MARTIN ROSS A STUNT TOO FAR JoHfi Sullivan was ordered to do community service in New Zealand last February after he was caught speeding semi-naked down a road on a motorised barstool with his bottom on fire.
He claimed the stool could reach 50mph and set his arse on fire using a rolled up newspaper.
A researcher claims he's decoded 10 possible words in the famously unreadable Voynich manuscript, which has eluded interpretation for a century.
The medieval text was discovered by an antique book dealer in 1912, and it has been rather stingy in giving up its secrets ever since.
He says he's also picked out the word for Taurus written beside an illustration of the Pleiades, a star cluster in the constellation Taurus.
A recent statistical study published in the journal PLOS ONE found that ""Voyni chese"" adheres to linguistic rules.
Bax notes that the manuscript is still a long way from being understood, and that he is coming forward with what he's found thus far in the hopes that other linguists will work with him to crack the code.
Page 1 Happy 100th birthday to electric traffic light — out of frustration from an early Two years ago, Salt Lake C m * _ _ x* * MfflKK m rmi. rplphra ted its own claim to the Trio of inventors all played roles Matt Schmitz Cars.com This week marked the 100th anniversary of what is believed to be the world’s first electric traffic signal.
Based on a design by James Hoge, who received the United States patent for his device in 1918, the “Municipal Traffic Control System” comprised four pairs of redand-green lights that served as stop-and-go indicators.
The lights were each mounted on a corner post and were operated by a switch inside a control booth.
The switch was ingeniousWIN MCNAMEE, GETTY IMAGES Today’s system of traffic lights got its start a century ago. ly configured to make giving conflicting signals impossible.
GRIDLOCK SOLUTION This invention brought to an end a growing problem in the early days of automobiles, when pedestrians, bicycles, horses and streetcars all converged on the same roadways, the site states.
The inventor died of a cerebral hemorrhage in 1926, just a few years after another Clevelander, Garrett Morgan, patented the three-position traffic signal that we all know so well today.
SALT LAKE CITY ALSO CLAIMS FIRST LIGHT The honor of being the site of the world’s first traffic light, of course, isn’t without dispute.
Two years ago, Salt Lake City celebrated its own claim to the title when the Utah Department of Transportation unveiled a commemorative replica of the device that was invented by Lester Wire in 1912.
Indian dentists operate on 1 /-year-dd Ashik Gavai at JJ Hospital in Mumbai.
Ashik Gavai, 17. was in pain and the right side of his jaw swollen when doctors at JJ Hospital in Mumbai diagnosed him with complex odontoma, a rare condition that occurs when a small tumor made up of tooth-like tissue grows in the mouth.
The medical team expected to find a few chunks of tooth-like pieces in the boy's mouth but were shocked after removing 232.
This might be the record number of teeth ever removed from an odontoma patient.
Gavai’s father, Suresh, was concerned that Hie teen's growth was cancerous.
Thankfully the turn or is benign and odontoma don't reoccur after removal.
While the boy underwent a major surgery, his jaw remained intact and should heal without any deformities.
Not surprisingly Galliford has had offers for his bovine wonder, but would prefer her to be exhibited at a fair m price in a zoo or ppsfe somewhere sitnilary so that people can see her.
Perhaps the gifted Sirnmi may yet become a horn of plenty for her owner. ;4in IVIafbh;20G2, a hair on its brow, but as that this hair tuft was the farm of Allan Galliford, near Oneway, which is 25 miles (4Gkm| northwest of Edmonton, capital of only the start of something much to grow there now, a year ia Alberta.
An 11year-old girl from the southern Indian state of Kerala has been found to have three lungs, said the United News of India.
These residents have been told that they can't leave the area, and police have set up roadblocks to prevent anyone from entering these zones.
City officials say that they have enough rice, flour, and oil to supply all 30,000 residents for up to a month, but reports haven't yet mentioned how long this situation might last.
According to Reuters, bubonic plague outbreaks are rare in China, and when they do occur, most take place in rural areas.
Since 2009, an estimated 12 people have been diagnosed with the disease, and four people have died.
Modern antibiotics are effective in treating the plague, but doctors have to administer them quickly because death can occur 24 hours after the initial infection.
At the moment, officials in Beijing say that the risk of a spread is minimal.
Third-sex skeleton found outside Prague April 08, 2011 A 5,000-year-old skeleton found in a suburb of Prague is believed to be the remains of a transgender person.
The skeleton is male and was buried in a way that is believed to be reserved only for female burials.
The skeleton is believed to date from 2900 and 2500BC and is from the Copper Age.
During that period, men’s bodies were buried with their heads facing west and with weapons.
Its head is facing east and is surrounded with jugs, a manner reserved for women.
Archaeologists theorised at a press conference in Prague on Tuesday that the person may have been a third sex or transgender.
This isn’t the first time a third sex or transgender skeleton has been found buried as a member of the opposite sex.
Image by Raul654 For 40 Years, This Russian Family Was Cut Off From All Human Contact, Unaware of World War II In 1978, Soviet geologists prospecting in the wilds of Siberia discovered a family of six, lost in the taiga 1 1 1 Reddit | Digg | Stumble | Email | • By Mike Dash • Smithsonian.com, January 29, 2013, Subscribe The Siberian taiga in the Abakan district.
More from Smithsonian.com • Quite Likely the Worst Job Ever • One Man Against Tvrannv • Everything Was Fake but Her Wealth Siberian summers do not last long.
When the warm days do arrive, though, the taiga blooms, and for a few short months it can seem almost welcoming.
It is then that man can see most clearly into this hidden world — not on land, for the taiga can swallow whole armies of explorers, but from the air.
Siberia is the source of most of Russia's oil and mineral resources, and, over the years, even its most distant parts have been overflown by oil prospectors and surveyors on their way to backwoods camps where the work of extracting wealth is carried on.
Karp Lykov and his daughter Agafia, wearing clothes donated by Soviet geologists not long after their family was rediscovered.
A helicopter sent to find a safe spot to land a party of geologists was skimming the treeline a hundred or so miles from the Mongolian border when it dropped into the thickly wooded valley of an unnamed tributary of the Abakan, a seething ribbon of water rushing through dangerous terrain.
The valley walls were narrow, with sides that were close to vertical in places, and the skinny pine and birch trees swaying in the rotors' downdraft were so thickly clustered that there was no chance of finding a spot to set the aircraft down.
But, peering intently through his windscreen in search of a landing place, the pilot saw something that should not have been there.
It was a clearing, 6,000 feet up a mountainside, wedged between the pine and larch and scored with what looked like long, dark furrows.
The baffled helicopter crew made several passes before reluctantly concluding that this was evidence of human habitation — a garden that, from the size and shape of the clearing, must have been there for a long time.
The Soviet authorities had no records of anyone living in the district.
The four scientists sent into the district to prospect for iron ore were told about the pilots' sighting, and it perplexed and worried them.
Blackened by time and rain, the hut was piled up on all sides with taiga rubbish — bark, poles, planks.
If it hadn't been for a window the size of my backpack pocket, it would have been hard to believe that people lived there.
The low door creaked, and the figure of a very old man emerged into the light of day, straight out of a fairy tale.
He wore trousers of the same material, also in patches, and had an uncombed beard.
Jerry-built from whatever materials came to hand, the dwelling was not much more than a burrow — ""a low, soot-blackened log kennel that was as cold as a cellar,"" with a floor consisting of potato peel and pine-nut shells.
Looking around in the dim light, the visitors saw that it consisted of a single room.
The light from the little window fell on her wide, terrified eyes, and we realized we had to get out of there as quickly as possible.
Led by Pismenskaya, the scientists backed hurriedly out of the hut and retreated to a spot a few yards away, where they took out some provisions and began to eat.
The old man's name was Karp Lykov, and he was an Old Believer — a member of a fundamentalist Russian Orthodox sect, worshiping in a style unchanged since the 17th century.
Old Believers had been persecuted since the days of Peter the Great, and Lykov talked about it as though it had happened only yesterday; for him, Peter was a personal enemy and ""the anti-Christ in human form""— a point he insisted had been amply proved by Tsar's campaign to modernize Russia by forcibly ""chopping off the beards of Christians "" But these centuries-old hatreds were conflated with more recent grievances; Karp was prone to complain in the same breath about a merchant who had refused to make a gift of 26 poods of potatoes to the Old Believers sometime around 1900.
Things had only got worse for the Lykov family when the atheist Bolsheviks took power.
Under the Soviets, isolated Old Believer communities that had fled to Siberia to escape persecution began to retreat ever further from civilization.
During the purges of the 1930s, with Christianity itself under assault, a Communist patrol had shot Lykov's brother on the outskirts of their village while Lykov knelt working beside him.
That was in 1936, and there were only four Lykovs then — Karp; his wife, Akulina; a son named Savin, 9 years old, and Natalia, a daughter who was only 2.
Taking their possessions and some seeds, they had retreated ever deeper into the taiga, building themselves a succession of crude dwelling places, until at last they had fetched up in this desolate spot.
Two more children had been bom in the wild — Dmitry in 1940 and Agafia in 1943 — and neither of the youngest Lykov children had ever seen a human being who was not a member of their family.
All that Agafia and Dmitry knew of the outside world they learned entirely from their parents' stories.
The Lykov children knew there were places called cities where humans lived crammed together in tall buildings.
Their only reading matter was prayer books and an ancient family Bible.
Akulina had used the gospels to teach her children to read and write, using sharpened birch sticks dipped into honeysuckle juice as pen and ink.
When Agafia was shown a picture of a horse, she recognized it from her mother's Bible stories.
But if the family's isolation was hard to grasp, the unmitigated harshness of their lives was not.
Traveling to the Lykov homestead on foot was astonishingly arduous, even with the help of a boat along the Abakap.
Peter the Great's attempts to modernize the Russia of the early 18 th century found a focal point in a campaign to end the wearing of beards.
Facial hair was taxed and non-payers were compulsorily shaved — anathema to Karp Lykov and the Old Believers.
Dependent solely on their own resources, the Lykovs struggled to replace the few things they had brought into the taiga with them.
Clothes were patched and repatched until they fell apart, then replaced with hemp cloth grown from seed.
The Lykovs had carried a crude spinning wheel and, incredibly, the components of a loom into the taiga with them — moving these from place to place as they gradually went further into the wilderness must have required many long and arduous journeys — but they had no technology for replacing metal.
A couple of kettles served them well for many years, but when rust finally overcame them, the only replacements they could fashion came from birch bark.
Since these could not be placed in a fire, it became far harder to cook.
By the time the Lykovs were discovered, their staple diet was potato patties mixed with ground rye and hemp seeds.
It was not until the late 1950s, when Dmitry reached manhood, that they first trapped animals for their meat and skins.
Lacking guns and even bows, they could hunt only by digging traps or pursuing prey across the mountains until the animals collapsed from exhaustion.
Dmitry built up astonishing endurance, and could hunt barefoot in winter, sometimes returning to the hut after several days, having slept in the open in 40 degrees of frost, a young elk across his shoulders.
More often than not, though, there was no meat, and their diet gradually became more monotonous.
Every year we held a council to decide whether to eat everything up or leave some for seed Famine was an ever-present danger in these circumstances, and in 1961 it snowed in June.
The hard frost killed everything growing in their garden, and by spring the family had been reduced to eating shoes and bark.
Akulina chose to see her children fed, and that year she died of starvation.
The Lykovs put up a fence around the shoot and guarded it zealously night and day to keep off mice and squirrels.
At harvest time, the solitary spike yielded 18 grains, and from this they painstakingly rebuilt their rye crop.
As the Soviet geologists got to know the Lykov family, they realized that they had underestimated their abilities and intelligence.
Each family member had a distinct personality; Old Karp was usually delighted by the latest innovations that the scientists brought up from their camp, and though he steadfastly refused to believe that man had set foot on the moon, he adapted swiftly to the idea of satellites.
And Karp held grimly to his status as head of the family, though he was well into his 80s.
His eldest child, Savin, dealt with this by casting himself as the family's unbending arbiter in matters of religion.
Certainly the eldest son would have encountered little resistance from Natalia, who always struggled to replace her mother as cook, seamstress and nurse.
The two younger children, on the other hand, were more approachable and more open to change and innovation.
Agafia's unusual speech — she had a singsong voice and stretched simple words into polysyllables — convinced some of her visitors she was slow-witted; in fact she was markedly intelligent, and took charge of the difficult task, in a family that possessed no calendars, of keeping track of time.
She thought nothing of hard work, either, excavating a new cellar by hand late in the fall and working on by moonlight when the sun had set.
Of all the Lykovs, though, the geologists' favorite was Dmitry, a consummate outdoorsman who knew all of the Dmitry and Savin in the Siberian summer A Russian press photo of Karp Lykov with Dmitry and Agafia, taiga's moods.
He was the most curious and perhaps the most forward-looking member of the family.
It was he who had built the family stove, and all the birch-bark buckets that they used to store food.
It was also Dmitry who spent days handcutting and hand-planing each log that the Lykovs felled.
Perhaps it was no surprise that he was also the most enraptured by the scientists' technology.
Once relations had improved to the point that the Lykovs could be persuaded to visit the Soviets' camp, downstream, he spent many happy hours in its little sawmill, marveling at how easily a circular saw and lathes could finish wood.
Karp Lykov fought a long and losing battle with himself to keep all this modernity at bay.
When they first got to know the geologists, the family would accept only a single gift — salt.
They welcomed the assistance of their special friend among the geologists — a driller named Yerofei Sedov, who spent much of his spare time helping them to plant and harvest crops.
They took knives, forks, handles, grain and eventually even pen and paper and an electric torch.
Perhaps the saddest aspect of the Lykovs' strange story was the rapidity with which the family went into decline after they re-established contact with the outside world.
In the fall of 1981, three of the four children followed their mother to the grave within a few days of one another.
According to Peskov, their deaths were not, as might have been expected, the result of exposure to diseases to which they had no immunity.
Both Savin and Natalia suffered from kidney failure, most likely a result of their harsh diet.
But Dmitry died of pneumonia, which might have begun as an infection he acquired from his new friends.
They offered to call in a helicopter and have him evacuated to a hospital.
But Dmitry, in extremis, would abandon neither his family nor the religion he had practiced all his life.
When all three Lykovs had been buried, the geologists attempted to talk Karp and Agafia into leaving the forest and returning to be with relatives who had survived the persecutions of the purge years, and who still lived on in the same old villages.
Karp Lykov died in his sleep on February 16, 1988, 27 years to the day after his wife, Akulina.
Agafia buried him on the mountain slopes with the help of the geologists, then turned and headed back to her home.
The Lord would provide, and she would stay, she said — as indeed she has.
A quarter of a century later, now in her seventies herself, this child of the taiga lives on alone, high above the Abakan.
Today only Agafia survives of the family of six, living alone in the taiga. / looked back to wave at Agafia.
Stranniki , 20 February 2009, accessed August 2, 2011; Georg B Michels.
One Russian Family's Fifty-Year Struggle for Survival and Religious Freedom in the Siberian Wilderness.
By News from Elsewhere media reports from around the world, found by BBC Monitoring 09:51 UK time, Wednesday, 30 July 2014 A government agency in India has released information showing that it has been giving sewing machines and bicycles to women registered as being as old as 532, it's been reported.
Aggarwal thinks the discrepancies could be just the ""tip of the iceberg"", since his request only asked for information about the state capital of Raipur.
Chhattisgarh's deputy labour commissioner, Savita Mishra, says the errors were caused by a software glitch.
Dead Ringers © Mourners in a Malaysian village were flabbergasted when a man they thought they had buried walked into a prayer session after his funeral.
Mohamad Shamsul Abdul Rahman, 22, had been missing for 10 days when the decomposed body of a drowned man was found near his village in Selising.
The hanged man was mistaken for Ravindran before being handed over to his family for cremation.
Thanom Wongsupheng, 35, had been working in the capital as a security guard.
His identity card had been found on the body of the accident victim, leading to the misunderstanding.
He had been missing for two months in November 2001 when his wife identified a dead body as being him.
A year later, he was found wandering in the town’s streets by a family friend and taken home.
He had lost his memory and said he had been walking for months trying to find his family.
The coffin contained a disfigured road victim, mistaken by police for Mr Vicuna, who had been on a benderforthree days.
AND SOME CLASSIC BODY DOUBLES © In the summer of 1904, John Gobbett left Greenwich on a barge, bound for Southend.
The next day, a body taken from the Thames was identified as Gobbett by his wife and father.
Like Gobbett, the dead man had a long scar on the leg, which had been broken and mended badly; a scar on the bridge of the nose; and a peculiar birthmark.
Both Steer and the dead man had a crushed toe, a dent over an eye-brow, and had lost an eye.
Distinctive scars on John's nose and leg corresponded with scars on the dead man.
Mr Thompson and his wife agreed it was John, but John's sister was not convinced.
She knew that her brother's “J.T.” tattoo was topped by an anchor, which was missing on the corpse but she was overruled by her father.
Scanning a newspaper in Toronto, John Thompson read of his own death and returned home to Hamilton to find his family in black and a flower-bedecked coffin in the parlour.
The dead man was never identified and was interred in Hamilton's Holy Sepulchre cemetery.
None of the three, from North RhineWestphalia and Bavaria, had correctly guessed the Super Number and the €4 million jackpot will roll over to Saturday's draw.
A spokesperson for the Saartoto corporation behind the 6/49 draw said another 1,165 lotto players will claim approximately €1,050 in the five-number draw win.
Lotto.de's host Nina Azizi didn't react as she called out the unlikely combination of numbers.
This is not the first time such an unlikely combination has turned up in the German lottery scores.
So many winners claimed the five-number win that the prize was a mere €194.
The odds of picking six of six numbers in a Lotto 6/49 draw is 1 in 13,983,816.
For four years they rented homes in the densely forested area northeast of Colorado Springs before finding a spacious, two-story log home in the thickest part of the woods.
What they did not know was that the former tenant of the house was convinced the property was haunted but did not say anything.
We had all kinds of lights flashing through, and it sounded like people stomping across the roof.
Their sons complained of weird lights and shadows in their rooms, lights and appliances started going on and off by themselves, and untraceable chemical odors burned family members' eyes and throats.
Steve Lee, a 34-year-old professional truck driver, believed someone was trying to scare his family out of their new home.
But the Louisiana-born man told me that he had ""just enough redneck left"" to fight back no matter what it was.
He installed a state-of-the-art, $70,000 security system with video surveillance and motion detectors, though the system often sounded alarms with no one around to trigger them.
Over the next four years, they would have sixty-two unexplainable ""break-ins"", and the El Paso County Sheriff's Department simply stopped responding.
Steve noticed that photographs and videotape taken in certain locations on the property exhibited strange light streaks running through them, and sometimes, translucent faces even appeared on the film.
No matter what type of camera or film he used, Steve captured evidence of unexplainable light phenomena that included brilliant beams, floating balls of light, and glowing outlines of humans and animals.
Sometimes the mysterious lights could be seen with the naked eye, though most often, they lasted just a split second and showed up only on film.
Steve and Beth finally agreed that something paranormal might be going on in their home, and in early 1995, they sent some videotape to the ""Sightings"" television show.
The show investigated the Lee property on three separate occasions, and producers considered it one of their most interesting and welldocumented cases.
Three months earlier, the Lees had asked State Senator Charles Duke to investigate with his own camera equipment.
He was able to capture a cloudy image that he said was ""clearly a dog"", an apparition that had been photographed repeatedly on the property and that Steve believes might be his own dog who died ten years ago.
I was also able to capture this ""flying dog"" on film, as well as the frightening face of another ghost, possibly the ""old woman"" described by some witnesses.
Several of the scientists have stated that the lightforms recorded on film do not behave according to accepted laws of physics.
I am continuing my own investigation of the site and have concluded that it qualifies as one of the most ""haunted"" houses in the nation.
Each entry contains a synopsis, address, telephone number, and travel directions.
They were hairy like a woolly mammoth — another extinct elephant relative — but had straighter tusks and squatter heads.
Two years ago, a pair of sixth-graders stumbled on a giant bone in a Shelby Township stream.
Wanda and Winky ■ The Detroit Zoo parted ways in 2005 with two modern-day elephants named Wanda and Winky over staff concerns that the animals shouldn’t be kept in a cold-weather zoo without a lot of space to move around.
JC Reindl On a broiling summer day four decades ago, a 4-ton circus elephant named Little Jennie dropped dead at what is now Summit Place Mall in Waterford.
She was not just any elephant, but an aging Hollywood star living out life in the traveling circus.
The circumstances of her death required an impromptu burial on mall grounds.
Michigan’s first enclosed mall, Summit Place is now its own retail graveyard of empty storefronts and weedy parking lot.
Little Jennie’s grave was never marked, and no one can recall where exactly the elephant has been resting since 1972.
Metro Detroit’s dead and dying shopping malls ■ In-depth: Metro Detroit malls that once thrived are now fighting to survive Two reporters who were at the scene do remember the grief on the face of the elephant’s trainer, who unshackled a larger elephant named Babe to push Jennie’s lifeless body into a 9-foot-deep grave dug by a backhoe.
Such a tale could be the stuff of urban legend if not for living witnesses and a front-page photograph in a local newspaper.
The plot unfolded on a July 21 afternoon when the carnival-circus had setup outside what was then the Pontiac Mall.
By all accounts, she was a gentle and obedient creature when she arrived in town.
Her burial was witnessed by two reporters for the Oakland Press, who were in the newsroom when calls came in about a dead elephant at the mall.
Police threatened to close down the circus if the body wasn’t disposed of.
The reporters, Bill Felchand Kingsley Cotton, rushed to a scene that the men said last week they’ll never forget.
There was Jennie, slumped to the ground near a freshly dug hole north ofthe mall.
Felch’s obituary-style article, headlined “Waterford is Elephant Graveyard,” tells how circus management wanted the elephant carried away, but Waterford police said there was no one in Oakland County who could lift the 60-year-old beast.
As the obituary states, a “toothless old circus hand” went to retrieve Babe.
Cotton, now 67 and a Southfield-based attorney, took a black-and-white photo for the paper as Babe maneuvered her head and trunk to push the body.
The article described how the old circus hand was devastated to lose an animal he had fed and groomed for 14 years.
Dehydration was one suspected cause of death, as was pneumonia and old age.
In a phone interview last week, Felch, now 65 and living in Stinson Beach, Calif., recalled how emotional the scene was.
Summit Place closed in 200910 and other witnesses to Little Jennie’s burial have passed on.
Township resident Betty Seymour said it was her uncle, the late Herb Noskey, who donated the use of his company’s backhoe to dig the grave.
Now 74, Seymour said she once worked in the mail’s Montgomery Ward and fed popcorn and peanuts to the circus’ baby elephants on lunch breaks and watched them get baths in the evening.
She knew about Jennie’s burial that day in 1972, but couldn’t bring herself to go.
Forty-two years later, few people can say the precise location of the elephant’s grave.
Neither Felch nor Cotton, who visited the property with the Free Press last week, remember where it all happened.
Seymour said she and a cousin think the grave was behind a now-vanished billboard on the north end of the mall near the corner of Telegraph and Pontiac Lake roads.
In 1989, an elephant researcher offered to excavate Jennie’s remains and mount an exhibit of her skeleton inside Summit Place.
There’s no public record on how the mail’s ownership responded to the plan.
Summit Place’s current owner, Los Angeles-based SR Capital, did not return a call for comment.
According to the story, the extra face cou id neither Bat nor speak, but it could laugh and cry.
Edward begged doctors to have his 'devil twin' removed, because, supposedly, it whispered horrible things to him at night, but no doctor would attempt it.
But am sure the 'whispering horrible things at night' could have been untrue.
MAJA AHLGREN, 38, IS A HAIRDRESSER from Kungsangen, north of Stockholm in Sweden, divorced with a son.
In 1982 she visit ed Paris and fell in love with a boy of her age, who promised to write but never did, or so she thought until she got his letter in early November 2002, 20 years late.
It was post' marked 28 October 1982, and was correctly addressed to her parents’ home, where she lived when she was 18.
She was a trifle bitter about the love letter’s delay, suggesting her life might have taken a different turn had it been delivered on time.
His name was Daniel Sebag, and he said in the letter that he wished to visit Los Angeles.
However, the man didn’t remember Maja, nor did he recall writing the letter, although he did not exclude the possibility.
He moved to London, where he is married for the second time and has 11 children.
Maja didn’t recognise him (“perhaps because his hat and beard cover half his face”), but he immediately recognised her.
Maja also recognised him but he was not the youth she fell in love with, but his friend.
According to this version of the story, after 20 years Maja had forgotten the name of her Paris love, but took for granted he was the lettenwriter.
Instead his friend, who had secretly fallen in love with her, wrote the letter that entered postal limbo.
After all, the interesting ques^ tion is not who wrote the letter, but how many Sebags it would have been possible to find remembering that they wrote the letter.
Michael Alfred Shepherd The reasons Michael Alfred Shepherd gave for the calls ranged from nose bleeds to vomiting blood.
Shepherd confessed to “eating drugs” and having an alcohol problem but said he made the calls from genuine fears for his health.
He was found guilty of persistently using a public communication network to cause annoyance, inconvenience or anxiety following his trial in Furness Magistrates’ Court yesterday.
Shepherd, 35, of Egerton Court, made 25 calls to the North West Ambulance Service from January 14 to April 6.
On February 6 Shepherd made a drunken call after taking diazepam and told operators he had toothache.
Shepherd walked down a stairwell and it was noted he smelled of alcohol.
He was taken to Furness General Hospital but he left before being treated.
An ASBO has been imposed for five years, preventing Shepherd from causing a nuisance at Furness General Hospital or its premises or remaining on hospital property after being asked to leave by police or hospital staff.
They were born when the nature spirit Vash’Nok cried and his tears fell to the earth.
The Abatwa are very shy seclusive and can only be seen by children, pregant women and magic prationers. rhe Abatwa are highly skilled hunters and warriors, they wield poisionous darts and arrows to protect themselves because >f their size and if you were to step on one it could be a possible death sentence for you.
Accused Spy Is Freed For Lack of Evidence By Rick Bromer During the First Battle of Kernstown, fought in the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia on March 23, 1862, Union intelligence officers learned that Isabella “Belle” Boyd had been spying on their army.
The seventeen-year-old girl had been sending information about Union troop movements to Major General “Stonewall” Jackson of the Confederate army.
After the battle, a warrant was issued for Boyd’s arrest. obtained a safe-conduct pass from Union Brigadier General James Shields, the fifty-two-year-old commander of the First Division, at the same time that the general’s provost marshall was signing the warrant for her arrest.
Boyd did not describe her meeting with the general, who was off-duty when she met him.
Shields was recuperating from wounds that he had suffered on March 22, when he had been struck by Confederate shrapnel.
Shields had no authority to issue passes when Boyd obtained hers because, soon after being wounded, he had given command of his division to another officer, Colonel Nathan Kimball.
When Boyd approached him, Shields must have been resting at some plade where he was isolated from the headquarters of his former command.
Although Boyd never explained how she persuaded Shields to give her the pass, she had a knack for convincing men to do whatever she asked.
She was tall, slim, and athletic, with a mane of red hair and a flamboyant personality.
An enthusiastic amateur actress, she loved to sing, to read aloud, and to otherwise make herself a center of attention.
She came from one of the more prosperous families of Martinsburg, Virginia , and her personal possessions included a slave, several horses, and a wardrobe of expensive frocks that she wore with Isabella “Belle” Boyd. an air of strutting self-confidence.
Her face was not especially pretty, and one young woman of her acquaintance complained frequently in a diary that Boyd was annoyingly loud and pushy, but most men found the young spy delightful.
After General Shields authorized her pass, Boyd went with her slave, Eliza Hopewell, to the Winchester railroad station.
They tried to board a train bound for Martinsburg but were halted by a Union officer in a captain’s uniform.
The captain seemed astonished when he examined the pass, but after some reflection, he decided to go ahead and arrest Boyd.
Leaving Hopewell on the train to Martinsburg, the Union officer marched Boyd to another train bound for Baltimore.
At Baltimore, Boyd was kept in confinement for one week, and then she was freed for lack of evidence.
She went home to Martinsburg, where she celebrated her eighteenth birthday on May 9. visit some relatives who owned a hotel in Front Royal, Virginia.
Night fell before the three women arrived at the Hotel Strickler, where they were surprised to find their hosts living in a small cottage on the hotel grounds.
The main hotel building had become the headquarters of General Shields, who had resumed command of his division on April 30, when his surgeons judged that he had sufficiently recovered from his wound.
We were glad enough to find ourselves at our journey’s end, and to sit down to a comfortable dinner, for which fatigue and a long fast had sharpened our appetite.
As soon as we had satisfied our hunger I sent in my card to General Shields, who promptly returned my missive in person.
Shields greeted Boyd cheerfully, and acted as if he had no idea that one of his own staff officers had recently arrested Boyd as a spy.
It is possible that Shields was ignorant of Boyd’s arrest, or perhaps he did not take Boyd seriously as a spy because the charges against her had been dropped, and because of her youth, her sex, and her general air of playful good nature.
He elaborated with a pun, saying the Confederate army of “Stonewall” Jackson had Kernstown, Shields explained with a smirk.
He added that Boyd would be free to travel wherever she pleased as soon as he finished annihilating Jackson’s army, which might take a few days.
Boyd asked him how he planned to accomplish that and, to her astonishment, he dropped a few hints.
I am convinced he felt confident of immediate and complete success, or he would not have allowed some expressions to escape him which I turned to account.
In short, he was completely off his guard, and forgot that a woman can sometimes listen and remember.
James Shields. page two General Shields introduced me to the officers of his staff, two of whom were young Irishmen; and to one of these.
Captain K., I am indebted for some very remarkable effusions, some withered flowers, and last, not least, for a great deal of very important information, which was carefully transmitted to my countrymen.
Shields and his staff continued to occupy the Hotel Strickler for several days after Boyd’s arrival in Front Royal; then, on May 14 or 15, the general announced that he was about to depart “to whip Jackson,” and that Boyd and her relatives could soon leave the cottage and move back into their hotel.
Later that evening, Shields held a council of war in the drawing room of the apartment normally occupied by Boyd’s aunt in the hotel.
Boyd, who had played in the hotel as a child, was aware that somebody had drilled a hole through the floor of a closet in a bedroom above that drawing room, apparently to spy on activities below.
Boyd learned that Shields had lost track of Jackson’s Confederate army, which was maneuvering in a very rapid and confusing way in the southwestern part of the Shenandoah Valley.
Shields mistakenly believed that Jackson had left the valley and was marching east to participate in the defense of the Confederate capital of Richmond.
Shields had therefore decided to leave the valley and take the bulk of his army east, leaving Front Royal very weakly defended.
The council prolonged their discussion for some hours; but I remained motionless and silent until the proceedings were brought to a conclusion, at one o’clock in the morning.
As soon as the coast was clear I crossed the courtyard, and made the best of my way to my own room, and took down in cipher everything I had heard which seemed to me of any importance. a servant, or maite any uisiurbance at that hour, would excite the suspicions of the Federals by whom I was surrounded; accordingly I went straight to the stables myself, saddled my horse, and galloped away in the direction of the mountains.
As a member of the Confederate secret courier service, Boyd reported to Colonel Turner Ashby, the leader of Stonewall Jackson’s cavalry.
Since her spymaster changed location frequently, she did not know exactly where she would find him.
After a scamper of about fifteen miles, I found myself at the door of Mr M.’s house.
I did not lose a moment in springing from my horse; and, running up the steps, I knocked at the door with such vehemence that the house reechoed with the sound.
Upon hearing that his party was a quarter of a mile farther up the wood, I turned to depart in search of them, and was in the very act of remounting when a door on my right was thrown open, and revealed Colonel Ashby himself, who could not conceal his surprise at seeing me standing before him.
I first convinced him he presence was suDSiantiai anu of the earth— not a visionary emanation from the world of spirits— then, without farther circumlocution, I proceeded to narrate all I had overheard in the closet, of which I have before made mention.
A few days afterwards General Shields marched south, laying a trap, as he supposed, to catch “poor old Jackson and his demoralized army,” leaving behind him, to occupy Front Royal, one squadron of cavalry, one field battery, and the 1st Maryland Regiment of Infantry.
Jackson’s entire Confederate army, meanwhile, marched rapidly toward Front Royal to attack the outnumbered federals who remained there.
On May 23 Boyd was sitting at a window, theatrically reading aloud from a book to her grandmother and cousin, when Confederate advance units surprised the Union pickets south of town.
The streets were thronged with Yankee soldiers, hurrying about in every direction in the greatest confusion.
I asked a Federal officer, who just then happened to be passing by, what was the matter.
He answered that the Confederates were approaching the town in force, under Generals Jackson and Ewell, that they had surprised and captured the outside pickets, and had actually advanced within a mile of the town, without the attack being even suspected.
Boyd returned to the Strickler Hotel, went upstairs, and saw through her opera glasses a force of Confederates less than a mile from town.
She wrote out some information about the positions of the Union defenders in town and wimin a nity-mne raaius.
I again went down to the door, and this time I observed, standing about in groups, several men who had always professed attachment to the cause of the South.
I demanded if there was one among them who would venture to carry to General Jackson the information I possessed.
I put on a white sunbonnet, and started at a run down the street, which was thronged with Federal officers and men.
I soon cleared the town and gained the open fields, which I traversed with unabated speed, hoping to escape observation until such time as I could make good my way to the Confederate line, which was still rapidly advancing.
I had on a dark blue dress, with a little fancy white apron over it; and this contrast of colors, being visible at a great distance, made me far more conspicuous than was just then agreeable.
Bullets kicked up dust around Boyd, and artillery shells fired by both armies whistled overhead from opposite directions.
At length a Federal shell struck the ground within twenty yards of my feet; and page three the explosion, of course, sent the fragments flying, in every direction around me.
I had, however, just time to throw myself flat upon the ground before the deadly engine burst; and again Providence spared my life.
Springing up when the danger was passed, I pursued my career, still under a heavy fire.
I often marvel and even shudder when I reflect how I cleared the fields and bounded over the fences with the agility of a deer.
As I neared our line I waved my bonnet to our soldiers, to intimate that they should press forward, upon which one regiment, the 1st Maryland “rebel” Infantry, and Hay’s Louisiana Brigade, gave me a loud cheer, and, without waiting for further orders, dashed upon the town at a rapid pace.
They did not then know who I was, and they were naturally surprised to see a woman on the battlefield, and on a spot, too, where the fire was so hot.
Their shouts of approbation and triumph rang in my ears for many a day afterwards, and I still hear them not infrequently in my dreams.
For some seconds I could say no more; but, as soon as I had sufficiently recovered myself, I produced the “little note,” and told him all, urging him to hurry on the cavalry, with orders to them to seize the bridges before the retreating Federals should have time to destroy them.
He instantly galloped off to report to General Jackson, who immediately rode forward, and asked me if 1 would have an escort and a horse wherewith to return to the village.
Jackson won a lopsided victory at Front Royal, where his Confederates captured six hundred and ninetyone federal soldiers.
He followed up his success with a series of fast maneuvers and surprise attacks in the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia, which runs in a northeasterly direction between the Appalachian Mountains to its west and the Blue Ridge Mountains to its east.
Jackson’s forces never totaled more than seventeen thousand men, but his menacing presence in the Shenandoah Valley caused President Lincoln to divert fifty thousand troops from General George B McClellan’s attack on the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia, which failed.
Jackson felt very grateful to Boyd for her contribution to his success.
He arranged for her to receive a captain’s commission in the Confederate army, and he made sure that she was awarded the Southern Cross of Honor medal.
MISS BELLE BOYD, I thank you, for myself and for the army, for the immense service that you have rendered your country to-day.
AIRLINE LOSES WOMAN Joe Dabney, 63, a retired taxi driver, has sued American airlines for $10 million for losing his 70-year-old wife Margie, who suffers from Alzheimer's disease and diabetes.
The Dabneys were travelling home to Bakersfield, California, after visiting their daughter in Indianapolis on 5 December when they changed planes at Dallas-Fort Worth Airport in Texas.
The pair had arranged to be escorted off the aircraft and taken to their connecting flight by airline staff, but while Mr Dabney (who had just undergone hip surgery) was being wheeled off to a lavatory, Mrs Dabney disappeared.
The aircrew knew she needed help as she was wearing a special tag and had to be taken back to her seat at one point during the flight when she tried to open the door of the plane in mid-air.
Two to three hours later, a pilot reported that a ""black woman"" was wandering around on the airport tarmac, but again she could not be found.
Four days later, bloodhounds were dispatched to track down Mrs Dabney's scent at the airport.
The trail led to a service road where it then disappeared, leading Mr Dabney to conclude that she had been picked up by car.
NY Post, Sun, 20 April; Adelaide Advertiser, Gold Coast Bulletin, 30 April 2002.
The attackers chopped off one of her hands the other had to be amputated in hospital, where she spent weeks recovering from her horrific injuries.
Traumatised, Ms Staford Bandaba then took the brave step of identifying her attackers.
She was taken to a safe-house where she lived under government protection.
But the government recently decided she could no longer live there, leaving the 28-year-old fearing for her safety.
The administrative officer in the village where she was re-housed, Erasmus Rugarabamu, told the BBC Swahili service that the situation had improved and no albinos had been killed in her home village in the north-western Kagera region in the past year.
The decision by the authorities comes just a few weeks after a court sentenced three men to death for the murder of an albino boy.
Albino murders Ms Staford Bandaba is one of thousands of people with albinism who live in fear in Tanzania.
Her harrowing tale has become commonplace in a country where 53 albinos are believed to have been murdered in the past two years.
Albinos, who are pale because of a lack of pigment in their skin, have been routinely killed because witchdoctors say that potions made with their body parts will bring good fortune in love, life and business to those who use them.
The killings have also spread to neighbouring Burundi where at least 12 people have been murdered.
The victims were mutilated and their body parts are believed to have been sold in Tanzania to make potions.
One man was sentenced to death and eight others were jailed in Burundi earlier this year.
Ms Staford Bandaba’s alleged attackers have been caught in north-western Tanzania, the region where the vast majority of the murders have been carried out.
Tears The story of her eviction caught the attention of a businessman who has agreed to let her and her mother live in a room in his house for a year.
Her father and four siblings who were taking care of her and feeding her were also evicted.
They have had no choice but to return to the village where she was so brutally attacked.
Her father, Staford Bandaba, admitted he was very anxious about reprisal attacks being carried out on his family.
Condemnation ""Albinos are still being hunted and we don't yet know how to solve the problem,"" one local resident says.
They started well and they should continue to help Mariam get a permanent house which will be safe,"" another person tells me.
President Jakaya Kikwete has said the albino murders have brought shame to Tanzania and his government has taken steps to identify and prosecute the perpetrators.
In March thousands of people took part in an exercise to identify those they suspected of being involved, by filling in forms anonymously.
The authorities have also issued a ban on all traditional healers, and several people have been arrested.
The government has now given Ms Staford Bandaba a plot of land to build a house away from her village.
But she says she has no money for the construction work, leaving her feeling abandoned at a time when she needs the help most.
I am begging all Tanzanians to kindly keep on helping me, because my situation is now worse.
I have no hands."" linn Fortunately, a local businessman has heard her plea.
But in a year's time, Ms Staford Bandaba will once again be faced with the prospect of having to return to the village where she was nearly killed.
For in stark contrast to all of his famously black-and-white brethren at the zoo, he was totally white.
And, when he opened his eyes, they were pink thereby confirming Snowdrop to be not merely the first albino penguin seen in Britain, but the first born in captivity anywhere in the world, and with only a couple of sightings of wild albino penguins on record from Snowdrop's native South Africa.
Caught by a local fisherman off Anglesey who must have thought he was seeing triple, Clarissa is an edible crab whose palatability is destined never to be tested, thanks to an eye-catching accessory.
Not content with inflicting painful nips using the traditional crustacean complement of two claws, Clarissa is additionally equipped with a third claw a sight so strange that this maritime curio was duly deposited at Anglesey Sea Zoo, where it now resides on display.
Wolverhampton Express and Star, 8 Aug 2002. where, four months later, a large white felid was also reported; and in August 1993 a big tawny wildcat was spied by locals in Palolo Valley.
ALBINO CROCODILES The creeks of India's Bhitarkanika Wildlife Sanctuary are deemed by naturalists to be the ideal habitat for estuarine crocodiles which is just as well, because at least 12 albino specimens have recently been discovered there.
Prior to that remarkable find, according to local wildlife officials, only two white individuals of this species had ever been recorded from Asia, and one of those was born in captivity.
Albino animals, on account of their conspicuous appearance, often fare poorly in the wild, but as most of these albino crocodiles are female, it seems likely that the mutant gene responsible for them will persist in this population.
LATE SURVIVAL The extraordinary scimitar cat Homotherium latidens is traditionally deemed to have become extinct in Europe around 300,000 years ago.
However, as I noted in my book Mystery Cats of the World , there is some enigmatic iconographical evidence to suggest that it still survived as late, geologically speaking, as 30,000 years ago.
As revealed in a newly-published paper by Jelle Reumer and colleagues, in March 2000 a partial lower jaw of H latidens was trawled from an area southeast of the Brown Bank in the North Sea by the fishing vessel UK33.
Radiocarbon analysis dated it to 28,000 ago, roughly the same age as the iconographical items, which most notably include a small statuette found in 1896 inside Isturitz cave, southwestern France.
Interestingly, this is not the first such ABC flap in the Hawaiian archipelago.
A mystery cat was sighted leaping from a ditch onto a road on Kaui in May 1984 but was never captured; a suspected puma was sought but again eluded capture in the hills above Aina Haina in February 1988 Although ABC reports have regularly emerged for decades from most states of the USA, such activity in Hawaii has tended to be conspicuous by its absence but no longer.
Since December 2002, several sightings of a dark-furred, largeheaded, long-tailed feline mystery beast said to be at least as large as a Labrador dog have been reported in the lower Olinda area of Maui.
Accordingly, being well aware of the danger that this creature SKUNK APE CELEBRATIONS The first Everglades Skunk Ape Festival, held on 14 June 2003 at Trail Lakes Campground in Ochopee, Florida, was a great success, and was held in honour of Bill Mitchell.
He in turn had launched the first-ever skunk ape festival 25 years earlier, commemorating a tourist's earlier encounter with Florida's most reclusive inhabitant.
This is the first record of Gurney's pitta in Burma for 89 years, but thesenewly located One of the most controversial photos of an alleged sea monster was snapped during the 1960s off Hook Island in Queensland's Great Barrier Reef by Robert le Serrec, depicting what looks somewhat like a colossal tadpole, but which certain investigators have dismissed as a hoax.
Since the 1960s, the whereabouts of le Serrec have remained as mysterious as the identity of the object in his photo, but recently GUST (Global Underwater Search Team), the organisation headed by cryptozoologist Jan-Ove Sundberg, located him.
Aged 75, le Serrec now lives in Asia, and GUST is hoping to interview him in the near future.
The last confirmed sighting of Gurney's pitta, a small, multicoloured species of ground-dwelling bird, occurred in 1952, and in 1985 it was finally classed as extinct only for it to be rediscovered alive and well in Thailand a year later.
Nevertheless, it has remained gravely endangered, with just 30 wild specimens known from one small area in that country.
Thirty-five reports citing various mythical beasts or extra-terrestrial activity were made since 2010, with officers investigating 18.
The police federation called for a public debate to discuss priorities and the screening of calls.
Officers gave ""words of advice"" to someone claiming he was an alien trail another planet.
The details, released in a freedom of information request, revealed that a person who thought they were a werewolf and told the force the’ wanted to go running on the moors, refused assistance.
Reports which officers did not attend included a man who said ghosts were sitting on his living room chair.
Nigel Rabbitts, chair of Devon and Cornwall Police Federation, said it had ""continually raised concerns about demand versus resources"", need for ""investment and training of staff who take the calls"" and managing the public's expectations.
I here should be a public debate as to what the public see as a priority, how resources should be distributed and what pereentac calls for service should be screened out.
While walking, visitors will get to hear stories of unexplained noises and strange happenings that occur in and around the historic buildings.
New evidence will be shared by the Porterville Ghost Society along with stories that deal with the paranormal.
T ours for anyone that is interested, tours will begin at 8:00 pm and continue every hour with the last tour at midnight.
Warm clothing is strongly advised as well as good walking shoes and flashlights.
And, in case you couldn’t tell by the image, he was a spider god, being able to morph into a spider and a normal looking human being.
In some stories, he is the son of Nyame, the sky god, who got so annoyed with his son that he turned him into a spider.
Speaking of Nyame, there’s a story that explains how stories came to be.
Once, there were no stories in the entire world, because Nyame hoarded them all.
Anansi didn’t like this so he went to ask Nyame to let him have the stories to share.
Nyame agreed but wanted Onini the Python, Osebo , Mmoboro Hornets, and the dwarf Mmoatia in exchange.
He tricked the python into tying himself on a branch, the leopard was caught in his webs when Anansi offered to help him out a hole , convinced the hornets that it was raining and the only shelter was this calabash he carried with him, and he got the dwarf stuck to a doll covered with sticky gum.
As promised, Nyame bestowed him the title of God of Stories* A title that he is most known for.
During the Slave Trade to the West Indies, the Africans who were taken as slaves kept his oral tradition alive.
Countries like the United States, the Caribbean Islands, Colombia, Suriname, etc. has their own variation of Anansi.
And as such, he became their symbol of resistance and freedom, telling stories of how Anansi could trick slave owners into granting freedom or humiliating them.
BBC News Wiltshire vicar revives ancient archery law 15:05 GMT, Saturday, 12 June 2010 16:05 UK Residents were rewarded for attending archery practice with a barbecue A vicar has revived an ancient law to call members of her parish together for archery practice.
The Reverend Mary Edwards, of Collingbourne Ducis, near Marlborough, called residents to the village recreation ground on Friday.
Residents were rewarded for complying with the law with a bar, a barbecue and live music.
Local historians Fletch Coke and Paul Clements have been working for years to solve the mystery of where Charles Dickinson is buried.
Dickinson was killed in a famous 1806 duel with Andrew Jackson, one that could have greatly altered the course of history had Jackson died from his wound.
The cause of the duel has its own controversy , but so does the outcome.
Historians in Caroline County, Maryland, where Dickinson was born, claim that years after Dickinson’s burial a loyal servant came to Tennessee, secretly dug up the remains of his former master, and returned with them to Maryland, where the remains were reburied.
Research and historical documents led him not to Maryland, but to the Bowen’s front yard.
It’s marked ‘Dickinson’s Grave,’ and you can see it relative to the location of the Peach Blossom house, the home of Joseph Erwin, Dickinson’s father-in-law,” Clements explained.
Archaeologist Dan Allen was eventually engaged to find the grave, and he thinks he’s succeeded.
The coffin nails were where they should be if the coffin had just deteriorated in place.
The wooden coffin has long since rotted away, leaving a coffin-shaped area containing two small bone fragments, which Allen believes are finger phalanges.
There had been hopes of uncovering something more substantial, perhaps even the bullet that killed Dickinson, but there were no other remains found.
He said that position, along with the hands being by the sides, are the most common.
A high level of acidity could explain the absence of more skeletal remains.
Allen is also consulting forensic anthropologists to determine if DNA testing of the bone fragments would be worthwhile.
But such testing is expensive and could possibly destroy the fragments, he said.
Along with the evidence Allen listed, Clements added the hexagonal shape of the coffin.
It would have been ilv unlikelv for a snr.iallv nmk. ""rave Found rout Yard e d To Be Those of Jackson In Duel k"" Allen said after the August fcscovery.
There had been hopes of Bering something more substanperhaps even the bullet that killed toson, but there were no other lins found. j fe excavated other graves from same period, the 1800 to 1810 | d, and I’ve rarely found any skelrmains in them,” said Allen, who ^lizes in moving historic graves.
He called the finger ins a “fluke of preservation.” *n is also consulting forensic apologists to determine if DNA g of the bone fragments would be ■while.
It would have been incredibly unlikely for a socially promK surface I encountered prehistoric deposits,” Allen said.
But they kept digging at the base of the stump and eventually found fragments of “cut nails,” the type used in coffins of the time.
Last year, reporters were on hand when a different archaeological team dug up the Bowen’s front yard, only to uncover a water pipe.
He set aside data from ground-penetrating radar, avoided historical clues and followed his intuition.
It eventually lead him underneath a tree stump, but not before meeting some challenges along the way.
They spent a laborious five hours removing the large stump, after which the grave was fully excavated.
Of the original burial Allen said, “They dug right through the deposits.
Which is exactly what Allen will be doing; everything that has been removed for examination— sherds, soil, nails and bone fragments-will eventually be reburied in the same location.
In the meantime, the Bowen’s have a large bare spot in their front yard where a tree used to be, and quite a bit of history to go with it.
Bob Dick recently toughed his way through a 90-minute total knee replacement without the aid of anesthesia, choosing to stay awake through the chisel and the buzz of the electric saw.
Next he held his thumb and forefinger together, imagining a walk around the pond at his home.
So began Dick’s surgery by hypnosis, which he describes as being so trouble-free that he hardly realized it happened.
He had nerveblockers reducing the pain throughout the surgery, but his deep relaxation techniques made “going under” a needless step.
Dick’s self -administered treatment is a rare but increasingly common alternative to general anesthesia, in which a patient is made unconscious through inhaled gases and intravenous drugs.
In 2006, British television broadcast a patient having hernia Dick decided to try the method he’s long employed in his own practice.
Someone meditating, praying or “zoning out” at work is using the same techniques that go into hypnosis.
As a young psychologist in the early 1970s, he studied for a week in Arizona with Milton Erickson, a psychiatrist who specialized in medical hypnosis.
In his own practice, he refers to it as an altered state of consciousness, an intense form of concentration that can change what the mind perceives.
Also, he stresses that a patient can’t be forced into a trance, only willingly led.
He tried it during a colonoscopy, which didn’t work as well because the doctor asked. started breathing deeply, a signal for his body to relax.
In 2006, British television broadcast a patient having hernia surgery Without any drugs, lulled into his inner peace.
In April, Guinean singer Alama Kante sang her way through throat surgery to keep doctors from damaging her vocal chords — a feat aided by hypnosis.
While anesthesia is widely considered safe, it carries the small risk of stroke, heart attack and death, especially in older adults or those with a serious medical history, according to the Mayo Clinic.
He tried it during a colonoscopy, which didn’t work as well because the docto r asked him if it hurt, which focused his mind on the pain.
But hypnosis worked well for the cataract surgeries on both eyes, in which he was able to focus deeply enough to avoid seeing the knife.
But knee replacement took longer, and Dick practiced for two weeks ahead of the procedure, 30 to 45 minutes at a time.
He also watched a Youlhbe video showing the operation, so he knew what noises to expect.
With surgery, “The anxiety is just as bad as physical pain,” Dick said.
Friday, April 3, 2009 Nurse charged in deaths of patients Bleach injected into people, police say BY PAUL J WEBER The Associated Press LUFKIN, Texas — Kimberly Saenz worked eight months as a nurse at the busiest dialysis clinic in town.
One patient after another died last April for reasons no one could explain.
Things got so grim at the Lufkin Dialysis Center that the clinic shut down to investigate.
Saenz deliberately injected 10 patients with bleach, killing five of them in what were probably excruciatingly painful deaths.
In a chilling indictment handed up this week, Saenz, 35, was charged with one count of capital murder coveringfive patients.
She was also charged with aggravated assault against five other patients who were allegedly injected with bleach but survived.
Among them was Debra Oates, who left the clinic on an ambulance stretcher April 26 last year when her arm would not stop bleeding.
Her nurse that day was Saenz, who Oates said often helped her pass the dreary, hourslong dialysis treatments by telling jokes.
Oates said she watched three people before her rushed to the hospital on the same day she was stricken.
Altogether, 34 emergency calls were made from the clinic in April — more than three times the number in March.
Investigators believe Saenz used syringes to inject bleach into the patients’ dialysis lines.
Authorities first charged Saenz last May with two counts of aggravated assault after two witnesses said they saw her draw bleach into syringes, and traces of bleach were found in the dialysis machine tubing.
After being charged with murder, Saenz turned herself in Wednesday and was jailed without bail.
Dialysis is a mostly miserable routine for about 325,000 people nationwide with kidney failure.
Most spend three days a week tethered for hours to a machine that filters their blood — a job their kidneys can no longer do.
THE ANIMISTIC VAMPIRE IN NEW ENGLAND GEORGE R STETSON The belief in the vampire and the whole family of demons has its origin in the animism, spiritism, or personification of the barbarian, who, unable to distinguish the objective from the subjective, ascribes good and evil influences and all natural phenomena to good and evil spirits.
Under the names of vampire, were* wolf, man-wolf, nightmare, night-demon — in the Illyrian tongue oupirea, or leeches ; in modern Greek broucolaqnea^ and in our common tongue ghosts, each country having its own peculiar designation — the superstitious of the ancient and modern world, of Chaldea and Babylonia, Persia, Egypt, and Syria, of Illyria* Poland, Turkey, Servia, Germany, England, Central Africa, New England, and the islands of the Malay and Polynesian archipelagoes, designate the spirits which leave the tomb, generally in the night, to torment the living.
The character, purpose, and manner of the vampire manifestations depend, tike its designation, upon environment and the plane of culture.
All primitive peoples have believed in the existence of good and evil spirits holding a middle place between men and gods.
Cal met lays down in most explicit terms, as he was bound to do by the canons of his church, the doctrine of angels and demons as a matter of dogmatic theology.
Dr declares the superstition to be prevalent in all the isolated districts of southern Rhode Island, and that many instances of its survival can be found in the large centers of population.
In the village now being considered known exhumations have been made in five families, in the village previously named in three families, and in two adjoining villages in two families.
Since then one of his sons has been sickly, and believing that the dead man would not rest until he had drawn tn himself the nine surviving members of the family, the sickly son, armed with a spade, exhumed his father and cut off his head.
Peculiar conditions have caused its manifestation and survival there, and similar ones are likely to produce it elsewhere.
The singular feature is that it should appear and flourish in a native population which from its infancy has had the ordinary New England educational advantages ; in a State having a larger population to the square mile than any in the Union, and in an environment of remarkable literacy and culture when compared with some other sections of the country.
It is perhaps fortunate that the isolation of which this is probably the product, an isolation common in sparsely settled regions, where thought stagnates and insanity and superstition are prevalent, has produced nothing worse.
In neighboring Connecticut, within a few miles of its university town of New Haven, there are rural farming populations, fairly prosperous, of average intelligence, and furnished with churches and schools, which have made themselves notorious by murder, suicides, and numerous cases of melancholia and insanity.
Other abundant evidence is at hand pointing to the conclusion that the vampire superstition still retains its hold in its original habitat — an illustration of the remarkable tenacity and continuity of a superstition through centuries of intellectual progress from a lower to a higher culture, and of the impotency of the latter to entirely eradicate from itself the traditional beliefs, customs, habits, observances, and impressions of the former.
The most enlightened and philosophic have, either apparent or secreted in their inmost consciousness, superstitious weaknesses— negative, involuntary, more or less barbaric, and under greater or lesser control in correspondence with their education, their present environment, and the degree of their development— in the control of the imagination and emotions.
These in various degrees predominate over the understanding where reason is silent or its authority weakens.
S6nya Koval4vsky , one of the most brilliant mathematicians of the century, who obtained the Prix-Bordin from the French academy, “ the greatest scientific honor ever gained by a woman,” ” whose love for mathematical and psychological problems amounted to a passion,” and whose intellect would accept no proposition incapable of a mathematical demonstration, all her life maintained a Arm belief in apparitions and in dreams as portents.
She was so influenced by disagreeable dreams and the apparition of a demon as to be for some time thereafter obviously depressed and low-spirited.
A well known and highly cultured American mathematician recently said to me that his servant had seven years ago nailed a horseshoe over a house door, and that he had never had the courage to remove it.
Buckle declared that “ superstition was the curse of Scotland,” and in this regard neither Germany nor Scotland are singular.
Of the origin of this superstition in Rhode Island or in other parts of the United States we are ignorant ; it is in all proba12 THE AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST [VoL IX bility an exotic like ourselves, originating in the mythographic period of the Aryan and Semitic peoples, although legends and superstitions of a somewhat similar character may be found among the American Indians.
Mr Mooney, in a personal note, says that he has not met with any close parallel of the vampire myth among the tribes with which he is familiar.
There are in that tribe quite a number of old witches and wizards who thrive and fatten upon the livers of murdered victims.
When some one is dangerously sick these witches gather invisibly about his bedside and torment him, even lifting him up and dashing him down again upon the ground until life is extinct.
After he is buried they dig up the body and take out the liver to feast upon.
They thus lengthen their own lives by as many days as they have taken from his.
In this way they get to he very aged, which renders them objects of suspicion.
If discovered and recognized during the feast, when they are again visible, they die within seven days.
I have personal experience of a case in which a reputed medicine-man was left to die alone because his friends were afraid to come into the house on account of the presence of invisible witches.
Jacob Grimm* defines superstition as a persistence of individual men in views which the common sense or culture of the majority has caused them to abandon, a definition which, while within its limits sufficiently accurate, does not recognize or take account of the subtile, universal, ineradicable fear of or reverence for the supernatural, the mysterious, and unknown.
De Quincey has more comprehensively remarked that “ superstition or sympathy with the invisible is the great test of man’s nature as an earthly combining with a celestial.
In superstition is the possibility of religion, and though superstition is often injurious, degrading, and demoralizing, it is so, not as a form of corruption or degradation, but as a form of non-development” In reviewing these cases of psychologic pre-Raphaelitism they seem, from an economic point of view, to form one of the strongest • Teutonic Mythology.
They also remind us of the boutade of the Saturday Review, “ that to be really mediaeval, one should have no body ; to be really modern, one should have no soul ; ” and it will be well to remember that if we do not quit© accept these demonic apparitions we shall subject ourselves to the criticism of that modern mystic.
Honey Superstitions. — Honey is believed to have power over spirits because honey is one of the earliest foods, yields an intoxicating drink, has many healing virtues, and prevents corruption.
The Dekhan Brahman father drops honey into the mouth of his new-born child.
Among higher class Hindus, especially among Brahmans, when a child is bom honey is dropped into its mouth from a gold spoon or ring.
Among Dekhan Hindus, when the bridegroom comes to the bride’s house honey and curds are given him to sip.
This honey-sipping is called madkuparka; its apparent object is to scare evil from the bridegroom.
How highly the early Hindus valued honey appears from the hymn, “ Let the winds pour down honey, the rivers pour down honey, may our plants be sweet.
The Feloops of West Africa made a strong liquor out of honey, and the Hottentots are fond of honey beer.
IX The early Christians were possessed, or obsessed, by demons, and the so-called demoniacal possession of idiots, lunatics, and hysterical persons is still common in Japan, China, India, and Africa, and instances are noted in western Europe, all yielding to the methods of Christian and pagan exorcists as practiced in New Testament times.
The Hebrew synonym of demon was serpent; the Greek, diaholus, a calumniator, or impure spirit.
The Rabbins were divided in opinion, some believing they were entirely spiritual, others that they were corporeal, capable of generation and subject to death.
As before suggested, it was the general belief that the vampire is a spirit which leaves its dead body in the grave to visit and torment the living.
The modern Greeks are persuaded that the bodies of the excommunicated do not putrefy in their tombs, but appear in the night as in the day, and that to encounter them is dangerous.
The Polynesians believed that the vampires were the departed souls, which quitted the grave, and grave idols, to creep by night into the houses and devour the heart and entrails of the sleepers, who afterward died.
The Mintira of the Malay peninsula have their water demon, who sucks blood from men’s toes and thumbs.
Jan.96] ANIMISTIC VAMPIRE IN NEW ENGLAND 3 “The first theory of the vampire superstitions,” remarks Tylor,* “ is that the soul of the living man, often a sorcerer, leaves its proper body asleep and goes forth, perhaps in the visible form of a straw or fluff of down, slips through the keyhole, and at* tacks a living victim.
Some say these Mauri come by night to men, sit upon their breasts, and suck their blood, while others think children are alone attacked, while to men they are nightmares.
The belief in the Obi of Jamaica and the Vaudoux or Vodun of the west African coast, Jamaica, and Haiti is essentially the same as that of the vampire, and its worship and superstitions, which in Africa include child -murder, still survive in those parts, as well as in several districts among the negro population of our southern states.
The negro laid under the ban of the Obi or who is vaudouxed or, in the vernacular, “hoodooed” Blowly pines to death.
It is there believed that consumption is not a physical hut a spiritual disease, obsession, or visitation ; that as long as the body of a dead consumptive relative has blood in its heart it is proof that an occult influence steals from it for death and is at work draining the blood of the living into the heart of the dead and causing his rapid decline.
It is a common belief in primitive races of low culture that disease is caused by the revengeful spirits of man or other animals — notably among some tribes of North American Indians as well as of African negroes.
Russian superstition supposes nine sisters who plague mankind with fever.
They lie chained up in caverns, and when let loose pounce upon men without pity.f As in the financial and political, the psychologic world has its periods of exaltation and depression, of ebb and flow, of confidence and alarm.
IX and western Europe, acquiring its new life and impetus from the horrors attending the prevalence of the plague and other distressing epidemics in an age of great public moral depravity and illiteracy.
Calmet, a learned Benedictine monk and abb<§ of Senones, seized this opportunity to write a popular treatise on the vampire, which in a short time passed through many editions.
It was my good fortune not long since to find in the Boston Athenaeum library an original copy of his work.
Calmet was born in Lorraine, near Commercy, in 1672, and hia chief works were a commentary and history of the Bible.
This curious treatise has evidently proved a mine of wealth to all modern encyclopedists and demonologists.
It impresses one as the work of a man whose mental convictions do not entirely conform to the traditions and dogmas of hia church, and his style at times appeal’s somewhat apologetic.
Calmet declares his belief to be that the vampires of Europe and the brucolaques of Greece are the excommunicated which the grave rejects.
They are the dead of a longer or shorter time who leave their tombs to torment the living, sucking their blood and announcing their appearance by rattling of doors and windows.
The name vampire, or d'oupires , signifies in the Slavonic tongue a bloodsucker.
First: That the persons were buried alive and naturally leave their tombs.
That they are dead, but that by God’s permission or particular command they return to their bodies for a time, as when they are exhumed their bodies are found entire, the blood red and fluid, and their members soft and pliable.
That it is the devil who makes these apparitions appear and by their means causes all the evil done to men and animals.
In 1730 in Turkish Servia it was believed that those who had been passive vampires during life became active after death; in Russia, that the vampire does not Stop his unwelcome visits at a single member of a family, but extends his visits to the last member, which is the Rhode Island belief.
The inhabitants of the island of Chio do not answer unless called twice, being persuaded that the brueolaques do not call but once, and when so called the vampire disappears, and the person called dies in a few days.
The classic writers from Sophocles to Shakespeare and from Shakespeare to our own time have recognized the superstition.
Mr Conway quotes' from the legend of Ishtar descending to Hades to seek some beloved one.
William of Malmsbury says that “in England they believed that the wicked came back after death by the will of the devil and it was not an unusual belief that those whose death had been caused in this manner, at their death pursued the same evil calling.
Naturally under such an uncomfortable and inconvenient infliction some avenue of escape must, if possible, be found.
If on opening the grave of a “ suspect ” the body was found to be of a rose color, the beard, hair, and nails renewed, and the veins filled, the evidence of its being the abode of a vampire was conclusive.
A voyager in the Levant in the seventeenth century is quoted as relating that an excommunicated person was exhumed and the body found full, healthy, and well disposed and the veins filled with the blood the vampire had taken from the living.
In a certain Turkish village, of forty persons exhumed seventeen gave evidence of vampirism.
In 1727 the bodies of five religieuze were discovered in a tomb near the hospital of Quebec, that had been buried twenty years, covered with flesh and suffused with blood,* The methods of relief from or disposition of the vampire's dwelling place are not numerous, but extremely sanguinary and ghastly.
In Servia a relief is found in eating of the earth of his grave and rubbing the person with his blood.
This prescription was, however, valueless if after forty days the body was exhumed and all the evidences of an archivampire were not found.
A more common and almost universal method of relief, especially in the Turkish provinces and in the Greek islands, was to burn the body and scatter the ashes to the winds.
Some old writers are of the opinion that the souls of the dead cannot be quiet until the entire body has been consumed.
Exceptions are noted in the Levant, where the body is cut in pieces and boiled in wine, and where, according to Voltaire, the heart is torn out and burned.
In New England the body is exhumed, the heart burned, and the ashes scattered.
In Hungary and in Russia they choose a boy young enough to be certain that he is innocent of any impurity, put him on the back of a horse which has never stumbled and is absolutely black, and make him ride over all the graves in the cemetery.
In plainer language, Stuart was born in the old snuff mill belonging to his father and Dr Moffat, at the head of Petaquamscott pond, six miles from Newport, across the bay, and about the same distance from Narragansett Pier, in the state of Rhode Island.
By some mysterious survival, occult transmission, or remarkable atavism, this region, including within its radius the towns of Exeter, Foster, Kingstown, East Greenwich, and others, with their scattered hamlets and more pretentious villages, is distinguished by the prevalence of this remarkable superstition-— a survival of the days of Sardanapalua, of Nebuchadnezzar, and of New Testament history in the closing years of what we are pleased to call the enlightened nineteenth century.
It is an extraordinary instance of a barbaric superstition outcropping in and coexisting with a high general culture, of which Max Muller and others have spoken, and which is not so uncommon, if rarely so extremely aggravated, crude, and painful.
The region referred to, where agriculture is in a depressed condition and abandoned farms are numerous, is the trampingground of the book agent, the chrotno peddler, the patent-medicine man and the home of the erotic and neurotic modem novel.
The social isolation away from the larger villages is as complete 8 THE AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST [Vol.
IX as a century and a half ago, when the hoy Gilbert Stuart tramped the woods, fished the streams, and was developing and absorbing his artistic inspirations, while the agricultural and economic conditions are very much worse.
In short, the region furnishes an object-lesson in the decline of wealth consequent upon the prevalence of a too common heresy in the district that land will take care of itself, or that it can be robbed from generation to generation without injury, and suggests the almost criminal neglect of the conservators of public education to give instruction to our farming youth in a more scientific and more practical agriculture.
Naturally, in such isolated conditions the superstitions of a much lower culture have maintained their place and are likely to keep it and perpetuate it, despite the church, the public school, and the weekly newspaper.
Here Cotton Mather, Justice Bewail, and the host of medical, clerical, and lay believers in the uncanny superstitions of bygone centuries could still hold high carnival.
The first visit in this farming community of native-born New Englanders was made to , a small seashore village possessing a summer hotel and a few cottages of summer residents not far from Newport — that Mecca of wealth, fashion, and nineteenth-century culture.
One member of this family had some years since lost children by consumption, and by common report claimed to have saved those surviving by exhumation and cremation of the dead.
Mr Arnold, in his history of the State, says that ""South Kingston was in 1780 by far the wealthiest town in the State'* It had a special provision made for the maintenance of religion and education/* Jaa.96] animistic vampire in new England 9 trade a mason, who is a living witness of the superstition and of the efficacy of the treatment of the dead which it prescribes.
He informed me that he had lost two brothers by consumption, Upon the attack of the second brother his father was advised by Mr , the head of the family before mentioned, to take up the first body and bum its heart, but the brother attacked objected to the sacrilege and in consequence subsequently died.
When he was attacked by the disease in his turn, ’s advice prevailed, and the body of the brother last dead was accordingly exhumed, and, “living"" blood being found in the heart and in circulation, it was cremated, and the sufferer began immediately to mend and stood before me a hale, hearty, and vigorous man of fifty years.
When questioned as to his understanding of the miraculous influence, he could suggest nothing and did not recognize the superstition even by name.
He remembered that the doctors did not believe in its efficacy, but he and many others did.
At , a small isolated village of scattered houses in a farming population, distant fifteen or twenty miles from Newport and eight or ten from Stuart's birthplace, there have been made within fifty years a half dozen or more exhumations.
The mother and four children had already succumbed to consumption, and the child most recently deceased (within six months) was, in obedience to the superstition, exhumed and the heart burned.
Dr , who made the autopsy, stated that he found the body in the usual condition after an interment of that length of time.
I learned that others of the family have since died, and one is now very low with the dreaded disease.
So say those in charge of the seventh annual Ryan Sheets Memorial ArmWrestling Championships, scheduled for noon Saturday at Veterans Hall in Oildale.
It’s die Sheets family’s way of paying tribute to Ryan Sheets, a former North High and Cal State Bakersfield wrestler who died while attending CSUB because of complications from a neck injury suffered while wrestling that was worsened by a car accident.
The tournament started two years later as a way to raise money for high school and youth wrestling programs throughout Bakersfield.
Some of the tens of thousands of dollars raised over the years went this past year to send Centennial state high school champ Seth Hicks to the High School Senior National Wrestling Championships in Virginia Beach, Va., and to send Frontier sophomore Alex Gomez to the USA Wresding Girls Folkstyle National Championships in Oklahoma City.
The event’s success probably can be traced to a combination of including old-fashioned fun — think refreshments and T-shirts, and, yes, alcohol — with a dam good athletic display.
There had been 24 deaths in the Enniscorthy-to-Wexford stretch of the river over 27 years; then there were five in a week.
OVER SIX DAYS IN NOVEMBER IN A string of unconnected incidents, six men jumped into the fast-flowing River Slaney in County Wexford, Ireland.
At 9am on Monday, 11 November, Peter Barron, 41, jumped into the river off a bridge in Enniscorthy after delivering his two children to school.
At 1.35am on Saturday, 15 November, David Kehoe, 28, was seen jumping into the river from the bridge.
Four men jumped into the river on Sunday, 17 November, three of whom drowned.
At 4am, a man believed to be from Latvia, 39 or ""in his late twenties"", jumped from the bridge and was rescued.
At 11pm, John Foley, 19, jumped in at Bunclody about 13 miles away, and his body was recovered three hours later.
Finally, some time before midnight, a man aged 23 jumped Babalu Aye Orisha who rules over infectious diseases and healing.
He is one of the most feared and revered orishaw because of his power over life and death.
Babalu Aye’s worship originated with the Fon tribe of Benin, in Western Africa, but his influence was so powerful that tribes up and down the West African coast adopted his worship.
Babalu Aye has a special relationship with the orisha Shango because he was the only one who reached out to assist him when he was sick and homeless.
Babalu Aye is frequently called upon for help with healing and overcoming these plagues.
A woman accused of trying to trade her seven-month-old daughter for a Chihuahua puppy in Enid r Oklahoma, was charged with trafficking in children.
Kathryn Smith, 21, offered to give her mother's neighbour the child if the woman gave her the Chihuahua she was selling for $200.
ARRESTED FOR DREAM An unnamed 40-year-old woman turned up on Alfredo Baldeschi’s doorstep and told him she had dreamed about the accident which had killed his sister Loredana Balseschi, 40, was found dead in her overturned Astra at Latina, south of Rome.
Alfredo told police about the encounter and they advised him to ask her to go through the “dream"" again and secretly record her.
After listening to the tape, police charged the woman with manslaughter because she recounted details known only to investigators.
The tiger shot and killed by trackers on Wednesday is lowered into a California Department of Fish and Game truck in Moorpark.
Mystery tiger shot, killed by trackers in Southland Animal tracked by paw prints, spotted near back yard in hills of Simi Valley The Associated Press LOS ANGELES — A tiger mysteriously on the loose in the hills of Southern California was shot and killed by government trackers early Wednesday after being spotted slinking along the back yards of suburban homes.
They finally caught up with the orange tiger as it darted through green brash in Moorpark, northwest of Los Angeles.
The tiger was shot several hundred yards from soccer and baseball fields at the edge of a housing development, said Loma Bernard, a spokeswoman for the California Department of Fish and Game.
Trackers with the United States Department of Agriculture’s Wildlife Services and state Fish andGamehad to shootto kill because a tranquilizer would have taken five to 10 minutes to bring down the animal, Bernard said.
They were concerned the animal might attack them or bolt onto a nearby highway.
Authorities received a call just after 6 am. from a resident who reported the tiger walking past his back fence.
Ken Tucker told KCBS-TV the tiger walked to a nearby house and “was just staring down” the neighbor’s dogs.
The trackers had been looking for the animal for eight days, using infrared equipment at night.
The hunt began after the discovery of paw prints on a ranch near the library that were far too large for native bobcats or mountain lions.
Bernard said the owner could have told authorities about the tiger’s temperament and eating habits, which might have helped them catch tire animal sooner.
As the cat roamed the hills, it became hungrier and disoriented, making it more dangerous to the nearby community of horse ranches and sprawling homes.
Authorities said they were investigating how the cat got loose in tire hills.
Two weeks ago, authorities removed nearly two-dozen large cats, including lions and tigers, from property rented by Abby and Emma Hedengran not far from the library, Bernard said.
All the animals that inspectors found on the property were accounted for, she said.
A telephone message left Wednesday for the Hedengrans by The Associated Press was not immediately returned.
Bernard said the couple had a permit to keep the animals in a facility in Temecula in Riverside County but had moved them to Moorpark in Ventura County, where they did not have a license to keep the animals.
The only facility in that area with a license to house exotic cats is Moorpark College’s teaching zoo, said Kathy Jenks, director of the Ventura County Department of Animal Regulations.
Anecropsywillbeperformedonthe tiger, which could help provide clues to its history.
Flames consumed the business district on July 7, 1 889, following a cooking accident from Kelsey Home.
With many of buildings at the time in the downtown area built from wood, and insufficient fire department techniques, the inferno raged.
For modem day reference the fire started on 20th and 1 streets and torched the block until it sizzled to a halt on Chester and 19th streets.
Despite losing the entire business district, many of the residents were spared according to records at the Kern County Museum.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
After McKinney killed his best friend in Porterville in 1902, he started zigzag across the southwest United States.
His journey as a horseback outlaw brought him back to the Central Valley in 1903.
McKinney came back to Bakersfield in 1903 to meet up with some friends.
His crew got together at the “Joss House,” which at the time was located on 22nd and L streets.
Local law enforcement caught wind of McKinney’s whereabouts and confronted the outlaw.
After a gun battle, the Bakersfield city marshal, deputy sheriff and McKinney were all left dead.
In November 1990, a teenager testified before the United States Congress that she'd seen Iraqi soldiers leaving babies to die on a Kuwaiti hospital floor and stealing their incubators.
It later transpired that the girl was the Kuwaiti ambassador's daughter, her testimony organised by a PR company hired to get America into the Gulf War.
While doctors removed the male organs at birth, she still has testosterone.
Wheeler says her father forced her into the sideshow life, and took the money she earned.
Depressed and in despair, Wheeler returned to the only life she knew the side show, but at each appearance she would look for her son.
Then one day, her son Richard Lorenc saw her in a book entitled American Sideshow, and tracked her down.
He came to Bakersfield in June, and brought along a scrapbook filled with pictures of his family, her daughter-in-law and her two grandkids.
A beaver and her baby have been captured after trying to get into a grocery store and will be released into the wild.
HALLOWEEN By STACY LEISER The Leaf-Chronicle If you’re looking to get away this weekend, you can enter a whole new realm by visiting the Bell Witch Cave in Adams, Term.
The cave is a 30-minute drive from downtown Clarksville, but the renowned ghostly gathering place feels worlds away from home.
The site was the home of John Bell and his family, who were tormented by a spiteful and sometimes violent witch from 1817 to 1821.
Although the many witness accounts lend credence to the stories of clear, disembodied voices speak-ing in the Bell house and people being struck and kicked by invisible aggressors, there is much curiosity about who the witch was and why she chose to harass the Bells.
Visitors can tour a cave on the property, said to be haunted, for $10, or tour a reproduction of the Bells’ log cabin for $7.
In honor of Halloween, Bell Witch Cave also will have haunted hayrides and psychic readings available on site today through Sunday.
Cabin tours $7 per person, daylight hours only.This weekend’s special Halloween offerings include psychic readings, $ 1 5 each, and, after dark, haunted hayrides, $ 1 0 per person.
EIH&rWFI JMBIIIZZ2 I EHIDE MXEFDafll HOME ONLINE STOTZB OWR LOCATION Historic Bell Witch Cave The Historic Bell Witch Cave Inc. has been placed on the National Historical Registry by the United States Department of Interior effective April 2008.
This is the very land that the Bell Witch tormented the Bell family on in the early 1800's.
Cave tours are $10.00 per person, with a minimum required $20.00 per cave tour.
May Open On Weekends Only June through Labor Day Open 6 Days a week Labor Day through Oct. 1st Open On Weekends Only Special Dates and Times in Oct. for Halloween Special Dates and Times in November and December call for details.
Bell Witch Cave Home | Legend Of The Bell Witch | Bell Witch Cave J Beil Witch Photos j Bell Witch Cabin A Bell Witch Halloween | Bell Witch Special Tours | Bell Witch Canoe Rentals | Bell Witch Online Store Website Design by Tennessee Web Technology, LLC ©2009.
The tormenting spirit of America's best-known poltergeist case ADAMS, TENNESSEE, in 1817 was the site of one of the most well-known hauntings in American history so well known that it eventually caught the attention and then the involvement of a future president of the United States.
The facts of The Bell Witch case share little in common with the mythology created for The Blair Witch Project, except they both attracted a great deal of public interest.
A remarkable occurrence, which attracted wide-spread interest, was connected with the family of John Bell, who settled near what is now Adams Station about 1804.
This witch was supposed to be some spiritual being having the voice and attributes of a woman.
It was invisible to the eye, yet it would hold conversation and even shake hands with certain individuals.
The freaks it performed were wonderful and seemingly designed to annoy the family.
It would take the sugar from the bowls, spill the milk, take the quilts from the beds, slap and pinch the children, and then laugh at the discomfiture of its victims.
At first it was supposed to be a good spirit, but its subsequent acts, together with the curses with which it supplemented its remarks, proved the contrary.
A volume might be written concerning the performance of this wonderful being, as they are now described by contemporaries and their descendants.
That all this actually occurred will not be disputed, nor will a rational explanation be attempted.
But the prevailing account is that it was the spirit of Kate Batts, a mean old neighbor of John Bell who believed she was cheated by him in a land purchase.
On her deathbed, she swore that she would haunt John Bell and his descendents.
Sure enough, tradition says, the Bells were tormented for years by the malicious spirit of Old Kate Batts.
Toward the other members of the family the witch was either indifferent or, as in the case of Mrs.
No one ever saw her, but every visitor to the Bell home heard her all too well.
She yelled all night to keep them from sleeping, and snatched food from their mouths at mealtime.
But the farmer's find last Friday was the first in a long time, Wolfe said.
The Salem Bomb Squad and the United States Air Force Explosive, Ordinance Disposal unit from Portland responded to the scene and took over the disposal process for the shell.
The EOD unit decided to wait until Saturday morning to dispose of the shell for safety reasons.
Sheriffs office personnel guarded the area overnight, and bomb disposal crews returned to thb scene Saturday and disposed of the shell.
Military personnel on scene identified the shell as a preWorld War II artillery shell with a range of 1 2 miles.
Mike Sheppard points to where Mrs Reynolds' pet dog was found THERE HAVE BEEN several dramatic Alien Big Cat incidents since our feature on the subject last issue.
On Sunday evening, 5 January, 90-year-old Joan Reynolds called her home help Michael Shepherd.
The house' bound widow was worried that she had not seen her sevenyear-old whippet, Peter, or her Bedlington terrier, Jason, for some time.
Mr Sheppard, 62, drove to Mrs Reynolds’s farmhouse in the Black Mountains near Llangadog, Carmarthenshire, and searched the farm with his torch.
He found the whippet lying dead with its throat tom out, and an enormous jet black cat standing over it with blood on its face.
An armed response unit arrived within 10 minutes and officers began a torchlight search.
One of them saw the larger beast, but it vanished into the woods before he could get a clear shot.
Two years ago, Mr Sheppard had seen the same large cat emerging from Mrs Reynolds’s Police warned farmers not to go out alone after dark chicken run with a hen in its jaws.
By the time police arrived that time the animal had gone, although officers took casts of its pawprints.
On 6 January police warned all local farmers not to go out alone after dark, and marksmen armed with sniper’s rifles and automatic weapons staked out Mrs Reynolds’s farmhouse.
At 2am on 8 January, a lorry driver saw a big cat in his headlights at the Associated Co-operative Creamery in Llangadog, not far from Mrs Reynolds’s farm.
The next day, there was another sighting on the edge of woodland at Ffairfach, about seven miles south-west of Llangadog.
Pawprints of various sizes were found in the snow and police said they could be looking for between five and seven animals.
There was a further sighting near Llangadog in the early hours of 12 January, by two police officers using night vision glasses.
Danny Bamping of the British Big Cats Society has been told by several different sources that two panthers were released into the wild in that area in 1995.
A man who used to use the panthers to guard his scrapyard was sent to prison and left the cats with a friend to look after, but he got scratched by them and released them into the wild.
Gwent is in south-east Wales, while Brechfa is in a forested area near Carmarthen, a good 40 miles further west.
Also, the Beast of Bont doesn’t prowl South Wales, but the area round Pontrhydfendigaid in Mid Wales.
The lynx that escaped from Kirkudbright Wildlife Park, Dumfries & Galloway was recaptured on Friday, 13 December at Cannee Farm, Kirkcudbright, after 17 days on the loose.
At 9.30am on the same day in Cardrona, Peebles-shire, John Smith and his wife Violet saw an odd-looking sheep on a hillside overlooking their back garden about half a mile away.
Through his binoculars, Mr Smith saw that it was a pure white ABC, at least 3ft long.
Around the same time, a farmer nearby complained of his horses being spooked.
The hand-held camera and digital zoom gave a poor picture quality, but Mark Fraser and other members of the Scottish Big Cat Society agreed it was a felid and larger than a domestic cat.
Albinism occurs in all cats; there was until recently an albino puma in Frankfurt Zoo.
At 3.20am on 23 December, residents of Ardrossan in Ayrshire, on Scotland’s west coast, called police after hearing shrill screams coming from wasteland near the railway line.
From a distance of about 35 yards , three officers saw a pumatype big cat with a dark coat, at least 3ft tall with a long black tail.
On 18 November, a motorist saw a brown ABC at Dalgarven, 4 miles inland, and on 24 December, three people reported a large black ABC on the outskirts of Beith, 10 miles inland from Ardrossan.
This year's festival features an oversized duck by Dutch artist Florentijn Hofman, whose Rubber Duck project has brought the world's largest ducks to harbors across the world, including Japan, Brazil, Australia and Taiwan, matt hamilton/ap Nobody Wants the 'Black USS Constitution' in Their Office United States News + More usnews.com Washington Whispers Offering a fun, insider’s view of Washington since 1933 A model of the USS Constitution celled the ""Bis ck Ship, "" at the National Museum of the United States Navy, has a storied past of tragedy.
Constitution' in Their Office There's a model boat with a haunting history sitting in a glass case at the National A model of the USS Constitution called the ""Black Ship,"" at the National Museum of the United States Navy, has a storied past of tragedy.
EDT There’s a model ship at the National Museum of the United States Navy that has a history so creepy, that nobody in the United States government wants the toy boat in their office.
Henry J Hendrix, the outgoing director of Naval History and Heritage Command, as he gives a tour of the museum, part of Washington’s Navy Yard.
The “black ship,” as it’s also called, is a replica of the USS Constitution, a relic from the 1790s that remains in Boston.
So instead the boat remains behind a glass case in the museum what used to be the old Naval Gun Factory — on the same campus where the September 2013 Navy Yard shooting occurred.
National Museum of the United States Navy, has a storied past of tragedy.
It’s Hendnx’s last full day on the job, after serving “26 years, two months, 1 7 days” in the Navy. an e , S m 61 ndl ' 19 hls career at . the be'"" 1 ofthe unit charged with looking after its archives, artifacts, art d museums.
There was mold growing on some documents and even more documents were piling up.
But literally we have undertaken what we call band-aid solutions,” Hendrix said, ticking off improvements like upgrading temperature and humidity control in the museum.
On the same day as Hendrix’s retirement, the Naval History and entage Command is being awarded a Meritorious Unit Commendation for getting the archives And much has been discovered going through the documents, microfilm and crates.
The reason it was ""Navy"" was because its twin resided on the presidential yacht, the USS Mayflower.
After the USS Mayflower, in presidential yacht history, came the USS Sequoia.
And speaking of presidents’ bottoms, Hendrix then pointed out Abe Lincoln's old chair.
Much ofthe furniture came off, including the chair, which ended up in the building we today call the Old Executive Office Building “That’s where Lincoln would go to take telegraphs from the field,” Hendrix said.
Nikki Schwab • Nikki Schwab is a reporter for United States News and World Report.
In M A Literary Analysis of The Scarlet Letter "" Johnson relates how some Puritans believe that Chillingworth was tainted during his stay with the Indians.
Numbers in parentheses in Johnson’s text refer to the Signet Classic edition of The Scarlet Letter ] ""In one aspect of human nature, however, Chillingworth is like no other.
While not sharing in the full range of human warmth and emotions encompassed by the f A, * he becomes monomaniacally supreme in one aspect alone, sacrificing all things good, even his own life and health, for that diabolical distortion of human character-revenge.
Torturing the man who has fathered a child with his wife becomes the sole purpose of Chillingworth* s life.
Then, through his determined searching, he discovers at last that Dimmesdale, too, has an * A* on his heart corresponding to Hester’s.
Chillingworth ’ s ’A’ may also stand for alchemist and artist, for he is both.
Unlike Hester’s creative art, however, his is a wholly destructive black art, clearly meaning black magic and witchcraft.
CONCLUSION The close association of Chillingworth (who, as avenger, becomes the Black Man or devil) with the community creates a number of ironies.
These affinities are established as soon as Chillingworth enters the community, when they rejoice that he, the old physician, can treat the ailing young minister Dimmesdale, who initially, and secretly, rejects this.
From this allegiance of Chillingworth and the community come several other ironies.
While the community thinks that the Black Man abides in the forest, he actually abides among them in the form of their honored guest and ’healer, * Chillingworth.
And while the community believes that witchcraft is practiced somewhere in the depths of the forest, the most heinous black magic is practiced with their approval and cooperation right under their noses in Chillingworth 1 s laboratory.
The conclusion that the reader is given to draw, then, is that Hester and Pearl are not respectively, lover and daughter of a Black Man or Satan who inhabits the forest.
Rather it is the community itself which has a close relationship to the Black Man, in the person of Chillingworth, and encourages his dark arts.
The true nature of every human is both sinful and angelic, somber and joyful, selfish and loving.
My parents lived in Littleton before I was born, but I had ever been there before this.
It has some very beautiful rural areas, including Sarah Doublet Forest, the site of one of the 17th century praying Indian villages.
In the 1640s Reverend John Eliot of Roxbury, Massachusetts began trying to convert local Indians to Christianity.
Although the villages had native names, Eliot expected their inhabitants to adopt not just Christianity but also an English way of life.
Apparently hunting, gardening and a seasonally nomadic life were just too pagan.
Instead, the Indians lived in wooden houses, raised livestock, and farmed like their Puritan neighbors.
Men and women cut their hair in the English fashion and discarded their traditional dress for wool clothes.
It’s estimated that up to 20% of Massachusetts Indians eventually lived in these villages, but since no villages remain you can correctly surmise things didn’t turn out well.
In 1675 the other 80% of the native population rose up to oust the English from Massachusetts in the conflict called King Philip f s war.
Although the praying Indian’s pledged their support to the colonists they were nonetheless rounded up and confined to Deer Island and Long Island in Boston Harbor.
Sarah and a few others had made their way back to Nashoba, but eventually she became the last survivor of that praying Indian village.
When she died in 1736 she willed whatever land had not already been taken by her English neighbors to Ephraim and Elnathan Jones, two local men who had cared for her when she grew infirm.
The land eventually came into the hands of two women named Edith Jenkins and Fanny Knapp, who willed the land to Littleton in the 1970s.
A'pcinic the lake monster would have lived in Lake Nagog, which is adjacent to Sarah Doublet forest.
A'pcinic, who had a beak and horns, supposedly dragged his tentacled arms along the shoreline when hungry to find his next meal.
Squeeze This Rice, and It Drips Blood • by Cathrvn Wellner • November 8, 2011 • 9:30 pm Put away the Halloween costume.
Normally HSA protein is manufactured by the liver and harvested the same way any other blood ingredients are, through donations.
In heavy demand for both medicinal (severe bums, cirrhosis of the liver, hemorrhagic shock) and laboratory uses, HSA is in perennially short supply.
China has experienced both chronic shortages of HSA and problems with tainted blood supplies.
So Professor Daichang Yang, a plant biotechnologist, and his colleagues set to work to develop a rice that could carry the albumin gene.
According to Nature News * HSA-yielding plants such as potatoes have been used for the last two decades, but they have been too high cost and low yield for commercial use.
Rice seeds, with their high protein content and high yields, are proving to be attractive carriers of the HSA gene.
Not only were the two chemically and physically identical, but they were also similar when tested for medical efficacy and immune reactivity.
In rats with liver disease, both types of HSA proved equally effective in relieving symptoms associated with cirrhosis.
And rats that were given rice-derived HSA showed no stronger immune reaction than animals that had been given the plasma-derived version.
Yang is hoping the United States Food and Dmg Administration will grant permission for human trials within the next two years.
Large-scale planting of genetically modified rice fields that could produce enough seed for mass production of the protein also raises environmental and food supply contamination concerns, since rice is a major world food staple.
Cross pollination among rice varieties occurs less frequently than among some cultivars such as canola.
However, the Rice Knowledge Bank maintained by the International Rice Research Institute suggests up to 5% of a rice crop can be cross pollinated through wind, insects, birds, snails and water.
Given the biotech industry’s penchant for ignoring research that reveals numerous problems with genetically modified crops, enthusiasm for this new supply of HSA needs to be tempered with considerable caution.
Carri Wilbanks Special for USA TODAY Buckle up, sit back and enjoy “America’s Favorite Drive,” from Virginia to North Carolina, to the tune of some good ol’ mountain music along the famed Blue Ridge Parkway.
The scenic link between Shenandoah National Park and the Great Smoky Mountains National Park is a meandering drive that winds visitors slowly through the southern highlands of Appalachia.
STAYING AROUND THE PARK Aside from staying at one of the many quaint towns just a few miles off the parkway, visitors have several overnight options along the route itself.
Open from spring to fall, the Peaks of Otter Lodge is located at Milepost 86 and greets weary travelers with a full-service restaurant and lounge, as well as 63 rooms with views of Abbott Lake.
If car camping is more your speed, reserve your spot at one of several campgrounds along the drive, such as the park’s largest, Julian Price Park.
Open from May 9 through the fall, it offers campers options to rent canoes, fish and hike among the hemlocks and hickory trees that shade the campground.
Visitors should keep their north of eyes out for black bears, river otMount ters, 31 salamander species and Pisgah even the occasional peregrine in North falcon.
OUTDOOR ACTIVITIES Along the parkway, stop and stretch your legs on a short stroll to Humpback Rocks and explore the 19th-century farm buildings at the site near Milepost 5.8.
Nearby, one of the most photographed buildings on the drive, Mabry Mill, is a must-see destination and the perfect place for a post-hike picnic.
The Blue Ridge Parkway also offers a great opportunity to take in the dazzling autumn fall foliage, starting in October, or rhododendrons and other wildflowers blossoming in spring.
ICONIC FEATURES OF THE PARK More than just breathtaking overlooks, hiking and bird watching, the parkway also offers visitors true mountain culture including mountain music at a number of concerts throughout the year.
Bluegrass, mountain gospel music and flatfoot dancing opportunities abound along the drive.
The Blue Ridge Music Center celebrates the music and musicians of the area.
It features an outdoor amphitheater and an indoor interpretive center/theater.
You can hear traditional fiddle, banjo and guitar music wafting out of the center via free presentations each weekday from noon to 4m.
Be sure to take note of the relics of the pioneer past as you drive by preserved log structures and other historical settlements, some of which are among the oldest in the country.
Many pf the stones in the cemetery are missing due to theft, vandalism and weather, but Friends of Bodie is working to prevent that in the future.
Proceeds from the sale of this brochure are to be used for the stabilization and restoration of the cemetery.
AQeia Mattos Dec., 1902 Age 1 yr , 9 mos, 17 ds Myrtle on reverse side 37.
Arrild April 29, 1903 19 yrs, 8 mos “He shall sleep but not forever” 39.
Alexander Nixon Native Tyrone, Ireland Bom 1847June 13, 1878 Age 3lyrs.
He was killed in a shootout at Gallagher and O'Brien’s Saloon over words about who was a better man after the offer of a drink by his friend Tom McDonald.
AnnaMaria Petralli June 24, 1852June 30, 1915 Follow the path out and up the hill ON TOP OF THE HILL AT BODIE 45.
Loose Warren Born Quincy, Illinois August 6, 1848 DiedBodie Aug., 1917 Footstone says “Brother’ 7 A small splintered wooden marker is next to this site.
Wereley “Brother We lay thee now to rest ” Dec., 1848-Feb., 1890 A Native of Ontario, Canada 53.
McCracken April 19, 1905 Age 45 yrs “McCracken” on base Ivy on reverse side of stone 54.
Dolan Mary April 10, 1851-Feb., 1917 James S Jan., 1841-March 11, 1904 58.
Joe Scanavino Bom 1842Died 1909 An Italian immigrant who spoke little' English, he owned and operate the Goat Ranch south of Bodie for many years.
The father of eight children, Mono Co. hired a teacher to live and teach at his ranch.
Steven A Scanavino April 19, 1895-Dec., 1970 Worked as an electrical engineer for several large firms.
In memory of James A Garfield President of the United States Died Sept., 1881 Erected Jan.89 This monument was originally cut for “Bill Bodey,” father of the town.
There was some talk on the streets Monday in the direction of raising a subscription to buy the monument which was cut a couple of years ago in Bodie, and have it erected in the cemetery in honor of the late President Garfield.
The fickle public did take and use the monument meant for Bill Bodey and erected it to the memory of President Garfield, while 72.
Edith E Richards April 9, 1876-Jan., 1906 Go back through gate to Wards Cemetary 73.
In Loving memory Christine” Daughter of George & Alice Parker March 18, 1903-Aug., 1905 Gray with ivy on sides, white base 74.
Owner of the Merchandise Store, he also had stage transport contracts to Hawthorne, NV. the remains of Bill Bodey rested in an unmarked grave.
Thomas Miller Aug 4, 1858-Dec 17, 1903 “Father” Odd Fellow's Emblem Ran the Mono Mills Store.
Mary A Miller 1893-1963 “In God’s Care” “Mother” Exit cemetery, turn right and follow fence to next marker 80.
She moved to mining camp brothels in Colorado and Idaho for 2 years, and then on to Virginia City and Reno.
Because of the life she led, when she died in Nov. of 1911 or 1912, she was buried outside the cemetery fence.
LOTTIE JOHL Another local prostitute named Lottie was a little more fortunate.
She married a local butcher Eli Johl and, they lived in town for many years.
When Lottie Johl died in Nov.99, her husband Eli fought hard to have her buried inside the cemetery.
The townspeople finally gave in and let him bury her at the far southwest corner of the cemetery.
CEMETERY SYMBOLS One way to learn about the past is through information found in cemeteries.
Besides names, birth and death dates and other personal information, cemetery symbols used by stone carvers and monument companies from the 1700s forward included traditional and religious symbols.
Angels of heaven, trumpeting they accompany the soul heavenward, announcing arrival.
Calla Lilly-majestic beauty Daisy-youth Morning glory-resurrection Lily -purity, chastity Pansy-humility Rose-love Shamrock-holy trinity Thistle-fall of man Gates-passageway to heaven Hands-clasped, showing love and eternity.
L ong experience in the undertaking business enables me to give it the proper attention.
COFFINS, CASKETS ANI' SHROUDS Always on hand. f LOST BUT These persons are known to be buried in Bodie; the location of their graves is unknown.
Jack O’Hara Died of gun shot wounds when he and 3 others jumped a mining claim.
O’Brien July 10,1879 Died in explosion of powder magazine at Summit Mine.
As he lay dying he fired one shot critically wounding Tom Dillon who survived.
Shot in the back by Joseph DeRoche, when he objected to DeRoche dancing with his wife.
James Blair Died in a duel Jan 18, 1878 Antone Valencis Died 1878 Shot by Jesus Revis James Doyle Killed in the Bodie Mine June 19, 1878 John Goff Shot in a claim jumping dispute Aug 23, 1879 Almond Parks Fell 50 ft down shaft in Black Hawk Mine Oct 1879 Michael J Cody U S Land Agent.
THE BODIE CEMETERY The present site of the Bodie Cemetery was established in 1877 and consists of three discrete burial areas within the perimeter fence.
The People’s or Ward’s Cemetery is located on the north end of the cemetery.
The Freemason’s or Masonic, and the Miner’s Union plots are on the south end.
The last burial to take place in the cemetery was on August 14,1994 when Kenneth L McKeough, bom in Bodie in 1908 was interred.
Due to Bodie’s status as a landmark, there are only about a dozen citizens left who may be buried here.
However the high water table in this area caused the graves to fill with water, and in 1877 the cemetery was moved to its present location.
Not all of the burials were defined by monuments, or the markers were missing in the old cemetery.
As a result, an unknown number of graves remain in the original location.
The area within the fence was reserved for the “Respectable,” and those “Outside the Pale of Decency” such as prostitutes, gunmen and illegitimate children were buried outside the fence.
Before the establishment of a cemetery at Bodie, the earliest burials took place 18 miles northeast of Bodie at Aurora in the early 1860's and at Bridgeport, located 12 miles southwest, established in the late 1850's.
Nearly all the Chinese originally arrived in San Francisco and moved from camp to camp, coming to Bodie from Virginia City.
The Chinese owned and operated many businesses, even in the main part of town.
A few Chinese mined their own claims, which had been deserted by Euro-American miners.
Both the Chinese and EuroAmerican population began to decline as the economic downturn began in town.
Early Chinese cemeteries were only marked by wooden headboards and inscribed with the name and often the location in China where the remains were to he sent for final burial.
It was the belief of the Chinese immigrants that the final resting-place of their dead must be in family plots in China.
Burials in America were only temporary as the graves would be reopened after several years and the bones shipped back to the deceased's home village when financially possible.
According to their religious beliefs the spirit of the dead person remains near the body, requiring care and attention from the descendants.
The saints may be forgotten or rituals ineffective if the bones are not returned to the home village.
While social customs were responsible for determining whom among the EuroAmerican population could be buried within the main cemetery, ethnic background of the individual was also a crucial factor in location of the burial.
Racial prejudice required that the Chinese be buried on the slope above the west perimeter fence, where the remains of several hundred Chinese were buried.
By 1870 approximately 11 thousand Chinese had died in the United States and the remains of over 6 thousand had been shipped home to China.
In June 1994 a ground penetrating radar survey was conducted and shoed no evidence of disturbances in an area southeast of the current cemetery thought to have been used as the Chinese cemetery.
This showed the cemetery never extended to that area as previously thought.
Nathan Cook Gregory Son of Nathan H & Catherine C Gregory Jan., 1887Sept., 1890 “Suffer little children to come unto me.
Rest in Peace ” He operated a cattle ranch between Bodie and Aurora, and maintained a residence still standing in Bodie today.
Boyd owned and operated the Occidental Hotel from 1883 to the time it burned down in the 1932 fire.
James D Perry Native Ireland Died June 9, 1896 Aged 63yrs Odd Fellows emblem and all seeing eye on shield A spray of ivy Served as Supervisor of Mono Co.
McKean March 24, 1860-May 30, 1923 or 1928 Independent Order of Odd Fellows Emblem at top 12.
Lester L.Bell Jan., 1888-July 5, 1950 Managed the Standard Mill in later years.
It was said no matter how much gold passed through his hands, none of it stuck.
Leslie S Nich oils Born June 17, 1908 Died Oct., 1908 “Our Darling” 18.
She died after she was accidentally struck in the head with a pick axe while drainage was being dug around her house.
Her obituary states that Mary was mourned by a large circle of friends after a long illness.
Masonic Emblem on top At the time of his death, he was one of the oldest resident miners.
John F Kennedy July 11, 1902 Age 39yrs Arrived in San Francisco in 1851, and found his way to Bodie from there.
Conway May 20, 1901 Aged 1 yr, 2 mos, 28 ds 9 Welcome to Bodie State Historic Park This brochure contains our current tour schedule and map.
Enjoy exploring Bodie on your own with this booklet that describes over 65 marked sites in the town.
Cost: $1 ♦ Available at museum & cemetery History Talk: Free Time: 2:15m.
Free Time: 12:15m. at County Barn, near museum ♦ A 30-minute V^eo-abSMSe^ ONLY origins and glory days of Bodie.
Please, no dogs on lour ♦ A 50-minute tour of the Standard Consolidated Mill, where the majority of Bodie’s gold and silver was processed after being mined.
Many of our tours are presented as “Living History,” where the tour guide is in period costume.
Journey back into time and decide if you would like being an employee at the mill in the early 1900s.
While the distance covered is not great, tours may be challenging for those who have difficulty walking.
Friends of Bodie is a group dedicated to the preservation of the gold-mining ghost town of Bodie.
This expanded tour will take you to die railway station, site of Bodie’s last cyanide plant, and entrances to mine shafts.
Moderate walk; wear good walking shoes, bring water, hat, sunscreen and windb maker.
In addition to sites seen on the above tour, we will walk die old iailway grade, visit the site of die Red Cloud Mine and end up atop Standard Hill.
At conclusion of tour, a walk and talk through town ends your visit to Bodie.
MORTUARY CO-OWNER CHARGED WITH ABUSE The co-owner of a Texas mortuary where eight decaying bodies were found has turned himself into police.
Johnson’s wife, 35-year-old Rachel HardyJ ohnson, was arrested Friday at her Arlington, Texas, home on seven warrants.
Both are accused of treating in “an offensive maimer” the remains of seven bodies.
Officials said the superintendent at the North Side Cemetery made the discovery on Monday.
He said he believes someone used a shovel to dig up the grave sometime over the weekend.
Police said they think the action was planned because of how neatly it was done.
Nov 12, 9s*5 PM EST Doctors say marrow transplant may have cured AIDS By PATRICK McGROARTY Associated Press Writer BERLIN -An American man who suffered from AIDS appears to have been cured of the disease 20 months after receiving a targeted bone marrow transplant normally used to fight leukemia, his doctors said Wednesday.
Gero Huetter said his 42-year-old patient, an American living in Berlin who was not identified, had been infected with the AIDS virus for more than a decade.
But 20 months after undergoing a transplant of genetically selected bone marrow, he no longer show r s signs of carrying the virus.
Researchers at Berlin’s Charite hospital and medical school say tests on his bone marrow, blood and other organ tissues have all been clean.
Andrew Badlev, director of the HIV and immunology research lab at the Mavo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., said those tests have probably not been extensive enough.
This isn’t the first time marrow r transplants have been attempted for treating AIDS or HIV infection.
In 1999, an article in the journal Medical Hypotheses reviewed the results of 32 attempts reported between 1982 and 1996.
As Huetter w ho is a hematologist, not an HIV specialist prepared to treat the patient’s leukemia with a bone marrow transplant, he recalled that some people cam' a genetic mutation that seems to make them resistant to HIV infection.
If the mutation, called Delta 32, is inherited from both parents, it prevents HD 7 from attaching itself to cells by blocking CCR5, a receptor that acts as a kind of gateway. ”1 read it in 1996, coincidentally,” Huetter told reporters at the medical school.
Roughly one in 1,000 Europeans and Americans hav e inherited the mutation from both parents, and Huetter set out to find one such person among donors that matched the patient’s marrow type.
Out of a pool of 80 suitable donors, the 61st person tested carried the proper mutation.
Before the transplant, the patient endured powerful drugs and radiation to kill off his own infected bone marrow cells and disable his immune system a treatment fatal to between 20 and 30 percent of recipients.
Huetters team feared that the drugs might interfere with the new marrow r cells’ survival.
They risked lowering his defenses in the hopes that the new r , mutated cells would reiect the virus on their own.
NEWS Nepal jails 19 over 'Himalayan Viagra' murders AFP Tue, Nov 15, 2011 A court in Nepal has convicted 19 villagers over the murder of a group of farmers during a fight over a prized aphrodisiac plant dubbed the ""Himalayan Viagra"", an official said Tuesday.
Seven farmers were killed in the remote northern district of Manang in June 2009 after going to forage for Yarchagumba, a rare parasitic plant that is a major source of income for many Himalayan communities.
The accused claimed the farmers died accidentally when a fight broke out over the right to harvest the plant, which is in particular demand in China where a kilogramme can fetch tens of thousands of dollars.
The valley near the border with China where the victims went missing in June 2009 is among the most remote parts of Nepal, and it was several weeks before authorities learned of the deaths.
The court, which is a two day walk from the nearest road, has had to delay the verdict more than a dozen times due to absent judges and lawyers.
Local authorities say police had to walk for days to reach the area where the bodies of the seven men were discovered.
They initially arrested the entire village, but later released the women and children.
News Network | / 1 of 1 11 / 16/2011 7:04 PM OCKNEY BRAIN DRAINED rchaeologists have discovered the ■mains of the earliest Londoner to have idergone major head surgery.
The )per half of the adult male skull came to jht last October during archaeological ork on the foreshore of the Thames at lelsea.
The man, who lived around 1750 "", had been trepanned a portion of e skull was removed using a scraping ol, probably a flint.
There was no evimce of post-operative infection, and me had re-grown around the edge of e hole, indicating that the man had surged his treatment.
It is difficult to determine why drilling holes into peoples' heads has been a feature of almost every culture in world history, but the procedure may have alleviated cranial fractures or been believed to relieve the effects of theninexplicable mental illness.
Detectives cordoned off the area and forensic experts made a fingertip search.
Then forest manager Peter Adams arrived and identified the 'brain' as a beeffungus.
TWO YEARS AGO, FAYE AND STEPHEN Beuby, an American couple, bought a villa in the hilltop village of Benabbio, near the spa resort of Bagni di Lucca in northern Tuscany.
On 30 November 2002, workmen broke through a bricked-up door to create space for a wine cellar, and found the skeleton of Nemo Cianelli, 57.
With the skeleton lay a suitcase, rifle, bricklayer's trowel, bucket, pile of bricks and suicide note in a Chianti bottle.
The note, on paper headed with Cianelli's name, explained that he had an incurable disease and wanted to spare his family grief.
In April 1958, he told everyone he was going to America and was never heard from again.
He left instructions with a local builder to come in after his ""departure"" and replaster the wall.
Cianelli had been a wealthy businessman who lived in the villa with his wife and daughters.
He worked for a local tannery, drove a sports car and travelled frequently to America on business.
His wife died several years ago without learning what had become of her husband.
One has to wonder why none of them was curious about the new brickwork in the cellar.
An extra twist to the story is given by the family doctor, Francesco De Paulis, who said that the medical records of Cianelli, whose first name means ""no one"" in Latin, showed that he had been in perfect health at the time of his disappearance.
Home TV & Video United States I World I Politics I Justice I Entertainment I Tech I Health I Living I Travel I Opinion I iReport I Money I Sports » California wildfires temporarily suspend search for aliens By Melodi Smith and Kate Grise, CN N updated 8:1 3 AM EDT, Wed August 6, 2014 Smoke and fire close in on SETTs telescope array.
New space threat has NASA over the moon updated 12:55 PM EDT, Wed July 25, 2014 Seems NASA's fascination w ith the moon is in the past.
At SETI — which stands for Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence -scientists search the heavens for signs of extraterrestrial life by ""listening"" with an array of small satellite dishes.
The blaze came within a mile of the facility, located near Hat Creek, California, on both the east and west, according to Shostak.
We're 'very close' to finding another Earth updated 11:56 PM EDT, Mon July 14, 2014 Scientists looking for signs of life in the universe -as w ell as another planet lil« our ow n — are a lot closer to their goal than people realize.
United States reveals secret plans for '60s moon base updated 8:56 AM EDT, Frl July 25, 2014 The United States Army brainchild ""Project Horizon"" was born.
As the flames got closer, the staff fled to safer ground and shut down the satellites.
After moon, next stop Mars updated 8:57 AM EDT, Frl July 25, 2014 Back in July 1 969, I stood on the talcum-like lunar dust just a few feet from our home aw ay from home, Eagle, the lunar module that transported Neil Armstrong and me to the bleak, craterpocked moonscape.
However, fire officials say the fire is 35% contained and is expected to be fully contained by August 20th.
The scientists were eventually given the all clear to return to the facility.
Fine, with a chance of solar flares updated 9:1 1AM EDT, Wdd July 16, 2014 From Earth, the sun appears as a constant circle of light, but w hen viewed in space a brilliant display of mot bn is revealed.
Pacific Northwest wildfires char a million acres, spur warnings of bad air Citizen scientists shape destiny of humanity' with SETI Dave A Is up contributed to this report.
The summer of supermoons is here updated 1:31 PM EDT, Thu July 17,2014 The full moons of this summer July 12, August 1 0 and September 9 — are supermoons, as NASA calls them.
But after three long years, NASA's successor is almost ready to make an entrance.
II a v • Reply * Share* 40words ^LikeABoss • 14 hours ago The sniveling cowards that they are. 10 a v * Reply • Share » Inside a passenger spaceship updated 10:21 AM EOT, Frl Juna 15, 2014 When I first poked my head inside Virgin Galactic's newest spaceship, I felt a little like I w as getting a frontrow seat to space history.
NASA cameras capture huge solar flares updated 7:05 PM EOT, Tua June 10, 2014 The sun is putting on a f irew orks show again.
NASA's Curiosity rover can attest that it's enough time for some unexpected life changes.
But scientists have used a code to create a model of how the universe as w e know it today might have evolved.
This may support life on Jupiter's moon May 2, 2014 At least one corner of the solar system may be serving up an ice-and-w ater sandw ich, w ith the possibility of life on the rocks.
MARKA / Alamy/Alamy The lost tomb of Caligula has been found, according to Italian police, after the arrest of a man tiying to smuggle abroad a statue of the notorious Roman emperor recovered from the site.
After reportedly sleeping with his sisters, killing for pleasure and seeking to appoint his horse a consul during his rule from AD37 to 41, Caligula was described by contemporaries as insane.
With many of Caligula's monuments destroyed after he was killed by his Praetorian guard at 28, archaeologists are eager to excavate for his remains.
Officers from the archaeological squad of Italy 's tax police had a break last week after arresting a man near Lake Nemi, south of Rome, as he loaded part of a 2. metre statue into a loriy.
The emperor had a villa there, as well as a floating temple and a floating palace; their hulks were recovered in Mussolini's time but destroyed in the war.
Its rare Greek marble, throne and god’s robes convinced the police it came from the emperor's tomb.
Under questioning, the tomb raider led them to the site, where excavations will start today. guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media Limited 2011 TWO SISTERS DIED ON 17 NOVEMBER when their matching Cherokee Jeeps collided head-on at 60mph near Six Mile, Alabama, as they travelled to visit each other.
Sheila Wentworth, 45, and Doris Jean Hall, 51, were killed, along with Mrs Hall's husband, Billy Joe, 45.
The sisters often visited each other unannounced and had travelled the road countless times, mostly at weekends.
Wednesday, January 21, 2009 It’s a musical staple of nursery schools and seniors’ fitness classes throughout the English-speaking world.
But The Hokey Pokey the right-hand-in, right-hand-out ditty that sparked a 1950s dance craze has become the focus of a bizarre controversy in Britain that has drawn in politicians, the Catholic Church in Scotland and soccer fans accused of exploiting the song’s alleged anti-Catholic roots to taunt opposing teams.
Ottawa schoolchildren do The Hokey Pokey on the lawn of Parliament Hill last May as part of Physical Education Day.
The song has caused a ruckus in Britain that has drawn in politicians, the Catholic Church in Scotland and soccer fans.
A Catholic Church spokesman warned that The Hokey Cokey had centuries-old origins as a Protestant song meant to mock the words and actions of Catholic clergy presiding over the Latin mass.
Although apparently innocuous, it was devised as an attack on and a parody of the Catholic mass,"" Peter Kearney, a spokesman for Scottish Catholic Cardinal Keith O'Brien, said at the time.
Kennedy Jr. then quoted his father's own recollections about how the future children's classic emerged from a 1942 gathering at a London nightclub where Canadian soldiers stationed in Britain were enjoying a riotous party.
So when I got back to my hotel, I wrote a chorus based on the feet and hand movements the Canadians had used, with a few adaptations.
A car ended up on its top after crashing thrpugh a wall into a yard where the Baxter County Sheriff's Department parked three helicopters.
An ambulance took the driver, Otis ivie, 71, to tne hospital after the crash, which was about 3:20m. witnesses told investigators that ivie was driving erratically before the crash.
Sunday, 25 April 2010 12:12PM Brooklyn Teacher Gets Stolen Car Back, All Souped Up NEW YORK A Brooklyn schoolteacher whose car was stolen three years ago has gotten it back, totally souped up and unrecognizable.
Amanda Pogany's 1996 Honda was returned to her drag-race ready, with a new V-8 engine, manual transmission, leather interior, tinted windows and oversize tires.
Police found the car at an illegal chop shop and were able to trace it to Pogany even though the VIN number had been filed off.
She hasn't driven the new version of the Honda yet because she doesn't know how to drive a stick shift.
Zeke the cat lives in one of the offices at Cat Depot on 1 7th Street in Sarasota.
Staff there say that on Monday, when the office's human resident left for lunch, Zeke dialed 91 1 on the office phone.
Sarasota County dispatch got no response when they answered, so they called back and spoke to a volunteer at the front desk, who had no idea who placed the call.
Further investigation led them to find Zeke sprawled across the phone, with the handset off the hook.
Staff there tells ABC 7 that Zeke has a reputation for walking on laptops and other electrical devices.
The life and the legend Bob Bauder, Times Staff 03/10/2007 Ask 10 people about the legend of Charlie No Face, aka the Green Man, and you’ll hear a different story each time.
He worked for a power company and was zapped while climbing a utility pole, or while climbing a tree as a boy to retrieve a kite, or to look at a bird's nest.
He haunts Koppel-New Galilee Road in Big Beaver, or a deserted industrial area near New Castle, or an old railroad tunnel in South Park, or any one of a half-dozen other places around the Pittsburgh region.
He was one of the kindest human beings on the face of this earth, despite his horrible disfigurement.
That last one is the truth, according to a relative, but the truth has been obscured by decades of hyperbole.
The true story of Charlie No Face, which is how Beaver Countians typically refer to him, is a little less sensational than the legend.
He lived in Big Beaver for most of his life and had a habit of walking a lonely stretch of highway between Koppel and New Galilee for pleasure.
He did this at night because the injuries he suffered at a too-young age were so horrific that he probably would have caused mass hysteria otherwise.
The Morado Bridge just north of Beaver Falls where Raymond Robinson was severly burned.
The story of Raymond Robinson's electrocution from The Daily Times of June 19, 1919.
Robinson's nocturnal wanderings, which spanned parts of at least five decades, attracted the attention of local folks, who told their friends.
Friends told other friends, and the story spread across western Pennsylvania and neighboring states like ripples in a pond.
Robinson became a supernatural creature who haunted isolated country lanes and railroad tunnels from Youngstown to South Park.
At least two Web sites contain in-depth, albeit highly exaggerated, accounts of his deeds and those of people who went to see him.
Magazines dedicated to folklore and the paranormal have featured Robinson in their pages.
A folklore specialist from Pittsburgh regularly features Robinson in talks.
But very few people, if any, actually know how Raymond Robinson became Charlie No Face.
MORADO LAD Raymond T Robinson was born Oct., 1910, in Beaver County, but little is known about his early years.
He was a son of Robert and Louise Robinson, and the family lived on the outskirts of Beaver Falls.
He swam the Beaver River in the summer, hung out with his playmates around the Morado section of Beaver Falls and, like a typical boy, took dares.
On June 18, 1919, he and several friends were heading for a swimming hole on the Beaver River when they came upon the Pittsburgh, Harmony, Butler and New Castle Railway Co. bridge spanning Wallace Run.
The bridge, which was tom down years ago and has been replaced by a Route 18 highway bridge, had connected Beaver Falls and Big Beaver.
The Harmony Line, as it was known, had regular daily trolley service between Ellwood City and Beaver Falls.
It crossed the Beaver River at Koppel and paralleled the river as it made its way south into Beaver Falls.
It came to a dead end just over the Wallace Run bridge in Morado, where passengers transferred to Beaver Valley Traction Co. trolleys serving Beaver County.
The Wallace Run bridge would have carried both voltages, Fronczek said.
In September 1918, another Beaver Falls boy Robert Littell, 12 died from electrical burns he received while playing on the bridge with friends.
Robinson and his four companions knew about that fatal accident when they ventured onto the span at twilight on June 18, 1919.
But a newspaper account the following day reported that the boys had spied a bird's nest high on the bridge structure.
Several times a week in good weather, he would grab his walking stick around 10 m. and head outside.
Whether it was for exercise, or to talk with people other than his relatives, the family never knew for sure.
What they do know was it caused no uncertain amount of worry and anguish for the family.
The nephew recalled family members walking the road in the middle of the night.
Word soon spread about the strange man who walked the road, and people at first it was local teenagers began driving out there trying to get a look at him.
Scores of cars loaded with kids from all over the region were soon driving up and down Koppel-New Galilee Road in search of Charlie No Face.
They brought beer and cigarettes, which they used to barter for a few words with the legendary figure.
They resented the derogatory nicknames and particularly disliked the fact that people gave him booze.
He had spent the night in woods and crawled to the roadside after hearing traffic.
One time during a carnival in Koppel, one of the owners came to see whether he could hire Robinson for the freak show.
RITE OF PASSAGE Jim Tripodi of Beaver considered Charlie No Face a friend.
Tripodi, 57, grew up in the College Hill section of Beaver Falls in the 1 960s and began visiting Koppel-New Galilee Road when he was in high school.
He and his buddies made numerous trips to see Robinson in the late 1960s.
The visits began as curiosity, Tripodi said, but as time wore on, they realized Robinson was just a lonely guy who wanted company.
Stories have circulated about people picking up Robinson and taking him for rides to local bars.
None of the stories has been confirmed, but Tripodi and several others said Robinson told them personally that people were nasty to him.
For Tripodi, the visits usually began as he and his friends were sitting around on a summer evening with nothing better to do.
Similar scenes played out time and again across the region over the 30 years or more that Robinson walked the highway.
JoeNardone, 80, of Koppel remembers kids visiting Robinson in the 1940s; Bob Zahorsky, 67, who grew up in Aliquippa, remembers the same thing from the 1950s; and the late John ""Butch"" Maranciak, 51 , who grew up in Hopewell Township, remembered in a 2005 interview that he and his friends would drive out to see Robinson in the 1970s.
Robinson typically remained in the shadows and often hid when cars approached.
Tripodi said he and his friends sometimes took dates to scare the daylights out of them.
Going to see Charlie No Face became a rite of passage for Beaver Valley teens.
They christened landmarks along the road ""Charlie's Rock"" or ""Charlie's Tree"" after places where they would pull over and talk to him.
Ann Steele, 71, of Koppel wrote to local soldiers stationed overseas during the Vietnam War, and they would ask her about Robinson in their letters.
She said some of them told her they prayed for Robinson, who was struck several times by cars while walking the road.
The Charlie No Face story was passed along from generation to generation.
White, 31, researches local urban legends and is particularly interested in stories about Charlie No Face and the Green Man.
Green Man stories always involve a man who was electrocuted or injured in some type of industrial accident.
He is called the Green Man because the accident left him with a greenish tint to his skin.
To get him to appear, people have to do something ritualistic such as blow a car horn or yell, White said.
White has documented purported Green Man sightings at various locations across the Pittsburgh region, including North and South Park, Brookline, McKees Rocks, West Mifflin, Ross Township and New Castle.
Tripodi remembered a carload of people from West Virginia pulling up at a local pizza shop one time and asking for directions to the Green Man.
White, who gives talks about urban legends, always includes Charlie No Face and the Green Man.
CHARLIE’S END Ray Robinson died on June 11, 1985 seven days before the 66th anniversary of his accident at the Beaver County Geriatric Center, now Friendship Ridge, in Brighton Township, where he spent the last few years of his life.
He is buried in Grandview Cemetery, overlooking the site of the old Wallace Run trolley bridge.
Robert Littell, the Beaver Falls boy who was fatally burned on the bridge nine months before Robinson, also is buried there.
Robinson stopped walking Koppel-New Galilee Road several years before he moved to the nursing home, but his legend is permanently ingrained in the folklore of western Pennsylvania.
Charon’s obol is the coin placed in or on the mouth of a dead person before burial* Greek and Latin literary sources explain it as a payment or a bribe for Charon, the ferryman who conveyed souls across the River Styx, which divided the world of the living from the world of the dead.
More precious gold or silver coins were seldom buried with the deceased so a type of “ghost money” was made instead by making an impression of a real coin into thin gold foil.
Actual coins were also buried with the dead as well, though they were generally small denominations.
She supposedly has haunted Livingston Park in front of Children's Hospital over the decades.
She also has been reported at Camp Chase, now the Confederate cemetery along Sullivant Avenue, said Lois Neff, historian for the Hilltop Historical Society.
It is believed that the ghost is searching for a grave of a Confederate soldier.
Neff said fresh flowers have appeared regularly on the grave of Benjamin E Allen, Company D, 50th Tennessee Regiment.
Cindy Steinke, president of the society, said flowers also are found on the unknown soldier's grave in the cemetery.
Steinke has never seen the lady ghost, but she said she's talked to many people who have.
She is dressed in a gray, wool traveling suit with black buttons and black trim in the style of the 1860s or 1870s.
It was perfectly quiet that afternoon when a sudden wind swept through the gate and over the cemetery.
The wind blew down the tent set up for the reenactment, scattering materials on tables in the tent.
This series of old columns, which will run through June, will be compiled into a book.
SrjH^rjIirmril HZ VII JMBIIIZ 2 2 \QE Mm lEHVfflUII II 1 1 1 I || | 1 1 1 1 1 1 1| | 1 1 | II I IHfll ■ *; news.com.au World Breaking News Corpse left on police roof for two years From correspondents in New Dehli, IndiaAgence France-PresseOctober 28, 2009 08:56pm THE corpse of a man has been found on the roof of a police station in northern India where it was placed over two years ago during an inquiry, a report said today.
The body of Chukkan Nishad, a 22-year-old who went missing in July 2007, was meant to be sent for DNA testing but was instead put in a body bag and placed on the roof, the Mail Today newspaper said.
The newspaper, citing Nishad's father and local officials, said the family kept requesting the body at the police station but were repeatedly told there was an investigation underway.
The Mail said the body was placed there after local authorities refused to release the funds for the DNA test on Nishad, whose death remains a mystery.
Mr Ram said police were now completing the formalities to return Mishad's remains no more than bones after two years exposed to the elements to his family.
Nikola Tesla , posing in 1910 with one of his many bright ideas The Cult of the Volt Inventor Nikola Tesla didn’t get much glory when he was alive, but to hipsters now, he’s a real turn-on.
By Jennie Yabroff T |HERE’S a scene in the film “Coffee and Cigarettes” where Jack and Meg White, of the band the White Stripes, are discussing the Serbian inventor Nikola Tesla.
The two hipsters are slouched at a table in a cafe, staring moodily at Jack’s homemade Tesla coil, a high-voltage transformer that looks like something from a 1950s sci-fi movie.
Talking about the inventor, the usually taciturn Jack becomes animated with enthusiasm for his unsung hero’s accomplishments.
Of course A prototype of the they used lots of AC. electric Tesla mobile motors, no X-ray technology, no fluorescent lights.
Such is the tragicomic legacy of a scientist who was a celebrity in his time but is today overshadowed by his rivals Guglielmo Marconi (often credited with inventing the wireless radio) or Thomas Edison (DC electricity), while being most often linked to an ’80s hair band.
Yet to a growing group of artists, writers, musicians and filmmakers, Tesla has become an inspiration.
Bowie’s Tesla Fan Club: Tesla in The Whites in ‘Coffee ‘The Prestige’ and Cigarettes’ Stream” was inspired by a photograph of Tesla in front of one of his enormous coils.
Later, Tesla worked with George Westinghouse on AC energy sources, including fluorescent light bulbs.
He filed the first patent for the radio and investigated remote-controlled robotics and wireless communication.
Morgan, Mark Twain and John Muir, but over time his ideas became more farfetched, including claims of communication with Mars and a “death ray” part cle-beam weapon he thought would enc war.
The key to Tesla’s appeal is not only his prodigious inventions, but the sad fact that credit for his greatest ideas was usurped by more market-minded rivals.
Tesla was also an idealist who ripped up a $12 million contract with Westinghouse rather than see his benefactor bankrupted by the expense.
This anti-materialistic bent may be what both endears him to artists and has prevented him from getting his due.
In addition to the books by Hunt, Auster and Rushkoff, he’s appeared in a Thomas Pynchon novel and been namechecked by Aaron Sorkin.
There’s even an electric car, the Tesla Roadster, being developed by Silicon Valley’s Tesla Motors.
Plus, as anyone who knows about him will tell you, Tesla had an electric personality.
HE WHO OWNS THIS DIAMOND WILL OWN THE WORLD FOLLOWING THE DEATH OF THE QUEEN Mother on 30 March, it seemed as if the famous curse of the Koh-i-Noor, the great diamond at the top of her crown, struck again.
On 4 April, when the crown was moved from the Tower of London in preparation for the state funeral the following day, a fire gutted the main complex at the Center Parcs holiday village in the grounds of Elveden Hall in Suffolk.
Elvedon Hall was once the home of the diamond's last male owner, Duleep Singh, Maharajah of the Punjab , who had inherited the jewel after a clutch of claimants had killed each other during the 18th and 19th centuries.
It was discovered in the Golconda mines in southern India, around AD 1100 according to one story but Haydn's Dictionary of Dates says it was found there in 1550.
Or maybe the first record of it dates from 1304, or 1306, when it belonged to Sultan Allah ed Din.
Contradictions of dates, ownership and weight have accompanied the jewel for centuries.
Babur the Great Moghul allegedly obtained the famous stone in 1525, while the Moghul Emperor Aurangzeb set it as the eye of the peacock in the legendary peacock throne in Delhi.
The Persian warrior king Nadir Shah defeated the Moghul Empire in 1739 and sacked Delhi but didn't find the diamond until a disgruntled concubine told him the emperor hid it in his turban.
Nadir offered to exchange turbans, an offer the vanquished monarch could not refuse.
After a bloody reign, Nadir was murdered in 1747, while his son and successor was dethroned and blinded by his brother.
The stone passed into Afghanistan, but when Shah Shuja was deposed he gave it to Ranjit Singh, ruler of the Punjab , who vainly promised to help him regain the Afghan throne.
Ten years after Ranjit's death, the Punjab was absorbed into the British Raj and the stone given by treaty in 1849 to Queen Victoria as Empress of India, nominally as tribute from the nine-year-old Maharajah Duleep Singh.
After reputedly disappointing the public at the Great Exhibition of 1851, the Koh-INoor was recut at Garrards, the royal jewellers.
The machinery was started by the Prime Minister, the Duke of Wellington, who rode to the shop in Regent Street on his white horse.
Alexandra , Mary and Elizabeth all wore it at their enthronements, set in different crowns.
The Taliban demanded its return to Afghanistan in 2000, and India, Pakistan and Iran have all claimed it.
After a life of enforced idleness as an English country gentleman, a broken and impoverished Singh died in Paris in 1893.
D.Mail, 3 April; D Telegraph, 5+6 April 2002; Brewer's Dictionary of Phrase and Fable.
During the summer of 1944, 1 arrived in England as a member of the United States Army Medical Corps.
Hitler then called off the planned invasion and turned toward his other enemy, Russia.
The Buzz Bomb One week following the invasion of the continent on D-Day, the first of Germany’s secret weapons fell on Britain.
It was named Vergeltung, for vengeance, as Berlin was being bombed at that time.
The VI, also known as the “buzz bomb” or the “doodlebug,” was a pilotless flying bomb that looked like a small plane.
This was a rocket that flew straight up and, by gyroscope, flew over England and dropped down.
At that time, I was on detached service from the United States Army to Pinewood Studios outside London as an actor playing an American soldier in English documentary films.
I was housed in London near Marble Arch as the Vis and V2s were falling.
Before dawn one morning, there was a terrific blast that hurled me out of my bed and into an old tub in the bathroom.
Realizing that we had been hit, we pulled on some clothes, grabbed our few possessions, and raced for the door, but, as I opened it, we were met by a wall of fire and smoke.
I ran to the window, but the fire was as all-consuming there as it was at the door.
For some reason unknown to me, then or now, I ran back to the door and opened it to the fire which was still as intense.
Suddenly the wall of fire seemed to roll back on both sides, and all I could think of was the parting of the Red Sea.
We clattered down the steps and into the street where people had gathered.
Much later, by Richard Vath when I was home on furlough, my mother pointed to a turned-back calendar page where a day was circled in red.
I consulted the small notebook I always carried to record events and saw it was the night of the fire.
We scanned the newspaper, picked a theater, and set out on a doubledecker bus.
But, when we neared the theater and started to get off, I suddenly said, “Let’s skip this one.
We went on to the second theater and, the following morning, the newspaper carried an article on the theater we had planned to attend.
It was the Bo48 Fate / Jan-Feb 2002 hemian capital of England, like the Left Bank is in Paris.
Thieves, murderers, and such were said to gather there, but we were young and adventurous, so off we went.
We toured about, then wound up in a low-life pub with people who might have just stepped out of the police lineup.
Rough oak tables stained by spilled beer, cigarette butts, and spittle stood about on the sawdustcovered floor.
The bar, on one side, was backed by a mirrored wall that was cracked and filthy.
Cigarette smoke, noise, and horrible music from a broken-down piano filled the room.
The Exploding Pub I heard the crash of a glass that had been knocked off a table.
Suddenly the cacophony of the pub was overshadowed by the blast of a V2.
For a split second, the wall with the mirrors and bottles rose up in the air.
I dragged him under the table with me just as the entire wall of glass crashed atop and around our heavy oak shelter.
Flaming timbers, bricks, and plaster fell on our table, but it remained solid.
Looking through the smoke and fire, I could see the outside door but questioned whether we could get there or not.
I grabbed Walter and we dashed for the door, stepping over burning wood and bodies.
How we made it to the door still remains a mystery in my mind but make it we did, with just minor cuts and bruises.
At the door, I turned just in time to see the entire roof cave in and, finally, our table gave way — the table that had saved our lives.
We made our way, in the blackout, back to our hotel, where we cleaned up and dressed our wounds.
To this day, I do not know All I do know is that I survived the war, the blitz, and other dangers.
As I write this, I am in my 70s and have had a fine career in the theater.
I also have a wonderful wife, a son who is a professional military man, and four outstanding grandchildren.
One thing I do know is that, in my mind, I am the most fortunate man on the face of this earth.
Y Richard Vath is a former actor and director who has retired to Mexico as a professional writer.
Thursday, October 30, 2008 Health Time change linked to heart attacks BY KAREN KAPLAN Los Angeles Times Turning your clock back one hour Sunday for the end of daylight saving time could do your own ticker some good.
Researchers have found a 5 percent drop in heart attack deaths and hospitalizations the day after clocks are reset each year to standard time, according to a study published today in the New England journal of Medicine.
Physicians can now add daylight saving time to the list of everyday events that affect heart attacks, said Dr.
Ralph Brindis, a vice presi-* dent of the American College of Cardiology who practices in Oakland.
The risk also rises on holidays and anniversaries, although no one Time to fall back Turn your clocks .back one hour to standard i time at | 2 a,m.
Scientists have known that sleep deprivation is bad for the heart — the body responds by boosting blood pressure, heart rate and the tendency to form dangerous dots — but they didn't realize a single hour could have a measurable effect.
More than 1. billion people change their docks twice a year to make the most of the available sunlight.
William Willett, a British builder, proposed the idea in 1905 after watching Londoners sleep through so many perfectly good hours of morning sunshine.
The idea gained traction in 1916 as World War I turned coal into a predous resource.
As they were setting their docks ahead in March, two Stockholm-based epidemiologists who study the relationship between heart attacks and sleep decided to investigate the effect of moving into and out of daylight saving time.
Rickard Ljung of Sweden’s National Board of Health and Welfare examined data from the Swedish Myocardial Infarction Register, a catalog of all heart attacks in Sweden.
They also looked up the number of heart attacks a few weeks before and after each of those days, calculated the average and made a comparison.
The on five of th of the week, of those di enough to be tistically sign In the spri of heart art the Monda} Wednesday saving turn increases rar cent to 10 pe Dr.
Martha Sell You day was 2, 140, but that fell to professor of preventive medan average of 2,038 on the icine at Northwestern UniMonday after daylight saving versity's Feinberg School of time ended — a 5 percent Medicine in Chicago, cauavailable .sunlight.
The idea ed the average and made a Wednesday after daylight factors for cardiovascular Sunday. gained traction in 1916 as comparison. saving time began.
Stockholm-based epidemi>rit is probably ologists who study the relaitists have known tionship between heart ieprivation is bad attacks and sleep decided to art — the body investigate the effect of movy boosting blood ing into and out of daylight . eart rate and the saving time.
Health and Welfare exami 1. billion peoined data from the Swedish their clocks twice Myocardial Infarction Regiske the most of the ter, a catalog of all heart Sell Your Home In 30 Days or Receive $500.00 Some resuiaiom a ppiy.
H % * p***~*{ urrt@EerricoH(ns.com Rollins leam p|r 661.664.0655 * 661.332.2230 ■■■I i linked to heart attacks • Mv Profile * Sign Out family.com Dead animal hoarder partially eaten by pets by azfamily.com Video report by Ashleigh Barry Posted on August 6, 2014 at 3:25 PM Updated yesterday at 7:58 PM WITTMANN, Ariz. -A 78-year-old man described as an animal hoarder has been found dead in his Wittmann mobile home and authorities say he was partially eaten by his pets.
Maricopa County sheriffs officials said the body of Jerry Brown was discovered Tuesday morning and he likely died about a week ago.
Halstead said he could not recognize Brown because the body was so decomposed.
Brown said authorities told her that it would be the family's responsibility to remove the animals from the property.
She said her husband is in the hospital with stage 4 nonHodgkin lymphoma and she has an autoimmune disorder.
Sheriff Joe Arpaio said his deputies are working with officials from the Arizona Humane Society to rescue the animals and take them to a facility for care and keeping.
One of the animals is a 4month-old black kitten that is missing both eyes.
Interviews about dead animal hoarder partially eaten bv pets NEVADA Las Vegas: A man has been ordered to life in prison without the possibility of parole for killing a 4 -month-old baby with a medievalstyle battle ax and critically wounding the child’s mother in a random attack on a sidewalk.
Harold Eugene Montague, 38, was sentenced after pleading guilty but mentally ill to first-degree murder with a deadly weapon, attempted murder and battery on a police officer.
She then travelled to Australia with her sister to visit friends hurt in the explosion, but the Grim Reaper had marked her card.
On 23 October, her body was pulled from the jaws of a 13ft crocodile In the northern Australian outback after she took a late night swim in the Sandy Billabong waterhole in Kakadu National Park.
Deep Cover Peering through a 55-pound brass helmet, marine biologist Roy Waldo Miner “prepares to make movie actors of the rainbow-hued residents of a coral reef” off Andros Island, Bahamas.
Miner’s expedition, which he wrote about in the June 1934 issue of National Geographic, also harvested some 40 tons of coral from the site.
That coral is still on display, part of a two-story-tall diorama in that museum. -Margaret G Zackowitz K Flashback Archive Find all the photos at ngm.com Dr.
From Saturday morning, Feb., 1872, New North-West, Deer Lodge, Montana Territory.
Rowe, night watchman, and Mr Robert Wiles discovered flames issuing from the rear portion of the roof of Coffee & Preston's large livery stable, standing at the corner of Main and Second streets, and at once gave the alarm, Mr Rowe rousing Main Street in a few minutes.
When discovered it had gained but little headway, but almost a gale prevailing from a point or two east of south it was fanned to fury in a few minutes, and the eager flames swept from the immense stable front and rear around the adjoining store of Parchen, Paynter & Co. gathering its rich store of combustibles to its assistance, and presaging almost inevitable destruction to the two principal business blocks of Deer Lodge.
In a few minutes hundreds of men were at the scene, and to save the most valuable goods from the stores in the certainly doomed block, was accepted as a first duty, and, like Trojans, scores of willing men applied themselves to the task, in some instances standing by their dangerous task until the flames enveloped them, and skins were parched in the on sweeping furnace.
So fierce was the heat that thoroughly saturated blankets on these buildings repeatedly ignited, and the face of them is browned almost blackened and the paint is crisped and peeled.
In some places the pitch from the pine exuded under the heat and fried like a spider.
Fortunately not a blaze started on that side, for the sheet of flame would have flashed along the entire block almost instantly and no man could have withstood it.
GENEABLOGGERS BADGE Gcinr.aP»lt GENEABLOGGERS GROUP on Facebook FACEBOOK BADGE Bill Smith | Create Your Badge COPYRIGHT STATEMENT You may NOT use the contents of this site for commercial purposes without explicit permission from the author and blog owner.
Commercial purposes includes blogs with ads and income generating features, and/or blogs or sites using feed content as a replacement for original content.
CARNIVAL OF GENEALOGY While this was going on, Bein's Brewery, Robinson & Thornton's, Grant's large City Hall and adjoining Restaurant, the Harris Building, Welch Building , and the Welch & Willey Building , caught in quick succession, and at 4:30 o'clock the entire block was in blaze a grand, glowing mass of flame and coal, an alter on which was sacrificed this Sabbath morning the hard earnings of many and the all of more than one good, honest, industrious man.
While the Grant Building was burning hottest there occurred one of the heroic incidents of the fire, seen by hundreds, and its success was rewarded with a round cheer of grateful appreciation.
The roof of the ""old Decker Building,"" an eye sore and standing iniquity of the town, was fired in three places by wafted brands.
In anticipation of this, ropes had been put to it, the corner posts and tenons cut, and all in readiness to pull it down if need be, as it commanded, and its burning made inevitable, the destruction of Dance & Murphy's Planing Mill and the yard containing over a million feet of piled lumber.
When it caught it was found impossible with the force of men available to pull it down.
Murphy, and ""Bob"" Bouier, ascended inside, and Bouier mounting on the shoulders of the others jumped through a burning hole in the steep roof to the outside with a pail of water, sprang up it, ran along the high comb like a Btondin, and extinguished a burning spot inaccessible from the inside.
The other places were easily reached, and no other places igniting, in that portion of the town, the valuable machinery and lumber requisite to rebuild the burnt district was saved.
It had burned the entire block; its expansion had been prevented, walls and chimneys were crumbled to their bases.
Copinus clothing , 2,000 Parchen, Paynter & Co. house and drug stock, $5,000; burnt in cash $500, 5,500 [Fireproof with $1 0,000 stock saved, will open tomorrow adjoining Gas & Klein] Cohen groceries, 3,000 Mrs.
A Wright 1 ,500 Joseph Rosenthal clothing and dry-goods, house and merchandise 8,000 Wm.
Men wrked better, and although some ware indifferent, some paralyzed, an were poltroons who stood back with the Chinamen and absolutely refusr assist, nearly every one came forward nobly when shown where he coul of service.
We join w*h the Independent in giving the colored men of De, Lodge due mention.
The Chinese, with one exception, positively refused to tfeder anV aSSIStance ' We acknowledge gratitude to the employees of New North-West, to others who assisted us, and to the many, including Independent friends, who proffered service when the situation was perilous.
However, the wind happened to hold firm in one direction, and that with the night thaw the first of the year which flooded the streets and made wa er plentiful, saved a large portion of the town.
It is an unhappy fact ▼ 2009 ► December ► November ▼ October Surname Saturday Kinnick More on Daily Blogging Themes Surname Saturday Blog Entry Deer Lodge Montana Fire 1872 Episode 8 Episode 7 Episode 6 ► September RECENT POSTS RECENT COMIVENTS io 19/11/2010 2:40 PM Dr.
THE ORIGIN OF THE FIRE is unknown; but the general belief is that the fire was started by an incendiary.
There had been no fire in Coffey's stable, and no one, that Coffey knew of, occupying it since Feb 1st.
We think Deer Lodge would be a pretty warm ant-room to Hades for the wretch who fired it, if he were known.
Coffey had just removed his last buggy from the stable yesterday, and it only contained two tons of hay.
Hank Valiton cut his sixty horses loose, and got nearly a 8 them out of the stable and across the river without trouble, where they and the other horses of the neighborhood behaved frantically till morning, but were prevented from recrossing the bridge.
So rapid did the fire sweep over some buildings that not even the money was saved from the tills.
Thornton & Robinson will rebuild at once, and doubtless many others purpose doing the same.
We have noted but briefly and hastily, for the information of other localities, this disaster to our fair village.
Before midsummer we believe the entire block will be rebuilt with better structures.
Kleinschmidt Bros, opened today in Louis & Coleman's building, adjoining Gans & Klein’s.
The losses to the Scott House and Emmerson & Gerber’s, omitted in first account, are inserted today.
Mr Henry M Parchen informs us that $5,000 will cover their entire toss, inclusive of cash.
Hancock, butcher, opened yesterday adjoining the Metropolitan Billiard Hall.
Higgens & Murphy and Dance, Stuart & Co., will erect two large fire-proof stores next to Osborn & Dennee’s, as soon as material can be used.
Emmerson & Gerber are repairing their hall in first-class style before re-opening.
The Burnt District was thronged with workers today, clearing off ritobish, collecting ""rich dirt,"" and removing goods from firs-proofs.
E Evans authorizes us to say he will furnish all Ns customers who were burned out, with milk without cost for two months from date.
Thornton & Robinson contracted with John Murphy this afternoon to erect them a law office 13 x 30, on the site of the burned building.
Eileen Elias * * * * * Eliza Elizabeth FIRE ENGINE Ellis engine Enterprise Episode E Stella Evelyn Expo family tradition farm farmer Farmington Ferguson Festival FindaGrave fire Firestone Flashback Friday Follow Form and Style France Frances Friday FTM for Mac Fun Funeral Card Genea-Musings GeneaBloggers Genealogy On Wednesday and Thursday Mr Wm.
Kenyon 50 Mitchell & Holmes 50 Rev R DeRyckere 50 Peter Valiton 50 Chas.
Maxwell 5 Gans & Klen 50 generations GOUDY Gower grandchildren Grandma Graveyard Greene Greene County Greenfield Greta Grimes The total amount to date is $2410.
It will cost, probably, as much more to supply the requisite cisterns, engine house, etc.
That done, and an efficient company organized, the town wifl be comparatively safe.
Within two weeks after the fire, the town had raised the necessary funds for a new fire truck and established the first volunteer fire department here which continues today.
The ""vampire"" was found entombed among church ruins in the Black Sea town of Sozopol earlier in the month.
The skeleton had been stabbed in the chest with an iron rod , which was in the tomb next to the body.
Scholars believe the rod and tooth-pulling were techniques villagers used to prevent dead men from turning into vampires.
EPA / REUTERS By Nick Squires, Rome 1 1 :04PM GMT 06 Nov 2011 The Satanic image went unnoticed until now because it is artfully hidden in the folds of a cloud and is invisible from ground level.
The discovery of the face, in a fresco which depicts the death of St Francis, was made by Chiara Frugoni, a medievalist and an expert on the saint.
In the Middle Ages it was believed that demons lived in the sky and that they could impede the ascension of human souls to Heaven.
Sergio Fusetti, the head of the restoration work in the basilica, said the devil face may have been a dig at somebody the artist had quarrelled with.
Claudio Strinati, an art historian, said it was not unusual for Renaissance artists to include hidden meanings in their works.
Millions of pilgrims and tourists have trooped through the basilica in Assisi, in Umbria, since the frescc was painted in the 13th century without noticing the devil's face.
It was only discovered during restoration of the fresco, the 20th in a series of images of St Francis's life and death by Giotto.
Bom near Florence in the late Middle Ages, Giotto di Bondone became one of the most important figures of the Early Renaissance.
Among his most celebrated works are a series of frescoes in Padua, frescoes and altarpieces in Santa Croce church in Florence and a painting of the Madonna which is on display in Florence's Uffizi Galleries.
Police launched an unusual investigation after one runner made a surprising, creepy discovery while on a jog in Brooklyn’s Prospect Park Wednesday August 6th.
Filling out the tableau were four paintings of flowers arranged in the foreground and an American flag hanging from the trees behind.
Police removed the skeleton on Wednesday and on Thursday determined that it was a prop.
Lauren Wolfe via NBC LOS Angeles Source: NAZI WAR SUSPECT, 89, DIES AS EXTRADITION APPROVED An 89-year-old Nazi war crimes suspect died, in custody hours before a United States ruling Wednesday that he should be extradited to Germany to face trial.
Johann Breyer died Tuesday night at a Philadelphia hospital, where he had been transferred Saturday after a month in jail, his lawyer and the United States Marshals Service said.
United States Magistrate Timothy Rice had just approved the extradition request, which would have needed final United States government review.
A local complex that was once home to a repair and maintenance terminal for steam locomotives will be the site of an archaeological dig next I month.
The Sioux City Journal reported the Siouxland Historical Railroad Association hopes the dig will boost efforts to have the complex placed on the National Register of Historic Places.
A lthough there are many accounts of lake monsters residing in Irish waters, some of them going back centuries, they have tended to become irreversibly entwined with the country’s mythology and folklore.
They have been seen quite regularly (particularly from the 1950s to the 1970s) in the west of Ireland, more specifically in the sparsely populated area of Connemara in Co.
It was said to be an extremely rare breed of otter with unusual, and even supernatural qualities.
The Dobhar-Chu was also thought to possess certain mythical qualities; one notion was that even the slightest portion of its pelt could save a ship from being wrecked, a horse from drowning or a man from gunshot wounds and other serious injuries.
It was believed that the only way to kill the animal was by shooting it with a silver bullet a motif uncannily familiar from the werewolf legend.
When researcher Patrick Tohall was investigating the DobharChu legend, he was told by an old man in the records office of the Commission for Boundaries, Co.
Donegal, that an old Irish phrase said the Dobhar-Chu is the seventh cub of the common otter, and that this was connected with its status as a super or master-otter.
Within Ireland, this supposedly mythical beast has all but vanished from memory with one notable exception.
In the county of Leitrim , the local population has a very good reason for being unable to erase the ‘master otter’ from its memories and folklore a local woman is said to have been killed by a Dobhar-Chu.
THE DOBHARCHU OF GLENADE An anonymous poem, possibly dating from the early 20th century By Glenade lake tradition tells, two hundred years ago A thrilling scene enacted was, to which as years unflow, Old men and women still relate, and while relating dread, Some demon of its kind may yet be found within its bed.
It happened one McGloughlan lived close by the neighbouring shore, A lovely spot, where fairies oft in rivalry wandered o’er, A beauteous dell where prince and chief oft met in rivalry, With Frenchmen bold and warriors old to hunt the wild boar, free.
He and his wife Grace Connolly lived there unknown to fame, There, years in peace, until one day from out the lakes there came What brought a change in all their home and prospects too.
It was a bright September morn, the sun scarce mountain high, No chill or damp was in the air all nature seemed to vie, As if to render homage proud the cloudless sky above A day for mortals to discourse in luxury and love.
And whilst this gorgeous way of life in beauty did abound, From out the vastness of the lake stole out the water hound, And seized for victim her who shared McGloughlan’s bed and board, His loving wife, his more than life, whom almost he adored.
She having gone to bathe it seems within the waters clear, And not having returned when she might, her husband fraught with fear, Hasting to where he her might find, when on, to his surprise, Her mangled form, still bleeding warm, lay stretched before his eyes.
Upon her bosom, snow white once, but now besmeared with gore, The Dobharchu reposing was, his surfeiting being o’er.
He prayed for strength, the fiend lay still, he tottered like a child, The surge of life within his veins surged rapidly and wild.
One long last glance at her he loved, then fast his footsteps turned, To home, while all his pent up rage and passion fiercely burned.
The lough itself is approximately a mile in length and half a mile wide, and is on the left side of the road if one is driving north.
When Grace failed to return, her husband Terence went to search for her.
Eventually, he found her, but the sight that confronted him was a terrible one, for lying across his wife’s motionless body was her assailant a Dobhar-Chu.
Terence killed the beast, but its dying cries attracted its mate from the nearby lough.
Terence fled on horseback, along with his brother Gilmartin, but they were pursued relentlessly by the second Dobhar-Chu.
The two men eventually reached a place about 20 miles distant, known as Castlegarden Hill, where they lay hidden and waited for the beast to appear.
The Dobhar-Chu easily traversed the intervening mountains and difficult terrain, eventually reaching the spot where the two men lay in ambush.
In some versions of the story, the Dobhar-Chu killed one of the unfortunate horses and, before it could visit the same fate on the men’s remaining steed, Terence surprised it and stabbed it to death.
The event is also commemorated in verse, and there are at least two poems dealing with the unfortunate death of Grace Connolly.
The tombstone of Grace Connolly in Conwall cemetery, showing the strange creature.
A ‘master otter', represented with a white coat and a black cross on its back.
The second is an anonymous piece, possibly dating from the 1920s, which runs to 16 verses and is simply entitled The Dobhar-Chu of Glenade’ see sidebars.
T he story of Grace Connolly’s death and her husband’s slaying of the Dobhar-Chu would appear to be a rather fanciful and unbelievable folk legend; however, there is actual evidence for this event in the form of the slain woman’s grave.
It is located in Conwall cemetery, in the townland of Drummans, approximately 2-3 miles (3.24.8km) from the lake where she is said to have met her untimely death.
The tombstone is about four and a half feet by 2ft , laid horizontally in the ground.
Its hind and front legs are equally long and powerful; it has a long tail with a barely conspicuous tuft at its tip (the portion showing the tuft was a thin slice of sandstone and has since flaked off), and it has a deep-set powerful chest.
However, its barrel chest and long muzzle are morphologically canine rather than lutrine.
Up until the First World War, a similar tombstone existed not far from the first, in a town called Kilroosk.
This stone was also said to show a Dobhar-Chu, and was the gravestone of Grace’s husband Terence.
Unfortunately, at some point, it was placed on a boundary wall after it had broken in two and was subsequently lost.
The very fact that at one point in time the two gravestones existed within the same locality demonstrates that the story of the Dobhar-Chu had a genuine significance for the local population.
Also noteworthy here is the mention in Patrick Tohall’s article that the inciTHE LEGEND IS A PART OF DAILY LIFE dent was still fresh in local memory, which strengthens any case for the story’s authenticity.
There have been other reports from Irish loughs of mysterious denizens that do not fit easily within the category of the familiar ‘horseeel’ of Connemara.
One of these (possibly the last of its kind) was spotted in Sraheen’s Lough, a small body of water on Ireland’s largest island Achill Island in County Mayo.
Sraheen’s lough (which also goes by the name of Glendarry lough) is circular and roughly 400ft in diameter.
There are dense rhododendron bushes growing around most of its shoreline and, considering its location on the western extremity of Europe, a more windswept and isolated wilderness would be hard to imagine.
Significant within the context of the legend is the lough’s proximity to Glenade Lough in County Leitrim.
Achill is situated just off Co Mayo, which is the county immediately west of Counties Sligo and Leitrim where the DobharChu legend is still a part of daily life.
Even in the 20th century, there was an oral tradition of water monsters in and around Sraheens Lough, with many sightings claimed in the 1930s.
Such tales were remembered and retold by the older generation (and used to frighten unruly children) but in 1968 the old stories took on an air of literal truth when a series of inexplicable events appeared to turn myth into reality.
It began when two local men, John Cooney and Michael Nulty, had an unforgettable experience at Sraheens Lough on the night of 1 May 1968.
They were driving home to Achill Sound, on k the mainland, from the village of Keel, when at about He reached his house, he grasped his gun which clenched with nerves of steel.
He backwards sped, upraising his arm and then one piercing squeal Was heard upon the balmy air.
The comrade of the dying fiend with whistles long and loud, Came nigh and nigher to the spot Mr McGloughlan growing cowed, Rushed to his home, his neighbours called their council, asked.
And flight what they bid him do at once, was and not to wait ‘till night.
He and his brother a sturdy pair as brothers true when tried, Their horses took, their homes foresook and westward fast they did ride, One dagger sharp and long, each man had for protection too Fast pursued by that fierce brute the Whistling Dobharchu.
The ploughman left his horses alone, the fishes too ‘tis said, Away from the mountain streams though far, went rushing to the sea.
For twenty miles the gallant steeds, the riders proudly bore, With sadness strain o’er hill and dale that ne'er was seen before, The fiend, fast closing on their tracks, his dreaded cry more shrill, ‘Twas brothers try, we'll do or die at Castlegarden Hill.
Dismounting from their panting steeds they placed them one by one, Athwart the path in lengthways formed, within the ancient wall, And standing by the outmost horse awaiting for their foe, Their daggers raised, their nerves they braced to strike that fatal blow.
Not long to wait, for nose on trail, the scenting hound arrives, And through the horse with a plunge to force himself he tries, And just as through the outmost horse his head and foremost part, McGloughlan 's dagger to the hilt lay buried in his heart.
Thank God, Thank God, the brothers cried in wildness and delight, Our humble home by Glenade lake shall shelter us to-night.
Be any doubt to what I write, go visit old Conwell, And see the grave where sleeps the brave whose epitaph can tell.
THE “IRISH CROCODILE T here is one rarity more, which we may term the Irish crocodile, whereof one, as yet living, about ten years ago had sad experience.
The water about him was all bloody, whether from the beast's blood, or his own, or from both he knows not.
It was the pitch of an ordinary greyhound, of a black slimey skin, without hair as he imagines.
Old men acquainted with the lake do tell there is such a beast in it, and that a stout fellow with a wolf dog along with him met the like there once; which after a long struggling went away in spite of the man and his dog, and was a long time after found rotten in a rocky cave of the lake when the waters decreased.
The like they say is seen in other lakes in Ireland, they call it doyarchu,e. waterdog, or anchu which is the same.
Connaught , by Roderick O'FlahertY mal darted across the road from the direction of the lake and disappeared into the thick undergrowth.
They were able to see it clearly as it was illuminated by their headlights, and described it as being eight to 10 feet long , four-legged, black or dark brown in colour, having a thick tail, a long neck like a swan’s and a head like that of a sheep or a greyhound.
John Cooney also noted that it was moving at an angle, weaving and curving as it ran.
O nly a week after Cooney and Nulty’s sighting, a 15 -year-old boy, Gay Dever, stopped whilst cycling by the lough on his way home from Mass.
It was early evening, and he saw a creature emerging from the lough and climbing the bank.
Visibility was still good, as there was adequate light, and he observed an animal “bigger than a horse” (a possible exaggeration caused by such a shocking and unprecedented sight) with a sheep-like head on a long neck, a long tail and four legs, of which the hind ones were noticeably larger than the front.
It moved in a rather jumpy way, “like a kangaroo” and was about 12 ft long.
The incidents on Achill Island may seem at first glance to be unrelated to the legend of the Dobhar-Chu.
This reconstruction, based on the eyewitness accounts of 1968, is strikingly similar to the animal depicted on Grace Connolly’s tombstone in Drummans.
The obvious, if incredible, answer would seem to be that the legendary Dobhar-Chu was very much extant and had been residing in a small lough in western Ireland as recently as the late 1960s.
In the chapter on Achill, the author talks about the island’s early history and discusses the region’s impressive flora and fauna, areas of natural beauty and other attractions for visitors, including the famous seal caves, one of which was known as the Priest’s Cave.
According to an old man by the name of Harris Stone, who lived in Dooaghart around 1906, there was a rare species of sea otter that lived in a stagnant pool in the Priest’s Cave.
The cave was to be found on the north slope of Slievemore, but sadly its entrance is no longer accessible.
This sea otter could be distinguished by its unusual colour black, or at any rate almost black with a white patch on its throat.
Also noteworthy is the very mention by the author of a ‘sea otter’ there are of course nc sea otters residing in Europe, let alone Ireland.
The ‘sea otter’ described by the elderly Harris Stone must at one time have been indigenous to the island for it to be included in Achill’s oral traditions.
John Cooney, one of the witnesses to the 1968 sightings on Achill Island, stands iIGNS: A battered roadsign points to Conwall graveyard and church and Grace Connolly's tombstone. ightings and observed behaviour of the :ommon and endearing Irish otter.
Both the Eurasian otter and the Irish subspecies (which s slightly darker) do indeed inhabit the :oastal regions of both Scotland and Ireland. x>cal folklore might have incorporated this act into he legend of the ‘sea otter’ residing in the >articular area where the seal caves are locate :d.
Even the black coloration of Stone’s ‘sea )tter’ could be attributed to one of the physilogical characteristics by which early zoologists endeavoured to procure full species status or the Irish form of the Eurasian otter.
If Theresa Macdonald gathered the infornation concerning the seal-caves and the ‘sea )tter’ independently of any articles concerning the Sraheens Lough monster, then this :ould be a significant piece of evidence with Loch, possible home of the mysterious beast.
It also suggests that the strange animal was indigenous to Achill and its existence recognised by the islanders long before the incidents at Sraheens Lough in 1968.
T he story of the mysterious master-otter, whether legend or reality, may have a tragic ending.
No creatures resembling the Dobhar-Chu of folklore, such as the Sraheens Lough monster, have been reported from Ireland since the events of 1968.
If there ever was a ‘real’ creature whether endemic to Achill Island or a transient visitor to Irish shores the changes wrought to the region’s delicately balanced ecosystem since the early 1970s may have been the final nail in its coffin.
Tourists in search of isolated beauty spots, the increase in water sports and other recreations and the growth in population, traffic and pollution have all taken their toll on the area, leading to a dramatic reduction in unspoilt wilderness.
The area’s fish-farming industry, too, may have impacted on the food chain; sea-lice and disease caused by faecal material from cultured salmonoid species can eventually filter into an already fragile ecosystem, potentially devastating natural stocks.
Any animal returning to once traditional sanctuaries would discover a wholly different environment today.
If the Sraheens Lough creature was a large predator, at the top of the food chain, it would, in any case, have been considerably scarcer then its prey; such an animal, already small in numbers, could have died out completely.
If, however, the creatures were merely visitors to Achill Island, then perhaps they sought sanctuary elsewhere, in another remote island habitat or coastal shoreline.
Perhaps they travelled to a country farther north, towards the Arctic circle, or even westwards towards Iceland and Greenland to become incorporated into the folklore of those lands.
When I spoke to retired Irish Water Spaniel breeder Eddie Lennon, he told me that while he was conducting his own research at Grace Connolly’s grave in Conwall cemetery, a woman had approached him and begun to talk about the legend.
She told him that the people of Conwall and neighbouring townlands intended to stage a festival sometime in the future to commemorate the Dobhar-Chu legend and to keep the folklore of Grace Connolly and her ghastly fate alive for generations to come, ffl NOTES 1.
The stone can be located within the cemetery by walking roughly 20ft in a north-westerly direction after leaving the small path from the entrance gate.
Only recently has the spoken language surrendered to the change, as down to our own time those who signed 'Terence' were called Truilach' in this locality.
He devotes his spare time to researching Irish lake monsters, and plans to write a book on the subject some time in the future.
An intruder who broke into a house in Charmouth, Dorset, stole nothing, but left behind a television and a bottle of alcopop.
Although the nine-year-old White House was the largest private residence in the United States, some rooms were bare of furniture, while others held drab offices.
Dolley Madison wanted to redecorate some of the barren spaces in the White House to create rooms in which she could host gala social events.
Previous first ladies had avoided publicity and public events, but Dolley Madison loved a party.
She believed that she could increase her husband’s popularity and help him push his political programs through Congress if she became the leading hostess in First Lady Dolley Madison.
She therefore drew up plans to create an elegant dining room, a drawing room, and a parlor in the White House.
She discussed her plans with her husband, who was taken aback when he learned that the first lady’s proposed redecoration would cost more than his entire $25,000 annual salary as chief executive of the United States.
He told her that she would have to figure out some way to raise the necessary money.
The fifty-seven-year-old president, who was sixteen years older than his wife, did not share her enthusiasm for entertaining.
He was the principal author of the United States Constitution, but he was too bashful to make small talk at parties.
Happiest at his desk among books and papers, James Madison seemed nervous in social situations.
Pale and thin, with a weak, boyish voice, Madison was a short man, five feet, four inches tall.
Dolley Madison, who sometimes called her husband “the great little Madison,” thought that he ought to attend more parties in order to develop a public image as a cheerful, friendly man.
As if trying to counterbalance her husband’s subdued demeanor, the first lady cultivated a flamboyant style.
For parties, she liked to dress up in imported French dresses with daringly low necklines.
Although her wardrobe raised some eyebrows, her manner was so warm and unpretentious that almost everyone who met the first lady immediately liked her.
The writer Washington Irving described her as “a buxom dame who has a smile and pleasant word for everyone.” page 2 To finance her redecoration of the White House, Dolley Madison decided to seek help from the United States Congress.
She invited congressmen of both political parties to tea at the White House, and when they arrived she took them on tours of the building.
She showed them the bare rooms, which she described as a national embarrassment.
Eager to improve America’s image and to please the charming first lady, a majority of congressmen voted an appropriation of $12,000 for repairs and $14,000 for new furnishings at the White House.
Dolley Madison then hired Benjamin Latrobe, the noted architect, to help her choose furnishings.
Latrobe spent $2,150 for three mirrors, $556.15 for new china, and $220.90 for silverware.
At the request of the first lady, he also spent $28 for a guitar and $458 for a piano.
He was dismayed when she insisted on buying some velvet curtains that he found too gaudy for the drawing room.
With her new decor in place, Dolley Madison began holding “receptions” every Wednesday at the White House.
Slaves and servants served the guests French cuisine, fine wines, and plentiful liquor.
Dolley Madison carefully introduced every new guest to her husband, but James Madison usually stayed in a comer with a few close friends, intensely discussing political issues.
Celebrated writers and artists who attended the receptions usually seemed more eager to meet the first lady than to meet the president.
Dolley Madison’s real goal was to increase her husband’s popularity, rather than her own, and for several years she seemed to be succeeding.
Then, in the summer of 1812, President Madison caused a controversy in America when he asked Congress to vote for a declaration of war against Great Britain.
The British government, which was at war with France, had provoked the United States by seizing American merchant ships bound for French ports, by forcibly conscripting Americans into the British navy, and by allowing traders in Canada to arm the Indians who killed settlers in the American west.
The Federalists preferred the British monarchy to the radical dictatorship of Napoleon Bonaparte, and they hated the idea of helping a French dictator to fight against liberty-loving Englishmen.
After that, Dolley Madison’s parties began to be disrupted by shouted arguments between antiwar Federalists and pro-war Democrats.
To keep everyone as calm as possible, the first lady restricted her own conversation to small talk and laughter.
In an effort to encourage national unity, the first lady threw more parties than ever, but her husband’s political problems grew worse.
Congress refused to raise taxes for what the antiwar congressmen called “Mister Madison’s war.” page 3 The president called for fifty thousand volunteers to invade Canada, but only five thousand signed up.
James Madison’s popularity fell further when his underfunded attempts to invade Canada failed disastrously.
Dolley Madison became alarmed in 1813 when she heard rumors that British sympathizers and spies in Washington, D.C., intended to set fire to the White House to avenge the burning of the Canadian Parliament buildings at York by American invaders.
To defend her redecorated Executive Mansion, Dolley Madison began sleeping with a saber under her bed, so that she would be equipped to fight off any arsonists who might try to climb through her bedroom window.
The United States Navy was too small to oppose the enemy ships, which on August 19 landed an army of four thousand British regulars on the shore of the Patuxent River in Maryland.
As the British began marching toward Washington, D.C., Dolley Madison was alarmed not only by the enemy advance, but also by the depth of hatred that antiwar Americans began expressing towards her husband.
Nobody in Washington seemed to feel much confidence in the American army of one thousand regulars, backed by several thousand ill-trained militiamen, who marched from Washington to confront the British invaders.
President Madison felt that the troops needed some encouragement to cheer them up.
On August 23 he told his wife that he felt it was necessary for him to address the troops in the field, and he asked her if she would be afraid to stay alone at the White House that night.
Her husband expressed confidence in the American army, but he also showed her cases of secret documents that he did not want the British to see.
He told her that, if she was forced to flee from the White House, she should be sure to take the documents with her.
On the morning of August 24, Dolley Madison received an alarming dispatch from her husband.
The first lady immediately loaded the secret papers into trunks and had them carried to her carriage.
She found that the trunks completely filled the carriage, leaving hardly any room for her personal possessions.
She tried to hire a wagon, but none was available because many of the city’s residents were fleeing with all their goods.
Dolley Madison was secretly worried that her husband might be lynched by antiwar Federalists.
She felt that her own popularity might protect him, so she was eager to join him.
In a letter to her sister, written while she waited at the White House for the president’s return, the first lady wrote, “Our private property must be sacrificed, as it is impossible to procure wagons for its transportation.
I am determined not to go myself until I see Mr Madison safe, so that he can accompany me, as I hear of much hostility towards him.
At noon Dolley Madison went to the roof of the White House with a spyglass, hoping to see her husband returning from the battlefield.
Instead she saw small groups of American soldiers running back towards Washington without their guns.
She went downstairs and told the house steward, Jean-Pierre “French John” Sioussat, to prepare a meal in case the president and his party returned soon.
Then, resuming her letter to her sister, the first lady wrote, “French John , with his usual activity and resolution, offers to spike the cannon at the gate, and lay a train of powder, which would blow up the British, should they enter the house.
At threem. a messenger from the front galloped up to the White House waving his hat.
Our kind friend, Mr Carroll, has come to hasten my departure, and is in a very bad humor with me, because I insist on waiting until the large picture of General Washington is secured, and it requires to be unscrewed from the wall.
This process was found too tedious for these perilous moments; I have ordered the frame to be broken, and the canvas taken out.
And now, dear sister, I must leave this house, or the retreating army will make me a prisoner in it by filling up the road I am directed to take.
They had burned both the Capitol Building and the White House, they had then marched back to their ships.
Dolley Madison was told that British troops had done no damage to private property in the city, and that they had been “perfectly polite” to the citizens.
She nevertheless expressed the opinion that only insensate barbarians could have committed such a hideous act of vandalism as the burning of the White House.
Returning to Washington, D.C., the Madisons moved into the Octagon House, which had recently been vacated by the French ambassador.
There the first lady resumed holding her weekly receptions, but with fewer guests, because there was not enough room for large crowds in the smaller house.
Congress voted to rebuild the White House, but Dolley Madison was disappointed to learn that the work would This portrait of George Washington, painted by Gilbert Stuart, decorated the White House in 1814. not be completed before the end of her husband’s final term in office.
The burning of the White House angered most Americans and therefore helped to unite the country behind President Madison.
The Americans won the next major battles of the war, when they successfully defended Baltimore and New Orleans from British attacks.
These victories, quickly followed by a peace settlement, restored President Madison’s popularity, and boosted his first lady’s reputation to new heights.
In 1817, when James Madison completed his second term in office, he and Dolley Madison retired to their farm in Virginia.
That same year the White House rebuilding was completed, and the official portrait of George Washington, which Dolley Madison had saved from destruction, was returned to the Executive Mansion.
After her husband died in 1836, Dolley Madison returned to Washington, D.C., where she resumed her social activities, attending parties in her signature turbans and French gowns.
Until her death in the summer of 1848, she was the most sought-after guest in Washington, attending many parties in the rebuilt White House, where various presidents, eager to be seen in her presence, escorted her from one brilliantly-lit parlor to another.
Although her White House redecoration did not endure, Dolley Madison’s public persona was so successful that it became the model for subsequent first ladies, most of whom have tried to boost the popularity of their presidential husbands by being fashionable, sociable, and cheerfully apolitical.
At least eight families have received the dolls in the I alega community of oan Clemente, with all or the girls targeted around 10 years old.
Families began filing police reports about the dolls as early as June 16, but the mystery of their origin continues.
Jeff Flallock from the Orange County Sheriffs Department told ABC News.
Though some of the girls do attend the same school, sane families don’t know each other, making It difficult fa' investigators to uncover who is leaving the dolls.
The dolls were being ieft at these homes, but everybody thought they were the only one,” said Hallock.
Police are trying to figure out if the dolls were homemade or bought at a local retailer.
A leas, eight families received the dolls in he Talega community of San Clemente, with all of the girl, targeted around 10 years old.
Police Probe Mysterious Porcelain Dolls Left in Front of Homes of Girls They Resemble patterns.
The investigation focused on a woman who aflend. chorch with man, of he families who found he <k*. according to a news release issued late Thursday by the Orange County Sheriffs Department. ■lnves.iaa.o-s mad. contact with the female adult who admitted to placing the porcelain dolls m the pooh of the vatioos residences in he conmonfty"" Investigators have concluded ha, her motion was out o, goodwill and ha, she intended i, as a had gesture, he news release says of the woman whom authorities have not identified.
If you didn’t know already, dragons are a prominent totem in Chinese culture, believed to dominate natural forces like wind and rain.
On this day, they “raise their heads” with the sound of rumbling thunder, a sign of the coming rains that will revitalize the earth.
Around this time , the earth is bursting with life, grass and trees are beginning to sprout and formers are getting ready to till the fields.
In ancient China, people would worship the dragon god beside a river or a lake, praying for the precious spring rains to nurture their crops.
Ancient China used a constellation system called Twenty Eight Mansions to measure the locations of the sun, moon and stars and to decide the season.
One constellation, called “the Double Dragon of the East,” was hidden all winter beneath the eastern horizon.
The special foods usually eaten on this day include dragon’s scales, popcorn, soy beans, pig’s head and shepherd’s pursefried rice.
In the town of Nanzhan in Shandong Province, this day was the first big celebration after Spring Festival, and occasion for their femous mule and horse feir.
Even people from Inner Mongolia and Xinjiang would participate in the feir, herding their domestic animals here in advance.
It was believed that on this day the well was full of dragon eggs and that bringing them home would bless the collector with a year of fevorable weather and good harvest.
Now in its 10th year, “Haunting History” is a volunteer effort supported by Friends of Dunbar Cave, Tennessee Trails tion and the Roxy Regional Theatre.
All you’ll need is sturdy shoes, a jacket if you’re easily chilled, a flashlight, and $5 per person.
Once inside the cave, the guide will lead participants to three different scenes where students from the Roxy School of the Arts will act out skits pertaining to the Dunbar Cave area The skits are directed by Brendan Cataldo.
Facts about the cave — “This scene is about how bats are beneficial to the environment and why they are important to Dunbar Cave,” Boen said.
Starting at theVisitors’ Center of Dunbar Cave State NaturalArea, • COST: $5 per person.
The cast of “Haunting History of Dunbar Cave” pose at the mouth of the cave.
They are Becca Winters, Patrick Long, Hallie Sampson, Tim SmiJ;h, Kayla Coleman, Jacob Ritchart, Emily Ritchart, Autumn Crafton, Jaymin Burr, Frances Dennis and Christian Boyd.
The students from the Roxy Regional Theatre’s School of the Arts will perform three skits inside the cave 5-m.
Friday and Saturday. — A vignette of people who have lived and grown up around Dunbar Cave.
Questions — This scene focuses on questions left behind by former residents of the cave, including American Indians who used the cave, as well as a discussion about the cave art found inside.
Money raised from this event will be used for new interpretive signage for the natural area.
Maria Rice McClure is the features and custom content editor at The Leaf-Chronicle.
Explorers head to S Pacific to confirm Earhart's plane wreck Wednesday 3/12/2014, 8:39pm ET By Megan Cloherty WASHINGTON Amelia Earhart's plane disappeared in 1937 and it remains one of the world's enduring mysteries.
Now, explorers are excited about new evidence that could confirm that artifacts found on a remote South Pacific island are from the wreckage of her plane.
Experts say the rivets and their pattern on this plane fuselage discovered on the island match the repair records of Earhart's Lockheed Electra.
The National Group for Historic Aircraft Recovering is making its 11th trip this coming fall to the island of Nikumaroro where increasingly, evidence of a plane crash there points to the Earhart wreck.
The TIGHAR team of archaeologists and plane crash recovery experts are going back yet again to connect the dots they know of, and experiment with new technology which could help them uncover more.
If there's a whole chapter of her life surviving as a castaway on a waterless Pacific atoll.
Human remains were found on the island three years after Earhart's plane disappeared that are believed to be a woman's.
There is a piece of plane fuselage that the team's director believes washed up on shore many years ago which has rivet marks that match repair records of Earhart's Lockheed Electra.
Finally, campsite artifacts recovered on the island date to the 1930's and were manufactured in America.
Some of those items were a women's compact and freckle-cream jar manufactured in the United States around that decade.
He is concerned with preserving whatever the team finds on the island or around its reef slope.
He pointed specifically to any remnants of the plane, which was aluminum, submerged for this long would be particularly difficult to bring back for lab testing.
So you really want to be very careful and anything we find is going to have to be either left down there or brought into a controlled environment very quickly,"" King says.
The island of Nikumaroro is uninhabited, very hot and full of wildlife, Gillespie says.
The group is looking for sponsorship and funding, even reserving four spots for individuals who want to pay to experience the exploration first-hand.
SjjjftHE amount of animal Electricity which a man possesses is the true measure of his mental anti bodily vigor, and when it falls below the normal or health -standard through overwork, excesses or accidental causes, nature is often unable to restore it unaided, and a seriously impaired mental, physical and sexual condition ia the result.
Astonishing Effects of Electrieily, In that peculiar form of nervous exhaustion which results iu sexual weakness or general sexual debility, electricity rightly applied produces marvelous results/ As the nervous system is gradually strengthened, sexual vigor returns and all annoying symptoms disappear, and the patient speedily finds himself restored to a better condition than lie ever expected to enjoy.
Mr Silverlake identified the trainer as Tim Mericash, 23, of Nor1 walk.., and said the elephant was Elite, a 40-year-old.
Another circus employee, Mickey King, of Halls, Tcnn.. was Injured In the accident and was hospitalized in satisfactory condition at Baptist Medical Center in Little Rock, Ark,, with second-degree burns on his legs and back.
The circus was In this northwestern Louisiana town of 6,800 people near the Arkansas tine for a fund-raising event sponsored by the Jaycees, Mr Sllverlake said.
The elephant was Jolted by the electric shock, then fell on Mr tunrinsch iv hn also died of electrical Browse ail newspapers » <3. h a Page ~4| of is an 1 » ;■ elephant died of electric shock yes1 terday when the circus tent pole they were raising for the night's two performances touched overhead electrical lines.
Mr Silverlake Identified the trainer as Tim Mericash, 23. of Norwalk, 0., and said the elephant was Elbe, a 40-year-old.
The circus was In this northwestern Louisiana town of 8,800 people near (he Arkansas line for a fund-raising event sponsored by the Jaycees.
The elephant was pulling the chain to hoist the central pole into position when the metal pole hit the electrical lines in a vacant lot behind the Piggly Wiggly Shopping Center, Mr Silverlake said.
The elephant was jolted by the electric shock, then fell on Mr Mericash, who also died of electrical shock, Jerry Stephens, chief of the Spnnghill police, said.
It is said that a ghost named Emily haunts the historic covered bridge, and she's not just a spooky specter that allows the watcher a fleeting glimps before vanishing back into nothingness.
This ghost is feared as she is known for shaking cars and slashing victims with invisible claws.
People have heard a woman's voice, seen ghostly figures, and witnessed strange lights at Emily's Bridge.
Photographs often develop improperly without explanation, and many have found whispy streaks or ""orbs"" appearing in the photos.
On 28 May, the X-Project Magazine was invited to Kierstead's most recent stakeout at the bridge.
While Emily did not appear during the four-hour-long ""ghost watch"", some interesting things did happen.
As was expected, jnumerous ""orbs"" showed up in some of the photographs taken from within the bridge.
While often associated with hauntings, orbs are likely caused by jmoisture or dust particles in the air that reflect light into the camera lense causing tiny luminous globes that are unseen until inspection of the photograph.
Furthermore, as is also reported at haunted places, our photography equipment repeatedly malfuntioned while taking photographs inside the bridge.
Even though the highquality batteries were purchased that afternoon, the camera repeatedly malfuntioned in the bridge.
The second digital camera drained it's new batteries after only 40 photographs were taken.
While no distinctly human voices were heard, many peculiar sounds suggested a plethora of causes... footsteps, grunting, things rubbing the sides of the bridge.
Due to the hollowness of the structure and the very loud, babbling brook just below the bridge, I am certain one would hear just about anything, especially with the wind howling through the wooded surroundings or the rain beating upon the roof.
While Emily's Bridge has a serene beauty by day, at night the covered bridge takes on a more dramatically spooky look.
It takes a certain bravery to enter alone after dark; and with the loud rushing of water clouding your sense of hearing, and the pitch blackness of nightime in the country, the mind easily recalls every chilling story associated with the bridge.
For more information on Emily's Bridge, read Joseph Citro's book, Passing Strange , True Tales of New England Hauntings and Horrors.
Also, check out Kevin Kierstead's web site, Paranormal Research America to read about his previous visits.
A monk from Surpatele monastery in Romania. had a vision in a monastery on Mount Athos in Greece.
A light appeared before him and then a voice from heaven told him that the archangel Michael will sound his trumpet on 11 August 2002, heraiding three days and three nights of fire and earthquakes which will be the end of the world.
On the banks of the river Nidd, near the town of Knaresborough in North Yorkshire, England is a spring that was once thought to have been cursed by the devil.
Anyone could see that the waterfall over which the spring flowed looked like a giant's skull.
Some said that if you let the mysterious and frightening waters of the well touch you, then you would also be petrified.
Article Add to Favorites Add to ’Articles to Read’ Popular Articles Mime.
My Sister's Keeper By Aubrey Ward in j 07 / 3/2009 DVD Review: Street Fighter Tfee Legend Of Chun li By Aubrey Ward IS | 07 / 5/2009 MovieReview— S3ho&‘ The Last Vampire By Peter Gutierrez j Yesterday Review— Bum Notice: ’Tearless Leader'"" By barbara mpu.ntjpy i 07 / 2/2009 Review ; Guiding light Week of Time 29.
Instead, if an object was left in the waters, it was gradually petrified.
Because of this, townspeople sought out the well in order to leave objects that would gradually turn to stone.
About that time, the well was experiencing a boom in popularity due to its proximity to the local soothsayer, Ursula Southeil , These days, Mother Shipton is credited with foretelling everything from the Great Fire of London to Australia to cellular phones to the end of the world.
Although the legend says that Agatha's lover continued to support her, she chose to have her child in a cave near the supposedly devil-cursed, witchcraft plagued petrified well.
So It's not really surprising that when Agatha's baby was born misshapen, people began to talk.
The talk continued throughout the future Mother Shipton 's childhood and through the point of marriage.
At that point, Mother Shipton gave them plenty of other things to talk about with her lyrical prophecies.
In the early 1600's medical physicians examined the waters, and pronounced that they could cure any malady that the body might have.
Then, In 1630, King Charles I sold the land that the well sits on to Sir Charles Sllngsby.
Sir Slingsby must have been able to recognize a business opportunity when he saw one, because he immediately put the well on exhibition and charged money for guided tours around his new property.
Interviews Movies Music Original Fiction Press Releases Reviews Television Theatre Video Games Horror Firms and Thrillers The Paranormal Technology Convention and Event of 2 7/9IKB9 5:15 PM rig^nas Mysterious i'ctri tying well M*p:fflrcl»x.ofgtacw^^ tfngtondT-My sterious-1’ tfritying-We... and its surrounding area have been in continuous operation as an attraction since then.
Mineral deposits in the water formed a hard shell around whatever was left in the water.
Over the years, celebrities including Queen Mary, John Wayne and Agatha Christie have left items behind to be petrified in the well.
A soft toy can take anywhere from three to five months to petrify, while larger, nonporous items can take up to 18 months.
Firerex News is not affiliated with MozOa, however, we highly recommend the Firefbx Browser and other Moziia products.
Please do not reproduce articles from this site in their entirety on forums, blogs, or other Web sites without our express permission.
We have no objection to short quotes from our articles being posted on other sites.
More than two decades after the last inmate checked out of the Ohio State Reformatory, it remains a fixture in Mansfield, thanks, in part, to Hollywood.
It was the setting for The Shawshank Redemption , one of the most critically acclaimed prison movies ever, and draws visitors for events from April to November.
This Labor Day weekend , organizers are saluting the film's 20th anniversary.
Highlights include a two-day bus tour to 13 sites on Mansfield's Shawshank Trail; a jazz cocktail party in the prison; lodging packages; and a Sunday prison service.
The all-ages event highlights the role of animals at the historic penitentiary.
Jayne Clark Osty, Eugene French physician and psychical researcher, for many years director of the institut metapsychique international in Paris.
He studied medicine, and, after obtaining his degree in 1901, established a practice in a small town in central France.
Osty first became interested in the psychic in 1909, when a palmist impressed him with her apparently accurate knowledge of subjects known to him but not to her.
After an intensive study of palm reading, he became convinced that clairvoyance was the operative function, and that the palm merely served to focus the mind.
He began to divide his time between his medical practice and the study of professional sensitives, resulting in his book.
After serving with the French Army Medical Corps L* ^ World War I, Osty published The Meaning of Human & tye , m which he linked the mental evolution human beings with their psychic potentials.
In 1921, he settled permanently in Paris, began to lecfore on his work with psychics, and became a memv £ er of the governing committee of the IMI, which W been founded in 1918.
An important book, Su.■y-' P^rnormal Faculties in Man , in which he summed up K nis thinking on clairvoyance and human nature, appeared in 1923.
He was by this time well respected for his work on clairvoyance, and his appointment was hailed, even in the public press, as a brilliant move.
During his period at the IMI, which lasted until his own death in 1938, Osty took up the study of physical mediumship.
Innovative in his research methodology, he developed a technique of photography using ultraviolet light for use in the seance room, and he devised a system of control involving an infrared beam, which if crossed would cause a battery of automatic cameras to take pictures.
The idea was to catch any trickery in the act, but every time the beam was crossed and the cameras went off, the medium, Rudi Schneider (see Schneider brothers), was hunched in his chair, in deep trance.
At the same time, however, objects on the table or elsewhere in the room were displaced.
His 1930 experiments with Schneider are widely regarded as among the most important in psychical research history.
The Unknown Powers of Mind over Matter , coauthored with his son, Marcel.
Cemetery work leads to hassles By JAKE LOWARY The Leaf-Chronicle Restoration and improvements are routine at Mount Olive Cemetery, and are often met with wide approval and support.
Jessica Saunders, who lives right next to the nearly 200year-old African American cemetery, insists she is not against the cemetery’s presence or even the improvements being made, but says there could be more prudence given to her property and privacy while the work goes on.
Saunders said flocks of people venture onto her property, have cut down her trees, and sometimes refused to cooperate with her requests to stay off her family’s land.
She said she has called the police several times, along with neighbors, but has not been met with kind favor.
Saunders and her family, a husband and six children, live on a limited budget and aren’t able to afford an attorney, she added.
Saunders said inmates from the Montgomery County Jail also have been taken to the cemetery to clean it up, but that leaves Saunders with fear for herself and children with only one or two officers monitoring the inmates — sometimes as many as two dozen in number.
Saunders’ husband is in the military at Fort Campbell and is preparing to deploy, adding to her worry.
There’s been particular problems with a triangleshaped piece of land between Rollins Road and an access road to the cemetery.
Saunders says it’s hers — exhibited by a paid survey of the parcel — but Bell also says she’s been told by the city of Clarksville it belongs to the cemetery.
Bell admitted she ignored Saunders initially, but said later she decided “that’s just not right” and agreed to stay off the small piece of land.
Saunders said it’s not even necessary to use the road, as there is supposed to be access through a church parking lot off Cumberland Drive.
Bell suspects the Saunders of being prejudiced to a degree, but Saunders insists she and her husband and family are not.
Saunders said there’s also a privacy issue, as she has seen people standing in her front yard chatting in the morning and allegedly looking into her windows.
Saunders said she and her husband have also had to install a costly water pump to remove flooding from her land every time it rains, which she says is caused by brush placed in a ravine on the cemetery’s property that allows the water to flow away.
Saunders said she also had to foot the bill when a large tree on the cemetery’s property fell onto hers, damaging a shed.
Bell said she is willing to work with Saunders about her concerns, and doesn’t want any more bad blood.
He can be reached at 24507 19 or by e-mail at jakelowary@theleafchronicle.com.
This Kenneth Mackenzie divined what was to be in a pebble his mother bequeathed to him, having received it from a dead Norse princess who was buried in Scotland.
When the graves gave up their dead for an hour at midnight she had far to journey overseas to revisit her native land.
Mackenzie, watching her flocks one night, saw the emptied kirk-yard refill, but the one who came in the track of the Norland wind was delayed, and being a brave woman, Kenneth's mother laid the staff, which she had been herding the cattle with, across the grave.
The spirit could not enter, and desired the woman to remove the hindering stick, promising her as a reward a stone for her son Kenneth in which the future would be reflected.
She told his mother, how she, a daughter of the King of Norway, was drowned while bathing, and that her body had drifted to Scottish shores and was there buried.
It was thus, so tradition avers, that Kenneth Mackenzie, who lived in the seventeenth century, became possessed of the stone which gave him the power of divination.
He was only a day labourer, but he was sought after by the gentry throughout the length and breadth of the land, and no special assembly was complete unless the shrewdwitted Kenneth was there.
A gentleman who was writing down the seer's prophecies, when he gave tongue to this, flung them all in the fire, as he deemed this was too absurd.
He also foretold that a white house would be on every hillock, and schools and shooting lodges verify this statement.
The Fetch approximates to the Highlander's "" second sight,"" and is a mere shadow, resembling in stature, features, and dress, a living person well known to the beholder.
If the apparition appears in the morning a happy longevity for the original may be confidently predicted ; but if it appears in the evening the immediate dissolution of the living prototype may be as surely anticipated.
When the Fetch appears agitated in its movements a violent or painful death is indicated for the doomed prototype, who is known at the time to be labouring under some serious illness.
Individuals often behold their own Fetches, and the Phantom may make its appearance at the same time and in vanishing 5 ” 3065, ^ SeUeral PerS ° nS ' Spirit ' like< 11 flits before thfi si S ht of the beholder, walking leisurely in front, and mysteriously — Elder faithsof Ireland, woodmartin 'A series of trials which took place in Orkney in 1615-1616 shows the same mingling of beliefs.
Katherine Carey, a healer, admitted that at sundown among the hills, ""ane great number of fairie men mett her,' among them 'a maisterman "" perhaps the devil.
Katherine Jones-dochter, who was able to transfer disease, had seen the trow’s come out of their hills and knew too much about them.
Elspeth Reoch had been taught her craft by a man in green tartan who appeared to her 'wath another man in black.
The latter, who called himself 'a farie man,"" was the spirit of a dead relative, neither dead nor living, and doomed for ever to go betwixt the heaven and the earth,e. he was with the fairies.
A fifth woman, Isobel Sinclair, was under fairy control, as a result of which she had second sight.
Two zoo keepers in Recklinghausen, north-west Germany, were suspended after being caught barbecuing five Tibetan mountain chickens and two Cameroonian sheep at the zoo, popular with children who were allowed to stroke the animals.
ZOE MEYERS/THE DESERT SUN y and the protech batteries , r ets. cts us a lot.
The Imperial Valley begins receiving Colorado River water in 1901 through the Alamo Canal.
Flooding causes a break in the Alamo Canal, which creates the Salton Sea.
The Upper Colorado Basin states (Colorado, Wyoming, Utah and New Mexico), the Lower Basin States (California, Arizona and Nevada) and the federal government sign the Colorado River Compact.
Boulder Canyon Project Act authorizes construction of Boulder Dam and the All-American Canal.
The act also prescribes how the annual 7. million acre-feet would be divided among the Lower Basin States.
Construction begins on the Coachella Canal, a branch of the All-American Canal.
CVWD and Desert Water Agency enter into agreements to purchase water from the California State Water Project to alleviate declining water tables.
United States Supreme Court decrees that Arizona's annual apportionment is 2. million acre-feet, California's is 4. million acrefeet and Nevada's is 300,000 acre-feet.
State Water Resources Control Board investigates wasteful watering practices in the Imperial Valley.
Quantification Settlement Agreement allocates water rights in the Lower Basin.
Beginning in 2018, it will accelerate the sea's shrinking as water long used for agriculture — creating runoff that fed the sea — is transferred to urban markets such as San Dieqo.
V K rj The dying Salton Sea is a refuge to some, a beautiful lady with a bad reputation to others MEET THE PEOPLE » Visit DesertSun.com/SaltonSea to watch a video about the people in the story who live along the shores of the state's largest lake.
The once-bustling Salton Sea that drew stars and tourists is still a spot of beauty that has drawn residents to its shores.
By Ricardo Cano and Zoe Meyers The Desert Sun In summer, Lolita Springer fished with her family and swam with the other kids in inflatable tubes.
They’d catch orange-mouthed corvina as fast as they could pull them up using cane poles.
The Salton Sea was salty, of course, but nothing a good rinse-down couldn’t shed from your skin.
Behind the counter at the Bombay Market, the only store in the community of 250, she rings up a customer.
In the 1960s, at the height of the Salton Sea’s popular allure, her family drove up from Brawley for weekend getaways to Bombay Beach.
Prime real estate, with uninterrupted views of the sea, has been abandoned.
Accidental lake will continue drying up The Salton Sea’s ailing health has not turned everyone away.
They are the sentinels for the storms of dust and stench that kick up when deoxygenation wipes out schools of tilapia and the wind scours the sea’s exposed playa.
Since then, the lake has been fed by runoff from nearby larms, some flowing in from the Alamo, New and Whitewater rivers.
But that runoff has been decreasing and is set to decline dramatically in the coming years as water is transferred to San Diego County and the Coachella Valley.
Starting in 2018, water deliveries to the Imperial Irrigation District, which rims a majority _ sea > w jfl be cut under the 2003 Quantification Settlement Agreement, or QSA, the nation’s largest agricultural-to-urban water transfer deal.
Other days, not so much Houses along the edge of the road closest to the sea’s water are intact, but their windows are boarded up or broken.
The community’s biggest worry, Springer said, is the behef that, one day, the community will cease to exist.
She stopped for a moment to tape together two crumbled pieces of a $20 bill handed to her by an elderly customer. believe most of us think that s what s coming in store for Bombay Beach,” she said.
April and Les Crawford and their son, 6-year-old Kaleb were homeless after a family emergency strained their finances.
Victims of bad credit, they eventually found a place to rent in Vista Del Mar, near the seashore north of Salton City.
For $600 a month, they share a three-bedroom house. . , A P^f> , 35 > is a caretaker for the elderly.
I walk 10 feet out from my house and I can see the beautiful sea,“ Les said.
High asthma rates are linked to dust storms, which will grow worse as the sea shrinks.
How will her kids play outside and what will clouds of seabed do to their lungs, Pimentel said.
Hospital and emergency room visits due to asthma among Imperial County residents is double the state averThere is a park a block from her house on Neptune Drive, olides and monkey bars were built and funded by the community but there is no shade.
In the SUNDAY, AUGUST 3, 2014 The sun sets over the Salton Sea on July 28. zoe meyers/the desert sun Palm Springs Catherdral City Palm Desert Indio Coachella CUD Mecca North Shore 5 miles Ml | THE DESERT SUN | DESERTSUN.COM A15 summer heat, the metal bars are scorching.
The sea looked like a vacation paradise when Pimentel and her family first moved to the area.
But when they visited the shore, ground fish bones overtook the sand in spots.
The center opened in 2010 and occupies a building once exclusive to the North Shore Yacht Club.
Endless fields of fruit and vegetables, and the labor required to pick miles of fields in the blazing sun, drew a large Latino community to North Shore.
The eastern Coachella Valley’s $500 million agriculture industry produces a majority of United States table grapes and dates, and significant supplies of other seasonal produce.
They move in here,” he said one recent morning, swatting flies from his face as his crew harvested grapes.
The Salton Sea is “a beautiful lady with a bad reputation,” said North Shore resident Linda Lemus, 61.
Lemus, who moved here a decade ago, is a volunteer at the North Shore Community Center.
Her neighbor are “lowerWest Shores # Salton City The Salton Sea GOD “I guarantee you that if the Salton t Rancho Mirage, or in Palm Spring $ downtown L.A. or Orange County, t Sea would not be looking the way it LINDA LEMUS, North Shore resident income,” mainly work on farms and lack voting power.
The sea's a 'treasure' Proposals to deal with the Salton Sea are endless, from restoration to a slow death.
Some push desalinization, others would build a canal to carry water from the Sea of Cortez.
One idea would cut the lake into smaller, more manageable lakes, another focuses on preserving mini-wetlands.
The most aggressive proposals would cost more than a billion dollars, one as much as $9 billion.
Expanding geothermal power production along the lake’s southeastern shore is a recent favorite proposed fix for the sea and has the added benefit of adding jobs.
Lithium extraction from salty brine hokls the promise of marrying renewable energ duction of highfor cars and gad| The sea “affe keeps a lot of Mansfield said. lot bigger than w The largest er Salton City areaHighway 86 ar Realty — empl Mansfield said.
I took up an interest in UFOs and started reading all the books I could get hold of.
I was half way through John Keel’s Operation Trojan Horse when my parents left me alone in the house for the weekend.
That night I had the vivid impression that a woman, dressed in a purple Victorian ball-gown, was in the bedroom with me.
It unnerved me a bit, but I soon put it out of my mind and went to sleep.
A few nights later (when my parents had returned) I was woken by what I thought were small children jumping across my bed.
After searching the room for likely suspects, I went back to bed and started to doze off again.
Then, as I lay on my back, I became aware of a weight sitting on my chest.
When I opened my eyes I was face to face about 6in away with what I can only describe as a wolf.
I can still picture its black face, slobbering mouth, teeth and pink tongue.
After an uncertain period of time, I managed to move and the apparition was instantly gone.
Either someone would be sitting on the edge of the bed or leaning over me, and each time I found it impossible to move.
I had a large wardrobe at the end of my bed, which also started getting in on the act.
It was as if it was being punched, only once a night, causing the same loud and distinct thud.
These experiences continued, on and off, for about three months and although I thought it best to halt my interest in UFOs, I never told my parents about what was going on.
The new house initially had no after-dark visitors and I had a chance to renew my interest in the unknown.
This time something was in bed with me again, and I had the distinct impression that it was a woman with her arms wrapped around me, gripping me tightly and not allowing me to move.
I managed to break free, but instead of being frightened, I was fuming.
Far from dampening my curiosity about the unknown, in some ways it was the beginning of my interest, almost like an initiation.
I developed a dislike for German Shepherds as they remind me of the wolf, and I cringe every time I see a wardrobe like my old one.
An insulting remark about Rachel Jackson was a primary cause of the duel between Andrew Jackson and Charles Dickinson.
The official explanation is that the duel resulted from a series of events that began when Andrew Jackson was accused of questioning the integrity of Charles Dickinson and his fatherin-law Joseph Erwin.
A horse race between Ploughboy, owned by Erwin and Dickinson, and Truxton, owned by Jackson, was postponed due to an injury to Ploughboy.
Because their horse could not run, Erwin and Dickinson were obligated to surrender a forfeiture fee of $800, which was to be paid to Jackson in notes-the IOUs of that day.
The notes to be used to satisfy a forfeit had been agreed to before the day of the race.
Later, Jackson reportedly said that the notes he was initially offered by Dickinson and Erwin were not the ones they had previously agreed upon, thus raising questions of the two men’s honor and leading to the duel.
There is no shortage of documentation to substantiate the role the notes played in bringing about the duel.
But there is reason to believe that a great deal more was involved— something beyond notes and impugned honor.
Upon hearing this report, General Jackson called on Dickinson and asked him if he had used the language attributed to him.
Dickinson replied that if he had, it must have been while he was drunk.
Further explanations and denials removed all ill feeling from General Jackson’s mind, and they separated in a friendly manwhen it is put in context.
In a letter written for publication , John Hoggatt, a highly respected citizen of Davidson County, described a conversation that had occurred in his presence on Christmas night, 1805, three days before the meeting at Winn’s Tavern.
During that conversation, Joseph Erwin said in front of his son-in-law, Dickinson, that “he expected that they would have to fight a duel,” because of Jackson’s alleged remarks.
Then he publicly questioned whether Dickinson would “flinch,” or in other words, back down.
Hoggatt was a neighbor and close associate of Jackson, and it seems highly likely that he would have disclosed such important information.
But whether Jackson heard about the conversation or not, the atmosphere surrounding the meeting at Winn’s Tavern would have been especially ominous.
Given that context, it is difficult to imagine that the initial subject from which Dickinson diverted the conversation could have been any less serious than what he steered the conversation to-the notes.
This was repeated to Dickinson, who, being somewhat excited by his losses, and probably under the influence of liquor, rejoined, ‘Yes, about as far out of sight as Mrs.
Swann was involved in circulating Jackson’s supposed remark about Dickinson and Erwin, and after Jackson denied the accusation and referred to Swann as “a damned liar,” Swann wrote a letter challenging Jackson to a duel.
Note, sir, there was no notes delivered at the time of making the race as stated in your letter, neither was the meeting between me and Mr D at Mr Wins on that subject-it was introduced by Mr D to change the subject I took him out to converse onSo Jackson had come to Nashville to take up a personal matter with Dickinson.
Jackson’s postscript reveals that what Jackson took Dickinson outside to talk about had nothing to do with the notes.
That piece of information becomes more telling What else could the initial topic have been but something similar to what the unnamed relative of Mrs.
It is true that in the postscript of his letter Jackson did not specifically say what “the subject” was.
For Andrew Jackson to have acknowledged, in a letter that might be made public, that his wife had been cast as an adulteress would have been unthinkable.
There was a great deal more to the duel than can fully be examined here.
There were the details of Jackson’s early life with Rachel, and the complex set of circumstances that surrounded their trip down the Mississippi to which Dickinson had reportedly referred.
There was Jackson’s deep animosity for, and his political rivalry with, John Sevier of East Tennessee, and Jackson’s suspicion that Dickinson was picking a fight with him on behalf of Jackson’s political enemies.
There was the duel itself, including the details of Dickinson’s expertise as a marksman, Jackson’s strategy, and his unlikely triumph.
There was the presidential campaign of 1828, which so scandalized Rachel that her death, soon after her husband’s election, was widely attributed to the emotional toll it took on her.
And there was Jackson’s death in 1845, which may have been brought about by the bullet fired into his chest by Dickinson nearly 40 years earlier.
The duel contained those aspects and many more, but as for what brought it about, there is far more than folklore to suggest that an insulting remark about Rachel Jackson was a primary cause of the duel in which her husband killed Charles Dickinson.
Paul Clements is a historian and author of A Past Remembered and the forthcoming book, Chronicles of The Cumberland Settlements.
Father Pellegrino Emetti , welhknown and respected both as a man of God and a rigorous scholar, announced to the world that he had invented a time machine.
He called it the ‘Chrono visor’, and while, unlike H G Wells’s famous fictional device, it didn’t allow one to travel back physically across the ages, it did allow its operator to see into the past, to witness history’s key moments as they actually happened.
It would have been an outlandish claim for anyone to make; the fact that it came from the otherwise dignified and sober Emetti made it all the more unusual.
A man of unusual brilliance and learning, Father Emetti occupied an endowed chair in pre-polyphonic or ‘archaic’ music at Venice’s Conservatorio Benedetto Marcello.
His scholar' ly studies of such early pre'polyphonic music had resulted in some 70 books and hundreds of articles.
He directed the choir of the Benedictine Abbey of San Giorgio Maggiore and recorded over 50 LPs of Gregorian Chant and related music.
And his knowledge ranged far beyond the world of archaic music; he held a degree in quantum and subatomic physics, and had contributed to significant research in these areas.
He was also an exorcist of considerable renown , performing huge numbers of exorcisms at the height of his career, and writing a book on the subject, Satan’s Catechism , in which he described in detail the symptoms and signs of demonic possession.
He had apparently been at work on the machine since 1950 although not alone.
According to Emetti, the Chronovisor was the result of extensive research he had conducted with a group of 12 prominent, but necessarily anonymous, scientists.
The shadowy group is supposed to have included physicist Enrico Fermi, who had worked on the atom bomb, and rocket-scientist Wemher von Braun.
The scholarly Ernetti transcribed the play from his sessions with the Chronovisor, thus bringing back to the world a lost literary treasure and proving the efficacy of his own wonderful invention.
What really caught the world’s attention, though, was Emetti’s further claim that he had used the Chronovisor to tune in to the last days of the life of Jesus.
N o original plans or photographs of the Chronovisor exist, so we can only speculate as to how it was supposed to work.
Supposedly, it consisted of a large number of antennae, corn structed from unnamed alloys; some kind of direction-finding apparatus, driven by the wavelengths of sound and light, which allowed the user to home in on any time, place or person in history; and some complex recording devices to store sound and images.
The notorious Christ photo is the only known example of the Chronovisor acting as a camera capable of bringing back images or freeze-frames from the unfurling vistas of the past to which it gave access.
In the years leading up to his death in 1994, Ernetti said less and less about his astonishing creation, leaving little evidence to persuade the doubters, but enough tantalising hints to ensure that rumours about the time-travelling monk of Venice would continue to circulate in Italy for many years to come.
They had begun, declared Ernetti, by trying to tune in on one of Mussolini's speeches.
They had captured images of the Italian dictator giving a speech in Rome; so much documentation and footage existed on Mussolini that Ernetti was certain it was him. travelled further back in time, to ancient Rome.
Ernetti noticed differences in the Latin pronunciation from what is taught in schools today.
Mussolini Next, they set the Chronovisor's dials further back in time, attempting to catch the sounds and images of one of Napoleon's speeches.
Then, the team THE CHRONOVISOR IN ACTION 32 FT165 Recently, though, there has been a further turn of the screw, with claims of a Vatican cover-up.
According to a recent book by a French Jesuit priest, the Vatican not only ordered Emetti to keep silent about his discovery, but has also, since his death in 1994, suppressed any material evidence of its existence.
Now in Le Nouveau Mystere du Vatican (New Mystery of the Vatican, 2002) he accuses the Vatican of suppressing Emetti’s temporal research documents and con1 struction plans for the Chronovisor.
Brune’s familiarity with the story arose from his accidental encounter with Emetti in 1962, when Brune then a young Jesuit priest who had just completed graduate work in Rome was touring the grounds of Venice’s basilica of San Giorgio THE TEAM TRAVELLED BACK IN TIME TO ANCIENT n ROME Maggiore, adjacent to the monastery where Father Emetti lived.
At that first meeting, Emetti told an astonished Bmne about the F "" ^ Chronovisor; afterward, the two met regularly, exchanging ideas on a wide range of subjects.
In 1997, the Viennese journalist Peter Krassa drew heavily on Brune’s book to retell Emetti’s story.
Father Brune’s Le Nouveau Mystere du Vatican is in part a reaction to the New Paradigm version which included the first translation from Latin of Emetti’s Thyestes fragment.
The translation was made by Dr Katherine Owen Eldred of Princeton, who tentatively suggests, on the basis of internal linguistic evidence, that the passage provided by Ernetti is a fraud, carefully pieced together from other texts by Emetti, who was himself a noted Latinist.
In his book, Father Francois Bmne, also an excellent Latinist, responds vigorously to this muted allegation.
He points out a number of errors in Dr Eldred’s translation, which, though minor in nature, do serve as is Father Bmne’s intention to undercut Dr Eldred’s authority and cast doubt on her hypothesis of fraud.
Father Brune does this because he cannot accept that Father Ernetti might not, in the main, be telling the truth about the Chronovisor.
He points to Ernetti’s enormous scholarly output to support this belief.
The portrait first appeared in public in the Milan newspaper Domenica del Cor ri ere on 2 May 1972, heralding a storm of scepticism.
Within weeks of its second airing in the Giornale del Misteri , a man wrote in with an identical [ photo saying he'd bought it at the gift shop of the Sanctuary of Merciful Love at Collevalenza, near Perugia.
This photgraph is a close-up sincere desire to believe that this gave proof of the reality of Christianity) or whether he really thought he couldn't let people down (like the girls who made the Cottingley fairy ‘photos'), no one will ever know.
Filters; Bulk memory; Device providing comparison with already-recorded data.
GENERATORANALYZER -ENHANCER which may be made into one unit with simple hardware which already exists commercially more or less perfected SUSPECT DEVICE: Although no photos or original plans of the Chronovisor exist, there have been some imaginative attempts at reconstruction.
Brune insists on his subject’s respectability and authority in the face of mounting confusion about Emetti’s obsession with the Chronovisor.
During his lifetime, Ernetti had given conflicting accounts of his timeviewer, even claiming that the notorious ‘photo’ of Christ’s agony on the Cross was actually of his own face while he was watching Christ’s crucifixion via the Chronovisor.
Ernetti asserted that the visionary nun might actually have been transported to the time and place of the crucifixion and seen exactly what Ernetti himself had seen through the Chronovisor.
D espite such suspicious material, Brune is unable to completely dismiss Emetti’s assertions.
Not only is he overawed by Emetti’s great learning and productivity as a scientist and a scholar, he is convinced of Emetti’s high personal integrity, which he was able to observe closely in the course of many conversations.
There is more in the New Paradigm edition to try the patience of Father Brune.
The final chapter consists of a hitherto unpublished ‘deathbed confession’ sent anonymously to me by a person claiming to be a distant relative of Ernetti who attended his deathbed that, although he was continually working on the Chronovisor, he had never perfected it and had never travelled with it through time.
This strange and gripping document also purports to explain the psychological roots of Emetti’s obsession with Thyestes; Ernetti said he remembered living in ancient Rome as a boy, attending a performance of Ennius’s play and being fascinated by its portrayal of cannibalism.
I cannot say for certain whether this ‘confession’ is authentic, but I have, after some investigation, reason to believe that it is.
In Le Nouveau M ystere du Vatican, Brune examines this ‘confession’ closely, for it seems to contradict his basic assertion that Ernetti was telling the truth.
He points out, quite rightly, a number of errors and contradictions in it for instance, there would have been no nuns (expressly mentioned by the supposed relative) in the monastery of San Giorgio Maggiore, even if they were serving as nurses to Ernetti.
In the ‘confession’, Ernetti says that it was only during a near-death experience the previous night that he “remembered obscurely” that it was not Quintus Ennius, but himself, who had composed the fragment of Thyestes that he claimed to have brought back from the past.
However, the ‘deathbed’ account also contains some fascinating original detail.
Ernetti reveals to the relative that, during his NDE of the night before, he learned that he had tried to build the Chronovisor in a number of previous lifetimes.
A s an author concentrating on Ancient Astronautics and other topics of fortean interest, the Austrian writer Peter Krassa (shown at left of photo) is not quite in the same league as Erich von Daniken or Johannes von Buttlar.
Still, with his impressive list of publications over the past three decades, he is well known to the German-speaking part of the SpaceGod fraternity.
In 1998, each of us published a book that involved the Count of Saint Germain.
No competition, really, as his account was non-fictional, while mine was a historical novel that co-starred the infamous charlatan.
Despite this amusing coincidence and even sharing a couple of friends in common, I had never been in contact with him until now.
That same year, 1998, also saw the publication of Krassa's book on the Chronovisor.
I was already familiar with Ernetti's claims but, frankly, I had never considered them worthy of further investigation.
I actually used the Chronovisor as a plot device in one of my Die Abenteurer suspense novels, written in the summer of 2002.
Actually, I think they had a positive influence on the book, so I don't mind.
Of course, they did not strictly play it by the book pun intended but both my German publishers and I see the good intentions behind this.
I first read about his strange apparatus in the 1970s, in a weekly magazine published in Vienna.
I was intrigued at first, but then I simply forgot about it until later some friends gave me an article translated from an Italian magazine.
I read a couple of books written by Paul Uccusic, who was my local editor at the Vienna daily paper Kurier and, much to my amazement, he mentioned the Chronovisor.
Then I read Professor Ernst Senkowski's book and, again, I was confronted with this weird machine.
So I started researching the story of Pellegrino Ernetti, who was involved in the development of the Chronovisor between 1950 and 1990, apparently cooperating with a number of international scientists.
I became increasingly fascinated and, with the help of Senkowski, I made contact with French theologian Father Frangois Brune, a lecturer at the Sorbonne and a close friend of Ernetti.
No one ever saw the Chronovisor, not even Brune or Senkowski, who were both in close contact with him.
Also, Ernetti never named the scientists who were cooperating with him because he wanted, he claimed, to protect them from public harassment.
The exceptions were Wernher von Braun and Enrico Fermi, who were already dead.
He also mentioned a Japanese scientist and Nobel Prize winner in physics.
Some lines of research present too much difficulty, with nothing much to be turned up, in my opinion.
In the early 1990s, I corresponded with Ernetti, but his answers were rather vague.
I did not know then that the Vatican had already ordered him to keep silent because his earlier public statements came close to arousing the interest of the espionage community.
Nonetheless, I'm still convinced of Ernetti's honesty, even in the light of all the inconsistencies in his story.
As a theologian, he could not really expect any personal gain from a hoax and, also, he could not seriously hope to make a financial profit.
Obviously, the Chronovisor itself would be the best evidence for his claims; but shortly before he died from cancer, Ernetti had the machine disassembled and ordered the single parts to be sent to different locations over the world.
We will never know why Father Ernetti insisted this was an authentic screenshot right off the Chronovisor.
Perhaps, visions or ideas that were incompatible with his scientific education haunted him.
The Chronovisor might be a symbol of scientific reasoning, a self-delusional mental construct.
Nor do I believe that his account of the Chronovisor is purely metaphorical.
Just recently, I read a newspaper article in which Professor Giuseppe Marasca the teacher who claims to have seen Father Ernetti's recording of the lost Roman opera Thyestes says he still possesses this most spectacular videotape.
I can hardly be a judge of Ernetti's character, as I never met him in person.
Still, from descriptions by others, I assume he was a very charming person, even if he had moments where he was rather egocentric.
Nor must we forget that he was a top-notch scientist and renowned academic, an expert on archaic music who had studied nuclear physics.
Some theses were proven wrong; others were based on flawed assumptions.
It would not be very wise and would very probably damage my reputation as an author to stick with my own errors.
We will have to wait and see if it also happens with the Chronovisor one day.
Over the last years, he has also become a critically acclaimed novelist with five hardcover books published.
His most recent effort is the gothic comedy Karl May und der Wettermacher, which one critic described as a successful blend of Sherlock Holmes and Three Men in a Boat He is currently working on a high-tech thriller and a number of other projects he won't even speak about.
OTHER 'TIME CAMERA' IDEAS W itches were accused of 'scrying' when they gazed into a crystal, a mirror or bowl of water, usually for the purposes of divination.
Some accounts imply 'real time' visions of things happening long ago or what might yet be as Frodo saw in Galadriel's mirror in Tolkien's Fellowship of the Ring.
Another form of time-viewing is experienced by those who 'relive' past lives.
The English reincarnationist Jenny Cockell interviewed in FT72:36-39said she had already had previews of a future life.
In the spiritual and folkloric tradition of near-death experiences, your life is said to 'flash before your eyes' and involves the direct reliving of everything you have done, or experienced, and its effect on other people.
Lubek published an account of his attempts at trans-time photography in 1912.
In 1934, William D Pelley, an American radical and editor of Liberation magazine, reported on 'Ultra-Vision', a form of time-camera which he allegedly developed in collaboration with Thomas Edison.
The 1950s saw much discussion of the Radionic Camera, which was developed by George DeLaWarr from prior experiments by the Americans Albert Abrams, a 19th century physician, and Ruth Drown, a chiropractor.
Drown became a martyr to Radionics when she died in 1966, after the FDA had imprisoned her for fraud and confiscated her equipment.
DeLaWarr claimed that his Radionic devices could bridge space and time by tuning into sympathetic energies or emanations.
A sample could generate an image of the whole it came from, no matter how far away or when it existed or will exist.
Science fiction is stuffed with variations of the timetravel story; however, we note that when Ernetti proffered a 'photo' of Christ's face in support of his claim of witnessing the Crucifixion, he was emulating HG Wells's timetraveller, who brought back a flower as his evidence of another world.
More specifically, Arthur C Clarke and Stephen Baxter invented a 'scientific' basis for something like the Chronovisor in their 2000 novel The Light of Other Days, which explores the personal, social and political consequences of a device that can 'see' anywhere and anywhen.
Ernetti then swears that he will reincarnate once again to try to complete the Chronovisor.
It fails to change his conviction that the Chronovisor actually existed.
On the contrary, he believes that the ‘confession’ is proof that someone has a serious interest in discrediting Father Ernetti’s claims.
Brune goes on to hint at sinister plots in the darker recesses of the Vatican.
Ernetti’s eventual lapse into silence on the subject of his magnum opus may have been due to pressures from above, pressures that made it extremely difficult for him to discuss his work, defend himself (as in the case of the ‘Christ’ photo), or to attend conferences at which he had been due to speak.
At their very last meeting, according to Brune, Ernetti told him that one month earlier, on 30 September 1993, he had been invited to the Vatican, along with the two surviving scientists of the original Chronovisor team.
Brune ’s book ends, then, on a positive note, having shed no real light on the mystery of the Chronovisor.
Already, mythologising forces have taken over the tale ‘and, as time goes on, mystery will beget mystery.
Any prospect of finding out the truth behind the story of Father Ernetti’s machine recedes into the past that so fascinated him.
He met Adolf Hitler in 1933 and was convinced the Nazi planned to exterminate Europe’s Jews, prompting him to sound warnings.
America and the Holocaust"" argued, he did little to save their European brethren.
Cut red tape that kept immigration quotas from being filled, allowing entry for 27,370 Germans — most of them Jews.
Hoped to resettle millions of Jews from Central and Eastern Europe to other countries, mostly in Latin America.
Promised to ask Congress for $150 million to help resettle refugees if Britain allowed more Jews into Palestine and private funds could be raised.
Most countries refused to admit Jews amid a depression and anti-Semitism, Breitman says.
Opposition also was strong at the State Department and in Congress, which voted in 1939 not to let in 20,000 German Jewish children.
Cuba, the United States and Canada turned away those on the ’’voyage of the damned,"" and the ship returned to Europe.
Roosevelt “made a decision to go for big results,” Breitman says, adding that the president viewed letting in small numbers of Jews as “a gesture, not a solution” to the larger refugee problem.
In 1940, after the start of World War II in Europe, his priorities turned to national security, Breitman writes.
Rafael Medoff, director of the Wyman Institute, which studies America’s response to the Holocaust, says the book won’t absolve Roosevelt.
He says FDR failed to take “concrete steps” such as giving Jewish refugees temporary haven in United States territories such as the Virgin Islands.
On 1 April 2003, reports appeared in the media of an enormous, monstrous squid that had attempted to attack an Antarctic fishing vessel in the Ross Sea.
According to the reports, it was armed with swivelling razor-sharp hooks on its tentacles, had eyes the size of dinner plates, made the formidable giant squid look positively tame in comparison, was itself referred to as the colossal squid, and had the jaw-breaking scientific name Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni.
Not too surprisingly, it was widely dismissed as just another fraudulent beast engendered by the imagination of some reporter hoping for the biggest April Fool’s hoax of 2003.
So out of curiosity, I looked up ‘ Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni ’, and was intrigued to learn that such a species did indeed exist.
The only member of its genus, which was created in 1925 to accommodate it, the colossal squid (this name seems to be of much more recent origin) first came to scientific attention from remains retrieved from the stomachs of sperm whales.
It is nowadays known from a number of juveniles, but until this new specimen, a half-grown adult female, was reported, only one complete postjuvenile specimen had been recorded caught at a depth of 2,500ft in the Antarctic, off Droning Maud Land, by the Soviet trawler Evrica in 1981.
According to the plethora of reports that swiftly followed the 1 April ones, the new specimen was almost 20ft long, but could have grown to 40ft , weighed 3301b but might have attained a full-grown weight of 2,0001b , and was feeding on Patagonian toothfishes caught on longlines set by the fishermen.
Not everyone was happy with these media reports, however, and on the online cephalopod discussion list, CEPH-LIST, a number of discrepancies between media speculation and zoological reality were highlighted.
To begin with, based upon behaviour exhibited by other members of the taxonomic family, Cranchiidae, to which the colossal squid belongs, it is more likely that this species ambushes its prey by hanging motionless in the water, rather than being forcefully aggressive.
Coupled with this, its bizarre-sounding tentacle hooks are not as extraordinary as suggested by the tone of the media reports, because several other squid species, even including very small ones, also have them, modified from tentacle suckers.
So there should be no inference drawn that these are designed for attacking humans, but merely that they are modifications for capturing certain types of prey.
In addition, Richard Ellis personally discounts the possibility that the colossal squid is any more of a monster than the giant squid, or any more dangerous to humans.
Even the claim that the Ross Sea specimen was only half-grown and might therefore have attained a much greater size had it lived is unsubstantiated.
As noted in the cephalopod group’s The squid was dismissed as another fraudulent beast discussions, during their later stages of development, squid mature rapidly, with almost all their energy being channelled into sperm and egg production, not into body size increase.
So the Ross Sea individual could have become fully mature, mated, spawned, and died without gaining any additional size at all.
In short, the Ross Sea specimen of colossal squid was indeed a remarkable discovery, and well worth receiving attention from the media.
Click on graphic for larger image — Description — Feverfew is a composite plant growing in every hedgerow, with numerous, small, daisy-like heads of yellow flowers with outer white rays, the central yellow florets being arranged on a nearly flat receptacle, not conical as in the chamomiles.
The stem is finely furrowed and hairy, about 2 feet high; the leaves alternate, downy with short hairs, or nearly smooth-about 4 1/2 inches long and 2 inches broad bipinnatifid, with serrate margins, the leaf-stalk being flattened above and convex beneath.
It is not to be confounded with other wild chamomilelike allied species, which mostly have more feathery leaves and somewhat large flowers; the stem also is upright, whereas that of the true garden Chamomile is procumbent.
The whole plant has a strong and bitter smell, and is particularly disliked by bees.
A double variety is cultivated in gardens for ornamental purposes, and its flower-heads are sometimes substituted for the double Chamomile.
Country people have long been accustomed to make curative uses of this herb, which grows abundantly throughout England.
Gerard tells us that it may be used both in drinks, and bound on the wrists is of singular virtue against the ague.
Pyrethrum is derived from the Greek pur , in allusion to the hot taste of the root. —Cultivation — Feverfew is a perennial, and herbaceous in habit.
When once planted it gives year after year an abundant supply of blossoms with only the merest degree of attention.
Planting may be done in autumn, but the best time is about the end of April.
Any ordinary good soil is suitable, but better results are obtained when well-drained, and of a stiff, loamy character, enriched with good manure.
Weeding should be done by hand, the plants when first put out being small might be injured by hoeing.
To propagate by division , lift the plants in March, or whenever the roots are in an active condition, and with a sharp spade, divide them into three or five fairly large pieces.
Cuttings should be made from the young shoots that start from the base of the plant, and should be taken with a heel of the old plant attached, which will greatly assist their rooting.
The foliage must be shortened to about 3 inches, when the cuttings will be ready for insertion in a bed of light, sandy soil, in the open.
For the latter pest, try peppering the plants; for the others use soot, ashes or lime.
Is also employed in hysterical complaints, nervousness and lowness of spirits, and is a general tonic.
The cold infusion is made from 1 OZ. of the herb to a pint of boiling water, allowed to cool, and taken frequently in doses of half a teacupful.
A decoction with sugar or honey is said to be good for coughs, wheezing and difficult breathing.
The herb, bruised and heated, or fried with a little wine and oil, has been employed as a warm external application for wind and colic.
A tincture made from Feverfew and applied locally immediately relieves the pain and swelling caused by bites of insects and vermin.
It is said that if two teaspoonfuls of tincture are mixed with 1/2 pint of cold water, and all parts of the body likely to be exposed to the bites of insects are freely sponged with it, they will remain unassailable.
A tincture of the leaves of the true Chamomile and of the German Chamomile will have the same effect.
Planted round dwellings, it is said to purify the atmosphere and ward off disease.
See CHAMOMILE, PELLITORY, PYRETHRUM. — Other Species — SWEET FEVERFEW and C maritima, found by the seashore, especially in the north, with leaves broader, more fleshy, succulent and smaller flowerheads than the Common Feverfew.
Common Name Index A MODERN HERBAL Home Page Purchase this Herb from Botanical. com Bear in mind ”A Modern Herbal” was written with the conventional wisdom of the early 1900's.
Of course, the results of this quizlet will not be as offer valuable insight nonetheless.
A kamikaze squirrel fell from the sky and detonated a Bayonne woman's car yesterday, police said today.
Lindsey Millar, 23, and her brother, Tony., were both home Wednesday at about 12:45m. when Lindsey's car suddenly started burning outside their 42nd Street home.
Tony Millar said firefighters told them it was the work of a bucktoothed saboteur that had been gnawing on overhead power lines connected to a transformer directly above the 2006 Toyota Camry.
Police said there were no injuries — except for the squirrel, that is, w hich is dead.
The Millars' home is decorated for Halloween, complete with a tiny plastic tombstone on their front lawn.
Tony Millar said the family will consider dedicating the tombstone to the squirrel, who was not named.
A History,” we investigated the failure of the allies to respond to the refugee crisis triggered by Nazi persecution and the prospect of our new book, “Flight From the Reich: Refugee Jews, 1933-1946,” opened.
This book examines the ever dwindling choices open to asylum seekers, and the often painful decisions of the many people who dealt with them — consuls, immigration officers and other government officials, church, health and social workers, volunteers; private individuals.
Refugee Jews 1933-1946"" is a story with which both Robert and I have personal connection: We both are related by friendship and kinship to many people who left Nazi Europe as refugees, and to a few who had the opportunity to flee, chose to remain, and survived.
A History,” which spans the history in which the Holocaust was rooted, professor Jan Van Pelt and I coauthored “Auschwitz,” which established the context in which historians now view that annihilation camp.
My first book, “Children with a Star,” gave voice to the silenced children of the Holocaust, and was the first history of the daily lives of young people caught in the net of Nazism.
This book has been translated into German, Italian, Dutch and Japanese and was the subject of a documentary by the Canadian Broadcasting Company.
A is the actual specimen, B is the right side doubled at the midline and mirrored, and C is the left side doubled and mirrored.
Its discoverers dubbed the find Homo floresiensis , a name suggesting a previously unknown species of human.
Although LBl lived only 15,000 years ago, comparisons were made to earlier hominins, including Homo erectus and Australopithecus.
Other traits were characterized as unique and therefore indicative of a new species.
Enlarge This figure compares the skull of LB1 to that of Liang Momer E, another skull from Flores, dated in the range of 3,000 to 5,000 years ago.
Tire original estimate of 3. feet for the creature’s height was based on extrapolation combining the short thigh bone with a formula derived from an African pygmy population But humans with Down syndrome also have diagnostically short thigh bones, Eckhardt said.
Though these and other features are unusual, he acknowledged, ”unusual does not equal unique.
The first indicator is cranio fecial asymmetry, a left-right mismatch of the skull that is characteristic of this and other disorders.
Eckhardt and colleagues noted Ms asymmetry in LB1 as early as 2006, but it had not been reported by the excavating team and was later dismissed as a result of the skull's being long buried, he said.
Here too, the brain size they estimate is within the range expected for an Australomelanesian human with Down syndrome.
LBTs short thigh bones not only match the height reduction seen in Down syndrome, Eckhardt said, but when corrected statistically for normal growth, they would yield a stature of about 1.26 meters, or just over tour feet, a figure matched by some humans now living on Flores and in surrounding regions.
Officials said someone is placing sharpened rebar spikes around Forest Service roads in Arizona.
The Arizona Daily Sun reported that United States Forest Service officials said at least five pieces of spiked rebar were found on a forest road in the Happy Jack area.
Group faced threats, violence and harassment as they set out across South to claim rights By Michael Cass The Tennessean NASHVILLE The decision was easy for Catherine BurksBrooks.
She and other Nashville college students, veterans of the sit-in movement to desegregate downtown lunch counters a year earlier, decided there was too much at stake and they had to keep the Freedom Rides alive.
So the students made plans to travel from Nashville to Birmingham, Ala., on a Greyhound bus May 17.
PBS will broadcast a two-hour documentary, Freedom Riders, which was shown May 1 6 at the 2010 Nashville Film Festival.
A group of 40 college students from across the country will retrace the rides, stopping in Nashville on May 12.
The first Freedom Ride was a project of the Congress of Racial Equality, a national civil rights group.
Seven riders boarded a Trailways bus and six got on a Greyhound in Washington on May 4, all of them bound for New Orleans, according to Raymond Arsenault’s 2006 book, Freedom Riders.
John Lewis, D-Ga., then a student at Nashville’s American Baptist Theological Seminary passed through Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia without any major incidents.
After a mob attacked the Greyhound bus, police escorted it to the city limits.
Driver Joe Cavanaugh punches the ticket of a Freedom Rider before the group left Birmingham, Ala., on May 20, 1961, en route to Montgomery. black smoke and flames and nearly killing the riders.
The Trailways riders were harassed by Ku Klux Klansmen as they rode from Atlanta to Alabama, then viciously attacked after they got off the bus in Birmingham.
The attacks grabbed the attention of a nation that hadn’t spent much time focusing on the Freedom Rides up to that point.
Among those watching were President Kennedy and his brother Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, who dispatched John Seigenthaler to Alabama.
Seigenthaler, a Nashville native arrived in Birmingham after the Freedom Riders’ plans to fly to Montgomery were disrupted by a bomb threat.
He was able to put together a plan to “sneak the Riders on board a flight to New Orleans” and joined them for the 10:38m. trip, Arsenault writes.
But the Nashville students, led by Lewis and Diane Nash, decided the movement couldn’t end like that.
They hustled to work out logistics for a ride from Nashville to Birmingham and on to Montgomery, Jackson and New Orleans, finally persuading the Nashville Christian Leadership Conference to provide $900 for bus tickets.
When the riders tried to leave Birmingham for Montgomery, Greyhound canceled the ride.
So the riders sat in the bus terminal for hours, surrounded by a restless crowd outside.
When the bus finally arrived in Montgomery the next day, Seigenthaler remembers seeing a “teeming anthill of violence” and hearing “screams, both of anger and of pain” as he arrived at the bus terminal.
Veterans of the Freedom Rides say the movement had a quick impact and a lasting legacy.
Signs ordering African Americans to use separate facilities came down “all through the South,” said Ernest “Rip” Patton of Nashville, who rode from Montgomery, Ala., to Jackson, Miss., where he was arrested and thrown in jail for more than a month. ^ roimd 8,000 mummified corpses line the walls of l Jr the Capuchin Catacombs, Palermo, Sicily, a macabre A Ik store for the mortal remains of the town’s departed citizens.
The story of this bizarre repository of the dead began in the 16th century, when Palermo’s Capuchin fathers exhumed the bodies of some monks and found that the dry soil of the area had preserved them by a natural process of mummification.
They soon caught on to the potential religious significance of the process and preserved the body of a particularly holy monk, Brother Silvestro, for public viewing.
Soon it became something of a status symbol for Palermo’s leading citizens to be preserved in the catacombs.
They would indicate in their wills how they would like to be remembered, and were often dressed in their finest clothes as momenti mori for grieving relatives.
Others would even ask for their garments to be changed at a certain time after their deaths.
Although the catacombs were officially closed in 1880, one of the last bodies to be interned before the local authorities banned the practice was that of two-year-old Rosalia Lombardo in 1920.
Nicknamed the “Sleeping Beauty”, her lifelike body is still perfectly intact, down to her grey-blue eyes.
Her remarkable preservation was the work of one Dr Solafia of Palermo, who took its secret with him to the grave.
Some have been arranged in poses two children sit together on a rocking chair, and a husband and wife remain happily united even in death.
Some look cheerful, as if they are enjoying a joke with their neighbours, while others frown upon the tourists.
Time has not always been kind to the bodies, some of whose faces have become distorted to resemble anguished screams from beyond the grave.
Monks are preserved in the clothes they wore in life, with the ropes they wore as penance still dangling from their necks, while priests hang in rows on a wall dressed in their sacramental robes.
Others mummies are dressed in the clothes of the period in which they lived.
Colonel Enea DiGuiliano stands proudly in the French Bourbon uniform he wore in the 1800s.
Among the more famous inhabitants is the the Spanish painter Velasquez who, confusingly, died in Seville.
Others include the sculptors Filippo Pennino and Lorenzo Marabitti and the writer Guiseppe Tommasi di Lampedusa, author of II Gattopardo , one of the best known works of Sicilian literature.
Here are some of the most notorious and unforgivably cruel serial killers of all time.
Gilles de Rais Gilles de Rais, a 15th century nobleman, considered to be the precursor to the modem serial killers, used to be soldier alongside Joan of Arc and was one of the wealthiest men in France.
Eventhough the precise number is unknown, it is generally placed between 80 and 200.
Vampire of Sacramento Richard Trenton Chase, who was known as the 'Vampire of Sacramento' due to his habit of drinking victims' blood and cannibalism, was an American schizophrenic serial killer, who killed six people in the span of a month.
He believed that he needed to prevent Nazis from turning his blood into powder via a poison they had planted beneath his soap dish.
In 1976, his attempt to inject rabbit blood directly into his body made him very sick, and he ended up in a mental ward.
In the summer of 1977 several neighbourhood pets became victims of Chase's thirst.
Using blenders, he'd mix up blood-and-guts cocktails, but soon it was not enough.
Chase was found guilty of six counts of first degree murder and was sentenced to die in the gas chamber.
On 26 December 1980, Chase hoarded the anti-depressants offered to calm him and made himself disappear.
Mailwaukee Cannibal Known as the Milwaukee Cannibal, Dahmer murdered at least 17 men and boys between 1978 and 1991.
Criminal Minds claimed his murders to be particularly gruesome, involving acts of forced sodomy, necrophilia, dismemberment, and cannibalism.
Unlike most serial killers, Dahmer's fantasies included a series of crimes against the corpse of his victims, or what he referred to as passive sex.
This became part of his regular pattern and possibly the one obsession that pushed him to kill.
Prairie Ghosts revealed, including commonly eating feces and drinking urine.
At the age of 20, he began raping young boys in Manhattan where he had moved with his mother.
Fish tortured, mutilated and murdered young children with what he termed his ""Implements of Hell"", which included a meat cleaver, a butcher knife, and a small handsaw.
A general view of a graveyard that will be recycled by the Ethekwini Municipality at the Loon Street cemetry in Durban, South Africa.
It's a blasphemy for South Africa's Zulus who revere their ancestors, but overcrowding in Durban's cemeteries has forced the city to begin ""recyclying"" tombs.
Durban is located in KwaZulu-Natal province which suffers the highest HIV rate in the nation with the world's biggest burden of 5. million AIDS cases.
The death toll has soared for years, and cemeteries are running out of space.
Urban graveyards reserved for whites only under apartheid have also filled up since multi-racial democracy arrived in 1994.
So Durban has launched a pilot project at one graveyard, which will eventually expand to all 60 in the city.
Remains more than 10 years old will be re-buried farther underground, with new corpses placed above.
A general view of a graveyard that will be recycled by 1 hifini miirKonl Kiimietnolih; of thp T rvr\r» If funeral rites are not followed properly, misfortune can befall the family of the deceased, which dreates concerns about how to yeneTate a-shared grave; — "" ""They believe that if you recycle the graves, there can be a confusion of the ancestors spirits.
I )urSf n says it has no choice, fearing the exi sting cemete ries_.will-be cofftpkteiy^TtHed in two years. l^an^ Jor new cemeteries is hard to come by in this coastal city of four million people, squeezed between the Indian Ocean and the hills of Zululand. -* , — ""If you look at the map, the land is not free.
Jntil the city settles on a solution, black market vendors of illegal tombs are filling in the gap.
Some cemetery guards are reportedljl re-selling abandoned tombs, while others are digging spaces outside approved burial grounds.
Another illegal practice involves stealing tombstones, a luxury in South Africa where 43 percent of the population lives on less than two dollars a day.
That's why recently barbed wire and elec ric fences have begun sprouting around Durban's cemeteries.
From the Evening Advertiser, Swindon r last October: ""A police spokesman said that the man was armed and dangerous, and advised the public nit to have a go/' The Anansi stories originated from Ghana’s Ashanti tribe.
Anansi must bring back Onini the Python, Osebo the Leopard, the Mmoboro Hornets, and Mmoatia the dwarf.
First he went to where Python lived and debated out loud whether Python was really longer than the palm branch or not as his wife Aso says.
Python overheard and, when Anansi explained the debate, agreed to lie along the palm branch.
Because he cannot easily make himself completely straight a true impression of his actual length is difficult to obtain, so Python agreed to be tied to the branch.
When the leopard fell in the hole Anansi offered to help him out with his webs.
Once the leopard was out of the hole though he was bound in Anansi’s webs and was carried away.
To catch the hornets, Anansi filled a calabash with water and poured some over a banana leaf he held over his head and some over the nest, calling out that it was raining.
He suggested the hornets get into the empty calabash, and when they obliged, he quickly sealed the opening.
He placed the doll under the odum tree where the dwarfs play and put some yam in a bowl in front of it.
When the dwarf came and ate the yam she thanked the doll which of course did not reply.
Annoyed at its bad manners she struck it, first with one hand then the other.
Nyame rewarded him with the stories, which now become known as Anansi stories.
Ginger Huang If the word “temple” brings to mind crushing tourist crowds and monks peddling lotus candles and prayer services, you’re probably hitting the wrong temples.
There are some Buddhist temples that, far from tourist attractions, house monks who live lives of seclusion and meditation, and remain connected to the outer world only through rituals and lectures.
Better yet, you don’t have to hop a mule up some winding mountain road to reach them — case m point is Guanghua Temple nestled on Yaer Hutong in a quiet quarter of Houhai.
For Beijing residents curious about Buddhism, this is the perfect spot to drop in on tomorrow, August 3 1 , when the monks and other devotees will celebrate Ghost Day ), which fells on July 15 of the Chinese lunar calendar.
Ghost Day originated from Chinese folk legends, which have it that on this day the gates of hell open, and ghosts are let loose to roam the earth.
People pray for the wandering souls, and set lotus candles onto rivers in blessing of them In addition to these commemorations, the day is also loaded with superstitious taboos — for example, you’re not supposed to open umbrellas inside, as ghosts will find a way to hide inside them.
It’s also said that after opening a door you should wait a moment before going through so that the ghosts (if they happen to be standing there) can go through first.
Outside of the wooden window we can hear the low hum of a ritual that has been going on for three days.
The main prayer hall has been c hanting a Confession Sutra for over an hour now, and the yards outside the halls have been taken up by rows of yellow praying cushions, on which people kneel and kowtow to a monk’s cal “We have a lot of worshippers who come to the temple because of superstition, not religion,” Master Zhengyu says.
In the days of the Gautama Buddha, he used to travel along the Ganges River with his disciples to spread his teachings.
However, as the weather heated up, in order to protect his disciples from pests, beasts and epidemic diseases, he told them to stay indoors for three months, starting on April 1 5 of every year.
So his disciples stayed in, spending those months reading and meditating.
To mark the three months’ meditation, Buddhists held ceremonies during which they confessed to Buddha their trespasses of the past three months, as well as their progress.
The July 15 ritual lasts for three days, and two ceremonies are held each day, one at nine and one at three.
If you want to participate in Buddhist rituals on one of these days, Fayuan Temple near Niu Jie is another option Master Zhengyu recommends.
Spring Festival's Tofu Day Making Steamed Buns Army Day Becky's mom examining the wrecked automobile unexplained events took place.
On April 29, 2000, Dusty and her then boyfriend Daniel decided to drive to Columbia, Missouri.
Daniel had wanted to leave around noon, but Dusty and Becky were hosting a wedding shower that wouldn’t be over until around three in the afternoon.
Shortly after he picked her up, a strange feeling came over Becky that she hadn’t told Dusty that she loved her often enough.
It was so strong that she almost asked Daniel to turn around and take her back home.
About an hour later, Daniel and Dusty were rear-ended by a drunk driver traveling at a high rate of speed.
Daniel’s Mitsubishi was demolished, but they both survived with only minor cuts and scrapes.
The Rays can’t help but feel that someone was looking out for Dusty that day, and they believe that person was Marsalee.
On the day I finished working on this article, I debated whether or not to write about the car accident.
I knew that Becky and Dusty were convinced that Marsalee looks out for them; judging by the photos of Daniel’s car, it did seem miraculous that neither she nor Daniel had been seriously injured or killed, but I had no evidence that Marsalee had intervened. . .until a few days later.
That Sunday I called Becky to get some answers to questions I had about the accident.
Before we got talking about that, I inquired if anything out of the ordinary had happened to her or Dusty since we had spoken last.
Becky told me that when she went in the kitchen Saturday morning, the doors on the small cabinets over the stove were wide open.
However, Becky couldn’t understand what Marsalee’s purpose was in opening those cabinets as they only contained paper plates.
Those paper plates were last used at the wedding shower — the same wedding shower that took place the day of the accident.
We could only conclude that Marsalee opened those cabinet doors as a way of letting us know that she had a hand in saving Dusty from death or serious injury that day.
It is also our belief that Marsalee knew of my reluctance to include the car accident in the story, and that this was her way of encouraging me to use it.
Lingering Presence I don’t think this was the only thing Marsalee did for my benefit.
I first met Becky and Dusty at the Bishop House just prior to the holidays.
Though they were living in Independence, they had been invited to a wedding in their old town and had asked the owner of the house if they could show it to me.
He gave them permission on the condition that I not reveal its exact location.
During the hour or so that I spent with them at the house, I took video and still photos of the premises and tape-recorded an interview with them.
Though nothing unusual was present in any of the pictures or video, there was an intermittent, rhythmic clicking sound on portions of the audio tape.
Dusty had to leave on an errand shortly after I arrived, and was not there when I started the interview.
Interestingly, the clicking doesn’t start until about the time she returns.
None of us could recall hearing anything in the house that may have been responsible for the sound.
I checked a tape that I had made prior to their interview and there was nothing unusual on it.
There are no unusual sounds on any subsequent tapes I have made on that machine.
I will make this tape available to any serious investigator who would like to analyze it.
There is no way to know exactly why Marsalee has chosen to look after Dusty, or how long she will continue to do so.
In any event, Dusty can go through life with the added confidence of knowing that she has a very special guardian angel looking out for her.
He teaches a class on “ The Haunted Heartland ” in Kansas City and is currently working on a book entitled Evidence For Life After Death.
O n a sleepy residential street in a small central Missouri town stands a picturesque stone house, known locally as the Bishop House.
Currently, it is empty — empty, that is, except for the spirit of Marsalee Bishop, who died there in 1939 at the age of 19, a victim of scarlet fever.
Dreams and Apparitions In May 1997, Becky Ray, a recent divorcee, moved into the Bishop House with her teenage daughter Dusty to start life anew.
Shortly after moving in, Dusty had a series of unusual dreams on nights when she had fallen asleep on the couch in the living room.
A short time after this, Becky was working in the kitchen one day when she saw something out of the comer of her eye.
She turned just in time to see the image of a “young woman, late teens, early twenties, with short dark hair” walk past the doorway in the direction of Dusty’s room.
But having just seen Dusty asleep, she was curious as to why she was up.
Becky walked to the doorway, but when she looked down the hallway, she didn’t see anyone.
She thought it was odd that she hadn’t heard Dusty’s bedroom door open or close.
She then went to her own room where she found Dusty still asleep on the bed, right where she had last seen her.
Becky kept the sighting to herself, but it wouldn’t be long before Dusty, too, encountered Marsalee.
She turned and saw the translucent figure of a petite young woman with short brown hair looking at her.
About a month later, Dusty was in the kitchen again, when she got a feeling that someone was watching her.
She then turned and saw the apparition of Marsalee standing in the doorway, slightly bent forward with her hands on her hips, as though she was about to scold a young child.
Dusty was so taken by the sight that she can’t recall what happened next.
The experience upset her so much that she slept with her mom that night.
Skeptical Sister The next person to see Marsalee was Becky’s oldest daughter, Deanna, who was 20 at the time.
She was in the living room one morning folding a comforter when, like Dusty, she felt that someone was Dusty Ray , Becky Ray, and their dog Molly watching her.
She turned around, and there next to the linen press by the kitchen doorway was the translucent figure of Marsalee.
She was standing with her face cradled in her hands and her elbows resting on top of the linen press.
She then watched Marsalee step back from the linen press and run into the kitchen.
Deanna walked over to the doorway and peered in the kitchen, but she was gone.
Before her own sighting, Deanna was aware that both Becky and Dusty believed they had seen a ghost in the house.
She had been somewhat skeptical of their claims; but now, of course, she was a believer.
Upon reflection, Deanna was surprised that she hadn’t been scared during the sighting.
The next person to experience Marsalee was a friend of Dusty’s, Steve Whitlock.
When he approached the kitchen, he saw a young woman with short brown hair sitting on a bench to the right of the kitchen doorway.
Thinking that it might be Dusty — but not knowing how that could be — he glanced back toward Dusty’s room.
One time she was sitting on the couch and saw Marsalee walk from the direction of the kitchen toward her room.
Another time Dusty was on her way into the kitchen when she saw Marsalee come around the corner as though she had come from the guest room.
Psychokinetic Displays Though all the sightings took place close to the kitchen doorway, in an area approximately four feet by ten feet, Marsalee’s presence was made known in other parts of the house.
One night, after Dusty’s second sighting of Marsalee, she was sitting in the living room with an acquaintance named John.
John got up, put the videotape case on the fireplace mantle, and went into the kitchen.
When he came back, he started pacing back and forth in front of the mantle waiting for the tape to finish rewinding.
Suddenly, the tape case flew violently off the mantle, landing several feet away on the floor.
The Rays believe this was Marsalee’s way of expressing disapproval of the young man.
About three or four weeks after Dusty’s final sighting, she came home from school to find four of her candles sitting in the middle of her bedroom floor.
These candles had been on her dresser when she had left the house that morning.
The incident made Dusty think that Marsalee didn’t want her in that bedroom, so she moved into the guest room.
Another time, Becky came home from work and noticed that she couldn’t find her sandals, which she usually wore every day.
Her first thought was that maybe her dog Molly had made off with them, but she didn’t think that was likely as Molly would usually just play with one shoe, not both.
She and Dusty tore the house apart looking for the missing sandals, to no avail.
Another time Becky and her girlfriend Diane were sitting on the bed in her room when they both observed one of the bedroom windows opening on its own.
According to Becky it took quite a bit of strength to unlatch the windows.
Though neither Becky nor Diane heard the window being unlatched, they both definitely saw it opening on its own.
There were other times when Becky and Dusty heard footsteps in the living room when nobody was in there.
Another thing that caught their attention was the behavior of their dog Molly.
Sometimes Molly would be sitting on the couch with Becky and suddenly whip her head around and stare in the direction of the kitchen doorway.
She was sitting on the couch in the living room one time when she noticed Molly’s head going back and forth as though she was watching someone pace in front of the kitchen doorway.
Dusty was home alone, and was so frightened that she had to call a friend to help calm her nerves.
Marsalee's Story After seeing the apparition and experiencing some of the odd events that were taking place in the house, Becky was able to discern what she described as a “sense of loneliness” that she felt was connected to whoever was “residing” in her house.
This feeling made her want to know who this individual was, and so she started researching the history of the house.
She found some information in a local museum, and later was able to track down a descendent of the original owners.
Given a description of the young woman the Rays had seen, he replied that it matched the description of his cousin Marsalee, who had died from scarlet fever at the age of 19.
The “Bishop House” was her grandparents 5 residence; Marsalee was staying with them because her parents were out of town on business when she became ill.
He also confirmed that Dusty’s bedroom — the one with the moving candles — had been Marsalee’s room during her stay there.
With opportunities limited in a small town, she decided to move to Kansas City, where she soon found employment and rented an apartment in Independence.
She and Dusty hadn’t lived in their new place long when they again started experiencing things they couldn’t explain.
Not Left Behind One evening while they were both sitting in the living room, they noticed a touch lamp dim on its own, as though touched by an invisible hand.
Some time later, Dusty was in her bedroom with her four-year-old cousin Skyla, who threw a small key chain behind Dusty’s bed.
A couple weeks later, Dusty found the key chain lying in plain view in the middle of her floor.
There were other things that took place in Dusty’s room that defied an easy explanation.
On her bookcase was displayed an angel book with the cover facing forward.
On several occasions, she went in her room and noticed that the book had been turned so that the spine was facing front.
Later, Dusty noticed that another book of hers had been taken off the shelf and displayed so that one could read the cover — just the opposite of what had happened to the angel book.
Against the wall she has a small piece of furniture called a coffee cabinet.
The two doors are held closed by a piece of wood that revolves on a screw.
When the piece of wood is in the horizontal position, the doors are latched shut.
Two days in a row Becky came home from work and found the left door unlatched.
Someone had to have unlatched the doors, and then, holding the right door closed, moved the piece of wood back down to a horizontal position.
There was no way that Molly could have been responsible for this — this was a deliberate act that showed an intelligence at work.
The Rays believe that Marsalee has taken an interest in them — particularly Dusty.
It was Dusty who had the most sightings of Marsalee, and it was Dusty’s bedrooms where the majority of 1956,"" wrote Cynthia H Banister Raymond in a short memoir about the home.
David G Farragut Civil War hero haunts Quarters 'A' at Navy yard David Glasgow Farragut was born July 5, 1801 , at Campbell's Station, a few miles southwest of Knoxville, Tenn., according to a United States Navy Web site.
He was the second of five children of Jorge Farragut, who was born on the Spanish island of Menorca, and Elizabeth Shine Farragut of North Carolina.
But one famous visitor from long ago refuses to leave, instead making Quarters ""A"", the shipyard commander's residence, his home.
Farragut's mother died when he was 7, and his bereaved father Jorge sent him to live with the family of a close friend and fellow naval officer, David Porter.
David G Farragut, a hero of the Civil War, died in Quarters ""A"" in 1870, and now haunts the residence.
He has made his presence known to some, but not all, of the building's numerous inhabitants throughout the years.
Porter adopted the young boy and two years later helped him receive an appointment as a midshipman in the Navy.
During the course of his career, Farragut held various positions before his distinctive service in the Civil War.
Of the many notables, Farragut served as naval aide to the American minister to Tunis, and later established Mare Island Navy Yard in California.
During that time, he learned to speak French, Italian, Spanish and Arabic, and studied the social, economic and political history of the Mediterranean area.
Farragut had been appointed commander of the West Coast Blockading Squadron and was ordered to open the Mississippi to Union vessels and to attack New Orleans.
He opened the Battle of New Orleans, April 18, 1862, and 10 days later, Confederate forces surrendered.
Farragut had proved then-President Abraham Lincoln's trust in his selection by this victory, and Lincoln was the first to acknowledge it by submitting Farragut’s name to the Congress for promotion.
On July 26, 1866, Farragut made history by becoming the first Hispanic four-star admiral.
Quarters ""A” history From its establishment on June 12, 1800, and until the War of 1812, the shipyard was under the supervision of a ""naval agent,"" a civilian position, according to Jan Hussey, a shipyard public affairs officer.
The first military commandant was Commodore Isaac Hull, who assumed command of the shipyard on March 31, 1813.
Hull lived in a house in Portsmouth as there was a lack of ""suitable"" housing on the shipyard for a commandant.
Because of the nature of his position, it was rather inconvenient for a commandant to live off the shipyard particularly because he had to come to work by boat.
For this reason, Commodore Hull requested permission from the secretary of the Navy to build a ""modest home"" suitable for the commandant of a naval facility.
On Feb., 1814, Hull received permission and funding to build a home, provided that the cost did not exceed $5,000.
He immediately employed John Locke, a joiner from Portsmouth, to design and build the new commandant's quarters.
The house and surrounding grounds of Quarters ""A"" have survived nearly 1 90 years with only a few minor alterations and the addition of modern conveniences.
It is surrounded by the shipyard industrial and administrative complex, yet gives the impression of being remote and peaceful.
Quarters ""A"" has been the site of receptions for many important individuals throughout the years.
Visitors were often hosted at dinner parties and teas by the commandant.
In 1908, a bronze plaque was placed on the front of Quarters ""A"" in a panel to the left of the main entrance to honor the memory of Adm.
The plaque was later relocated to the iron fence in front of Quarters ""A,"" where it remains today, a memorial to one of America's great naval heroes.
More hauntings “As we all know, each family has their own familiar things to make them feel comfortable and at home,"" Raymond wrote.
However, there had been some time since the quarters had been redecorated and we had the good fortune of new paint and, at my request, the Indian shutters were made to operate.
William D McDonough spent five years in Quarters ""A,"" from 1974-79, as shipyard commander, with his wife, Nancy, and their seven daughters.
At his Kittery home recently, McDonough said he never experienced Farragufs ghost.
But on a floor plan in a book on Quarters ""A,"" he pointed out the section where others have experienced hauntings.
It's in the rear of the house in the exstewards' day room, which is accessed by a rear stairway.
Raymond, who now lives in York's Sentry Hill retirement community, recently asked her daughter about the hauntings she and her siblings encountered.
Shortly before the Banister family left in June 1 958, they had a last dinner at the Quarters.
However there was another maritime tragedy that took place on the same date some 32 years earlier.
Weis carried $32,000 in a leather briefcase in order to purchase a Port Stanley fishery for his employers at the Fish Company.
Lake Erie has a long history of being one of the most trecherous of the Great Lake, with powerful storms seemingly to appear out of nowhere.
The blistery winter storm suddenly blew out of the west and slammed mightily onto the Great Lakes with winds that were estimated to have reached at least 90 miles per hour.
The storm’s might was so furious that it actually dropped the temperature 45 degrees within a 24 hour time period.
Battered to and fro the Marquette & Bessemer No 2 tried in vain to criss cross the Lake in a doomed attempt to ride out the storm.
The frigid assault of the storm and an unfortunate streak of bad luck sealed the fate of the ship and its 31 passangers and crew.
The ship, its cargo and crew went to their watery grave in the deep depths of Lake Erie on the evening of December 9th 1909.
Last reported accounts tell that they saw the ship struggle in the waves off Port Stanley, and it seemed to have turned west.
Legend has it that about the time the ship went down the Captain’s wife who was on the Southern Coast of lake Erie at Conneaut that night heard the mournful pathetic blow of the ship’s whistle as it sank beneath the waves.
Three days later on December 12th a lone lifeboat was found washed ashore 15 miles from the city of Erie, Pennysl vania. it contained the frozen bodies of 9 of the crew and one ice encrusted set of clothing from a 10th in a position that that seemed to show whoever had donned the clothing had simply disappeared.
The belt was tied, the shirt was in the pants, a coat covered it all in perfect order.
To complete the hallow facade of frozen terror, the shoes still had their socks stuck to the inside as if the wearer had filled them when they froze.
Despite the great length of the ship and the shallow depths where it was supposed to have sank, the wreck of the Marquette & Bessemer No 2 has never been found.
At more than a hundred meters the ship was as long as a Football field.
Few such large ships have eluded devout hunters of sunken ships along the Great Lakes.
Despite thousands of dollars by private entrepreneurs and scientists, and hour upon hours of diving expeditions, the site of the ship’s resting place has never been found.
Many times since its untimely demise sailors have heard the ghostly moaning whistle of the ship when they are the only vessel for miles around.
An old fashioned whistle Page 1 Untitled that seems to struggle in a mournful wail that bemoans its fate.
Much as the same sound the Captains wife had reportedly heard that December night as the ship gave into the struggle with the pounding waves.
It also seems to be a common occurrence all across the beachfront of Lake Erie in both Pennsylvania and Ohio for a phantom ship to appear on the horizon iust for a few minutes before it fades away into a haze.
Now ore carriers are still a common site on most of Lake Erie, and it is not unusual to see them slowly crawl across the horizon as you relax on a Lake Erie beach during a hot summer day.
But no ore carrier of today has that old configuration and belches dark smoke from two forward smoke stacks.
The usual beachgoer may be too caught up to take much notice, but I have heard on more than one occasion where someone was taking in the panorama of Lake Erie to simply see a distant ship in the shape of the Marquette & Bessemer No 2 just blink out of existence.
It has been sighted about eight miles northeast of Conneaut, in about 10 fathoms of water.
To this day divers of the Great Lakes covet to find the mystery wreck of the Marquette & Bessemer No 2.
Page 2 untitled The Ghost Ship of Northumberland Strait is a ghost ship that can be seen sailing ablaze within the Northumberland Strait, the body of water that separates Prince Edward island from Nova Scotia and New Brunswick in eastern Canada.
The Ghost Ship of Northumberland Strait is described as a beautiful schooner that has three masts with pure white sails, all of which become completely engulfed in flames as onlookers watch.
Sightings have occurred throughout the seasons, but seem to be more prevalent from September to November.
These visions are also apparent before a northeast wind, and folklore has it that this brilliant ghost ship is a forewarning of a storm.
There never seems to be a predetermined place for where the ship will appear.
Sightings tend to happen when least expected. often, upon seeing the burning ship, mariners have attempted to rescue the crew aboard.
One of the more famous rescue attempts took place in Charlottetown Harbour about 1900.
A group of sailors boarded a small rowboat and raced toward the flaming ship to rescue the troubled crew.
During their struggle to reach the distressed vessel, the phantom ship completely vanished.
A thorough search was immediately carried out by divers, but no shipwreck was found.
The first sighting of the Ghost Ship of Northumberland Strait dates back to 1786.
Eyewitness accounts of the ship come from either side of the strait and are often very similar in description.
I had heard so much about the phantom ship that I decided this must be it.
My sister, who was visiting friends nearby, said she saw the same thing on the same night.
As it came nearer it seemed to lose speed, and as it came opposite our house it stopped still.
I said to Fred, “Perhaps they are coming ashore.” we got up on the banks to watch.
I can’t remember just how long it was, but I think about ten minutes after she stopped I seen smoke rising very slow all over the deck.
Then it was only a few minutes I seen men that seemed to come up from below and they were running around the deck every way.
Then, as they were running around, I seen a low flame all over the deck, when the flames started, the men climbed up the masts of the vessel, when they was about halfway up the masts, the sails caught.
I could not see the men anymore, as the flames hid my view, we watched it until the flames died and everything crumbled to the deck.
There was nothing left but the hull on the water, and gradually it seemed to sink lower and finally disappeared, as if it gradually filled with water and sunk.
The most recent sighting of this ghost ship was by 17-year-old Mathieu Giguere, who noticed the “bright white and gold ship” in midJanuary 2008.
Sightings vary in description, but there are sometimes reports of other bizarre occurrences during the sightings of the ghost ship.
Mysterious sea guns can be heard, and sometimes an apparent ball of fire can be seen in the sky.
As with any reported supernatural event, there are often attempts to hypothesize why an incident occurs, in the case of the fire ship, there are many scientific theories.
A New Brunswick scientist by the name of william Francis Ganong tried in 1905 to explain why this phenomenon happens.
Ganong stated, “It has its flat side to the water and at times it simply glows without much change of form, but at other times it rises into slender, moving columns, giving rise to an appearance capable of interpretation as the flaming rigging of a ship, its vibrating and dancing movements increasing the illusion.
A separate explanation suggests that this ship is merely a bank of fog reflecting moonlight.
Another justification for the apparent fire ship is seen in a video of a crescent moon setting below the horizon, which can be found on YouTube.
The ghost ship has become more widely known in recent years, in part due to a Page 1 Untitled popular song by Lennie Gallant, a Canadian singer-songwriter from Rustico, Prince Edward island.
Page 2 The Ghosfs of by Preston Dennett If you don’t find Ascension Your wife will get a pension — USAF airmen’s song O ne of the strangest and most isolated places on Earth is a little island called Ascension.
Located in the middle of the South Atlantic Ocean, this tiny, unassuming speck of land has a long, remarkable history filled with bizarre and paranormal events.
Despite its isolated location , the island ended up playing a vital role in many major world events.
Ascension Island’s fascinating story begins with its discovery on Ascension Day in 1501 by Portuguese mariner Juan de Nova Costella.
Hell on Earth Immediately, the island earned a reputation as a hellish place.
It covers approximately 35 square miles and contains no water and virtually no life.
The infamous pirate, explorer, and writer William Dampier was shipwrecked on the island in 1701.
Even the names of its geological features — Devil’s Cauldron, Dark Slope, Devil’s Ashpit — reveal what a dismal place it is.
Ironically, however, this little island out in the middle of nowhere turned out to be vitally important to a large number of people and nations across the world.
The strategic location of the island was first put to use in 1 8 1 5 by the English, who garrisoned it with marines to guard Napoleon after he had been exiled to the island of St.
Freed slaves were taken to Ascension Island where they were rehabilitated and liberated.
In 1836 Charles Darwin, then a 27year-old unknown naturalist, heard about the island and its unusual wildlife.
He landed on Ascension and by observing the varieties of the rat population, verified his theory of evolution through natural selection.
In 1899, the first transatlantic submarine cable was installed at Ascension, making it the crossroad of international communication.
By now, it was clear that Ascension was a very important place, and other nations clamored to use it.
During World War II, the United States government built a landing strip on the island.
Three hundred enlisted men and a squadron of planes were stationed there, and so Ascension again played a crucial role in world events.
In 1960, NASA established a satellite tracking station at 1,750 feet above sea level, the highest point on Ascension, firmly establishing the tiny island as one of the most important places on earth.
The Abandoned Sailor While Ascension’s role in world events is undeniable, the saddest and strangest story of the island is that of Jan Svilt, age 39, a bookkeeper turned sailor, with a wife and two children, who was forcibly marooned on the island on May 5, 1725, after being accused of homosexual acts while at sea.
Svilt’s incredible story would have remained unknown if not for a gruesome discovery.
In 1747, Captain Mawson of the ship Compton was forced to land on Ascension Island for repairs.
Lying next to Svilt’s body was his diary, which told the sad story of his doomed struggle for survival on the dry, deserted island.
What makes Svilt’s story so riveting, however, is the amazing series of supernatural events he experienced prior to his death.
Before Svilt was marooned, more than 20 sailors on his ship had been killed through accident and disease, and more than half were ill.
Svilt was actually going to be thrown overboard before the decision was made to maroon him on Ascension.
He was abandoned on the island with only a small amount of food, supplies, and water.
After a few weeks of exploration, he found the island to be completely desolate, with almost no life except for hordes of rats.
In a matter of weeks, his food ran out and he began to suffer badly from starvation and exposure.
Svilt was a religious man, and he turned to prayer and reading his Bible to help him through his ordeal.
When his shoes and clothes disintegrated, he moved his campsite into a more sheltered cave further inland.
On June 16 , shortly after he moved into his cave, and a month and a half into his ordeal, Svilt had his first supernatural encounter.
It was to be the first of a series of encounters that would plague him until his death.
A Plague of Demons Although he was the only living human being on the island, Svilt was to discover that he wasn’t alone.
Bitter cursing and swearing mixed with the most blasphemous and libidinous expressions that I ever heard.
My hair stood on end with horror and cold sweat trickled down my cheeks.
Trembling I lay, fearful to speak, least some vile fiend more wicked than the rest should make prey of me.
I fear that the Devil has forsook his dark abode and come attended by infernal spirits to keep his hell on Ascension, for I was certain there was not a human creature on the island except myself, never having observed the footsteps of a man since my being there.
But the devils continued their onslaught until three o’clock in the morning, at which point he finally fell asleep.
He awoke early the next morning to hear a disembodied voice again screaming vile curses at him.
From this point on, Svilt was tormented by the ghosts of Ascension Island.
However, Svilt made it very clear in his diary that he believed the ghosts were real and not hallucinations.
A Friendly Spirit The next day, June 17, Svilt had another dramatic encounter.
This one, however, involved the benevolent spirit of his friend and shipmate, Piek Houtman, who had actually died early on the ill-fated voyage.
As he wrote, “Before I came to this miserable island I was a true Calvinist and used to laugh at the Romans when they talked to me of apparitions; but to my great sorrow now find smarting reasons to the contrary, and shall henceforth embrace their opinions.
This day, as I stood under the bright sun near the peak of a volcano, an apparition in the likeness of Piek Houtman appeared on a black plateau near me.
I did not know whether to run or to cower, but remained rooted to the spot as he talked to me of the sins of my past life, of which I have a sincere and heartfelt repentance.
Houtman’s nearness shocked me so that I became unsure whether I was already dead, or whether the vision was sent me to prepare me for death.
After a few moments, the apparition disappeared and Svilt returned to his cave.
The very next day, however, after Svilt dragged a log up to his cave, he had another encounter.
His name I am unwilling to again mention, not knowing what the consequence may be.
On the next night, the evil spirits returned, and this time they physically attacked Svilt, proving once and for all that they were no hallucination.
Instead, it seemed that the evil spirits and the spirit of Svilt s friend, Piek, were in a battle to save Svilts soul.
Piek Houtman spoke several times to me, nor I could think he meant me any harm, for when he was living we were as friendly as brothers.
It was nearly two months into his ordeal and Svilt had still seen no ships.
He was exploring the island when he came across the old gravesite of another castaway.
This threw him into a great depression, and he hiked forlornly back to his cave.
Writes Svilt in his diary, “I was no sooner come to my cavern but I heard a dreadful noise, resembling many coppersmiths at work.
Svilt shook his head and wondered if his long sufferings were causing him to lose his mind.
By this point, Svilt was so severely dehydrated, he was sure he would die from thirst.
While Providence had so far managed to provide enough food and water to survive, he was growing steadily weaker.
Svilt looked around, but there was no one; only a cloud of birds rose up, obscuring the sun for a moment.
But he was becoming convinced that evil spirits were taunting him and trying to capture his soul.
The Beatific Vision On September 6, his fourth month upon the island, Svilt lay in his cave, near death.
It was then that he had his final and most profound supernatural encounter.
After a while I dreamed that as I walked through the wilderness full of hardships I came upon a place where there was a cave, and I laid me down in that place to rest.
I dreamed that I was sadder than at any time in all my life; all my sin and vileness appeared before me great and consuming.
I saw that I was fit for nothing but hell and for the everlasting damnation of my soul — and I despaired.
And I did, and as I entered the golden gates I was given a raiment of golden cloth, light as spiders’ down.
We were met by sweet angels with harps and flutes who sang the praises of God.
In the radiant streets walked men and women wearing crowns on their heads and carrying palm fronds in their hands.
This experience gave Svilt some renewed hope, and he continued his struggle to survive.
He had survived for more than four months, leaving only his diary and a few belongings.
It would take more than 20 years for them to be discovered by a passing ship.
One Hessian tale, reported by Jacob Grimm in his monumental work on Teutonic mythology, relates how a farmer named Kurt didn’t seem to know that he was dead and continued to work around the farm.
But one day a stranger was hired to throw sheaves, and Kurt stopped working.
This rather minor tale serves to point out the difference between German ghost stories and those of other nations.
Most German supernatural tales seem to possess an element of violence and deeper horror than those from happier climes.
The Rats in the Walls In the tenth century, there was a Bishop of Mainz named Hatto.
Being rather a greedy fellow, the bishop refused to share his grain, which he had laid up for himself.
In order to get rid of the pests, whom he compared to rats, Hatto invited everyone to his great barn.
Quite satisfied with himself for ridding the country of these freeloaders, Hatto slept peacefully that night.
In the morning, he found that rats had eaten his portrait out of its frame.
Then a servant reported that rats had eaten all the corn in the granaries.
Then came a messenger to tell that an army of rats was advancing on the castle.
Bishop Hatto looked out the window and saw the landscape dark with rats, advancing remorselessly toward his palace.
But the rats swam the river, climbed the tower, chewed their way in, and ate the bishop.
To this day, tourists are shown the Mausethurm where the deadly assault took place.
Even so, the figures are not so large that they cannot be made out at ground level.
Seen at altitude, however, they assume a startling perspective to appear in their proper proportions, implying that they may be appreciated only from the sky.
In this feature, at least, they may be compared with Ohio’s Great Serpent Mound.
The modern park trail appears to follow closely the original ritual path used by the ancient worshipers as their processions wound from one effigy to the next.
Beyond it stands a small, conical pyramid, followed by a tear-drop figure pointing at another cone of the same size.
Despite having endured unknown centuries of erosional forces, the earthworks were probably not much larger at the time of their creation than they now appear.
Visitors come upon it gradually, imperceptibly, from the point of its tail.
As it does so, its power seems to gather momentum, increasing along the arched back to the massive head.
A few paces more brings the forepart of the most massive of the Panthers into view.
The trail leads directly between their heads, narrowing the site’s inherent energy into a narrow gap.
It is important to know that the sole surviving Indian tradition of Lizard Mounds involves this very spot.
The Menomonee remember that each winter solstice, their ancestors gathered behind these twin zoomorphs to observe sunset before the longest night of the year, marking the world’s transition from darkness back into the light, and the human soul’s reemergence from death to light.
At that critical moment, as the sun shed its last ray precisely between the two animal heads, the great shift between darkness and light — death and life — took place.
Curious if this Menomonee tradition had any basis in fact, James Scherz arrived at Lizard Mounds on the late afternoon of 1989’s winter solstice.
As he observed dusk on the longest night of the year, Professor Scherz saw the sun go down precisely between the two earthsculpted birds’ heads, just as described by the Menomonee Indians.
Just beyond the zoomorphs lies the effigy mound after which the set has been named.
The lizard represents the underlying motive force of all living creatures, the vital spirit of action.
In native South American symbolism, the lizard is associated with precipitation, from dew to deluge, although that meaning does not seem to apply at the Wisconsin location.
The trail leads away from the eponymous earthwork to smaller effigies, including a pair of linear embankments pointing to the only oval mound at the site.
Although not so spectacular as the others, it is the key to this sacred center, representing as it does the Cosmic Egg, the Womb of Life, earlier encountered at Ohio’s Great Serpent Mound.
More than any other figure, the oval earthwork identifies the site as a sacred center.
The trail passes between the heads and along the outstretched wings of two enormous bird effigies.
Perhaps they were meant to signify the uplifting experience of walking among the colossal figures of Lizard Mounds.
Although America’s surviving effigy mounds are few in number, they still resonate with at least some telluric power of the Earth from which they were so beautifully fashioned long ago.
T Frank Joseph is a regular Fate contributor and editor of Ancient American.
The Mouse Tower on the Rhine The Black Ball of Dresden In 1774, a Lepizig restaurant owner turned necromancer called up that which he could not put down.
Johann George Schroepfer opened a fashionable cafe that quickly gained a reputation as a gathering place for those interested in the occult and the arts of magic.
The establishment soon became an occult lodge devoted to necromancy — speaking with the spirits of the dead.
Even though many people felt that Schroepfer’s evocations were faked, he attracted the attention of Prince Charles of Saxony, son of the Elector.
Charles accordingly summoned Schroepfer to Dresden for the purpose of evoking the spirit of the Chevalier George Saxe, the deceased uncle of the prince.
What Schroepfer summoned into the palace at Dresden, before 19 members of the German nobility, was a huge black globe that continually put forth clouds of vapor.
Schroepfer appeared to panic as badly as everyone else, but he finally managed, with much shouting and gesticulation, to exorcise the apparition.
The horrified guests began to come to themselves, arising from the positions where they cowered on the floor, and began to heap abuse on Schroepfer.
More panic ensued, but at last Schroepfer was able to banish the thing for good.
Back home, Schroepfer’s supporters treated him to a banquet, and the necromancer tippled freely.
He invited his friends to go with him to the forest of Rosendaal outside the city gates for a further — and even greater — demonstration of his powers.
Once at their destination, Schroepfer excused himself to make preparations.
There once stood an old convent church on the mountain at the site of the martyrdom of Cassius and his companions, Florentius and Melusius, who died for the Christian faith.
On his way back home, he stopped at an ancient Roman tower to spend the night rent-free.
Standing before him were three Roman soldiers, whom he recognized as the martyrs of Kreuzberg.
He followed them into another building, where they showed him a table stacked with gold.
They filled his pockets with gold coins and offered him a glass of wine.
Startling himself by all the noise he was making by shouting, “Vivat,” the peasant awoke on the floor of the Roman tower.
The peasant naturally assumed that he’d had a wonderful dream — until he felt in his pockets.
A watchman stopped him, and the peasant told him his story and invited the watchman to share a draught at a nearby inn.
The story spread, and the road from the square to the tower was renamed Vivat Lane.
Other Tales But these are very far indeed from being the only tales of the supernatural that Germany has to offer.
In more modern times, there is the matter of how Adolf Hitler seemed to be protected and at times possessed by some strange spirit determined to propel him to his destiny, and Elie Wiesel’s mention of reports of the blood of Jewish victims geysering from the ground for months after a Nazi massacre in the Ukraine.
From the Wild Hunt and the Flying Dutchman to WW II appearances by the Red Baron of WW I and the mysterious happenings surrounding the Scharnhorst , Deutschland has abounded in accounts of the unexplained.
Children's laughter has been heard by those working on the third floor, and even outside the bathroom down in the restaurant when there have been no children around.
One of the many incidents he shared was when he hung some window treatments in the ballroom.
On the third morning when Hayden went to hang it again, a board came across the room and hit him.
No one else was in the room, and Hayden figured Mr Rawls didn't like what he had chosen.
In October 2002, local reporter Carole Brand spent an evening in the Rawls.
In search of spirits at historic Rawls Hotel By Carole Brand Sun Staff Writer Shortly after World War I, tales began to emerge of strange, unexplained events that happened at the Rawls Hotel.
When told by a few Enterprise residents with seemingly frightened faces, the tales were scoffed at by others and left to disappear among the gossip of older men and women through the years.
From time to time, that tales were retold with whispering voices in corners of a beauty salon or in a quiet out-of-the-way table at the local diner.
Some of the stories were without any kid of explanation; others were left up to the imagination.
These ghostly tales, however, passed on from one generation to another.
As a reporter, I found these tales interesting and thought some to be beyond belief.
As a reporter, I felt an obligation to research and explore the possibilities of what may lie beyond caught up in the shadows of the night.
Research says that orbs, usually floating light circles, can be seen by detailed special light cameras, but even orbs have shown up better in Polaroid's.
Smells and temperatures can be measured by delicate instruments, but mostly humans who come in contact with the ""spirit world"" often smell odors and feel the air temperatures drop.
The instruments can back up any questions skeptics may have, experts say, but a lot of questions continue to go unanswered.
With a check of my instruments and camera, I go forward in search of ghosts.
I had no interest in really searching for them for fear they might find me.
It was with little prior knowledge of ghosts hunting that I went into the Rawls late one evening.
I didn't expect what I experienced there; neither did I expect to hear such ghostly tales coming from within those walls by former employees.
Some have spoken only once about their experiences and say they will never speak of them again.
I rechecked my Polaroid camera to make sure everything was working right and checked my ""ghost meter,"" a temperature gauge I brought with me, just in case.
Visitors that come to the Rawls Hotel say they feel strange spirits in the building that was constructed in 1903.
First, the hotel was a two-story structure with a straight rectangle with a hall down the middle.
The Rawls, a magnificent work of Spanish-style architecture, has a grand ballroom, a restaurant area, a bed and breakfast, and a wine cellar/basement.
In the cellar, waitresses have reported seeing Captain Japheth Rawls, the original owner, who came to the Enterprise area in 1898.
He and his family were among the first passengers of the first train that ran to Enterprise.
In 1903, Rawls decided to build the hotel where he and his wife frequently stayed and dined.
It was in this same year that Enterprise acquired a railroad depot directly across from the Rawls.
Some travelers spent many wonderful and entertaining days at the newly built Rawls Hotel.
Children's voices have been heard in the basement of the Rawls and as an investigative reporter that was the first place I felt we should explore.
As a fellow employee and I, along with some hotel workers, toured the relatively dark wine cellar, my friend said she felt the presence of three children and saw them dressed in early 1920s clothes.
It was much colder in the basement than outside, especially in one dark corner.
Suddenly, I felt the presence of an older gentleman, complete with graying hair, a thick mustache and wearing a pair of light-colored handyman overalls.
I couldn't really see him physically, but my mind somehow showed me he was there, even down to his black shoes.
Somehow their presence didn't frighten us to the point of knocking each other over to head upstairs.
It was a calm feeling, a feeling of welcome and happiness, at least for the children.
We eased up the stairs quietly as if leaving them to play, guarded by the older gentleman.
It was much later in an interview that I found out one employee said he saw the deceased Capt.
The same gentleman said he had also seen, late one night, the faint shadow of a young boy walking up the stairs.
Exiting from the cellar and into the large kitchen area of the Rawls, I met some workers who say that there's a mischievous ghost who dwells there.
The grand ballroom of the Rawls serves as a meeting, dining and conference area today, but when the ballroom was built in the '20s, it was the highlight of the evening to see elegant ladies and couples dance by music played on a grand piano in one corner.
A Rawls employee said she was working late one night and heard the sound of a piano playing in the grand ballroom.
She knew no one was in the building at the time and certainly there was no piano in the ballroom.
As she cautiously approached the entrance doors listening to the sound, the music suddenly stopped.
Footsteps and the sound of feet running on the third floor have been reported to the local police by restaurant employees.
Another respected gentleman said he had heard strange sounds at night on the second and third floors.
One visitor to the bed and breakfast at the Rawls said she felt the spirits as soon as she entered the hotel.
The woman said she wasn't frightened or scared because she had grown up in an old house that had spirits and she was used to dealing with them.
Statistics show that most haunted places in the South are old home places or hotels where the ghosts experienced either the happiest moments or the saddest moments while living.
I don't know what the ghosts or spirits were feeling in the ballroom when we entered, but as I tried to open the door that led into the ballroom from the kitchen, I felt the door become heavy.
The group behind me laughed, thinking I was doing it on purpose, but I know I wasn't.
Finally, the door eased way into a small hall area that led into the main ballroom area.
I reached into my camera bag to grab my camera and the temperature gauge, but the air that had been comfortable now was suffocating.
My heart seemed to be pounding out of my chest and any energy I had seemed to leave me.
I reached down in my camera bag again to try to find my Polaroid and the temperature gauge.
I couldn't shake the heavy feeling I had and worse, I couldn't even describe it.
As I turned, still not saying a word, I saw my fellow employee behind me catching her breath.
I knew it was even though I was sweating, which should have turned my face into blood red. 12:40m.
In the ballroom we sat down in chairs to get our composure, comparing notes on just what had happened.
It seemed whatever it was had tried to grab and steal any energy we had.
Lots of experiences I knew I could explain, but not one of the creepy kind.
I took the gauge for one last time and walked toward the corner of the room.
After several, long minutes had passed, and we were seemingly sane again, I looked at my fellow ""spirit"" adventurer.
As we left the Rawls and exited from the rear entrance toward the railroad depot, I glanced up at one of the windows from the grand ballroom.
A figure, faint but recognizable as a younger woman dressed in white, was looking through the window.
Needless to say, my night of sleep was interrupted over and over again by the unexplainable things I had seen and experienced that night.
Maybe residents in Enterprise will soon be whispering tales, the ones only few know to be true.
Hull woman forced to move seven times Posted: August 08, 2014 By Faye Preston ""Terrified"" Hull woman Pauline Hickson says she was forced to moved seven times by ghosts that stole her bras and even used the shower.
Faye Preston reports. when her underwear started going missing, little did she know it would signal the start of two years of hell.
Because what could have been dismissed as a slight annoyance, was actually the work of forces beyond this world and one of many paranormal pranks that would ruin Pauline Hickson's life.
The 58-year-old says she was forced to move home seven times in two years because she has been followed around by two ghosts, who would steal her bras, take her jewellery and even use the shower.
The spooky happenings started two years ago, after she moved into a bungalow in Endike Lane, north Hull. within a few weeks of living there, Pauline felt a presence she could not explain and strange things would happen while she was out of the house.
Pictures started slipping off the walls, the shower room was being used and there were scratches left up and down the doors.
She would come in from a day out and be greeted by the mess left behind by the ghosts, who she says would also rifle through her belongings, send the temperature either soaring or plummeting in her home and even leave her a cup and spoon out ready for a hot drink.
It was the final straw for Pauline, who packed up her belongings and moved to Cambridge but she was followed and the same spooky pranks started happening again. within a few months she returned to Hull, this time to Orchard Park, with her niece, but it was not long before her clothes, including her bras, went missing again.
Then, an old doctor's note in her name from when she lived in the bungalow was placed mysteriously on the table.
Terrified, she moved into a hostel and then into Redbourne Street, off Hessle Road, but there was no escaping the ghostly presence.
I ended up staying in hotels because I was too scared to go home,"" she said. ""i thought my family were doing it to me.
Page 1 Untitled she moved into her current home in Essex street but when things started going awry again, she sought help from medium Anita Gordon, who led her to Hull's well-known gnostbuster Steve Kneeshaw.
He put her under hypnosis, which he combined with an exorcism, and the results were instant.
He reported feeling a ""blast of cold air"" and then saw an old, large man and a 14-year-old boy, fly past him.
Since then, Pauline has not experienced a hint of paranormal activity in her home. she suspects the ghosts are associated with an old dressing table she bought before she moved into the bungalow, in which she found a ruby wedding anniversary card and other personal items.
Now she feels she has had a spiritual awakening and is looking to move out of Hull and start a ghost-free life.
The hunter did not shoot at the animal, but he approached it with his knife drawn.
The anteater stood on its hind legs and grabbed the man with its forelimbs, causing deep puncture wounds in his thighs and upper arms* The hunter bled to death at the scene, said the report, which noted that the encounter happened on August 1 , 20 1 2 but had not been described in scientific literature until now.
Easily startled Giant anteaters are believed to be extinct in Belize, El Salvador, Guatemala and Uruguay.
Giant anteaters eat mainly insects but they also enjoy citrus and avocados, according to zookeeper Rebecca Lohse who works with them in captivity at the Reid Park Zoo in Tucson, Arizona.
Zookeepers generally avoid being in the same space as the animals, coaxing them into separate fenced-off areas when they approach their living quarters for cleaning, she added.
Anteater expert Flavia Miranda, who works with the animals in Brazil, said she was concerned that the journal article could cause more woes for a creature that already faces plenty of threats to its livelihood.
GIBBON BITES NAMESAKE Jack Gibbons, six, from Abbots Leigh, Somerset, was bitten by a gibbon in Phuket, Thailand, where he was on holiday with his family last January.
Jack's father had been filming the primate swimming in the family’s pool, when it jumped out and bitthe boy.
One was carrying produce and the other was carrying glue in 5 5 -gallon drums, 14 of which spilled on the highway.
NEWS Nigeria police hold 'robber' goat Police in Nigeria are holding a goat handed to them by a vigilante group, which said it was a car thief who had used witchcraft to change shape.
A police spokesman in Kwara State has been quoted as saying that the ""armed robbery suspect"" would remain in custody until investigations were over.
But another police spokesman told the BBC the goat was being held in case its owner claimed it.
The belief in witchcraft and the power to change shapes is common in Nigeria.
Police reform activists have condemned the ""arrest"", saying it highlights the low education levels of many Nigerian police officers.
Nigeria's Vanguard newspaper has a picture of the goat and reports that police paraded it in front of journalists in the Kwara state capital Ilorin on Thursday.
The next morning journalists turned up demanding to see the goat, he said.
Incompetent The BBC’s Andrew Walker in Abuja says communities often rely on ill-educated and badly prepared vigilante squads to fill the gaps where the police will not patrol at night Innocent Chukwuma of the justice reform group the Cleen Foundation, told the BBC that many Nigerian police officers were poorly educated.
He said in the past political leaders had allowed the police to be filled with incompetent and in some cases criminal officers so they could be easily bought to protect their own criminal activities.
Police have also been unable to stop vigilante squads from lynching suspects before they could investigate, he said.
He was spotted running on the train line by the driver, who gave and the carriage touched the animal's head. a warning whistle, but was unable to stop the train in time The animal was concussed and had to be pulled from underneath the train by the fire service.
Meanwhile, Fritzi's owner who lives nearby had noticed her pet was missing, Bild newspaper said.
After she heard the driver's warning whistle she went to the station, where the fire service returned her goat to her.
December 27, 1998 VICTIMS : 19 Well this one is a wonderful, yet very sad tale of an animal fighting back against the abuse from it's human tormentors.
For those who never heard about this case I will fill you in a little on this hero of animal kind.
As we all know millions of Gobindra Singh's relatives have been killed by us bastards.
And before this shitty' race of ours added him to it's list of victims, he struck.
So because of this law Gobindra was able to repeatedly get away with his actions.
Well Gobindra Singh was living in an area where the land was quickly being overtaken by humans.
Over a one and a half year period Gobindra Singh trampled at least 1 9 people to death.
They were moving into HIS backyard, killing HIS family, cutting down HIS food.
And if some cunt w ; as building a house in my backyard, killing my family and eating all my food, well I'd do more than trample them, and I'm sure most of you would too.
Since all of Gobindra's victims were poor villagers and the like he was able to get away w ith it for the first 1 8 killings, but with his last attack he chose someone of a higher standing in the community.
You see, the government knew about Gobindra's murder spree so they sent a veterinarian out to the Tinsukhia district to check out what was wrong w ith him.
So Gobindra acted in the • only way he could, he rolled over on top of his assailant to stop the vicious assault, and accidentally killed the vet.
Twin brothers Bill and Frank Watson believe 57 Irish immigrants met violent deaths there after a cholera epidemic struck in 1832.
The brothers first heard about Duffy's Cut from their grandfather , a railroad worker, who told the ghost story to h/s family every Thanksgiving.
They suspected that the files contained clues to the location of a mass grave.
They found forks and remnants of a shanty and, in 2005, what Bill Watson calls the ""Holy Grail"" -a pipe with an Irish flag on it.
They knew they were close, but Bill said they knew they needed ""hard science"" to get them to the next step.
The friend knew Bechtel could provide the missing link in the brothers' excavation efforts.
Bechtel's work included earth scans, which can help detect what's underground without digging or drilling.
By shooting electrical current through the slope, Bechtel said he learned there were ""oddball areas"" or places where the current wouldn't pass through.
After further digging, Bechtel and the Watsons detected ""air bubbles above the coffins,"" he said.
Bechtel helped pinpoint key areas to dig and on March 20, 2009, Bill Watson said the team made a startling discovery.
It was just the beginning of the many puzzle pieces to surface at Duffy's Cut.
The pieces led them to suspect that something other than cholera was responsible for the deaths.
She believes the teeth, because of their irregularities, could someday be linked through DNAto living descendents of the men unearthed at the dig site.
Since then, Monge has collected bones from seven skeletons unearthed at Duffy's Cut, including four skulls.
Poring over the bones with her green spectacles sitting low on her nose, Monge said she has focused her attention on the skulls, adding that they have provided crucial clues to what might have killed the Irishmen at Duffy's Cut.
With just one divot on one skull, she was reluctant to jump to conclusions.
Although they have unearthed seven individual's remains, the Duffy's Cut team labors on to find the 50 more they believe are still underneath the surface.
The brothers said their goal is to preserve the memory of the Irish workers and to put the story in textbooks, to be remembered for years to come.
It's the story you hear of workers that were exploited anywhere in the world,"" Frank Watson said.
Allow at least one hour and 15 minutes to complete the tour, and plan to arrive between 6:45m. and 7:45m.
But, that didn’t stop folks in the 19th century from burying their dead in a bizarre practice to prevent “undead” family members from leaving their graves and walking back to the homestead.
You can learn more on this grisly topic when Bellantoni will give a talk at the Friends of Hammonasset meeting at 7m., March 11, old Memorial Town Hall, 6 Meeting House Lane.
Sometimes family members “would conduct an experiment and if they found blood in their heart” they would rearrange the body.
And, instead of laying the body out “all nice and anatomical,” they would disturb the grave by taking the thigh bones and cross them on the corpse’s chest, in a skull and crossbones fashion, he describes.
While old graveyards abound in the state, this is little-known historical trivia.
At the time, tuberculosis was at epidemic levels and entire families would be stricken.
At that time there was much ignorance about tuberculosis and this was long before medical science had embraced germ theory, he says.
The gravesite Bellantoni will talk about is in Griswold, where in the 1990s, two boys playing on a gravel bank unearthed two human skulls.
Bellantoni was called in to investigate and he determined that the gravel pit had once been a Colonial -era cemetery. in this cemetery there was one burial that showed rearrangement “consistent with the vampire folk belief,” according to Bellantoni.
Before the presentation, The Friends of Hammonasset will hold annual elections and a conduct a brief business meeting.
Trackers find grizzly bear 'forest highway' By News from Elsewhere media reports from around the world, found by BBC Monitoring Bear trackers on Canada's Pacific coast say they have found a ""highway"" used by grizzly bears to travel across hundreds of miles of forest.
Tracker William Housty and other members of the Qqs Society in the Heiltsuk First Nation have been studying the bears for more than three years.
One in particular along the banks of the salmon-rich Koeye River amounts to a ""bear highway"" for the 65 grizzlies identified in the valley, Housty says.
The Heiltsuk Coastwatch team is planning to extend their tracking to other river systems on British Columbia's Central Coast, this time using fur snares to collect DNA, and hope their findings could lead to the development of a wildlife management plan for the whole region.
Former Slave Leads Nation To Independence By Matthew Surridge When a slave rebellion erupted in the French Caribbean colony of SaintDomingue in 1791, a former slave, Toussaint L’Ouverture, became the leader of the most powerful rebel faction.
No authentic portrait of him exists, but he was allegedly unattractive.
He was also literate, clever, and charming, with a charismatic personality.
At first L’Ouverture and his rebel slaves allied themselves with Spanish forces from the neighboring colony of Santo Domingo who hoped to seize Saint-Domingue from France, but L’Ouverture ’s reason for supporting Spain evaporated in February of 1794, when the French government in Paris formally abolished slavery in its colonies.
This abolition of slavery, a belated effect of the French Revolution, transformed the French government into a radical ally of the rebel slaves.
In response, L’Ouverture abruptly switched sides, accepting a commission as a French general.
He then turned on his former Spanish allies and drove them out of SaintDomingue.
L’Ouverture hoped to unify the war-tom colony, gain greater independence from France, and establish permanent racial equality throughout Saint-Domingue.
The defeat of the Spanish forces, and a treaty between Spain and France that ceded Santo Domingo to France, did not end the fighting in Saint-Domingue, because the colony was attacked by the British allies of Spain.
His success pleased the French government, which appointed him lieutenant governor of SaintDomingue.
The French expected L’Ouverture to keep fighting the English, but L’Ouverture felt no personal animosity towards the invaders, since they were not trying to reintroduce slavery to Saint-Domingue.
In October of 1798, when he was fifty, L’Ouverture negotiated a secret peace agreement in which the British renounced all claim to the colony’s lands in exchange for the right to trade freely with Saint-Domingue on an equal basis with France.
The treaty outraged the French commissioner in charge of the colony, Gabriel Marie Joseph, Comte d’Hedouville.
It also displeased Andre Rigaud, the leader of a revolutionary army in the south and west of Saint-Domingue.
Although Rigaud was theoretically subordinate to L’Ouverture, he had always acted independently, and he became openly defiant when L’Ouverture made peace with Britain.
L’Ouverture did not trust Rigaud to uphold the ban on slavery, partly because Rigaud was a light-skinned mulatto, the son of a white father and a black mother.
Unlike L’Ouverture ’s troops, who were mostly blackskinned men and former slaves, Rigaud’s troops consisted largely of “free men of color” who had never been slaves.
Many of Rigaud’s mulatto soldiers had themselves owned slaves under the former government, and Rigaud seemed to favor a class system in which mulattoes dominated.
After L’Ouverture signed his peace treaty with the British, Hedouville encouraged Rigaud to overthrow L’Ouverture in a coup.
Hedouville then returned to Paris, as the rivalry between L’Ouverture and Rigaud grew so heated that it threatened to explode into civil war.
L’Ouverture, hoping to unify the colony, spoke with Commissioner Philippe Rose Roume de SaintLaurent, the French official who had become the titular head of the colony.
He had Roume arrange a conference— set for February of TPI ] ' ; • , j < j I page eight 1799 in the colonial capital of Portau-Prince— between L’Ouverture, Rigaud, and their principal subordinates.
The most urgent issue at the congress was the distribution of areas to be controlled by the various generals.
Rigaud claimed the right to govern Saint-Domingue’s Southern Peninsula, the northern coastline of which included the two cities of Grand Goave and Petit Goave.
L’Ouverture, however, had assigned control of those cities to an officer of his own, General Laplume.
The conference opened in Port-auPrince on February 4, with a public ceremony celebrating the abolition of slavery, and a plea by Roume for unity, an appeal seconded by L’Ouverture.
Roume, L’Ouverture, Rigaud, Laplume, and a number of lesser generals then retreated to a council chamber to discuss the pressing issues.
The distribution of territory was the first issue to be raised, and Laplume immediately claimed the two cities L’Ouverture had assigned to him.
The discussion grew heated, with Rigaud and Laplume verbally attacking each other.
The two men went so far as to draw their swords, though neither made an actual physical assault.
He had written an angry letter to Roume, accusing the commissioner of showing undue favoritism to L’Ouverture.
During April, L’Ouverture negotiated a treaty of friendship with the United States, under President John Adams.
When the treaty was signed on April 27, it opened several cities in Saint-Domingue to trade with the United States.
It also prohibited French privateers from attacking American ships and required the United States to supply L’Ouverture with weapons and other goods.
L’Ouverture ensured that all the cities opened to American trade were in areas controlled by generals who were loyal to him, while the cities of the Southern Peninsula under Rigaud ’s control remained under blockade.
This was followed in May with the formal signing of the trade agreement with Britain.
L’Ouverture kept certain elements of the treaties secret in order not to alienate France, which was then at war with Britain and in a “quasi-war” with the United States.
Rigaud, who was not given access to the treaty, accused L’Ouverture of including secret clauses that were meant to enrich himself.
He further accused L’Ouverture of plotting with the English and the Americans to restore slavery.
In response, on June 15, Rigaud published a letter that had been sent to him by Hedouville, the former French commissioner who had been replaced by Roume.
The letter gave Rigaud the authority to depose L’Ouverture if he deemed it necessary.
Rigaud also sent another letter to Roume, repudiating Roume ’s and L’Ouverture ’s authority.
Following the publication of the letter from Hedouville, hundreds of men deserted L’Ouverture ’s army to join Rigaud.
The population of Portau-Prince— a centrally located city of thirty thousand where L’Ouverture maintained his headquarters— was restless, with a large number of citizens feeling sympathetic to Rigaud.
The majority of people in Port-au-Prince were mulattoes, and they tended to support Rigaud.
L’Ouverture at once proclaimed that he would address the public in the city’s parish church.
Despite his passionate speech, L’Ouverture soon learned that the commander of the city’s garrison was loyal to Rigaud.
L’Ouverture waited for his armies to gather at Port-au-Prince, and to be properly supplied, before leading them south in a forced march.
But as he prepared to set out, word came that Rigaud ’s supporters had risen in the northwest of the colony, capturing one city and attacking another.
L’Ouverture was faced with a potential second front opening on the north.
He decided to try to solve this problem by leading an attack in the north in person.
L’Ouverture knew that, in traveling relatively unguarded across the country, he faced tremendous personal risk from agents of Rigaud.
He delegated control of his armies to General Jean-Jacques Dessalines, and he commanded Dessalines to lead the attack in the south, L’Ouverture then immediately set out for the north on horseback.
Due to his quick action, which caught the rebels by surprise, L’Ouverture was able to suppress the rebellion in the northwest.
He then decided to return at once to the south to join the fight there.
Rouine supported L’Ouverture at once, and asked Rigaud to accept L’Ouverture ’s ruling.
Instead, Rigaud rose to his feet and stalked out of the council chamber.
One hour later L’Ouverture received a report that Rigaud had left Port-au-Prince.
That sanguinary and barbarous subaltern does not merit to be taken into the confidence of his chief.
Yes, there are secret clauses; on June 17, when reports reached L’Ouverture that Rigaud had sent men against Grand Goave and Petit Goave.
In a swift strike, Rigaud had captured both cities, and apparently was preparing to advance further northwest toward Port-au-Prince.
Word of the action seemed to galvanize at least some people in Port-au-Prince against Rigaud.
According to Stevens, the white minority supported L’Ouverture because Rigaud was generally believed to favor mulattoes over whites, and because L’Ouverture had impressed them with “his humane Andre Rigaud. physician, even though the countryside still held isolated bands of Rigaud’s supporters.
The party had reached a crossroads in a mountain range near the northern town of Port-de-Paix when shots rang out.
L’Ouverture ’s doctor was killed, and the plume of feathers, or panache, on L’Ouverture ’s hat was knocked off.
L’Ouverture continued his journey in a carriage for a time, and then again returned to horseback.
Nearing Port-au-Prince on another mountain road, the party was ambushed again.
The coach driver was killed, but L’Ouverture, riding behind the carriage, was uninjured.
Arriving in Port-au-Prince, L’Ouverture learned that his men had recaptured Grand Goave and Petit Goave.
As word of the failed assassination attempts spread, L’Ouverture ’s survival inspired the people of Saint-Domingue.
L’Ouverture ’s men pushed through the south of the colony, and by midNovember they had reached Jacmel.
It was built on the coast and protected on land by a half-circle of mountains built up with fortresses and other defenses.
L’Ouverture had Dessalines launch a full-scale attack, on January 6, 1800, but his men were turned back.
He decided to try to besiege the city, hoping to starve its defenders into submission.
It seemed clear that whoever controlled Toussaint UOuverture negotiates a secret treaty with British General Thomas Maitland in 1 799. page nine Jacmel would control the south of the colony.
Although L’Ouverture’s men successfully blockaded the land routes into the city, he did not have enough ships to entirely control the sea access to its port.
Rigaud was able to get some supplies to his men inside Jacmel, albeit with difficulty.
For several months the defenders, in an increasingly desperate state of hunger, held out against L’Ouverture’s attack.
L’Ouverture decided to take a slightly different tack, and bombard the city from the sea.
He ordered six warships to the area, but to his surprise and anger, the ships were impounded by British warships based in nearby British-held Jamaica.
L’Ouverture learned from diplomatic messengers that the British had discovered a French plot to foment a slave uprising in Jamaica.
They now feared that if L’Ouverture took control of the entire colony of SaintDomingue, he would direct slave revolts throughout the Caribbean.
In fact, although L’Ouverture hated slavery, his focus was then entirely on Saint-Domingue, and he had no plans for actions beyond the colony.
By the end of January, L’Ouverture was able to convince the British of this, but by that time they had already condemned and sold off the captured ships.
The British provided L’Ouverture with a cash settlement but gave him no replacement ships.
L’Ouverture’s armies progressed steadily through the south towards Rigaud ’s headquarters at the coastal city of Cayes.
At the same time, L’Ouverture found that Rigaud was attempting to slow the progress of L’Ouverture’s men by burning farms to deprive them of supplies.
L’Ouverture, supplied by American ships, was not materially affected by this scorchedearth tactic, but many farmers and plantation heads were alienated by Rigaud’s destruction of their homes.
As a result, many of them came over to L’Ouverture, and his numbers swelled.
Finally, on May 20, 1800, L’Ouverture’s forces cornered Rigaud and his men near the town of Acul.
T swear lit uau mi im; uuiitnl 1 1 ml vnu mIiuJI. into attempts to rebuild the colony’s infrastructure and economy.
In 1801 he assembled a gathering of representatives from municipalities across Saint-Domingue to establish a new constitution for the colony.
The new constitution and the treaty made by L’Ouverture with the United States were ultimately unacceptable to Napoleon Bonaparte.
He came to view L’Ouverture’s activities as too great an assertion of power at the expense of France.
He sent an army of twenty-two thousand soldiers and twenty thousand sailors to SaintDomingue to depose L’Ouverture.
L’Ouverture, after drafting new men to resist the French, had somewhere between twenty-five thousand and thirty thousand troops, as well as perhaps ten thousand irregular militiamen.
The French forces arrived early in February of 1802, and in the first wave of their assault, they took control of many of the large cities in Saint-Domingue.
Some of L’Ouverture’s officers surrendered in the face of what appeared to be overwhelming force.
In the days that followed, though, the French were met with a general uprising.
It was widely believed that the French would restore slavery, which was true.
In France, L’Ouverture was taken to the Fort de Joux, a high mountain fortress near the Swiss border.
The French troops, afflicted by malaria and yellow fever, were unable to crush the widespread resistance, which was led by L’Ouverture’s former general, JeanJacques Dessalines.
Saint-Domingue became the new nation of Haiti, so called after an indigenous name for the island.
Therefore, in February of 1800, L’Ouverture decided to approach his other allies, the Americans.
L’Ouverture knew that the United States still maintained a small fleet of warships in the vicinity of SaintDomingue.
L’Ouverture asked Consul General Edward Stevens for the help of the American navy.
Stevens was sympathetic, but he initially refused to assist L’Ouverture.
If the United States government was seen to openly involve itself in an internal French conflict, the diplomatic repercussions could be severe; relations between America and France were already strained.
Instead of committing American forces to possible combat, Stevens asked the commanding officer of the American naval forces in the area, Commodore Silas Talbot of the Constitution, to help L’Ouverture with the moving of supplies or of troops.
Commodore Talbot was evidently less concerned with diplomatic niceties than Stevens.
We cruised off the port for a considerable time, to intercept supplies for Rigaud.
That had the desired effect We engaged three of Rigaud ’s forts warmly for 30 or 40 minutes, in which time we obliged the enemy to evacuate the town and -O J — !«. la cascmiai lO the proper order of things.
Rigaud’s men were broken, fell back, reorganized and counter-attacked, and were beaten back again.
As they tried to rest after this second defeat, General Dessalines led another attack on their camp that effectively scattered the army.
At this point, representatives from France arrived in Saint-Domingue, bearing official letters confirming L Ouverture as commander-inchief of the colony.
They urged L Ouverture to give Rigaud a chance to surrender, and L’Ouverture immediately announced an amnesty for any Rigaud supporters who came over to his side.
After three days, however, he realized that he had no choice but to surrender.
He threw himself commander had been given secret orders by Napoleon to reinstate slavery once the colony was under French control.
A peace treaty had been signed between Britain and France, and the new Jefferson administration in the United States was less friendly to his rule of Saint-Domingue.
In late April, L Ouverture, accompanied by several hundred members of his honor guard, signed an agreement in the city of Le Cap, according to which he would keep his rank but retire to oversee the management of one of his properties.
Despite L’ Ouverture ’s surrender, many of his generals continued to fight.
They waged a guerilla campaign against the French soldiers, who, as the summer wore on, began to fall prey to tropical disease.
The French believed that the rebels were still being directed or encouraged by L’Ouverture.
Hill and Wang, 1965. ‘ort-de-Paix ^Afeo DOMINGO Port-au-Prince '<-<£3 sLr^ 'O 'Caves / \^ ca , { w / / Jacmel Petit Grand 0 50 Goave Goave JeanJacques Dessalines.
Happy 100th birthday to the electric traffic light Matt Schmitz, Cars.com 4:27m.
EOT August 5, 2014 Today marks what is many believe is the 100th anniversary of the world's first electric traffic signal.
Based on a design by James Hoge, who received the United States patent for his device in 1918, the ""Municipal Traffic Control System"" comprised four pairs of red and green lights that served as stop-and-go indicators, each mounted on a corner post and operated by a switch inside a control booth, configured to make conflicting signals impossible.
This invention brought to an end a growing problem in the early days of automobiles, when pedestrians, bicycles, horses and streetcars all converged on the same roadways, the History Channel states.
The honor of being the site of the world's first traffic light, of course, isn't without dispute.
Two years ago, Salt Lake City celebrated its own claim to the title when the Utah Department of Transportation unveiled a commemorative replica of the device invented by Lester Wire in 1912.
It’s the spirit of Harriet Haskell, principal for 40 years of Monticello Female Seminary, founded in 1836.
Haskell’s spirit was practically unheard from until 1971, when the Monticello campus was transferred to the community college district.
Professor Lars Hoffman, who collects lore about Haskell, said that on the day the contract was signed, a tree known to be Haskell s favorite toppled.
In LCCC’s early years, reports centered on the library — in Haskell’s day, the chapel where she held services for her girls and where her body lay in state following her 1907 death.
Librarians reported hearing themselves called by their proper name — never a nickname or diminutive — but looking up, saw no one nearby — sometimes, no one in the library.
From a corner magazine nook, a librarian saw a woman in an old-fashioned high-necked black dress standing at the main desk.
A series of mid-’80s Halloween ghost watches included a campus radio station broadcaster’s late-night encounter while airing periodic reports from the dark library, emptied of books and bookcases Sculpture of Harriet Haskell, on display in The Evergreens, located on the campus of Lewis and Clark Community College.
Kneeling before his transmitter, he felt hands settle on his shoulders as if someone were leaning over him to look.
Several of Hoffman’s ghost-hunting students spent the night in one room of a newer campus building.
A psychic visiting the campus said Haskell’s benign spirit was watching over the campus.
KARL SHUKER on scientific intransigence in the face of a mass of evidence.
WHEREAS MOST BIRDS INCUBATE THEIR EGGS SIMPLY BY SITTING on them, thereby directly harnessing their own body heat, those fowllike species known as the megapodes are renowned for eschewing this tried and trusted method in favour of much more remarkable and ingenious versions.
Some, for example, erect huge mounds composed of dead plant material, inside which they deposit their eggs, and allow the heat generated internally by the rotting vegetation to incubate them.
Today, therefore, the megapodes are notable avian celebrities, with their extraordinary modes of incubation faithfully documented in ornithological publications worldwide.
Yet these same publications invariably neglect to mention that for over three centuries, all reports of this most famous facet of megapode lifestyle were vigorously discounted by scientists as fanciful travellers’ tales with no basis in reality.
Accordingly, the history behind the formal scientific verification of these birds’ idiosyncratic incubation is a classic, compelling, yet nowadays all-but-forgotten example of a longrunning zoological controversy.
In April 1521, following Magellan’s famous but ill-fated global circumnavigation, survivor Antonio Pigafetta recorded in his journal that the Philippines housed a chickensized bird that laid eggs as large as a duck’s, but instead of hatching them itself, it chose to bury them in the sand, leaving them to be hatched by the sun’s heat.
It is nothing if not ironic that in an age when mermaids, unicorns and other wholly imaginary creatures were still widely accepted by naturalists as factual fauna, Pigafetta’s egg-burying bird was dismissed in no uncertain terms by those selfsame authorities as arrant poppycock.
Unfortunately, Nieremberg did not record this curious creature’s provenance, but that omission was remedied in 1651 via the publication of Francisco Hernandez’s Historia Avium Novae Hispaniae.
Offering a more detailed, accurate account, Hernandez corrected Nieremberg’s ‘daie’ to daic, and his ‘tapun’ to tapum, as well as revealing that this bird inhabited the Philippines.
During 1673, the Dominican missionary Navarrete returned to Megapodes were discounted as travellers’ tales with no reality Europe after spending a considerable time in the Philippines.
In a lengthy account entitled A Collection of Voyages and Travels , he recorded that many of the Malay Archipelago islands boasted a very unusual bird known locally as the tabon.
After excavating great holes in the sand into which it deposited its eggs, it filled the holes up again, in order for the hot sand and sun to hatch the buried eggs.
In 1699, veteran globe-trotter Gemelli Careri provided comparable details regarding the Philippine jungle fowl, which he termed the tavon; and additional data, drawn from his avifaunal observations on Luzon, was presented in 1703 by Camelli within the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London.
In view of such close correspondence between reports originating for the most part from wholly independent eyewitnesses and spanning two centuries, one might have expected that the jungle fowl’s internment of its eggs for hatching purposes would thereafter have been accepted as a fully verified ornithological fact.
Instead, Buffon and many other leading naturalists continued to disparage and reject totally all claims that birds could behave in such an overtly reptilian manner.
And so the matter remained unresolved for another century, until attention switched from the jungle fowl’s Philippine representatives to those inhabiting Australia.
Whereas the Philippine jungle fowl stood accused merely of interring its eggs beneath the sand, in Australia the aboriginals insisted that this diminutive bird was actually the architect responsible for all manner of immense mound-like structures widely distributed across much of northern Queensland and the Northern Territory.
They said that deep, concealed holes hewn into the mounds’ sides by the bird contained its eggs, with the mounds serving as giant incubators.
When the first Western settlers in Australia had encountered these incongruous edifices, some measuring up to 30ft long and 5ft high, they had taken them to be ancient burial mounds , erected long ago by the aboriginals’ ancestors.
Other, smaller mounds were deemed by them to be mud-castles built by native mothers to amuse their children.
The fact that the aboriginals themselves vehemently denied all of this was ignored not only by the settlers but by Western scientists too, thereby rejecting the claims of a people whose knowledge of this island continent stretched back many millennia.
When English naturalist John Gilbert (assistant to famed ornithological painter John Gould) arrived in autumn 1839 at Port Essington, Northern Territory, however, he resolved to conclude this heated conflict once and for all.
He would accompany a knowledgeable aboriginal to a little-known area of Port Essington called Knocker’s Bay, undisturbed by Westerners, where the native people asserted that a number of jungle fowl could be found.
Here, if anywhere, he might succeed in solving the mystery of the mounds.
Reaching the bay in November 1839, almost immediately they came upon a mound of sand and shells, incorporating a slight mixture of black soil too, and resting on a sandy beach just a few feet above the high-water mark.
Standing roughly 5ft tall, with a circumference of 25ft and conical in shape, the mound was profusely festooned with large yellow hibiscus blooms.
Encouraged by this, Gilbert duly scrambled up the mound’s sides to seek its alleged hidden holes and any eggs that they might contain, but he failed to do so.
However, his companion was unconcerned, pointing out that there were no signs to suggest that any adult birds had been there for quite some while.
Nevertheless, Gilbert’s searches were not entirely in vain; on one side of the mound he spotted a tunnel-like shaft about 2ft deep, which proved to contain a jungle fowl chick, lying on some dry, withered leaves.
As it was only a few days old, presumably it had indeed hatched inside the tunnel, but Gilbert could not be absolutely sure of this.
After all, it was possible that the chick had somehow made its vway into the tunnel from outside the mound, Especially as in comparison to similarly-aged domestic chickens it exhibited a remarkably advanced degree of development, with a well-formed, extensively-feathered body, plus the ability to mn and even fly.
Due to other commitments, Gilbert was unable to stay any longer at Knocker’s Bay, but by February 1840 he had returned and this time his quest met with success.
After selecting a likely-looking mound inside which to find eggs, his native companion dug down six times in succession to a depth of at least 6ft— 7ft without finding any eggs.
On the seventh attempt, he successfully retrieved one egg, followed after two or three more attempts by a second.
We now know that an average clutch contains about 15 eggs; one is laid and buried each day, within its own separate hole, until the entire clutch has been deposited.
Gilbert also discovered that whereas mounds primarily created from sand and shells are usually erected in the most exposed localities available, presumably to ensure that the necessary heat required for eggincubation will be met by the sun, mounds constructed in darker, cooler localities, protected from the sun’s rays, are largely composed of plant material and hence rely principally upon the heat released by decomposition for egg incubation.
Yet even today, mystery still surrounds the mound-building megapodes some scientists have opined that certain of the sand-and-shell mounds at Weipa, on Queensland’s Cape York Peninsula, are not bird-built but rather are of aboriginal origin.
It is said that history never repeats itself, but in the case of the Australian jungle fowl, it currently seems to be running backwards from tumulus to incubator to tumulus again.
The tour also celebrates the neighborhood’s love of Halloween and the eerie.
Kids of all ages will love posing for scarecrow pictures or taking a haunted hayride through the old barn and plantation fields.
Wear your Halloween costume and listen to ghost stories from Tennessee’s past, such as Bell Witch, Cherokee spirit Spearfinger, John Murrell’s Thumb, Ghost dog, and the Legend of Davy Crockett.
Roosevelt Motel MEMORABLE EVENTS OF THE PAST le glorious early days of Hollywood, the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel was the epitome of the exciteit, the glamour and the elegance known as HOLLYWOOD The Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel, named after the President Theodore Roosevelt, opened May 15, 1927.
It was built at a cost of $2. million dollars The hotel quickly became the center of the glamorous social whirl that was Hollywood.
The Hollywood Holding Co. that financed the building of the Roosevelt was headed by Charles Toberman.
He was called “the father of Hollywood” because of all the projects he handled the Chinese Theatre, the Egyptian Theatre, the Pantages Theatre and the Hollywood Bowl.
Investors in the company included Mary Pickford, Douglas Fairbanks, Louis B Mayer, Joseph Schenck and Marcus Loew.
Located across from the Chinese Theatre, the Roosevelt quickly became the gathering place for Hollywood luminaries.
The Motion Pictures Academy of Arts & Sciences used to meet in the hotel library.
The first Academy Awards presentation was held in the Blossom Ballroom on May 16, 1929.
The awards were called Merit Awards, and were given, not for one performance, but for work covering a 2 year period.
Douglas Fairbanks was host for the evening, presenting awards to Janet Gaynor as best actress, Emil Jannings as best actor, and to “Wings” starring Buddy Rogers, as best picture/' A broom closet at the Roosevelt was home to a penniless, unknown actor named David Niven, well-almost.
He was new in town and not-yet employed when he met Al Weingard, the reception clerk at the hotel.
Originally the Blossom Ballroom was a supper club, open to the public, and the place to go dining and dancing in Hollywood.
All the top bands played there, and the society pages of the local papers were always full of stories of the elegant parties held there.
In the early 30’s, when jazz was beginning to be the rage, it was decided the hotel should have a jazz club.
Something smaller & more intimate than the big ballroom a real cozy place.
Mary Martin had her first paying job as a singer in Hollywood in the Cinegrill.
She couldn’t always find a babysitter, so she sometimes had to bring the baby along.
After each show, the surprised guest was feted to a reception in the Blossom Ballroom at the Roosevelt.
Goodman said many “magical and enchanting things happened in the suite and it definitely has “a haunting quality” about it.
She stayed at the hotel often over the years, preferring a second floor Cabana Room overlooking the pool.
He would often pace the hall outside his 9th floor room, rehearsing his lines and sometimes blowing a bugle -much to the consternation of other guests nearby.
The story goes -that on windy nights you can hear his ghost in the hallway.. .so the story goes.
A long time favorite of Mr Vallee, the hotel was named specifically as a recipient of his momentos.
That makes it Hockney’s largest painting and the only place in the world where you can swim inside a million dollar work of art.
Recently returned to the hotel by an anony mous donor, the painting is now on display in the hotel lobby.
Check our front sidewalk and you will find stars for the Mills Brothers, Julie London, Maureen O’Hara, Stephen J Cannell, Ed McMahon, Julio Iglesias, Errol Flynn, Natalie Wood, Gene Autry, Cybill Shepard, Sid Ceasar, Dudley Moore, Eddie Murphy and many others.
These are as glamorous as old days with the stars arriving in limousines, kieig lights lighting up the night sky, photographers and fans everywhere, and the charm of the Roosevelt being shown off to its best advantage.
It has been seen on “Knots Landing”, “Moonlighting”, “Highway to Heaven”, “Hunter”, “Simon & Simon”, “Beverly Hills Cop II”, “Sunset”, “She’s Out of Control”, “Funny About Love”, “Internal Affairs”, “Neon Empire”, “Tales From the Crypt”, “Sibling Rivalry”, “Fabulous Baker Brothers”, “Boiling Point” and many others, plus a number of commercials and as background of interviews of well known personalities.
Johnny Grant, Honorary Mayor of Hollywood, moved into the Penthouse Suite of the hotel.
He even has his own table in Theodore’s Restaurant and calls the hotel Hollywood City Hall.
The Catering and Banquet Departments help with decor and menus and make it work beautifully.
The historic Arthur Murray Dance Studio adjacent to the hotel is being renovated.
This building has been used as a dance studio since 1927 and maybe before that.
After it has been fitted for earthquakes and remodeled, the Arthur Murray will become office for the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce and'the Community Redevelopment Agency, plus some retail space.
A new life for a grand old building as the Hollywood Roosevelt hotel continues to improve with age.
At any time, you could come across a film crew in any of the public areas of the hotel--a real treat for the tourists who come to Hollywood to see the movie stars.
The Roosevelt is a good place to meet for a meal, talk business, or just be entertained.
With the charm of the past and the convenience of the present, the Hollywood Roosevelt is once again the Grande Dame of Hollywood.
Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel TALES FROM THE ROOSEVELT GHOSTS, SPIRITS & OTHER THINGS THAT GO BUMP IN THE NIGHT Originally compiled for the entertainment of the staff, this collection of ghost stories soon became the talk of the hotel with much interest shown by our guests.
It was decided to make copies available to our guests, perhaps some of them will have an encounter to add.
As you know, old buildings sometimes have stories about ghosts or spirits.
There are many ghosts and spirits that we know about and probably a lot more that we don't know.
COLD SPOT IN BALLROOM In mid-December 1985, two weeks prior to the reopening of the hotel, the first spirits were discovered.
With the opening so close, all office workers, managers and secretaries spent the day cleaning, sweeping and dusting.
Alan Russell, actor and personal assistant to the general manager, offered to sweep the Blossom Ballroom before the carpeting was put down.
Alan swept the length of the room, noticing one area that seemed cooler than the rest of the room, but not giving it too much thought.
Later, as he swept the width of the room, the cool spot was still there.
At that point, he called Kelly Greene and together they tried to figure it out.
Tht^re were no doors open to cause a draft, the air conditioners had not been hooked up. there ssas no trap door in the floor ... no reason for the cold spot.
The spot is a circle about 30 inches in ’diameter and is about 1 0 degrees cooler than the rest of the room.
MARILYN MONROE'S GHOST IN MIRROR On the same day, Suzanne Leonard was dusting the general manager's office.
As she was dusting the tall dark-framed mirror, she saw the reflection of a blonde girl right where her hand was dusting.
When she turned around to speak to the girl, there was no one there, yet when she looked back at the mirror, the reflection was still there.
Suzanne was puzzled and a little startled, so she asked the manager about the mirror.
He told her that the mirror had belonged to Marilyn Monroe and had been removed from the suite that Marilyn had often occupied out by the pool.
It's hard to say if Marilyn's ghost really is seen in the mirror, but two psychics have ""read"" the mirror and told of seeing much sadness.
MONTGOMERY CLIFT'S GHOST IN HALLWAY Up on the 9th floor, maids were making up the beds while other employees stocked the rooms with towels.
As she went to the east end of the hall, to Room 928, she felt a cool breeze against her arms but didn't pay much attention.
Workmen were still working in the halls and doors were open it was just a draft.
But these doors have compression hinges -they don't slam., That startled her, but she went on and placed the towels in the proper place.
As she came out of the room, she again felt a definite coldness, like something brushing past her in the hall.
Later that day, two housemaids who also worked on the 9th floor excitedly said that ""there was something 1 strange there"" and would not go there again.
The Hollywood Roosevelt reopened for its first guests on December 30, 1985.
CALLS FROM A NOIM-PHOIME At the beginning, only the public areas of the hotel and floors 3, 4 and 5 were completed and in use.
One night before the floor was completed, there was a call to PBX from Room 1032.
A GHOST WHO LIKES LIGHTS By Spring of '86, work on the upper floors was being completed.
Daniel Cichon, Assistant Director of Housekeeping, was inspecting the rooms prior to the opening of the 1 1th floor.
In Star Suite 1101/1102 he finished his inspection, turned off the lights, locked the door and went back to the housekeeping department.
He was the only one with a key, yet ""someone"" had turned on all the lights.
As more guests came to stay in the hotel and more rooms were occupied, more strange things began to happen.
Calls from guests, late at night, about loud talking in the next room but when Security would investigate they would find the next room unoccupied.
A PUSHY GHOST In April of '86, Rachel, then a lobby maid, was doing her morning cleaning when she needed something from the supply closet just off the lobby.
She opened the double doors and as she reached inside, someone pushed her into the closet.
Pale -and shaken, she returned to the Housekeeping Dept, to tell her story.
Over the next few years, the late night calls about noisy neighbors continued.
So did reports of strange noises and strange shadows, none of which were explained to the satisfaction of ghost enthusiasts.
A PLAYFUL GHOST Summer of '88 found Steve Fava working in the purchasing department.
One of his jobs was to refill the soda machines on each floor of the hotel.
One morning as he did this he thought someone was playing a joke on him by moving his clipboard.
Upon entering the room where the soda machine and ice machine were, Steve placed the clipboard on top of the soda machine, then began to stock the sodas.
He looked and looked for it, finally finding it INSIDE an arm's length away from the soda machine.
He decided he must have put it on the ice machine and it just slipped off and into the ice.
By the time he reached the 1 0th floor, he was really shaken and took extra care to be sure to put the clipboard on the soda machine.
He finished stocking the sodas and when he reached for the clipboard -it was gone.
Alone late at night, patrolling the upper floors, a new officer suddenly felt as if someone was watching him.
He continued his rounds, a little uneasy, but attributed the feeling to being on a new job and being unfamiliar with the building.
But the feeling persisted for the next week or two, each night in a different part of the hotel.
He said he would suddenly feel uncomfortable, so would hurry down the hall, hoping to see a person.
Sometimes it would seem like someone was standing in a doorway and would suddenly step back inside the room as he approached.
He didn't really see or hear anything, it was just something he sensed.
A REAL GHOST WRITER Late one night in September of '89, the Night Supervisor of Housekeeping was passing the Personnel Office and heard the electric typewriter being used.
Knowing that the staff leaves at 5:00m., she rapped on the door to see who was in the office.
Several times she knocked and called out, but there was no response, only the steady tapping of the typewriter.
Next morning when the personnel staff arrived, the typewriter was still turned on, the chair that had been left at the desk was now at the typewriter, and the papers on the desk had been neatly arranged.
GHOSTLY PHONE CALLS Room 1217 has long been known to have ""something unique and magical"" about it.
She said then that the room had ""a presence, a special quality"" about itIn October of 1989 that presence made itself known again, this time by telephone.
When the light lit up again, the operator checked the guest register and found that the room was not occupied.
She called Security, explained the situation and asked that they check the room and put the phone back on the hook.
Each time, Security went up and replaced the phone, and the next time they went up ... the phone was off the hook.
TV TROUBLES AND SPECIAL EFFECTS In mid October of 1989, a TV film crew wanted to do a story on our ghosts for a Halloween special.
Shooting outside Room 928, the house lights went out, their sound equipment broke down, the lights went out again, the film jammed in the camera ... it took almost 4 hours to do a one hour shoot.
When they tried to film Marilyn's mirror, the smoke alarm went off and they couldn't complete the scene.
The Operator checked, then told the guest she must be mistaken, there was no one in the next room.
After spending some time in the room, she said, ""It's a man, a black man, a musician.
HOLIDAY SPIRIT On December 15,1 990, the Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office held a holiday Dinner Dance at the hotel.
After the party, one of the guests and his wife were looking at the pictures on the mezzanine.
As they neared the doors that lead to the balcony that overlook the Blossom Room, they heard piano music.
They followed the sound and standing near the piano they saw a man in a white suit.
The Front Desk Manager even came back upstairs with them, but there was no man in a white suit ... there was no one at all.
The following Monday morning, Billy from Engineering was working on the 3rd floor.
As he came to the corner he looked to his left and half way down the hall he saw a man standing in the hallway.
The man didn't answer, but continued to look from side to side as if he wasn't sure which way to go.
Billy came closer, within 3 feet of the man, and again asked if he could be of help.
The man still did nor reply, but turned and walked toward the fire exit at the east end of the hall.
He could not move for what seemed like 5 minutes, 'though he said it was probably only a few seconds.
Billy is from the Philippines and his culture firmly believes in spirits.
In 1991 a number of writers and TV reporters had come to the hotel asking about our ghosts.
Entertainment Tonight came to do a piece about Montgomery Clift's room and even brought a psychic with them.
The room had been vacant for three days, but when he went in, the heat was on full blast.
The film crew corrected him, saying that those lights last forever, but he wouldn't admit that anything strange was going on.
As he began the interview, he asked the psychic if she felt any ghosts in the room.
It couldn't have closed by itself because it opens sideways so someone would have to push it.
When the crew finished in the room, they went next door to talk to the guests in that room.
They didn't identify themselves as a TV crew, only asking if the girls had heard any noises in Room 928.
They replied ""Oh yeah, there were some bumping noises, but we didn't think anything about it.
Wales Caerphilly Castle, nr Cardiff A green lady flits from turret to turret so fearlessly that on one occasion some of the town boys almost caught her.
Modern day security personnel will not venture up to the flag tower because they can smell perfume at all times.
Cardiff Castle, Cardiff The second Marquess of Bute began restoration of Cardiff Castle but died in 1848.
He leaves this room by passing through a six-foot-thick wall into a corridor, then passes through the wall of the chapel into the room in which he died.
At precisely 3:45am heavy doors open and shut by themselves and the lights flash on and off.
A ""faceless vision in a flowing grayish-white skirt"" has also appeared in a stockroom close by, where things get disarranged.
Castell Coch, nr Cardiff The young son of Dame Griffiths fell into a bottomless pool of dark water within the precincts and was never seen again.
Her ghost restlessly continues to wander about the castle and its surrounding woods.
Conwy Castle, Conwy One of Robert Wynn's successors at Plas Mawr had to leave Conwy to fight in a distant war.
When the time was near for his return, his wife and child climbed the steep stair to the lookout tower.
He was late, and the wife and child had to leave the tower because of darkness.
On the way down she slipped, and, along with her child, fell to the bottom of the tower.
The bereaved husband eventually went mad with grief and died soon after.
His ghost still seeks the missing doctor in the lantern room and will continue to do so until he is found.
She floats through locked rooms in a white dress and may be the cause of the noisy running footsteps which mysteriously disturb the sleep of guests on occasions.
Ruthin Castle, Denbighshire There is a ghostly figure of a man in armor wearing only one gauntlet.
The ghost of Lady Grey has been seen wandering the hallways of the castle.
England Arundel Castle, Sussex A ghost from King Charles II's time browses books in the library.
Berry Pomeroy Castle, Devon Said to be haunted by the daughter of a wicked baron who, as a consequence of an enforced relationship with her father, bore him a child, which he strangled.
The king ordered that the children should be starved to death in the castle.
Cadbury Castle, Somerset Ghostly horsemen carrying torches have been seen at the castle.
Corfe Castle, Dorset The ghost of a headless woman has been seen next to the walls of the castle.
Dover Castle, Kent Dover Castle is associated with numerous ghosts and strange sounds.
In the King's bedroom, the lower half of a man has been seen walking through the doorway.
The specter of a woman dressed in a red dress has been seen at the west stairway of the keep.
The sounds of a creaking doorway opening and closing where a door used to be, but isn't anymore, have been heard.
Featherstone Castle, Northumberland The castle is associated with a ghostly bridal party.
Baron Featherstonehaugh had arranged for his daughter to marry a relative of his choice, even though the daughter was in love with someone else.
The wedding party left for the ""traditional hunt"" after the wedding, leaving the baron behind to make arrangements for the banquet.
When the party failed to return by midnight, the baron began to fear the worst.
On the anniversary of the wedding, the party can still be seen heading towards the castle.
Hever Castle, Kent The ghostly figure of Anne Boleyn has been seen gliding over the bridge.
He was very unhappy with a prearranged marriage, and fell in love with a farmer's daughter.
When she suddenly grew ill and died, Sir James refused to believe she was dead and left her on the bed.
She was finally moved and placed in a coffin with a glass lid, which he set in a cupboard where he could look at her.
At his funeral his coffin began to sway as it was lowered into the ground.
His spectral coach and ungroomed horses can be seen being driven through the parklands of the castle.
Okehampton Castle, Devon A specter of a black dog can be seen at the castle.
Old Wardour Castle, Wiltshire Lady Arundel's ghost haunts the castle grounds.
Pevensey Castle, Sussex Below the castle walls a spectral army can be seen and heard.
Rochester Castle, Kent The ghost of Lady Blanche de Warenne has been seen walking the castle battlements.
Sherborne Old Castle, Dorset Sir Walter Raleigh's ghost sits on the castle masonry.
The ghostly presence walked on unaffected and the guard, having told his unlikely story to others, died of shock a few days later.
A young guard shot and killed himself and another guard on duty saw him afterwards.
Scotland Aldourie Castle, Inverness & Nairn The castle is said to be haunted by a Gray Lady.
Barcaldine Castle, Argyll & Dunbartonshire Donald Campbell was murdered on the castle grounds, and his ghost has been seen at the castle.
Dunrobin Castle, Sutherland & Caithness The upper floor of the castle is said to be haunted by the daughter of the 14th Earl.
She had been imprisoned in the attic by her father for her wrong doings.
Duntrune Castle, Argyll & Dunbartonshire Coll Macdonnell had a personal score to settle with the Campbells of Duntrune.
A handless skeleton was later found at the castle, and pipe music can still be heard in the castle.
Hermitage Castle, Borders A neighboring chief sent a group of goodwill ambassadors to Hermitage to propose cessation of their long feud.
But they fear their suspect in a bank robbery may have eaten some of the evidence — the note handed to a Streetsboro bank teller demanding cash — while he was handcuffed and leaning over the hood of a police cruiser Twinsburg police Patrolman Daniel Biada said a dash cam video of Thursday's arrest of John H Ford, 35, of Cleveland, shows Ford gobbling a piece of paper while officers searched his pockets.
The whereabouts of the note demanding money came into question after Biada was taken into custody and Streetsboro investigators asked whether officers had found the piece of paper.
Twinsburg police reviewed the images captured on camera and said they observed Ford leaning over to eat something off the hood of the cruiser.
Authorities said they found a .38-caliber pistol on the driver's side floor of Fords car and a wad of cash covered in red ink on the passenger side of the vehicle.
In the Streetsboro case, a man walked into the FirstMerit branch on state Route 14 around 10 and handed a teller a note that demanded money.
No, the strange, seemingly paranormal, behaviour was experienced by workmen building a water ride at Thorpe Park, one of the country's biggest theme parks.
There were reports of workers feeling like someone was watching over their shoulder and sudden cold feelings being experienced.
As a result of the ghostly sightings, and fears that an ancient burial ground has been disturbed, the project was moved to another site.
This image was taken at Monk's Walk in Thorpe Park by the South West London Paranormal Society team who investigated the site.
They said the vague white mist appeared in a number of images but was not visible to the naked eye.
You decide' is the question posed by the group which investigated the claims of a headless monk wandering around the theme park A paranormal detection agency was then called in to the park in Chertsey, Surrey, to carry out tests and found that a burial ground or settlement could have been disturbed.
Managers at the park decided to relocate the ride to another area of the park and also called in a forensic team to carry out further investigations.
Forensic geophysicist Peter Masters, seen here in Thorpe Park, has been called in to analyse the site, using deep ground radar.
Managers at Thorpe Park decided to relocate the ride to another area of the park after reports of paranormal behaviour The ride's foundations would have been over an area of the park where stone coffins have previously been excavated.
Thorpe Park, however, was more striking as results were picked up immediately, with orbs, ghostly images in photography and ouija reaction results being strongest around the site where they were proposing to build Storm Surge.
Who checked them? John, Grantham, Lincolnshire, 07/2/201 1 I believe the organisation involved 3 professional parapsychologists called Dr.s.
Who checked them? John, Grantham, Lincolnshire, 07/2/201 1 22:53 Click to rate Rating 1 1 Report abuse Dung! Rebecca, Northern Ireland , 07/2/2011 22:50 Click to rate _ _ Rating 4 Report abuse For those of you who haven't experienced anything ’paranormal 1 , I understand the jokes.
It is very difficult to explain, truly, unless you’ve experienced the active spiritual world.
I know I never asked for this particular opportunity, but for the jokesters, perhaps a trip to this site is in order? -Tea, Please, San Antonio, USA 07/2/201 1 22:38 Click to rate _ _ Rating 20 Report abuse The views expressed in the contents above are those of our users and do not necessarily reflect the views of MailOnline.
The parish council has called in local ghost-busting minister Kevin Crouch to see if he can exorcise the road.
Perhaps I've been more fortunate than most in that I have also had a chance personally to investigate scores of hauntings and to spend nights in many haunted houses, hotels etc.
The events I relate here took place nearly 30 years ago and the case remains one of the strangest I have experienced.
I had to say that no, I investigated hauntings and other psychic phenomena but exorcism wasn't in my line.
Fifteen months earlier Rita and Alan Beckett, together with their sons Christopher, aged eight, Gavin and Keith had moved into the Victorian terrace in Higson Street, Salford, which is an industrial city in the north-west of England.
Previously they had lived with Rita's widowed mother in nearby Eccles while seeking an affordable home of their own anything to get them out of cramped digs, Rita said.
The cobbled neighbourhood included Archie Street, on which the popular English TV programme 'Coronation Street' had been modelled, while a couple of minutes away, across the main road, lay Salford Docks at the end of the Manchester Ship Canal.
It was a run-down, dreary area, and seemed all the more so when I arrived on a drizzly November evening.
Rita Beckett, at 32, looked careworn with lines around the eyes and the pinched features that come from hard circumstances and, as she told me, the circumstances had been getting harder.
After a few seconds somebody began stomping upstairs, dragging their feet.
We thought it must be one of the boys and that surprised us as we hadn't heard them leave their bedroom.
You can't creep about in this house because all the boards and stairs squeak like crazy, and the stairs aren't carpeted.
Not only that, but the door at the bottom was still closed, as we'd left it.
After we'd heard these footsteps we tried to convince ourselves it must have been the neighbours next door but we knew it wasn't.
The first really disturbing experience occurred the following week when Rita and the boys were in the house alone, Alan being at a factory some miles away where he worked night shifts on alternate weeks.
But half an hour later he woke me up again and said he couldn't sleep because of the old man who kept touching his hair.
I tucked Gavin in again and told him to stop making up stories, then I got back to my own bed and fell asleep.
The room wasn't completely dark because of a street light outside the window.
I couldn't see anyone but I noticed the same smell as in the boys' room dirty and musty.
When I turned on the light everything looked normal but I could feel somebody moving about, like a cold draught.
Alan returned from work a few hours later to find his family in the lounge, huddled together in blankets.
He told me, 'At some time after two in the morning I heard the door opening at the foot of the stairs, just like before, and then came the footsteps.
They were slow and heavy, and I thought I could hear a tapping like a walking stick.
This time we had a night light burning on the landing because Rita and the boys had been nervous since the last episode.
I got to the top of the stairs and immediately saw that the door at the bottom remained shut, and the stairs were empty yet the footsteps kept coming up.
Rita joined her husband on the landing, and they saw that the door to the third bedroom stood ajar.
We went inside and found Gavin sitting on the floor cross-legged, rocking backwards and forwards in the darkness.
After this the family became plagued almost nightly by footsteps on the stairs; and Gavin, previously a lively, bright boy became increasingly morose.
He expressed a deep fear of the house, and especially of that third bedroom, yet paradoxically he displayed the utmost reluctance to go outdoors.
He also began talking about 'the Body', apparently a presence he could see in the house although he found it difficult to describe.
Apparently it was not the 'bent old man' he had spoken about previously, as he also continued to see this man at night and seemed to grow fond of him.
He was an old man, seventy-eight, and apparently he walked with a stoop.
I shouted something at him, and then he seemed to wake up and began crying.
I asked about the other boys, if they had seen or sensed anything evil.
I am not psychic, and not one of those people who claim to be aware of unseen presences.
One did not need super sensitivity, however, to feel uncomfortable in the third bedroom of this house.
Not a scientific description, maybe, but it describes the room well enough.
More mundanely, it had a bare, gritty floor, old wallpaper peeling in places, and a sash window with net curtain.
It felt cold as one would expect, but not just ordinarily cold as on any November evening.
Here I found a bone-deep chill as though even its essence had been sucked away.
I've experienced similar chill in other haunted places and it is always profoundly unpleasant.
We continued our tour of the house, which apart from that third bedroom felt normal enough, and at the end I told the Becketts I would like to spend some time there and conduct tests.
A week later the family went to stay for a few days with Mrs Beckett's mother, and during that time they allowed me and three colleagues to move in.
I spent three nights and two full days in the house with Arthur Latham, Ross Price and Martin Hodgkiss, all of whom had accompanied me on previous investigations.
We took regular temperature readings in the rooms, monitored four tape recorders, and set up a movement-sensitive camera in the third bedroom.
In addition Arthur, our electronics expert, installed a range of equipment to test atmospheric pressure, shifts in the house structure, and sensors to detect movement on the stairs and in each of the bedrooms.
We of course experienced all the usual noises creaks, raps, bangings to be expected in any house of whatever age.
We could also hear the television sets in both adjoining houses, and at times it seemed the families had regiments of children running riot.
On our first night I took up position at the top of the stairs on the landing, Ross in the boys' bedroom and Martin on the threshold of the third bedroom, while Arthur remained in the lounge monitoring our equipment.
In each room we had a low-power bulb burning, and all interior doors were open.
At 2.13am we clearly heard the distinctive squeaking sound of the door at the bottom of the stairs opening , and almost immediately footsteps began slowly ascending.
Being on the landing, I could see both the staircase, which was in deep shadow but empty, and the open door.
Perhaps the most interesting, and certainly most sinister, phenomenon occurred in that room.
The sound, like someone dragging their feet across the uncarpeted floor, continued for seven minutes although nothing could be seen.
I joined Martin at the doorway and immediately noticed the extreme chill billowing out, and a sense of menace that had the hairs on our necks bristling.
We were satisfied that the noise came from the room itself and not from the adjoining houses, nor from the walls or loft.
With the dawn we compared notes, and Arthur reported that his equipment had indicated sounds being recorded in the third bedroom at the time Martin and I specified.
It emerged deep, hoarse and muffled, and it said just one word, repeated three times.
Ross, Martin and I switched positions for the second night, and again for the third.
There were more footsteps on the staircase on the second night, at 3.19am, and again the tape recorder picked up a voice in the third bedroom, although this time we couldn't even guess at the word or words.
I spoke to several other residents of Higson Street and from them learned that Albert and Dora Owen had lived in the house since at least the 1920s and that there had never been any suggestion of strange occurrences there.
I managed to trace Mr and Mrs Owen's son Derek, who now lived in North Wales, and from him heard a slightly different story.
He had grown up in the house and had occupied the third bedroom as a boy, but always felt uncomfortable there and suffered constant nightmares until moving into another room.
In addition, his mother had sometimes spoken of feeling uncomfortable in the upstairs rooms 'She used to say somebody seemed to be hovering over her,' Derek said.
He also told me of a rumour that someone had once hanged themselves in the house but I was unable to verify this either through the landlord or through library records.
My opinion, passed to Rita and Alan Beckett, was that there were at least two presences in the house, one benign and the other most definitely not.
I thought it possible that the footsteps on the stairs were caused by the ghost of Albert Owen, and that though they might find this phenomenon disconcerting, it would not harm them and was likely in time to disappear.
I could not say the same for the presence in the third bedroom, however.
Rita and Alan were anxious to have both presences removed if possible and I contacted a priest whom I knew had conducted exorcisms elsewhere.
The priest and two colleagues spent five hours at the house in mid-December, reporting that they all experienced a deep sense of evil in the third bedroom and, to a lesser extent, elsewhere in the house.
They were convinced, however, that their exorcism had succeeded and that the presences had been banished.
In early February the family moved out of the house for good, and an elderly couple similar in age to the Owens took up occupation in May.
I called on this couple after a few weeks and asked if they had experienced anything unusual.
The lady, Elsie Grainger, said, 'If you mean have we heard old Albert on the stairs, the answer's yes.
We've boarded up the doorway and don't use it, but sometimes we can hear voices there.
Home > Archives > Paranormal > Higson Street Hauntings A PERFECT PICTURE OF MYSTERY As I've often noted, mystery animals can turn up in the most unlikely places and one of these just so happens to be the American version of eBay, the online auction house.
From 16 to 26 September 2002, a most extraordinary painting was offered there, as Item #907237942, by a seller from Old Town, Florida, using the name ectopistes@webtv.net and requiring an undisclosed reserve price.
According to the seller's description, it was an original unframed water-colour, measuring 22ins by 30ins, bearing the signature Canzanella, and it depicted a pair of very odd-looking mammals.
The seller had owned the painting for roughly 28 years after paying $1,000 for it, but had no information as to what the animals in it were.
Certainly, the creatures depicted are decidedly unusual, even sinister, and I cannot readily identify them with any known species.
There are certain similarities to badgers (though the portrayed animals' legs seem too long for all but perhaps the Asian hog badger, Arctonyx collaris), and others to various viverrids.
The pink-hued white fur of the foreground specimen may indicate albinism.
In any event, the painting is reproduced here, and we'd welcome any opinions or information concerning the mystifying animals depicted, and the equally mysterious artist responsible for depicting them.
Guv builds biggest fart machine ever to fart at France with it Jesus Diaz Yesterday 12:49pm Colin Furze— maker of the coolest Wolverine claws — wants to build a giant butt and fart at France from Dover.
That's why he has built the biggest valveless pulse jet machine ever— these engines powered the Nazi V-l bombs that terrified London during WW2 making an infernal noise that sounds like a furious fart from hell.
Now that the engine is done he's actually going to build a gigantic butt, install the machine in its anus, put the whole thingamajig on the cliffs of Dover, point it at France, and fart on July 24— around 6-7pm local time— to see if the frenchies at the other side of the channel can hear it.
Francis Giangrossi, owner of Coast Roofing, and Jim Skiba, a supervisor at the business, took a plea deal last year that cleared them of murder charges.
I The two men admitted to Giangrossi Skiba <1 6 <' C oc "" fikgM l | paying to have four men • * z ' j ^ ' d vV/g'-Tty‘ Mmj, Q £ ■ hurting his hands.
The reason for the planned attack on Stewart stemmed from his relationship with Giangrossi’s wife, Madica Lynn Winchester.
Stewart was not injured, but he killed a man breaking into his house which led to murder charges against all of the suspects.
The three men who attempted to break into Stewart’s home also took plea deals recently.
Their sentencing is set for April 24. forum INFRASOUND I was a sonic experiment MARK BLACKLOCK recalls an evening of music designed to test the psychological effects of extremely low frequencies MARK BLACKLOCK is a journalist who verified the use of ultrasonic weapons in the the recent Gulf War.
At least that was the ripple which washed through the pond of conspiracy theorising for at least two decades after over-excitable French robotics researcher Vladimir Gavreau announced that he had stumbled across the dangerous effects of sound waves at the frequency of seven hertz.
More interesting than ruptured organs to the organisers of the event, which took place on Saturday 31 May, are altered moods and in particular the research of Vic Tandy , who has postulated that infrasound might be at the root of many reported hauntings.
Tandy’s theory goes that around the frequency of 19hz which NASA research in the Sixties discovered to be the frequency at which the eyeball resonates infrasound can cause people to see ghostly apparitions at the periphery of vision and to experience feelings of discomfort and drops in temperature.
It would appear that we have nothing to fear from infrasound but fear itself.
Furthermore, infrasound has long been associated with sacred music, and some of the largest church organs in the world produce profoundly low frequencies at high volumes.
The answers to such questions were what psychologist Richard Wiseman was setting out to discover with this mass experiment.
This event was not just about science, but rather the synthesis of art and science as promoted by the sciart Consortium.
Infrasound has been associated with sacred music Richard Long and Dan Simmonds of the National Physics Laboratory, “the keepers of the decibel”, who had constructed from a length of sewage piping and a subwoofer the real star of the show, the infrasonic generator.
The audience/guinea pigs would be asked to fill out a questionnaire at four separate points during the concert, rating feelings such as excitement, drowsiness and happiness and noting any unusual sensations or experiences.
Infrasound would be present during two of the four pieces and not during the other two.
At a later performance the infrasound pieces would be reversed, thereby establishing a control.
Following a question from the audience, Wiseman informed us that the infrasound would be generated at a frequency of 17hz, thereby disappointing all those who’d come for the constipation cure.
The music was essentially abstract, modem composition, aiming to fuse electronic with classically-derived pieces.
The standout piece of the recital, at least for this humble observer, was Philip Glass’s ‘Metamorphosis Two’, which called to mind collaborator Aphex Twin’s successful adventures with strings and treated piano.
Well, I noted a tightness in my chest and an increased heart rate during the pieces ‘Lo but Hi’ by Hayden Parsey and ‘Toccare’ by Ton Bruynel.
I was slightly disturbed to discover after the event that these were the two compositions from which infrasound was completely absent.
My colleague, despite encouragement to note a desire to kill his father, was troubled only by “slight erotic fantasies about the pianist” during the solo piano piece ‘Techno Etude No 3’ by Karen Tanaka, during which infrasound was played.
One can only conclude that further research into the aphrodisiac qualities of low frequency sound is urgently required.
IH REFERENCE www.infrasonicmusic.co.uk/ A further experiment will take place at the Science Museum IMAX theatre at a date to be confirmed.
He thought that the marvellous moggy was a hybrid of cat and flying squirrel but rose up when she ran.
In 1998, Joyce Harrigan of Letchworth, Hertfordshire, recalled to me that while a teenager in Ashford, Middlesex, during World War II, she knew of a big chubby black-and-white cat that sprouted wings from its shoulders.
The cat was owned by two pensioners, and was often seen in their garden, attracting many people who would look at it over the wall.
Passing a neighbor's yard, 1 saw an orange and white longhaired cat which was positively waddling due to large wing-like growths hanging from its midsection.
It climbed the house porch and a man came out the door, and I walked up to the door and asked about his winged cat.
He told me that this was the way the cat sheds fur in the summer, and that it happens each year. . . . acting like it was so natural and normal that I must have led quite a sheltered life not to have heard of such a thing.
The rectangular fur pads were at least five inches long and three to four inches tall.
They were attached to its torso nearest to the front two legs and felt like cardboard with fur haphazardly glued to it.
I remember the man was saying something about how the pads fall off by themselves but I was so engrossed with the cat that I don't know if he said how long it takes.
I do remember him saying that it doesn't seem to hurt the cat, except for the way the weight makes him waddle.
We moved to another town that winter so I never got to see if the same thing happened the next year.
Another text-book description of FCA. 1998 was clearly the year of the cat , because that was when I also heard of a stuffed New World specimen, via Lynda Brooks of Bumham-on-Crouch, Essex.
During this tour, she came across a very old, stuffed, mounted example, about the size of a year-old domestic cat.
Dark reddish-brown in colour with black tabby-like markings, it had thick coarse fur, and was very slim and wild-looking, with a thin tail, but its most striking features were two bony structures, one on each side of its spine.
Almost shoulder-bladelevel, they were covered with flaps of skin that reminded her of the ear-flaps on a deerstalker hat.
Finally, John Raggatt, a postman from Northwood, Middlesex, revealed to me that in 1998, he had twice spied a black winged cat while delivering mail to a private residential area called Moor Park, just outside Northwood.
The first time was around June, when he saw it walk out of a driveway, across the road, into a front garden, and down the side of the house.
Clearly, although they may not have made the fortean headlines much of late, winged cats are still very much around, and have been for quite some time.
If any FT readers have details of additional cases, we’d love to hear from you.
I wish to thank Janet Bord, Lynda Brooks, Joyce Harrigan, John Raggatt and Jay Allen Sanford for kindly sharing details of the above cases with me.
KARL SHUKER returns to the subject of winged cats now known to be sufferers from feline cutaneous asthenia and unearths some additional cases both old and new.
WINGED CATS, INCLUDING SUCH FAMOUS EXAMPLES AS the Wiveliscombe kitten of 1899, the black-and-white individual on show at Oxford Zoo during the 1930s, and the Manchester builder’s yard moggy publicised during the 1970s, have always been among my favourite fortean creatures, which I have researched in great detail for many years.
Cats exhibiting FCA have abnormally flexible , fragile skin, which if merely rubbed or stroked can stretch out into long furry wing-like extensions along their shoulders, back or haunches.
And because these extensions contain musculature, they can even be raised up and down a little, heightening their superficial resemblance to wings.
Moreover, if stretched too much, these extensions peel off, but without any bleeding, thus giving the impression that the ‘wings’ have moulted.
In recent years, little new material concerning winged cats has been published, but I have continued collecting data concerning these purring paradoxes.
Here is a long-overdue update, which contains a number of previously unpublished cases, or cases hitherto unpublicised in the fortean literature.
This book documents Thoreau’s two years of selfimposed solitary existence in a self-built cabin within a wood by the shores of Walden Pond, in Concord, Massachusetts.
According to Thoreau, a few years before he lived there, what he specifically refers to as a “winged cat” lived in one of the farmhouses in Lincoln nearest the pond.
On 3 August 1894, Cambridgeshire’s Independent Press carried a short item regarding a one-year-old cat “with wings resembling those of a duckling” that was being exhibited locally by David Badcock of the Ship Inn, in Reach.
Apparently, its wings had previously remained unnoticed until it had been roughly handled, whereupon the affronted felid had outspread them.
Accordingly, its owner was now charging tuppence to viewers during the daytime, and had begun touring the nearby villages with his winged protege at night.
A week later, however, the same newspaper reported that Badcock’s lucrative winged cat had been stolen, since when nothing more appears to have been heard of it.
A double curiosity from Matlock was documented by a local Derbyshire newspaper in 1897.
According to the report, this incredible tom had “fully grown pheasant’s wings projecting from each side of its fourth ribs”, which eyewitnesses claimed that it used, outstretched, when running to help it race along at a very fast pace.
As if its “pheasant’s wings” were not remarkable enough, this particular cat was described as being a male tortoiseshell.
If true, it would have been an exceedingly rare individual, because the tortoiseshell condition is due to a sex-linked mutant gene, the result of which is that virtually all tortoiseshell cats are female.
Ralph’s mouth only caught Rimmer’s thick jacket sleeve, so the firefighter wasn’t hurt.
Ralph’s owner, Ryan Roy, said he probably got out through a hole in the screen of his open bedroom window.
Roy had stopped home briefly Monday afternoon from his job as a school custodian and didn’t see Ralph.
After a meal of veggies, an unharmed Ralph sat on his branch and relaxed Tuesday night under a heat lamp, his eyes half open, Roy said.
As for Greener’s iguana, it ran away one winter day at home in Lake Arrowhead, never to return.
Budget cuts will force the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency to consider cutting hours at some state historic sites after the Labor Day weekend.
The agency's budget for historic site operations was cut by $1. million for the fiscal year that started July 1. ilton, Massachusets, seems an unlikely place for a miracle.
A prosperous, white-collar town of 26,062 residents within sight of Bostons skyscrapers, it is an understated community of staid Colonial houses set amid lush gardens on quiet streets.
It seems the embodiment of no-nonsense, strait-laced Yankee sensibility.
Yet in the summer of 2003, it had more in common with 1917 Fatima, Portugal, than Puritanism.
An employee of Milton Hospital, a small, private health-care center surrounded by trees on a quiet hill well off the street, happened to glance up at a window on the top floor of the three-story, brick office building behind the hospital.
For the past five years, this window in an eye doctors office had been clouded by condensation, caused by a leaky seal between the window’s double panes that let in moisture.
But now it appeared that the vapor had somehow morphed into a recognizable image.
The white-and-gray image looked to the employee like a full-length figure of Mary, the mother of Jesus, standing on the globe.
The amazed worker called the local newspaper and reported the apparition on June 10.
Soon the Boston Globe picked up the story, and shortly thereafter the story went worldwide on the Associated Press news 62 ing on the globe of the Earth.
It even looked to me like her gown was blown back against her lower leg by the wind.
Many in the crowd, obviously repeat visitors, talked about how the image had been more detailed in the earlier weeks.
As the security guards stood around with a jaded air, a woman began passing out Xeroxed sheets with lyrics to a hymn.
Information passed through the crowd that at 7m. the rosary would be prayed in seven different languages.
It seems not only do people see what they need to see in the window, they also discern a motivation for the apparition according to their own concerns.
Some hope the image is there to heal people, others While the window at top right reflects a pine tree and sky, the window with the image does not reflect anything. think it’s to promote racial diversity, and some want to make the woman in the window into the poster child for the anti-abortion movement.
As for me, I left Milton Hospital happy to see so many people of different races and ethnicities gathered quietly together, willing to open their minds to the possibility of a spiritual, even paranormal, manifestation.
As far as I’m concerned, that’s miracle enough. t| ' Janet Brennan is a newspaper editor in Portland , Maine.
Inventor Andrew S Hallidie successfully tested a cable car he had designed for the city of San Francisco.
Frontiersman ""Wild Bill"" Hickok was shot and killed while playing poker at a saloon in Deadwood, Dakota Territory, by Jack McCall, who was later hanged.
The original Lincoln ""wheat"" penny first went into circulation, replacing the ""Indian Head"" cent.
The sitting 29th president of the United States, Warren G Harding, died in San Francisco; Vice President Calvin Coolidge became president.
German President Paul von Hindenburg died, paving the way for Adolf Hitler's complete takeover.
Albert Einstein signed a letter to President Franklin D Roosevelt urging creation of an atomic weapons research program.
President Roosevelt signed the Hatch Act, which prohibited civil service employees from taking an active part in political campaigns.
John F Kennedy, sank after being rammed in the middle of the night by the Japanese destroyer Amagiri off the Solomon Islands.
President Harry S Truman, Soviet leader Josef Stalin and British Prime Minister Clement Attlee concluded the Potsdam conference.
The destroyer USS Maddox suffered light damage during a skirmish with North Vietnamese patrol torpedo boats in the Gulf of Tonkin.
Former White House counsel John W Dean III was sentenced to one to four years in prison for obstruction of justice in the Watergate coverup.
President George W Bush urged creation of a national intelligence director to coordinate the war on terrorism but without the sweeping powers for hiring, firing and spending recommended by the Sept. commission.
Turkish truckers stopped hauling goods for United States forces in Iraq after the shooting of a Turkish hostage was shown on the Internet.
Police in Salt Lake City arrested Mark Hacking, whose wife, Lori, had disappeared.
A mystery from the 1991 Gulf War was finally solved as the Pentagon announced that the remains of missing Navy pilot Michael ""Scott"" Speicher had been found.
The United States issued an extraordinary global travel warning to Americans about the threat of an al-Qaida attack and closed down 21 embassies and consulates across the Muslim world for the weekend.
Scotland’s Parliament abolishes papal jurisdiction and approves a Calvinistic confession of faith, thus founding the Church of Scotland.
Henry III, the last of the Valois line of French kings, is fatally stabbed by a Jacobin monk while laying siege to Paris, occupied by Catholic rebels.
The British Parliament moves to Oxford to save itself from decimation as the black plague rages through London, killing thousands each week.
The first United States census is completed; showing a population of 4 million people.
Britain’s Admiral Horatio Nelson destroys French fleet in Battle of the Nile, stranding Napoleon Bonaparte and his forces in Egypt.
Jerome Bonaparte becomes King of Westphalia, created from former Prussian possessions west of Elbe River.
British troops land in Portugal to help oust French forces, succeeding a year later.
Germany declares war on Russia at the start of World War I 1927 : Communists rise in Nanchang, China, and hold the city for a few days.
The event is now celebrated as the origin of the People’s Liberation Army.
The Olympic games open in Berlin with a ceremony presided over by Adolf Hitler.
The people of Warsaw rise against the Nazis, in the hope of liberating the city before the arrival of the Red Army.
United States Defense Department begins to pullout almost 3,000 United States troops from Vietnam.
Leaders of 35 nations meet in Helsinki, Finland, and affirm a peace charter in Europe.
An explosion by the Irish Republican Army kills a British soldier at an army barracks in London and wounds 10 others.
The attack was the first by the IRA on the British mainland since 1984.
Talks between Iraq and Kuwait over oil and border disputes break off, with 100,000 Iraqi troops massed on the Kuwaiti border.
A Swiss woman, Bea Wyler, 44, becomes Germany’s first female rabbi since the Holocaust.
Rocket fire sends more than 7,000 Cambodian refugees fleeing to Thailand as forces of coup leader Hun Sen attack rival bases along the border.
Milan Kovacevic, a Serb doctor implicated in some 2,000 deaths in concentration camps during the Bosnia-Herzegovina war, dies of a heart attack weeks after the start of his trial on war crimes charges in The Hague, Netherlands.
Palestine Liberation Organization leader Yasser Arafat meets with the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, a leftist Palestinian faction opposed to the peace process.
Britain’s Queen Mother Elizabeth is hospitalized for treatment of anemia, three days before her 101st birthday.
Azerbaijan switches to the Latin alphabet from Cyrillic to reduce Russian influence on Azeri culture.
Iraqi Foreign Minister Naji Sabri invites United Nations weapons inspectors to visit Iraq for the first time since 1998.
A suicide bomber driving an explosives-laden truck in Russia smashes through the gates of a military hospital in the southern republic of North Ossetia and kills 50 people.
Assailants trigger a coordinated series of explosions outside five churches in Baghdad and Mosul during evening services, killing 11 people and injuring more than 50 others in the first major assault on Iraq’s Christian minority since the 15month-old insurgency began.
Southern Sudanese riot in Khartoum, smashing cars and shops and blaming the government for the death in a helicopter crash of their hero, Vice President John Garang.
A bridge in Minneapolis jammed with rush-hour traffic suddenly breaks into huge sections and collapses into the Mississippi River, pitching dozens of cars 60 feet into the water and killing at least four people.
Iran state TV confirms that Tehran has detained three Americans who crossed the border from northern Iraq, saying they failed to heed warnings from Iranian guards.
The death toll from massive floods in northwestern Pakistan rises to 1,100 as rescue workers struggle to save more than 27,000 people still trapped by the raging water.
The U.N, chief urges some 1,200 Iranian exiles to follow orders to leave a camp in northern Iraq, the site of two deadly raids by Iraqi forces, and resettle in a new refugee camp near Baghdad.
Russia defies the United States and grants Edward Snowden temporary asylum, allowing the National Security Agency leaker to slip out of Moscow airport where he has been hold up for weeks in hopes of evading espionage charges back home.
Old Brutus Australian Outback Battle By Hannah Osborne August 6, 2014 10:22 BST Takes his Revenge on Shark in A 5. metre long crocodile attacks a bull shark in the Adelaide River in Kakadu, Australia The it Andrew Paice/Getty Images crocodile forced the bull shark into the mangroves and devoured A monster crocodile has been pictured swallowing a four-foot bull shark whole on a riverbank in northern Australia.
Brutus, an 18ft crocodile believed to be more than 80 years old, has been a popular attraction with tourists visiting Adelaide River.
However, the 25 tourists on the river cruise got more than they bargained for when they spotted Brutus feasting on a shark.
He then went back into the mangroves like he was ""The shark was still alive.
Brutus is easily identifiable by not only his huge size, but by his missing front leg believed to haw been lost in a shark attack many years ago.
In 2011 , he made headlines after bursting out of the water right beside a river cruise.
Lured by a dangling piece of kangaroo meat, the two-tonne monster jumped out of the water, giving onlookers quite a shock.
Who Will be Next 2 of 3 8/6/2014 6:46 PM North Smithfield, Rh ode Island : Vampire's Grasp Grave of Simon Whipple is), but his tombstone inscription mentioning a ""vampire victim of an immortal blood-drinker.
You may also be familiar with the stones involving the 1 figfrgate Vampire and the Vampire Of Croglin Grange.
There have been a few other vampire related tales the fit right along with the more famous narratives. . .though these were part of law enforcement investigations.
THE ATLAS VAMPIRE On May 1, 1932, a 32-year-old prostitute, Lilly Lindestrom was discussing plans for the evening’s May Day celebrations with her friend Minnie Jansson, a 35-year-old w r oman who lived on the same floor and made her living in the same way.
Lilly was nicknamed the “call girl” because she was the only person in the building with a phone.
Lilly received a call from a potential client, asking if he could come over.
On 4 May 1 932, Lilly was found dead in her flat in the Sankt Eriksplan district of Stockholm, Sweden.
Minnie said Lilly had to her apartment twice one evening to borrow condoms.
On the second occasion, around 9 PM, Lilly was totally naked beneath her coat.
Minnie became concerned after ringing Lilly’s doorbell and getting no reply.
Lilly was found lying dead on the sofa, her clothes neatly folded on a chair nearby.
Further inspection revealed that the blood had been drained from Lilly’s body, and the killer had used the ladle to drink it.
Eighty of Lilly’s customers were investigated, but no suspects were revealed.
Minnie hadn’t recognized the voice on the phone from what she’d heard, but she commented that the man had seemed sober and polite.
There didn’t seem to be any fingerprints on any of the suspicious items at the scene.
One theory was that the killer was a police officer who had bludgeoned Lilly with his truncheon and knew how to cover his tracks.
The body of Petre Toma had been unearthed six weeks later by his brother-in-law in the presence of several other members of the family, including his widow and her grand-daughter.
According to several testimonies, they made an incision in the chest of Toma to extract his heart before burning it.
One report states that, in accordance with a local custom to protect against vampires, they dissolved the ashes in water and drank it.
According to her, as soon as the exorcism ritual was performed the dead body “did not come any more to haunt” its family.
THE NEW ORLEANS VAMPIRE MURDERS In 1984 nine people were found dead in various sections of the French Quarter of New Orleans They all had been murdered by having their throats tom out.
The paramedics responding to the scenes were struck by the fact that there was no blood at the scenes. . . something or someone had simply sucked all the blood directly from the victims.
Police to this day do not have a suspect in this case. . . .the murder spree ended as quickly as it had began.
Rumors suggested that it was the work of a rogue vampire that was destroyed by the elder vampire sect of New Orleans because of pressure placed by authorities on the known vampire community in city.
In 1933, on two different nights, police were called to Royal Street where on each night young prostitutes were found laying in a alley with their throats tom out.
Both women had been dead only a few minutes when they were found but no blood was found at the scenes.
A local resident who lived above one of the murder scenes claimed a dark figure was observed leaning over one of the victims and people began to scream for police.
The witness said the dark figure had climbed over a 12 foot wall at the end of the alley with little effort.
It appeared to the witness that the dark figure was a man dressed in a black cape and hat.
The family name was Alfort and there were rumors that they had descended from royalty.
They bought land by the river and built what was then a very nice large southern colonial home.
Alfort opened up an office and phannacy in a few rooms in the front of the house.
The local people were at first really happy that a new doctor had arrived in their community. . .but very quickly this attitude was about to change.
Two men both who had gone to the new doctor to be treated for gout suddenly died.
Both men had been well liked members of tire community and the circumstances angered many of the residents.
However in a short time the local minister had brokered peace in the community and everything seemed to be fine.
That Fall the young daughter of the minister was found dead in her bed with puncture marks to her throat.
The minister’s wife swore she had seen a dark form hovering over her daughter and she screamed but it was too late and the child quickly succumb to the attack.
The incident caused a huge outcry in the town and the people of the area started to claim a vampire or a group of vampires was in their midst.
For many nights groups of men ventured out and searched but found nothing.
However some men claimed to have seen a large black bat-like creature fly over them.
A few nights after the sighting a young boy ran down the Ml to his grandfather’s house and proclaimed that something was up Hie hill in his house attacking his parents.
The grandfather summoned other men and they ran to the house but only found the parents and then two young daughters, who were dead with puncture wounds to their necks.
The area was immediately alerted. . .soldiers were called in and searched the area.
Then one evening screams were heard and when men arrived they witnessed a black form of a human run from the house, run down the hill and into the Alfort house.
When the village men went into the house where the screams had come from they found the bodies of a young couple with vicious bite marks to their throats.
Almost at once more men came and they were told that the murderer had ran down the hill and into the Alfort house.
The upstairs bedrooms each had beds but it was clear that no one had slept in them.
When the sheriff and search party went downstairs they found three caskets and Mrs.
Alfort, who was dressed in black, lying in one of the caskets and very much alive.
Later that night the sheriff and the village minister announced to the crowff assembled outside the Alfort house that the Alforts and their son were vampires.
The Alforts were summarily hanged and then placed back inside the house.
However the couple’s 1 5 year old son was not found and never seen in the area again.
His household, his family, and his live stock, and possibly even the live stock of the whole village, die off rapidly. 2.
He may eat what he finds in dishes and knock things about, or he may help with the housework and cut wood.
There was a Hungarian vampire which could not be kept away, even by the priest and holy water. 3.
A hole about the size of a serpent may be found near the tombstone of the dead man.
If so, it is a sign of a vampire, because vampires come out of graves by just such holes. 5.
Even in the daytime a white horse will not walk over the grave of a vampire, but stands still and snorts and neighs. 6.
If it has only spoilt and mined things at home, and eaten what it could find, the mouth will be covered with maize meal.
According to a recent sound test before about 1 80 people, two fungi infested violins bested a multi-million dollar Stradivarius.
Ninety nine percent of wood-attacking fungi create loose and soft wood that has strange acoustic properties.
By measuring how sound echoes through a tree, scientists can get a good idea of how healthy the tree is.
While using sound waves to check up on trees, Schwarze noted that a handful of fungal infections didn't produce widespread rot.
The density of the wood decreased slightly, but the speed of sound remained the same.
The top and bottom plates of a violin are made using two different kinds of wood.
Physisporinus vitreus for the spruce, and Xylaria longipes Nitschke (also known as Dead Moll's Fingers) for the sycamore.
The fungi grows from the rock slate into the wood, degrading the pit membranes on both sapwood and heart wood but leaving the majority of the wood unaffected.
Generally speaking, the wood sounds warmer, a combination of increasing the dampening factor that makes high notes more palatable to the ear, and an increase in the radiation ratio, or the ratio of the speed of sound to the density of the wood.
According to Schwarze, treating the wood with fungi artificially recreates the structure of the wood that was naturally occurring during Antonio Giacomo Stradivarius's lifetime.
The Little Ice Age, a period of abnormally cool weather between 1645 to 1715, made trees create more uniform wood.
Treating wood with the fungus artificially recreates wood similar to that which was created in the Little Ice Age.
Two violins were created using wood from the same tree but not treated with the fungus.
Three violins were made from wood treated with the fungi for six, nine and 12 months.
Only the violins treated for six and nine months were used in the testing.
The violin treated for twelve months developed cracks during production and was discarded.
Using the four violins, two treated and two untreated, and a Stradivarius valued at $2 million, British violinist Matthew Trusler played for an audience of more than 1 80 people earlier this month at a forestry conference.
More than 90 people ranked the bioviolin treated for nine months as the Stradivarius.
Matthew Trusler's real Stradivarius came in second, followed by the violin treated for six months.
Whether the violin is an original Stradivarius or made from fungus-treated wood, it takes a master violinist to bring out a violin's complete promise.
A great violin ""cannot be accomplished with one or another secret chemical or biological application,"" said Wiebe.
The cows, calves and a prize bull were crowded together under some small crabapple trees when the lightning struck, said rancher Jean Taylor.
The cast iron pillar, which has never corroded, is 23ft high and weighs more than six tonnes.
Theories explaining the mysterious properties of the pillar are legion, but Ramamurthy Balasubramaniam of the Indian Institute of Technology has discovered that a thin layer of 'misawite' (iron hydrogen phosphate hydrate) has protected the monument, preventing the iron from reacting with oxygen to form rust.
A film formed over the pillar within three years of its erection and has been growing ever since after 1,600 years the layer is just onetwentieth of a millimetre thick.
A report published in the journal Current Science suggests that the film was formed by high amounts of phosphorous in the iron as much as one per cent against less than 0.05 per cent in modern iron.
In modern furnaces, iron ore is heated with coking coal and limestone to make pig iron.
The limestone helps to remove phosphorus, but the ancient Indian iron smiths didn't use limestone, so the phosphorus would have remained.
Imagine Pinocchio becoming a real boy and then going back to being a puppet.
You can see it here, circled in blue ... i urn wood Lewbeach^ East Branch Peak-^Sft^ V ville J Cooks Falls kland Debruce Acidalia Willov Wti ii a* ivingston i Manor Cooley C ■ em&t Tennansn Fremont Cen Parksville Mileses Callicoi talker Youngsville N Branch Loomis Braman ... just up the road from Roscoe and Rockland.
In the 1930s , there was no town on that stretch between Rockland and nearby Beaverkill — just a dirt road.
Pirate-Protected Maps Companies that create maps get their work copied all the time.
You check spellings, you work on the colors, you get all the cities in the right place, and along comes a gas company, or a tourism agency; it takes what you’ve done, slaps its own name on it.
Because there's a real world out there, obviously maps are going to be identical.
So we're only guilty of describing the same world the other map described.
Jurors think, "" Hmm sounds reasonable,"" and the pirates get away with it.
Inventing Agloe That's what , director of the General Drafting Co., and his assistant, Ernest Alpers, did in the 1 930s.
The Telltale General Store Rand McNally told the court that its designers went to the official map of that county, looked up the coordinates, and on the spot called Agloe they found a building, and that building, they told the judge, is the Agloe General Store.
The owners had seen Agloe on a map distributed by Esso, which owned scores of gas stations.
If Esso says this place is called Agloe, the store folks figured, well, that's what we'll call ourselves.
So, a made-up name for a made-up place inadvertently created a real place that, for a time, really existed.
LLI Navigeren Jacobs says, ""n arrow still lands in the spot where Messrs.
Lindberg and Alpers placed it, long after the general store there has gone.
So, as of last week, when I wrote this post, Google was perpetuating an 80-year-old fantasy that for a short time turned real, then unreal.
And so, instead of a Google Gotcha post, you are now attending an instant online funeral for a town that never was, then was, then wasn't and now isn't.
So, I ask you to stand silently, think of the late Otto Lindberg and the late Ernest Alpers, who gave their initials so that Agloe might be; think of the proprietors of the Agloe General Store, and of the Somebody at Google, who, apparently, reads Frank Jacobs' blog, Strange Maps, and reacts faster than I do.
Untitled How to know if you are dealing with a demonic entity May 15, 6:19 PM • Add a Comment Back in the early 80s when I had my first experiences with possession and Exorcism, I was very curious and critical about how my mentors came to the conclusion that their clients were indeed under demonic influence.
Back then my experience with Exorcism was based solely on a few Missionary stories and the movie ‘The Exorcist’. when in these sessions of power encounter I was a bit disappointed.
I was expecting incredible paranormal phenomena with these incidents of Exorcism.
But there were no heads turning around, levitation or glowing red eyes.
There were incidents of bizarre personality shifts, people speaking in foreign languages which they had no knowledge of previously, and drastic temperature changes in the room as the ceremony was performed, while these were remarkable in and of themselves, it did not meet my expectations.
As time went by and I was exposed to various other techniques for performing other ceremonies and other spiritual interventions I came to understand that while astonishing paranormal activity can manifest itself during an Exorcism or confrontation with a demonic entity, it is a rarity and not a common experience.
Today we live in a time of growing interest in the paranormal, with new investigative teams appearing on every front.
Staged television shows that seem to produce dramatic encounters with the dark entities have given today’s generation an unrealistic view and the rare is now expected to be common place.
Along with this revived interest in the paranormal have come the hucksters and con-men just as they had in the height of the Spiritualism movement of the 1800s.
Self proclaimed professionals with limited or no professional training or experience have set themselves on a pedestal with internet degrees that any grade school kid could attain.
Some claim expertise in the field for such a length of time that they must have been gifted toddlers when they were first trained in demonic deliverance or paranormal investigations. lust like cult leaders leading the innocents astray some of these self proclaimed experts on the demonic will gather a faithful following.
When questioned about their training they rely upon their degrees or nebulous credentials.
If you question the credentials you are either accused of religious bias or self serving motives.
There are a lot of people out there in the paranormal community who are teaching others or performing rituals who have no idea what they are doing.
But hey, as a clergyman who has ministered in Evangelical, Mainline and Non-Denomi national churches I have to say from personal experience the same thing happens in the church.
I have met some ministers who have had no formal training but can preach, teach and lead better than most who have had the training.
But more often than not those ministers who I have met who had no formal training were often not only leading their flock astray with heresy, but were in it for the power of the position.
Such is the case with the current crop of paranormal experts as well, while I have met many demonologists and exorcists without formal training who know what they are talking about and humbly serve, I have found many who are self aggrandized and self serving.
They are also in it for the power of the position, in their everyday life they have no control or power and they find it in their role as a demonologist , exorcist or paranormal expert.
Such is life anywhere you might look, but the problem in this happening in the paranormal community is that false assumptions can be codified just by positions of power.
So many paranormal investigators who actually might have a case of demonic Page 1 Untitled influence might not understand just what they are encountering.
Along with stories of the unexplained I will take one report a month and delve into the area of practical demonology and Exorcism, while not focusing on its practicality for paranormal investigations, the average team should be able to glean some useful information from my diatribes.
Please be advised that my worldview is from a historical conservative Protestant Christian perspective.
Within this sphere I am a Reformed theologian who believes in a second act of grace that comes with the struggle to maintain personal piety.
If you are not Christian, you can transpose these to your faith if you wish.
Someone who is possessed by a demonic presence will not abide Scripture.
They will also show an aversion to holy items such as a cross, crucifix or holy water.
There might be physical manifestations such as poltergeist activity or temperature change and auditory manifestations.
They do not manifest themselves in the everyday life except for rare occasions.
These personalities are not human characters but rather primal forces with intellect and malice. 3) voice Change More than often this occurs with the multiple personalities the demonic manifests.
The person makes a very unusual and seemingly impossible voice, sometimes the voice may seem to be coming from many places or from multiple people with an echo.
Not always a ‘demonic’ bass voice like in popular fiction, this voice can be high pitched or whispery.
The most common is the growl, but more than naught it is not a supernatural voice.
Sometimes the possessed will eat something unimaginable and indigestible, or their tastes of cuisine will become dramatically altered.
If there are Page 2 Untitled letters or words make sure that there is no evidence of tampering by the victim or others and that it is a real supernatural experience.
However all the above are indeed paranormal in and of themselves, a physical manifestation seems to be extreme behavior and often by an entity that wishes to induce fear in the heart of the Exorcist and his/her team.
Contrary to popular thought it usually is a last resort by a less powerful entity which is itself frightened by the prospect of being once again disembodied.
This is by no means a complete list, but the categories are the most commonly encountered by those who have had actual experiences in power encounters with malevolent entities.
Spurred by this, Russell duly spent four days searching the same area earlier this year, and was thrilled to hear on one occasion a sound that he believes may have been the call of an ivory-bill.
Russell now plans to mount a return expedition in October to pursue the ivory-bill mystery further. www.newportthisweek.eom/news/2003/ 0424/Front_ Page/001 Mail 25 April 2003.
Cut marks crisscrossing the skull and jaw of the girl indicate her flesh, tongue and brains were removed from the skull, Owsley said.
Those were traditional cuts for animal butchery of the time, ""all parts of the cuisine of the 17 th century,"" he said.
The starving time was a period two years later in which 80% of the colonists died.
Besieged by Powhatan Indians in their wooden fort, the settlers had been joined by new colonists late that summer, among them women and children, whose main supply ship had disappeared in a storm, leaving them without food.
Cannibalism at Jamestown confirmed Owsley reported on the forensic analysis of 1 7th century human remains and a reconstruction of her appearance made by forensic scientists.
The remains had been excavated by Jamestown archaeologists led by William Kelso of the Jamestown Recovery Project in 2012 as part of a 20year excavation of the James Fort site.
This April 20 13 photo shows a forensic fecial reconstruction produced by StudioEIS of Brooklyn, N.Y., in consultation with William Kelso of the Jamestown Rediscovery Project.
While not all colonialera historians agreed that 1/2 5/1/13 Jamestown cannibalism confirmed by skull from ’Jane’ Smithsonian) cannibalism took place at Jamestown, most modem ones generally credited the accounts as reliable.
Horn and Owsley argued the butchery marks on Jane provide stronger evidence for the practice.
In the briefing, he identified a number of features on the skull and a shin bone that indicated that Jane was cannibalized.
Four shallow chops to the forehead were attempted in a first, foiled attempt to open the skull.
The final blow split the cranium opea 'The person doing this was not a very good, or experienced butcher,"" Owsley said.
Chop marks on the shin bone resemble more conventional butchers' marks seen on animal bones from the time, indicating that more than one person may have been involved in cannibalizing the girl She was doubtless one of the newly arrived settlers, though still not definitively identified.
It seems almost axiomatic that new technology is always an improvement on the old.
But in the case of a discovery made by archaeologists at the excavation site of the 1607 James Fort on Jamestown Island, Virginia, evidence was uncovered that proves that, sometimes, the opposite is true.
In 2005, a complete jack-of-plates was uncovered from a soldier's pit near the traces of a wall of the early fort.
The jack-of plates was a piece of body armor, in appearance like a jacket, that provided protection through the use of many small overlapping plates, as many as 1,000, made of iron and sewn between layers of fabric.
This form of body armor was used as far back as the 14th century, but by 1607 in Europe, the time of the construction of the early James Fort in North America by British colonists, the solid iron breastplate was the most commonly used succeeding technology.
But here in Virginia they were very effective against arrows,"" he said.
So the solution was found in the more flexible and effective jack-of-plates.
Above, a suit of armor that included a typical single-piece iron breastplate.
Wikimedia Commons Above, an example of an early 1 7th century jack-of-plates.
Wikimedia Commons Now, Gamble is at work carefully revealing and restoring the jack, a process requiring specialized tools, careful hands, and great patience.
The artifact, currently encased in a soil matrix that was lifted from the original location and brought back to the lab in 2005, will take more than half a year to see the full light of day.
Experts believe weather and water conditions in the breeding grounds, off the coast of China, have been ideal for the jellyfish in recent months.
Namesake Japanese fishing village celebrates United States election result (/news /worldnews/northamerica/usa/barackobama/3383667/Barack-Obama-victory-Namesake-Japanese-fishing-villagecelebrates-US-election-result.html) The crew of the fishing boat was thrown into the sea when the vessel capsized, but the three men were rescued by i ihii I I II II I 1 1 II II i i$ o -rei)QiyiiiMagn«aE ihuvXji e 1 . i 1 1 7 h«t uek >i® 1 1 is s s i <h«j ueh nil 'A* hdub 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 i-EsrqHWimwi'M another trawler, according to the Mainichi newspaper.
The local Coast Guard office reported that the weather was clear and the sea was calm at the time of the accident.
One of the largest jellyfish in the world, the species can grow up to 2 meters in diameter.
The last time Japan was invaded on a similar scale, in the summer of 2005, the jellyfish damaged nets, rendered fish inedible with their toxic stings and even caused injuries to fishermen.
Relatively little is known about Nomura's jellyfish, such as why some years see thousands of the creatures floating across the Sea of Japan on the Tsushima Current, but last year there were virtually no sightings.
In 2007, there were 15,500 reports of damage to fishing equipment caused by the creatures.
Experts believe that one contributing factor to the jellyfish becoming more frequent visitors to Japanese waters may be a decline in the number of predators, which include sea turtles and certain species of fish.
A river hag , similar to Peg Powler or a qrindvlow , she would pull childrenor the elderly into the water and drown them.
She was often described as green-skinned, with long hair, and sharp teeth.
She is likely to have been an invention to frighten children from dangerous waters similar to the Slavic Rusalka , the Kappa in Japanese mythology, or Australia’s Bunyip , but other folklorists have seen her as a memory of sacrificial practices.
She is said to live at the fountainhead of largerivers in Jamaica sitting on top of a rock, combing her long black hair with a gold comb.
She usually appears at midday and she disappears if she observes anyone approaching.
However, if an intruder sees her first and their eyes meet, terriblethings will happen to the intruder.
The name is also used to describe pondweed or duckweed , which can form a continuous mat over the surface of a smallbody of water, making it misleading and potentially treacherous, especially to unwary children.
Another informant, however, said Ginny ’had no known form, due to the fact that she never appeared above the surface of the pond.
A river hag , similar to Peg Powler or a grindylow , she would pull children or the elderly into the water and drown them.
She is called Jinny Greenteeth in Lancashire , but in Cheshire and Shropshire she is called Ginny Greenteeth, Jeannie Greenteeth, Wicked Jenny, or Peg o’ Nell.
With this meaning the name is common around Liverpool and south west Lancashire.
Jenny Greenteeth is a well known figure that is part of the English folklore.
The tradition says it lived in a river in Yorkshire, and that it was a very bad spirit of rivers.
The story tells that some time ago there was a family with a mother, a father, a son, a daughter and a grandmother who was crazy.
The mother and children were engaged to collect the vegetables from the fields, the father took care of the wood, to check the traps and collecting any prey to take water from the well, and the grandmother had the task of tidying up the house and cook.
During summer the family could get along without much trouble, but in winter the food was scarce and all went hungry.
One day the son asked why it was not possible to fish from the river to have more food and grandmother slapped him and replied that he was crazy and that nobody went into the river because here there was Jenny Greenteeth.
The boy asked who this Jenny Greenteeth was and grandmother laughed at the ignorance of the young man and told him it was a creature that seized and drown anyone looking into the river.
Once caught the evil creature killed the poor unfortunates and ate all their meat to the bone.
The young man laughed and denigrated her grandmother, who is even more angry and told him to be careful because Jenny Greenteeth was ready at all times.
Its favorites preys were the young people and children because more tender and tasty to eat.
The boy paid no attention to what her grandmother had told him and as the winter continued to advance and the food scarce, he decided to take care of everything.
He remained for some time on the shore, but strangely did not see any fish pass so while he was searching the waters saw one stranded in some green algae.
He tried to take it and pull it out of the water, but seemed anchored to the seabed, so he pulled harder and harder until he managed to detach the algae and the fish escaped.
Looking better he find out that were no algae, but long green arms with long nails and that they were attached to a body under water.
He also saw a grinning face and was pulled into the river where he drowned.
Elsewhere in England is also known by other names like Ginny, Jenny Wicked o’Nell or Peg.
Its name is also used to identify a type of plant that can completely cover an entire pool of water and that makes it very dangerous, especially for children.
Still today, mothers tell their children the story of Jenny Greenteethto persuade them to stay away from rivers.
The moral of all Jenny Greenteeth stories is to stay away from rivers and lakes, and it is thought that she was the imagined creation of mothers who wanted to warn their children away from the water's edge with frightening tales.
Her stories may have also derived from duckweed, an aqueous plant that wraps its tendrils around one's leg and traps them under water.
While most stories paint Jenny Greenteeth in morbid, unredeeming tones, some tales show a somewhat tender-albeit mislleading-side to the Greentoothed Woman.
In these accounts she uses her long bony arms to embrace her victims, stroking them with her sharp fingernails until they fall into a deep sleep whereupon she devours them.
Schlosser Upon hearing the sad melody, sailors had one last chance to turn back before she would strike.
Superstitions regarding water have been passed down over centuries, and we may take part in some of these customs without even knowing their origins.
For instance, throwing coins into a well in exchange for a wish resembles the custom begun thousands of years ago, when people tossed offerings into the wells to appease the gods and ensure the continuance of the water.
The Tweed River in Scotland was said to be subdued by one casting salt over its waters with nets.
There is a tradition of decorating wells with pictures of flowers that may have Victorian origins, or may even trace back to the days of the Black Death.
Some villages credited their escape to their sweet water, and to this day they dress their wells to protect it.
There is no protection, though, against the wicked Greentoothed Woman once you are within her grasp.
Like the tale of Jenny Greenteeth, all these superstitions are messages used by our ancestors to warn us against the danger of water.
Some people believe the Turin Shroud to have been Christ's burial cloth, but others believe it is a fake.
The newly found doth has a simpler weave than Turin's, the scientists say.
The body of a man wrapped in fragments of the shroud was found in a tomb dating from the time of Jesus near the Old City of Jerusalem.
The tomb is part of a cemetery called the Field of Blood, where Judas Iscariot is said to have committed suicide.
They say he was wrapped in a cloth made of a simple two-way weave, very different to the complex weave of the Turin Shroud.
As a result, they conclude that the Turin Shroud did not originate from lst-Century Jerusalem.
Tests 20 years ago dated the fabric to the Middle Ages, but believers say the cloth, which bears the imprint of a man's face, is an authentic image of Christ.
The nightmarish forces that haunted the waking hours of ancient man were believed to be susceptible to iron’s magic power, whether it took the form of the horseshoe attacked to the cottage door or a knight secreted beneath it.
According to the Roman historian Plin, iron coffin nails on the lintel of the door provided protection against all wandering spirits.
A form of white magic employed against suspected witches until well into the 19th century, consisted of filling a bottle with pins and heating it intensely.
This had the effect of so tormenting the hag that she was compelled to relinquishing her hold on her victim.
Equally potent and still observed in modem Italy is the custom of touching cold iron to counteract the Evil Eye.
In the same vein is a jettatore, an individual with the power to ‘fascinate’ or cast the Evil Eye, can also be overcome by the jangling of iron keys, since to a devil the very sound of iron is anathema.
Even in the 20th century, the hapless King Alfonso of Spain, a notorious jettatore, was embarrassed by the constant jangling of iron keys wherever he traveled in Italy.
He eventually realised that he could do had th' a h , 1S father who to d hlm tbat a birthmark was a Three murderers who went to any lengths to satisfy their greed.
Dorothy Puente, Michael Abdul Malik and acid bath slayer 'sz r ,otn a re,p “* bk ' label him a vampire.
SZS dt^7by ^ ,h “ appearin8 ' bonkers ' an,i ssr’^-' 1 ” «*^»-« *<^-«*. b^ ta... with the marriage on 6 July 1934.
Beatrice gave birth to a baby officially wed because he already had a wife afthe time.
V ° nC6 m ° re> f ° he by telbn8 her that they were never "" priS ° n for mainly ^udulem practices that involved McSwan tufd his T TTT ** ™ by a ^ Willia ™ ‘Mac’ Donald sotry to see him leave when he decided he wanted glittering pries' dsewtefe""' 8 ’ Pr ° m ° ,ed h ‘ m “ ^ busi "" eSS and were bc^iaSS liThoXp lh“ bSmetcT T* Wm ^ * WaS while he ""« go after rich, older women.
October 16, 2008 RTAINMENT Kern was home to sea of shanties BY GEORGE GILBERT LYNCH Contributing writer Thousands of immigrant families in Kern County strived to exist during the 1930s.
Families lived in squatters camps, ranch-operated housing, city-sponsored camps and federal government camps.
This camp was depicted in the book and movie “The Grapes Of Wrath,” where the Joad family heard the place was going to be burned out that night.
In reality, it wasn't burned and it increased in size as more families moved from the Midwest.
The Kern County Public Health Department assessed the camp’s health conditions.
Residents were allowed to move to approved sanitary facilities such as the Arvin, Shafter and Visalia Federal Camps.
Another large camp, called “Little Oklahoma,” was located at Brundage Lane and Cottonwood Road.
It was surrounded by a slaughter house and stockyards, a tallow rendering facility, and the county sewer farm.
As the Great Depression deepened in the early '30s, Kern County established a transient camp at the old fairgrounds on North Get your ‘Okie’ on at Dust Bowl Days THE BAKERSFIELD CALIFORNIAN Dust Bowl Days, a celebration of the “Okie” migrant experience, an integral part of Bakersfield and Kern’s history, has been taking place since 1990.
This year is no exception, so get out the of jalopy and head on down to Weedpatch, just south of Lamont for the fun.
Special attractions * Authors Gerald Haslaiti, Rick Wartzman, Jerry Stanley, Elizabeth Strickland, the widow of “Oklahoma Cookin’” author John Day and others will be there to meet the public and sell and sign their books.
Beans % and corn bread, biscuits and gravy, homemade cobblers and other Okie foods will be available for purchase.
Residents worked in exchange for room and board by clearing vegetation from the Kern River bed for flood control.
Kern County also purchased property near Weedpatch to build a transient camp.
In 1935, the federal government bought the Weedpatch Camp as an experiment.
It was the beginning for dozens of these settlements built in California by the Works Progress Administration.
For 10 cents a day, a family received tent space, sanitary facilities, electricity, a garden plot and news of jobs.
We always had a grand time in their swimming hole and running and roller skating on the wooden dance pavilion.
After World War II began, these government-funded communities were gradually eliminated.
War time jobs became plentiful and nothing remained of the Great Depression and the Dust Bowl except in our memories.
George Gilbert Lynch is a member of the Kern County Historical Society and writes about local history.
Scientist By IBTimes Staff Reporter | October 10, 2011 3:02 PM EDT An unusual Triassic burial site has scientists postulating the existence of a massive octopus-like creature similar to the mythological Kraken.
Mount Holyoke College paleontologist Mark McMenamin formulated the theory after exploring a Nevada site containing the remains of nine ichthyosaurs, massive creatures that once dominated the oceanic food chain.
That had McMenamin wondering whether a larger, intelligent predator may have neatly organized the bones.
The modern octopus is known to shuffle bones around purposefully, leading McMenamin to theorize that the icthyosaurs could have been stalked by a huge, intelligent invertebrate like the kraken of lore.
The proposed kraken would have been the most intelligent invertebrate ever.
McMenamin said that there is precedent for a confrontation similar to a kraken-like creature attacking the dangerous icthyosaur, noting that the staff of the Seattle Aquarium recently discovered their sharks were being killed by an octopus that shared their tank.
The kraken is a recurrent figure in Scandinavian lore, usually described as a titanic octopus-like creature that preys on ships.
It later made its way into some earlier scientific classifications of animals.
Maybe you didn’t hear about it, but the release from prison of Mariusz T., dubbed 'the Satan of Piotrkow’ for raping and murdering four young boys in 1988, had Polish parents and commentators in an uproar.
The current location of Mariusz T., now 52, remains undisclosed to protect his safety as the court decides whether he still poses a threat to society.
It’s a far cry from the fate of this city’s own serial killer, Karol Kot, known as the Vampire of Krakow.
Twenty years before Mariusz T’s, crimes, Kot ended his final interview by declining to give a message to his victims and their families.
In a way, the story of Kot’s spree of violence, which had begun four years prior, in the autumn of 1964, reads like a grotesque twist on the tragicomic exploits of any awkward and over zealous teenager.
He had planned to wait in a church for an elderly parishioner, knife concealed in hand.
It was only as he was leaving, frustrated, that he chanced upon his first victim, 48-year-old Helena W He stabbed her several times in the back and fled, licking the blood from the blade.
He finally succeeded with his third victim, another elderly churchgoer.
He was only a child when, bored on a family trip to Pcim, he wandered into a local slaughter house, where they allowed him to assist in the killing and watched in bemusement as he drank the warm blood from a cup.
He then began abusing the family cat, as well as slaughtering frogs, chickens, crows, moles and calves for fun.
Dreaming of enlisting in the army, he learned knife throwing and karate and was the star of the local shooting club.
He didn’t know that his son was on my execution list” Kot changed tack, experimenting with fire and poison.
He frequented popular pubs on the weekend and left out drinks laced with lethal doses of arsenic, hoping someone would take the bait.
Unsuccessful, too, was a similar attempt to tempt a girl he fancied with a poisoned bottle of beer left at her door.
Court experts later testified that the wounds far exceeded those necessary to kill.
Terror of the 'vampire’ killer spread across Krakow, with some people even sleeping with boards beneath their shirts to protect against knives.
Kot was ecstatic, showing a friend a copy of the news report and saying he would make it his wallpaper.
Yet no one took him seriously, and his parents never suspected a thing.
He confessed his lust for blood to her and once even held a knife to her throat “to see the insane fear in her eyes,” but she dismissed it as a tasteless joke.
It was only when he revealed the shards of glass in his pockets, which he had planned to dice her with and plant on her to make it look like suicide, that she became concerned.
Kot was swiftly arrested and charged with two murders, ten attempted murders, and four arsons.
Oddly, he was allowed was to take his Matura exam, but only so that he would be unable to convincingly plead insanity.
Reporters noted his “sunny disposition” at the trial, and he was warned several times by the judge to take the proceedings seriously.
Nearly a year after his arrest, in July 1967, he was sentenced to death.
Reflecting on his crimes while awaiting his sentence, Kot showed little remorse.
He even wondered if he might be set loose to remove “undesirable people,” as a good to society.
Today, the city that once lived in fear of a ‘vampire’ remembers him as a minor celebrity more than anything.
You can enjoy arsenic-free beer for 5 zl on the Rynek at the Kotkarola pub, whose mascot is a grinning cartoon cat nestled up to Edgar Allan Poe.
The ‘Macabre Krakow’ free walking tour advertises the legend for customers over 1 8.
And a real killer who, instead of posters, pasted articles on his wall like the one you hold in your hands.
UK THE ATHLETIC CLUB PRESENTS DINNER AND A MOVIE CHILDRENS HALLOWEEN PARTI FRI OCTOBER 29 v SAT OCTOBER 30 1 FOR MORE INFORMATION CALL 213.630.5255 f In Slavic folklore, Lady Midday ( ""Poludnitsa"" in Bulgarian and Russian, ""Polednice"" in Czech, ""Mittagsf rau"" in German, ""Poloznicha” in Komi, ” Poludnica"" in Polish, ""Poludnica"" in Serbian, ""Poludnica” in Slovak, ""Prezpoldnica"" Lower Sorbian, or ""Pripoldnica"" in Upper Sorbian) , was a demon of high noon, said to cause heatstrokes, neck pain, illness, and madness.
Lady Midday appears in the middle of hot summer days and often takes the form of dust clouds, a beautiful young woman in a white dress, a pubescent girl, or a hag, and carries a scythe.
She stops people in the field to ask them difficult questions or simply engage them in conversation.
Those who fail to answer her questions or try to change the subject are decapitated or blighted with sickness.
She was usually pictured as a young woman dressed in white that roamed field bounds.
Pscipolnitsa, who makes herself evident in the middle of hot summer days, takes the form of whirling dust clouds and carriesa scythe or shears ; most likely the shears would be of an older style, not akin to modern scissors.
She will stop people in th efield to ask them difficult questions or engage them in conversation.
If anyone fa ils to answer a question or tries to changethe subject, she will cut off their head or strike them with illness.
She may appear as an old hag, a beautiful woman, or a 12-year-old girl, and she was useful in scaring children away from valuable crops.
Farther north and west in formerly predominantly Slavic-speaking areas of Germany, especially inthe state of Brandenburg ( Low Saxon Branneborg, Serbian Braniborska ) , a related mythological spirit appears to be theR oggenmuhme that makes children disappear when they search for f lowers in among the tall grain plantson hot summer days.
Fears held for Russian scientists exploring ""alien” Antarctic lake, Vostok Russian scientists preparing to explore the ""most alien lake on Earth,"" Lake Vostok, have reportedly not been in touch with American colleagues in over five days.
News DeskFebruary 3, 2012 06:57 A less ancient Antarctic lake forms from melting snow near Cape Folger on the Budd Coast in the Australian Antarctic Territory on January 11, 2008.
Russian scientists preparing to explore the ""most alien lake on Earth,"" Lake Vostok, have reportedly not been in touch with American colleagues in over five days.
Vostok, buried over two miles — or 13,000 feet — beneath the great Antarctic ice sheet, is one of the world's largest lakes.
Some of the lakes existed in warmer times, when the continent was connected to Australia.
Vostok is thought to harbor conditions similar to those of Jupiter's moon Europa and Saturn's moon Enceladus, and the discovery of life in the lake's inky depths would significantly strengthen the prospect of discovering life on either of these icy bodies.
However, the lake is ""characterized by extremes, as geothermal heat from the Earth's interior warms the lake's bottom keeping it in a liquid state.
However, because there is no light, any nutrients can only exist in small quantities.
Last living United States World War I veteran dies Frank Buckles, the last living United States World War I veteran, has died, a spokesman for his family said Sunday.
Washington -Frank Buckles, the last living United States World War I veteran, has died, a spokesman for his family said Sunday.
Lawmakers Monday began to move ahead with proposed resolutions that would allow his casket to be displayed at the Capitol Rotunda, and plans were already in the works for his burial at Arlington National Cemetery.
Buckles ""died peacefully in his home of natural causes"" early Sunday morning, the family said in a statement sent to CNN late Sunday by spokesman David DeJonge.
Buckles marked his 110th birthday on February 1, but his family had earlier told CNN he had slowed considerably since last fall, according his daughter Susannah Buckles Flanagan, who lives at the family home near Charles Town, West Virginia.
Buckles, who served as a United States Army ambulance driver in Europe during what was then known as the ""Great War,"" rose to the rank of corporal before the war ended.
His assignments included that of an escort for German prisoners of war.
Oldest vet on WWI memorial He came to prominence in recent years, in part because of the work of DeJonge, a Michigan portrait photographer who had undertaken a project to document the last surviving veterans of that war.
His death leaves only two verified surviving WW1 veterans in the world, both of whom are British.
President Obama issued a statement Monday on Buckles' passing, saying he and first lady Michelle Obama were ""inspired"" by Buckles' story.
Buckles told CNN in 2007 he accepted the responsibility of honoring those who had gone before him, and to be their voice for permanent, national recognition after he was gone.
DeJonge found himself the spokesman and advocate for Buckles in his mission to see to it that his comrades were honored with a monument on the National Mall, pushing for improvements to a neglected, obscure city memorial nearly in the shadow of the elaborate World War II memorial.
War Memorial, a marble gazebo built in the 1930s that, for now, honors only his comrades from the District of Columbia.
His call was to elevate the designation of the site to join United States honors accorded to those who served in World War II, Korea and Vietnam.
Ted Poe, R-Texas, a House sponsor of legislation to upgrade the DC War Memorial.
The ""Frank Buckles WWI Memorial Act"" passed the House but had not cleared the Senate before Congress adjourned.
Poe on Monday restated his support for a House resolution that would allow a public display for Buckles in the Capitol Rotunda.
Buckles, after World War I ended, took up a career as a ship's officer on merchant vessels.
He was captured by the Japanese in the Philippines during World War II and held prisoner of war for more than three years before he was freed by United States troops.
During a visit to the run-down, neglected site a few years ago, he went past the nearby World War II memorial without stopping, even as younger veterans stopped and saluted the old soldier in his wheelchair as he went by.
Renovations to the structure began last fall, but Buckles, with his health already failing, could not make a trip to Washington to review the improvements.
The National Park Service is overseeing efforts that include replacing a neglected walkway and dressing up a deteriorated dome and marble columns.
Details for services and arrangements will be announced in the days ahead, the family statement said.
Flanagan, his daughter, said preliminary plans began weeks ago, with the Military District of Washington expressing its support for an honors burial at Arlington, including an escort platoon, a horse-drawn casket arrival, a band and a firing party.
Buckles in 2008 attended Veterans Day ceremonies at the grave of Pershing, the commander of United States troops during World War I He also met with then-President George W Bush at the White House, and United States Defense Secretary Robert Gates at the Pentagon.
Buckles' family asks that donations be made to the National World War I Legacy Project to honor Frank Buckles and the 4,734,991 Americans with whom he served.
More than 1 16,000 Americans were killed, and more than 204,000 wounded, in the 19 months of United States involvement in the war, according to the Congressional Research Service.
The overall death toll of the 1914-18 conflict was more than 16. million, including nearly 7 million civilians, and more than 20 million wounded.
Chester Crandellwas found dead Monday afternoon after he didn’t return from a horseback ride near Heber-Overgaard.
Chester Crandell, who was found dead Monday after setting out on horseback, cannot be replaced on the primary ballot, Secretary of State Ken Bennett said Tuesday.
Crandell, 68, was found dead near Heber-Overgaard, where he had been riding a colt.
The Navajo County Sheriff's Office is waiting for medical reports to shed more light on the cause of death.
Crandell was running unopposed to hold his District 6 seat and is the only candidate eligible to win the primary.
Posters explaining that votes for Crandell will still count for him will be placed at polling places for the Aug. primary.
Republican precinct committeemen from Crandell's home county — Navajo — will nominate three people to fill the position for the rest of Crandell's current term.
The county Board of Supervisors will select the temporary replacement from the three nominees.
Republican precinct committeemen from Coconino, Gila, Navajo and Yavapai counties — the counties under District 6's jurisdiction — will select a name to replace Crandell's on the general-election ballot.
Jose Garcia died during his campaign for the Corporation Commission and are intended as a sign of respect for the deceased.
The Legend of Springheeled Jack by Ahy Julian POSTED: 24 October 99 A strange creature, that pub worker and farmer's daughter Polly Adams could only describe as ""devil-like"", was the terror of London in the mid-1800s.
It all started in 1837 with the attack on Polly Adams, and then later in the year another woman was attacked in the Clapham churchyard.
But the sightings and attacks of this figure that could leap over fences in a single bound truly began to start in 1838.
Sir Cowan made the letter public, only to receive dozens of other letters by more witnesses of the creature.
Late at night there was a furious knocking at the door of the Alsop residence, where young Jane Alsop and her two sisters lived with their father.
Jane answered the door, and standing in the shadows was a man claiming to be a police officer.
He asked her to bring a candle, saying that he had captured Spring-heeled Jack.
The stranger took the candle but then grabbed Jane and began to claw at her face.
He ran off into the shadowy darkness when one of Jane's sisters came outside and called for help.
Jane's attacker allegedly wore a helmet and a white costume similar to oilskin and wore a black cloak over everything.
His eyes were like raging fireballs, blue flames shot from his mouth, and his fingers ended in claws.
A similar attack happened to 18-year-old Lucy Squires a few months later.
While walking with her sister through Green Dragon Alley in Limehouse, she was blinded with blazing blue flames by a tall cloaked figure.
A strange figure was seen atop the spire of a church and even on the Tower of London.
Throughout the 1850s and 60s, this strange creature was seen all over England.
Its descriptions varied from a winged and horned creature, not unlike the Jersey Devil, to the ""spaceman"" that attacked the two girls in 1838.
In the 1860s, one of the mobs cornered the creature, but it jumped over a hedge and escaped.
In 1877, people tried to shoot him, but just like in the cases of Mothman, the Jersey Devil, and other strange creatures, Springheeled Jack was not shot.
A century ago people believed him to be the Devil himself but nowadays many people believe Springheeled Jack to have been an extraterrestrial, judging by his ""space traveler"" attire and unusual abilities.
Whether it was alien, Satan, or a prankster, the legend of Springheeled Jack lives on as one of the most terrifying paranormal events in British history.
Anomalies Article: Springheeled Jack Aly Julian is the webmaster for Stranaeworld. one of the most all-inclusive encyclopedias of cryptozoology on the Internet.
My Brazilian companions heard it and moored our boat to a tree on the open-Tapajos side of the long flat island in the mouth of the Crepori, River of the Red Man.
We were heading down river from Barra and I was sick of Indians, trees, the green river out of the Matto Grosso, of bloodsucking flies, mosquitoes, my companions and myself.
I couldn’t budge anybody, hadn’t authority enough to compel my crew to continue on.
The pilot pointed eastward, across the hogback of the island, and shrugged.
A river, the River of the Red Man, Crepori, came out of the unexplored east there, out of the land of the borduna-wieldmg Guaiapos.
I had just come from the jungle store on the island where the proprietor had told me he was selling out and leaving because the Guaiapos, only the day before, had bashed out his partner’s brains with a war club.
The mainland here was a rich rubber area and Brazilians were trying their best to make their two-fifty a day, cutting and cooking rubber.
Between the Crepori and the das Tropas rivers, south, the Guaiapos had killed 20 rubber cutters during the past year.
Rubber cutters covered their estradas in pairs, one man carrying a shotgun.
Still the diminutive Guaiapos tricked them and struck from behind without warning.
I was invited to swing my hammock ashore just before dark, in a native dwelling occupied by several families of rubber cutters.
All rubber cutters who worked the east bank of the Tapajos between the Crepori and das Tropas kept their families on islands because the Guaiapos did not swim or make boats.
Following the estradas by day was like making a dash with a reconnaissance patrol.
Men and women exchanged strange, oddly wild glances, and spoke the word, scarcely above a whisper.
I would have cried out, but a palm covered my mouth, and the first hand held me down.
I nodded against the palm, which smelled of sweat and rubber, sat up, shook out my shoes in the dark lest scorpions or tarantulas might be sleeping in them, donned and tied them.
Tamara, I had noticed before dark, was the only pretty woman on the island, in the little cringing settlement.
The eyes of all men followed her lithe figure, and she walked much that they might.
I’d have thought her a light of love if she hadn’t worn dirty work dresses that proclaimed her respectability.
I followed the girl onto a trail leading east, out of the woods that covered the island, onto the flat area of sand which stretched toward but did not quite reach the mainland.
Other men and women were appearing out of the trees — more men and women than I knew to be on the island.
Visitors from up and down river, from the Indianless west bank, had clearly landed 40 Fate /May 2002 on the island while I slept.
That was the first impression I had of the odd exodus from Ilha do Crepori.
Tamara and I seemed the only two people who walked close together and she held me as if I were a prisoner.
The other men carried old flintlock rifles, muzzle-loaders, shotguns, bows and arrows, tridents used in spearing fish in shallow water, bushknives, small pistols and revolvers.
I could now see the stretch of green water which separated the sand from the mainland.
I got another bright idea, though it didn’t fit in with a midnight visit to Indian territory.
She hesitated so long before she said yes that I knew it wasn’t the correct answer, at least not quite.
The Brazilians, of course, could see further than I could; they were jungle people.
The Guaiapos, I knew, could see even further, and we were now almost within bowshot of the mainland.
I gulped and said yes, though I am deathly afraid of piranhas, the fierce flesheating fish of those rivers.
She stepped out of her own as if all her garments had been trick stuff.
Some men and women were going into the water with all their clothes on, some were disrobing, and the amazing thing about this is that Brazilian men and women would no more disrobe before one another than they would walk naked down a city street.
They are, virtually without exception in my experience, the most delicate and modest of people.
Whatever the urge that drove them all now, it transcended modesty — yet allowed them all somehow to retain their dignity.
Starshine gave her an ethereal quality that set the mood for whatever was to come.
I was just her current responsibility, to which someone had assigned her.
Tamara swiftly rolled my clothes with her own, to be carried in a bundle on her head, walked down a steeply slanting bank into the water.
To our left was the silent, gaping mouth of the River of the Red Man, running out of the east and southeast, no one knew from how far distant.
I bumbled against the smooth body of Tamara as we swam, but if she were aware of it she gave no sign.
Tamara, now a white shadow amid black ones — black ones which appeared to have swallowed our comrades from right to left — tendered me a cloth.
She rubbed my back with her towel, bade me perform the same service for her.
I had the urge to laugh — and stifled it for no Brazilians were laughing, and they laugh easily because they are a happy people — though they claim to be forever sad.
Now and again I could see the black surface of the Crepori to our left.
We turned aside, stooping, brushing away lianas that drooped over our faces, and presently I saw a glow of flame.
Tamara and I, after all, were among the first to reach the cleared area of flame, so I never knew who set the fire though I made a good guess before the strange evening ended.
The fire blazed brightly in the middle of a flat stone, roughly square, about 12 feet on each side.
There was a new-to-me, aromatic odor in the clearing and all around the edge of the rock, carefully arranged, were tasseled smoking pipes, dozens of May 2002 /Fate 41 them.
I had spent much time among the Mundurucu and had never seen one smoke a pipe; they smoked hand-rolled cigarettes.
But I had seen pipes they had used before “civilization” taught them cigarettes.
Civilization hadn’t reached the Guaiapos and this was Guaiapo territory.
The pipes were already filled, and men and women, walking like people in a trance, some of them still nude from the swim and quite indifferent to the fact, walked steadily, wide-eyed, up to the rock and hefted a pipe.
I would have smoked, Guaiapos or no Guaiapos, for it struck me that this must be strange tobacco indeed that made men and women forget nudity and not walk, but run , so far for a few puffs.
Some men with gnarled hands caught up coals from the fire in their fingers, dropped them into the pipes, tamped them down with thumbs, began smoking.
Once I had smoked, so I knew what I was doing and did not expect to be sick.
Men and women backed away from the fire and settled down in all sorts of postures.
Tamara drew me away to an open space, pulled me down to a sitting position, right side to the fire which crackled as if in glee.
Tamara did not sit beside me, but behind me, her back against mine, the back of her head touching mine.
I shuddered, for I had seen crawling things in the hair of even good-looking jungle women.
Others were whispering, none talking aloud, and some of the pipes gurgled.
Think, see y feel /” Small, dirty, smelly, stark naked Indians, men and women, came silently out of the jungles, walking gingerly as if in terror.
Some of the men carried very short bows aud bundles of arrows; some carried bordunaSy war clubs of hardwood which must have required months of patient effort to carve with rock and bone.
A quick glance at my companions told me that the Guaiapos could kill every last one of us without rousing even one to resistance.
I saw birdlike words issue from their mouthsy hang in the air y vanish.
There is no explaining that, I know, but I could compare it with other speech and did so.
To my left a young man and woman, clearly newlyweds all wrapped up in each other, were making love talk.
I didn’t hear them, either, but I saw the words they spoke in the air before their faces and the words were gentle and beautiful.
Now I was positive I knew what was coming, though this eerie contact of Guaiapos and Brazilians didn’t make any sense whatever.
Yesterday, if the island Brazilians had told me the truth, Guaiapos had murdered a rubber cutter.
Not one Indian had been seen by any Brazilian — unless there had been other meetings like this.
Then she moved away from my back, twisted around to my side, lay down with her head on my knee.
Neither was 1. 1 scarcely thought of it until I began to analyze it all later.
I knew some queer plants, like the deadly matacalada y amapaima y nhandu y catipi.
Men tasted its juice and could see things at a distance, could read the future — I began to look about me, and for the first time I noticed that each person present had an ethereal double, through which or whom one could see the fire, the forest, the Indians.
Material entities did things, smoked, talked, huddled together, while the doubles watched everything with a lofty tolerance.
So Caapi — no, Tamara had called it liamba! — mixed with tobacco, caused us all to see visions and dream dreams.
I tried to recall what drug I knew that caused men to see such visions and dream such dreams, but found the effort too much.
None need ask me how I knew how a god would feel for then I knew everything.
In no time from now I would find myself in the midst of such an orgy as no one has ever dared write about.
But as minutes passed and no Apollo, red or red-white, took advantage of any Aphrodite — and I could scarcely be bothered thinking about it, but only remembered that there once had been something of the kind in some long-ago — I tried some lazy tests, using whatever came to mind.
Instantly I saw all 60 tablets, spreading out from a pile as expert shufflers of cards spread a “hand,” standing in the air, the historical Chinese characters on them clear to my eyes and understandable.
Moreover, John himself told the meaning of Revelations in the first chapter.
As far as I am concerned, yes; for the eerie explanation I saw that night makes sense, good sense, such good, simple, uncluttered sense that I shall write of it in detail only when the world has time to spend on what will be an endless controversy — which should strengthen, not rob, the faithful of their faith.
Now the Guaiapos, each with his double, moved among us, refilling our pipes, lighting the liamba-tobacco mixture.
My comrades began to fall asleep, though each clung to his or her pipe.
I turned around so that we were head to head, sprawled so that I could keep on smoking.
Tamara was asleep, the firelight making her face more beautiful than ever.
The Guaiapos nodded to one another, moved among the sleepers — robbing them of rifles, shotguns, bows, arrows, knives.
I told myself, and saw my own words rise into the air like smoke eddies, show themselves clearly, then vanish.
With or against their will, the Brazilians traded weapons for liamba , from whose drug they derived “psychic ability,” “second sight,” “clairvoyance,” “clairaudience,” “clairsentience” — though probably not one of my companions on the Crepori would have understood one of those words.
I’d heard whispers of renegade Brazilians among the Guaiapos, keeping them stirred up to make rubber hard to get and to keep the price up.
I looked around at men and women gone utterly mad, at men and women striving to tear one another apart — just as I wanted to smash and break Tamara.
She caught me by the hand, a clasp I couldn’t break, and dragged me onto the trail, raced me back to the Tapajos.
I felt like a pariah when she turned and left me, going back to whatever they did when I wasn’t among them.
Apparently, if liamba and hashish were one and the same — as my only “authority,” a French botanist who did a great deal of plant classification in Brazil, seems to indicate.
The “record” seems to show that hashish is well known in the more “civilized” areas of Brazil where smoking is a sub rosa practice.
People who might be presumed to know insist that hashish will not produce the effects I have indicated in this document.
That puzzles me a little, and excites me even more; for I realize that what I saw, felt, and experienced may in no wise have resembled the visions, feelings, and experiences of the men and women who went through the above incidents with me.
Also that the liamba they know may not be the hashish of Paul Le Cointe, my book authority.
I’m not sure I like being — as far as I know — the only foreigner to experience a drug which might conceivably fill the world full of psychic wonders.
Let there be no rush, however, to imprison the Brazilians on the island in the mouth of the Crepori, for they have fled from it.
Let none send expeditions against the Guaiapos, for in this tale 1 have altered people and places deliberately to protect the people.
African folklore Type: Magical creature rhe real bird, Hammerkop, is most often indentified as the Lightning Bird.
It’s curved bill and long, shaggy crest on it’s lead resembles a hammer.
Women can see it in it’s true form but for ithers they see only the lightning. t s fat is a vital component of traditional African medicine.
It can be collected if the Lightning Bird is caught just as it hits he ground.
It s egg is said to bring bad luck to the surrounding area, and must be destroyed.
Lincoln, like many in 1834, didn't observe Christmas as an official holiday He says in late 19th century, Americans began to observe Christmas as a public holiday Early Americans kept a sharp separation of church and state, Frum says Frum ""War on Christmas"" flap a reaction to a perceived threat to folkway, not religion Editor's note: David Frum, a CNN contributor, is a contributing editor at The Daily Beast.
Frum was a special assistant to President George W Bush from 2001 to 2002. In 1834, Illinois voted whether to adopt Christmas as a legal holiday.
In 1834, Lincoln had not yet grown out of his atheist phase, but the young Lincoln's lack of faith in God ~ and his lifelong disbelief in the divinity of Christ does not explain his vote.
In 1 834, a vote against Christmas was a safe, even a conventional vote.
Not a single state in the Union closed its offices for Christmas on December 25 in 1834.
Lincoln marked his first Christmas as President, in December 1861, by holding a Cabinet meeting in the morning and a dinner party in the evening.
The Lincoln family never had a White House tree and sent no Christmas cards.
The public Christmas as Americans know it today did not take form until late in the 1 9th century.
The first state to recognize Christmas as a holiday was Alabama, in 1836, but the North and especially New England resisted.
Cupp says she disagrees with Phil Robertson's view on homosexuality but argues that it was ungracious of A&E to suspend him over his religious What tent cities say about America updated 7:55 AM EST, Mon Decerrfcer 23, 2013 Arjun Sethi says instead of helping the homeless, many states are cracking down on tent cities.
The peculiar history of the Pledge of Allegiance updated 9:06 AM EST, Mon December 23, 2013 On this day 71 years ago December 22, 1942 Congress got the United States out of what had turned into an unexpectedly embarrassing situation, Bob Greene writes.
The best week for privacy in a long time updated 10:54 AM EST, Sat December 21, 2013 H Catherine Crump says actions by a judge, an NSA review panel and the president signaled that surveillance programs may be reined in.
There's debate on the point, but it seems that Benjamin Harrison was the first president to allow a Christmas tree inside the White House in 1889.
The tradition of lighting a tree on the White House grounds commenced with Calvin Coolidge in 1923.
It waited until John F Kennedy in 1963 to send a card that depicted a nativity scene. updated 10:47 AM EST, Fri December 20, 2013 LZGranderson say ""Duck Dynasty's"" Phil Robertson is free to speak his mind but that doesn't mean Ns TV network needs to put him on Don't be fooled by Putin updated 10:09 AM EST, Sat December 21, 2013 Masha Gessen says don’t be fooled by Russian President Putin's decision to free political prisoner Mikhail Khodorkovsky.
In its first century, the national government practiced a separation of church and state far sharper than anything Americans would accept today.
From its founding in 1775, the federal post office delivered mail on Sundays.
As evangelical forms of Christianity spread after 1 800, the new denominations demanded an end to this desecration of the Sabbath.
In response, Congress voted in 1 81 0 to require all postmasters to work at least one hour on Sunday, on pain of losing their positions.
The Americans of the founding generations insisted upon separation of church and state not because they were irreligious, but precisely because so many of them were so very intensely religious.
Because religion mattered so much to early Americans, so did religious differences.
Calvinists and Baptists, Methodists and Catholics, the grandest Boston rector and the rawest frontier preacher disagreed, sometimes to the point of outright violence.
Anti-Catholic riots ripped apart Boston, Philadelphia and Bath, Maine, between the 1830s and 1850s.
These contending denominations could, however, agree at least that they did not want a remote government in Washington favoring some religious practices over others.
Better to deliver the mail on Sunday than debate who was right about the Sabbath.
Christmas is celebrated near the date of the old Roman holiday of Saturnalia.
The Christmas tree, the hanging of wreaths and house-to-house caroling hark back to the pre-Christian German holiday of Yule.
But many Protestant denominations retained a lingering suspicion of the holiday until deep into the 1 9th century.
The fading of distinctions between Christians and the decline of theology within Christianity.
The once-vivid mistrust of trees and tinsel and burning togs has vanished, as American Christianity evolved away from a creed in which people believed and into a set of practices that people did. if Christians decorate trees, then tree decorating must be Christian -no matter how or why the custom started and what the custom meant to the people who started it.
Devout Christian believers can still be counted in the millions of course.
Surrounding them, however, is a larger and more nebulous group for whom what was once a faith has become a folkway.
For them, a Christmas tree or a nativity scene is less a declaration of individual belief than it is an expression of group identity.
Many Americans feel this group identity to be under threat by changes in recent years.
That is why we have eruptions such as last week's flap over the whiteness of Santa Claus.
If your Christmas celebrates the appearance of God Himself in the form of a human baby, it won't have a tot of room for a gift-giving elf and flying reindeer.
But if Santa is at most tangential to the Christmas of faith, he is utterly central to the Christmas of folkway.
The Christmas of Santa and Rudolph, and trees and stockings, and candy canes and ""Merry Christmas"" greetings began to be most publicly celebrated in the United States only after and only because -the religious impetus for the holiday had already dwindled away.
Mark Coleman says the group’s new release likely has more to do with extending the copyright than anyone's need to hear obscure, unpolished tracks.
But the band remains a multimillion dollar draw Tea party, GOP need a divorce updated 2:15 PM EST, Wed December 18, 2013 LZ Grander son says the tea party is facing a GOP leadership fiat wants to rein it in for 2016.
The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of David Frum.
Alan Turing Mikhail Kalashnikov Steve Martin Tiffany & Co. 3 of 4 12/24/2013 5:02 PM LISTENING TO VEGETABLES The howls of the vegetable kingdom could be harnessed in the battle against their parasites difference between damage caused by crushing and damage caused by munching insects.
Crushed beans released chemicals, but the other plants ignored the signals, somehow realising there was no threat.
Research in the last five years has shown that many types of plants, such as maize and tobacco, send out chemical warnings to their neighbours.
New Scientist, 8 Mar 1997; Irish Times, 3 Aug 2000; [APJ 16 Mar 2001 ; Times, 3 May 2002.
When a leaf or a stem is sliced, the plant signals pain (or dismay) by releasing the gas ethylene over its entire surface.
The gas molecules are collected in a bell jar and bombarded with calibrated laser beams, which makes them vibrate.
The resultant sound waves are amplified in a resonance tube, then detected with a sensitive microphone.
One surprising result came from an apparently healthy cucumber that was virtually shouting with agony.
A closer study showed it had developed mildew, though the symptoms were not apparent.
Eavesdropping on plants could be of great benefit to farmers as an early-warning system to detect pests and disease and as an aid to efficient storing and transporting.
Apples, for instance, emit high levels of ethylene, increasing with ripeness and causing neighbouring fruit to wilt.
Invisible differences of ripeness can be detected acoustically, enabling fruit to be separated into batches and prolong its freshness.
The first injured plant released a chemical that changed the plant’s flavour, making it less attractive to the mites.
Other chemicals were emitted as a distress signal, causing adjacent plants to emit the same chemicals before any more mites arrived.
Some of these acted as a spider mite repellent, while others attracted a predator mite that enjoyed lunching on the spider mites.
USA TODAY THE DESERT SUN SUNDAY, JULY 27, 2014 5U I SI Places where history is alive History is best understood by walking the ground where it happened, says filmmaker Ken Burns.
MARK TWAIN HOUSE Visitors to Mark Twain’s house can sense the author’s presence, Burns says.
U ’ R""“"" prehen 'i the American Revolution, visit these Bostonarea towns.
Revolutionary War reenactors | get into I 1 the spirit 8 of 1775 at yf Lexington f and Nf Concord outside % Boston.
This year cdebratesae 150th anniversary of the act signed by Abraham Lincoln that first preserved the area.
It demonstrated that while our stillyoung country didn’t yet have great cities or cathedrals it had unparalleled natural be a “ bon nf t^ S ' U 7 aS the DecJ aration of Independence applied to a landscape.
NEW ORLEANS Voters can feel cultures clashing, meeting and merging in this Visit fn° mt m American history.
Visit to see New Orleans’ archiSdtheM 5 wrou S ht iron fences, and the Mississippi River “hrincrthf hint he i f °H dS and products of the hinterlands out to the Gulf of Mexico, Burns says.
America was shaken to its roots at what Burns calls ""the greatest tf!, e f er fought on American soil, when more than 50,000 soldiers were killed, wounded, captured or went missing.
The museum and visitors center offers a comprehensive preview, including a film narrated by Morgan Freeman.
Professor Yoshinori Imaizumi, of Japans National Science Museum remarked, “It’s a reptile, and the sketch looks very much like a plesiosaur.
But in contrast to petrified fossils from 65-plus million years ago, this was a fleshy carcass, sans bones.
Tissue samples were taken, and the carcass unceremoniously dumped back into the sea lest it contaminate the mackerel catch.
Later, these samples were found to yield the same ratio of the amino-acid tyrosine to other amino acids as does the blue shark’s fin.
It seems that shark bodies decompose in such a manner that they come to resemble a monstrous plesiosaur, and this sort of subsequent-mistaken identity has occurred on many occasions.
Plesiosaurs were sea-dwelling reptiles about 15 to 40 feet in length, having long to very long necks on flippered, seal-like bodies with short paddle-like tails.
They were fish-eaters, and swam the seas until around 65 million years ago.
Yet according to many monster-seeking “cryptozoologists,” plesiosaurs are common to this day, inhabiting seas and suburban lakes seemingly less primordially suitable as a habitat than the remote South American “Lost World” jungle of Arthur Conan Doyle’s novel.
Loch Ness In 1933, Scotland’s Loch Ness made worldwide news when, following the opening of a new highway leading to the region and increased tourism, sightings of a lake serpent were interpreted by many as evidence of a herd of plesiosaurs.
However, contrary to inevitable media pronouncements, such legends do not stretch back for centuries.
Robert Shine, a naturalist who undertook a survey of the loch, looked into the region’s back issues of newspapers and found that during the 1800s the legend was that a huge fish haunted the lake.
In 1968, the journal Nature remarked that “The plesiosaur theory holds that Loch Ness, once an arm of the sea, was pinched off by movement of the land, and so trapped the monsters.
Nevertheless, sturgeons reportedly come to Loch Ness from the sea, so compared to the idea of plesiosaurs surviving 65 million years, believers have little trouble shrugging this argument away.
Jan-Feb 2002 / Fate 21 A bobbing log, viewed from a distance, can appear disconcertingly like a living water serpent or a plesiosaur— the ultimate ""lake effect"" Maurice Burton, of the British Museum, followed the Nessie phenomenon from its 1933 beginning, at one time as a plesiosaur believer, but increasingly as a skeptic.
With a nod to the varied eyewitnesses’ descriptions, he sighed, “I can only regard the monster as the most versatile animal I have ever met in color, shape, and general behavior.
In one case a group of people watching “Nessie” from the shore were enlightened by someone armed with binoculars that the “monster” was only a great northern diver bird, while on another the alleged skeleton of a monster in the loch near Urquhart Castle turned out to be a sunken log.
British Columbia In North America, the Okanakane Indians believed that a dragonlike creature called na-ha-ha-itkhy or “holy water serpent,” haunted Okanagan Lake in southern British Columbia when they were first visited by whites in 1770.
The tribe even carved the likeness of the creatures on ceremonial canoes.
Later dubbed “Ogopogo” after a fictional African king in a parlor song, the phantom is now likened to a freshwater plesiosaur by believing cryptozoologists — or a serpentine dragon by fanciful park statues.
Such Indian tales told of a dragon-like, seven-foot serpent capable of growing wings and walking on land as well.
LeBlond, who has co-authored a book on Caddy, believes the source to be a plesiosaur-style (and size, contrary to Indian legends) survivor from dinosaur days, although not specifically a plesiosaur.
Local schoolteacher Joseph Zarzynski, who has searched relentlessly and unsuccessfully for the phantom since the mid-1970s, believes “Champ,” as the would-be creatures are called, to be a twoor three-humped, 25to 30-foot-long plesiosaur.
One photograph taken by a couple from the shore in 1977 does show a very plesiosaur-like humped, long-necked image in the lake’s waters.
But Lake Champlain is hardly ideal habitat for an airbreathing plesiosaur, for its waters freeze over during the winters.
Africa From out of Africa comes the most Hollywood-style of the plesiosaur or sauropod legends in the form of a creature called mokele-mhemhe y who is said to inhabit swampy Lake Tele in the People’s Repub22 Fate /J an-Feb 2002 Even water birds have been mistaken for plesiosaur-style lake monsters when seen from a distance in the right light and frame of mind.
Biologist Marcellin Agnagna specifically sought the creature in a camera safari in 1983.
But he had been a little too excited, for it seems he had forgotten to adjust the camera s settings, and so he had to be content with only an eyewitness sketch of the ultimate big one that got away.
Eyewitness descriptions of lake monsters tend to be less similar to a seal-like plesiosaur than multi-humped dragons.
But plesiosaurs — unlike dragons — did once exist, so those who believe in such watermonsters have found it more assuring to contend that their quarry is a survivor from the past rather than a figment of mythology.
Large jellyfish and squids do exist, and gobs of vegetation on lakes or seas could just as easily be mistaken for them with a little stretch of the imagination as logs are for plesiosaurs.
Actually, it should not be surprising that humans exhibit a fear of serpentine water images given the terror which many exhibit towards snakes.
For millions of years our ancestors were grubbing about in tropical lands in search of small edible creatures from termites to toads where venomous snakes also dwelled.
Any hominid who grabbed such a snake for a meal would have been bitten in defense and so eliminated from the family tree.
Those who fearfully avoided snakes, on the other hand, were the ones who survived to pass their loathing on to future generations, including today s often-cryptozoologist humans.
Humans and other creatures exhibit a seemingly morbid fascination directed towards threatening situations such as wildfires, a charging bull, or a falling tree even if they themselves are not immediately within the threatened area, for such riveting attention keeps them on guard in case the threat spreads.
It is possible that such trepidation of potentially venomous snakes, operating at a subliminal level below overt fear, may be the source of these lake-monster legends.
Thus, the serpentine image of a bobbing log, a family of otters, aquatic birds, or solitary waves (all of which have been mistaken for lake monsters) may trigger such primeval trepidation and be interpreted as monsters as a result of the mysterious loathing they unleash, thus allowing us to experience something of what our pre-human and human ancestors may have felt — albeit not so far back as dinosaur days.
This view does not disprove the existence of serpentine water monsters, nor require that they not exist.
Cryptozoologists might wish to argue that such serpentdreading ophiophobia may account for the apprehension and obsession which many harbor towards such serpentine phantoms.
Vf/tx Mark Sunlin was raised in the lake country of Minnesota and has written for BBC Wildlife magazine , the RSPCA , and Animal Agendas.
Jan-Feb 2002 / Fate 23 EATEN BY LIZARDS ON 16 JANUARY, POLICE WERE called to the studio apartment of car park attendant Ronald Huff in Newark, Delaware, after he failed to turn up for work.
Huffs body was on the floor, with his pet Nile monitor lizards feeding on his flesh.
The cause of death was not immedb ately known; but infection from a lizard bite could have contributed to the death if not treated.
One of Huff’s cats was also removed, along with three containers of 2 in Madagascar hissing roaches, which serve as lizard food.
One lizard was acting aggressively, “actually going towards you, mouth open”, said John Caldwell, director of the Delaware Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.
Nile monitors have small but very sharp teeth and muscular, whip -like tails that can cause serious injury.
In the wild, they eat eggs, birds and other animals, while in cap"" tivity, they are fed raw chicken and liver, and the occasional hard""boiled egg.
The DSPCA hoped to place the lizards with zoos or educational groups; barring that, they would be put down.
Sanford treasure hunters find priceless Spanish artifact off Fort Pierce beach 2hr wesh.com treasure fias""* been recovered °"" ^ ° f ^ ° Cean ’ PriCeleSS Spanish Treasure hunters from Sanford have struck it rich.
They say they spotted the lost piece of history shining in the sand of a Fort Pierce beach. lost piece of w hen I moved the boulder, I looked down and I could see the comer of the piece and I could see the filigree,"" said Eric Schmitt.
It sank with a Spanish r e r h “rc f „y^; d h e P * d d "" •"" Sand * 3 “ It could be worth maybe $600,000, maybe a million maybe a lot more.
NASA's twin STEREO probes are entering a mysterious region of space to look for remains of an ancient planet which once orbited the Sun not far from Earth.
If they find anything, it could solve a major puzzle—the origin of the Moon.
The ""Theia hypothesis"" is a brainchild of Princeton theorists Edward Belbruno and Richard Gott.
Many astronomers hold that in the formative years of the solar system, a Mars-sized protoplanet crashed into Earth.
Debris from the collision, a mixture of material from both bodies, spun out into Earth orbit and coalesced into the Moon.
This scenario explains many aspects of lunar geology including the size of the Moon's core and the density and isotopic composition of moon rocks.
When the solar system was young, Lagrange points were populated mainly by planetesimals, the asteroid-sized building blocks of planets.
Belbruno and Gott suggest that in one of the Lagrange points, L4 or L5, the planetesimals assembled themselves into Theia, nicknamed after the mythological Greek Titan who gave birth to the Moon goddess Selene.
Solar observatories often park themselves at LI while deep space observatories prefer L2.
If this idea is correct, Theia itself is long gone, but some of the ancient planetesimals that failed to join Theia may still be lingering at L4 or L5.
Astronomers have looked for Theiasteroids before using telescopes on Earth, and found nothing, but their results only rule out kilometer-sized objects.
By actually entering L4 and L5, STEREO will be able to hunt for much smaller bodies at relatively close range.
This dynamical simulation shows how asteroids linger in the gravitational well of a Lagrange point of the Sun-Jupiter system.
In the first sets of images, amateur astronomers found some known asteroids and new comet Itagaki was imaged just a couple of days after the announcement of its discovery.
Hunting for Theiasteroids is not STEREO'S primary mission, he points out.
The two probes are flanking the sun on opposite sides to gain a 3D view of solar activity.
We just happen to be passing through the L4 and L5 Lagrange points en route.
Lagrange points are not infinitesimal points in space; they are broad regions 50 million kilometers wide.
Closest approach to the bottoms of the gravitational wells comes in Sept-Oct.09.
The STEREO team is inviting the public to participate in the search by scrutinizing photos as they come in from the spacecraft.
If you see a dot of light moving with respect to the stars, you may have found a Theiasteroid.
Links to the data and further instructions may be found at sungrazer.nrl.navy.mil.
The historic rug spent the past 70 years at Pleasant Banks, Evandale, the home of the Fosters, who had bought it from the Stevenson family for three pounds and five shillings.
In the event, the rug was kept in Tasmania when it was bought for a whopping $270,000 (roughly £95,000) by two state museums and the Federal Hotels chain.
Professor Mike Archer, director of the Australian Museum in Sydney, announced on 28 May that his team had succeeded in replicating some fragments of DNA and that a Tassie clone could be born within a decade, although most other scientists are sceptical.
On 18 June, hunter James Malley, famous for having spent almost half a century searching for thylacines, received a call about a thylacine sighting on a bush road.
The witness, who wished to remain anonymous to avoid ridicule, said the supposedly extinct predator had stared at him from about five metres away before following two wombats it was hunting on a track near Circular Head.
I still get calls from all over Tasmania from people wanting me to come and have a look at tracks.
It would be more useful spending millions of dollars on a full-scale search rather than trying to clone a tiger.
Y.xg& * Possibly the first direct evidence of human-megafauna interaction, rock art along the Drysdale River appears to show a hunter fending off a large predator, likely Thylacoleo camifex.
Its massive jaws and teeth look lethal on a cast skeleton at Adelaide’s South Australian Museum.
That parallels the situation of mammoths in Siberia and giant sloths in the Americas, which also found island refuges and survived for thousands of years after the broader extinction spasms on the mainland.
This line of argument relies on the lack of fossil evidence for a prolonged human-megafauna overlap.
If, however, we find evidence that human beings and megafauna lived side by side for many thousands or tens of thousands of years, then the role of humans in the extinctions would become blurry at best.
Certainly it would disprove the notion of a rapid-fire, Martin-Flannery-style blitzkrieg.
As it happens, there is one place in the Australian outback where there may be such evidence.
But which extinction hypothesis the evidence supports is still in question.
Way back in 1878 a farmer sinking a well turned up megafauna bones at Cuddie.
In 1991, working as a graduate student at the site, Field discovered megafauna bones directly adjacent to stone tools — a headline-making find.
She says there are two layers showing the association, one about 30,000 years old, the other 35,000 years old.
If that dating is accurate, it would mean humans and megafauna coexisted in Australia for something like 20,000 years.
They say the fossils have been moved from their original resting places and redeposited in younger sediments.
Bert Roberts, a co-author with Flannery of a 2001 paper that argues for some kind of human causation in megafauna extinctions, has examined grains of sand at Cuddie and says he has found very young grains mixed among the supposedly older fossils.
It’s possible that the archaeological artifacts and the megafauna really do go together.
Field vigorously disputes that interpretation and argues that her critics are too wed to a human impact hypothesis for the megafauna extinctions.
Field and I decided to drive instead to another famous boneyard in the same general region, a place called Wellington Caves.
We drove for five hours from Sydney, across the Blue Mountains through a pastoral country that looks much like the rolling coastal lands of central California.
When we pulled into the Wellington Caves parking lot, we found it guarded by a fiberglass Diprotodon.
Diprotodon was most mega of the megafauna, the largest known marsupial ever to tread the Earth.
It’s a wide hole in the ground, a curving vertical shaft through a limestone hill, covered with a metal grate.
In 1830 a local official named George Rankin lowered himself into the cave on a rope tied to a protrusion in the cave wall.
A surveyor named Thomas Mitchell arrived later that year, explored the caves in the area, and shipped fossils off to Richard Owen, the British paleontologist who later gained fame for revealing the existence of dinosaurs.
Owen recognized that the Wellington bones belonged to extinct marsupials.
JUDITH field makes a key point about her scientific data — there’s not enough of it, not enough searching for the encoded narratives of the past.
Amateur paleontologists play a crucial role in finding the megafauna bones.
Hatcher is an easygoing fellow I met near the town of Margaret River, about a four-hour drive south of Perth.
Hatcher made one of the most significant fossil finds in recent years at Margaret River.
Hatcher took the path often used by spelunkers and found himself working his way right through a bunch of fossils.
A hole in the floor of the cave turned out to be the eye socket of a huge kangaroo.
More than 10,000 megafauna bones have since been hauled from Tight Entrance Cave.
Sometimes the bone hunters fly ultralights over the vast wasteland known as the Nullarbor Plain, the treeless underbelly of Australia along the Southern Ocean, and use GPS to map the locations of cave entrances they see from the air.
Hundreds of caves have been found recently in the Nullarbor, and four in particular have produced abundant megafauna bones.
Hatcher has also found caves with primitive boomerangs that he believes were used for hunting bats.
But again, megafauna and humans aren’t found in the same places — except in a tantalizing few.
Mammoth Cave has become a popular tourist destination near Margaret River.
Between 1909 and 1915 the cave sediments that contained fossils were hauled out and examined in a haphazard manner that no scientist today would approve.
When he looks at Mammoth Cave, he sees an obvious human habitat, a great shelter during the Ice Age.
The biggest ones reached over six feet tall at the shoulder and ten feet long, their furry, pillar-like legs supporting three tons of weight.
Diprotodon occupied a niche similar to the African elephant, browsing on shrubs and collecting at water holes.
Its SUV size and lack of agility would have made it a tempting target for marsupial lions and human hunters. wandered the illuminated chambers of the cavern.
What’s certain is that Hatcher will keep searching, doing his part to solve the continent’s greatest mystery. the earth preserves its history haphazardly.
Bones disintegrate, artifacts crumble, the land erodes, the climate changes, forests come and go, rivers change their course — and the past, if not obliterated, is steadily obscured.
Australia’s first people expressed themselves in rock art found on outcrops across the continent.
I caught up with Peter Murray, a paleontologist based in Alice Springs.
We drove to a site south of town where the red sandstone is adorned with circular and serpentine symbols.
Murray has, however, studied a rock painting in Arnhem Land, in far northern Australia, that shows what looks very much like a megafauna marsupial known as Palorchestes.
Often compared to a tapir, Palorchestes had a small, mobile trunk and a long tongue like that of a giraffe.
In Western Australia another ambiguous rock-art site shows what appears to be a human hunter with either a marsupial lion or a Tasmanian tiger — a major distinction, since the marsupial lion went extinct and the much smaller Tasmanian tiger survived into the historical era.
Murray, over an Alice Springs dinner of camel with beet sauce and some smoked emu, said of his profession, “Every step of the way involves interpretation.
The data doesn’t just speak for itself.” the blitzkrieg hypothesis paints the alarming picture of human beings rapidly wiping out a great number of animals.
The extinctions don’t happen quickly because of anything that resembles overkill but rather through a very incremental sequence of events, including climate change, during which the people involved could not fully discern what was happening to their environment.
Yet we are only gradually figuring out how we’re changing our world and the extent to which our efflorescence is harming or even driving to extinction countless species.
After tramping around Australia for a couple of weeks, poking into caves in three different states and hiking the outback, I returned to Sydney for a review session with Judith Field.
The slow-moving behemoth had been crossing a volcanic plain 1 00,000 years ago, when megafauna still walked tall. again of the controversial stratigraphy of Cuddie Springs, of the layers where megafauna and human tools may be associated, of the history of the enmity among the scientists.
My chin was cradled in my hand — I guess I looked as though I was about to put my head down on the table.
Science is a laborious process, and sometimes progress comes only with many stumbles and blind alleys.
Think of Rod Wells in Victoria Fossil Cave, slithering on his belly through passages so narrow that he had to turn his head sideways to squeeze forward.
Sometimes we will strike an impassable obstacle and have to back up the way we came.
The grapevines thrive in red soil that sits like a layer of icing on porous limestone.
The ground is pocked with holes, many no wider than a cafe table, known as pitfall traps.
Pitfall traps have gobbled up many a kangaroo bounding through the night.
One day in 1969 a fledgling fossil hunter named Rod Wells came to Naracoorte to explore what was then known as Victoria Cave.
It was an old tourist attraction, with steps and handrails and electric lights.
But Wells and half a dozen colleagues ventured beyond the tourist section, clawing through dark, narrow passages.
When they felt a suggestive breeze wafting from a pile of loose rubble, they knew there was a chamber beyond.
Victoria Fossil Cave, as the cavern is now known, warehouses the bones of something like 45,000 animals.
Some of the oldest bones belonged to creatures far larger and more fearsome than any found today in Australia.
They were the ancient Australian megafauna — huge animals that roamed the continent during the Pleistocene epoch.
In boneyards across the continent, scientists have found the fossils of a giant snake; a huge flightless bird; a wombat-like creature the size of a rhinoceros; and a seven-foot-tall kangaroo with a strangely short face.
They’ve found the remains of a tapir-like creature; a hippo-like beast; and a lizard, 20 feet long, that ambushed its prey and swallowed everything down to the last feather.
The Australian megafauna dominated their ecosystems — and then were gone in an extinction spasm that swept away nearly every animal that weighed a hundred pounds or more.
Scientists are finding abundant remains of animals that fell into the caves.
Given how much ink has been spilled on the extinction of the dinosaurs, its a wonder that even more hasn’t been devoted to the megafauna of the Pleistocene, creatures that had the dual virtues of being dramatically large and coexistent with humans.
Prehistoric humans never threw spears at Tyrannosaurus rex, except in cartoons.
The disappearance of American megafauna — mammoths, camels, giant short-faced bears, giant armadillos, stag moose, glyptodonts, sabertoothed cats, dire wolves, giant ground sloths, and horses, among others — happened relatively soon after the arrival of human beings, about 13,000 years ago.
In the 1960s, paleoecologist Paul Martin developed what became known as the blitzkrieg hypothesis.
Modern humans, Martin said, created havoc as they spread through the Americas, wielding spears tipped with stone points to annihilate animals that had never AUSTRALIAN MEGAFAUNA 95 faced a technological predator.
North America kept its deer, pronghorn, black bears, and a small type of bison; brown bears and newly arrived elk and moose expanded their ranges.
What happened to Australia’s large animals is one of the planet’s most baffling paleontological mysteries.
Indeed, Australia has been drying out for a million years or more, and the megafauna were faced with a continent that became increasingly parched and denuded of vegetation.
Australian paleontologist Tim Flannery suggests that humans, who arrived on the continent around 50,000 years ago, used fire to hunt, which led to deforestation and a dramatic disruption of the hydrologic cycle.
Something dramatic happened to Australia’s dominant land creatures — abruptly (how abruptly is a matter of debate) — somewhere around 46,000 years ago, strikingly soon after the invasion of a toolwielding, highly intelligent predator.
In 1994 Flannery published a book called The Future Eaters , in which he advanced the antipodal version of Paul Martin’s blitzkrieg hypothesis.
Amy Toensing covered the drought in Australia’s Murray-Darling River Basin in April 2009.
Dutch twin brothers and artists, Adrie and Alfons Kennis specialize in paintings and models of extinct animals and humans. one prone to ruining ecosystems and destroying their own futures.
Some viewed it as critical of the Aborigines, who pride themselves on living in harmony with nature.
The more basic problem with Flannery’s thesis is that there is no direct evidence that human beings killed any of the megafauna — not so much as a single animal.
It would be helpful if someone uncovered a Diprotodon skeleton with a spear point embedded in a rib— or perhaps a pile of Thylacoleo bones next to the charcoal of a human campfire.
Relatively few people, maybe numbering in just the thousands, would have had to kill a population of animals dispersed in a wide variety of habitats and refuges across an entire continent.
By definition there can be no survivors. the debate about megafauna pivots to a great degree on the techniques for dating old bones and the sediments in which they are buried.
If scientists can show that the megafauna died out fairly quickly and that this extinction event happened within a few hundred years, or even a couple thousand years, of the arrival of humans, that’s a strong case — even if a purely circumstantial one— that the one thing was the direct result of the other.
Long, clawed fingers and forelimbs that could extend upward like human arms allowed P goliah, the largest kangaroo ever, to thrive as a browser in open forests.
The seven-foottall marsupial with hooflike toes was one of the last of the megafauna to go extinct, overlapping with humans for thousands of years and likely inspiring Aboriginal tales about ■a WW 1 THE MYSTERY OF MEGAFAUNA EXTINCTIONS Between 50,000 and 10,000 years ago, two-thirds of all large animal genera in the world, from mastodons to giant kangaroos, disappeared.
Approximate extinction dates* 70,000 YEARS AGO 60,000 50,000 40,000 Procoptodon goliah 45,000a.
Australia Extinction of a majority of megafauna genera appears to coincide with human settlement over a 5,000-year period.
Contributing factors included hunting and changes in vegetation caused by fire and a falling population of giant herbivores.
North America once harbored an array of large mammal species rivaling Africa’s.
Within a few millennia of a major influx of hunters from Siberia about 13,000 years ago, most megafauna in North and South America were gone.
N America A century or so after the arrival of Polynesians, who became the Maori, hunting and land clearing eliminated giant birds, most notably the wingless moa and its main predator, Haast’s eagle, the world’s largest known eagle.
ANTHONY D BARNOSKY, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY; AARON CAMENS, UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE; ARAPATA HAKIWAI, MUSEUM OF NEW ZEALAND; RICHARD N HOLDAWAY, PALAECOL RESEARCH LTD: JOHN A LONG, NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM OF LOS ANGELES COUNTY; DENNIS STANFORD AND HANS-DIETER SUES, NATIONAL MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY; ROD T WELLS, FLINDERS UNIVERSITY lOO NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC • OCTOBER 2010 STIRTON’S THUNDERBIRD Dromornis stirtoni Perhaps the largest known bird, D stirtoni never left the ground.
Ten feet tall and weighing a thousand pounds, it belonged to a family of giant flightless birds, the dromornithids.
Humans never saw Stirton’s thunderbird; it lived about eight million years ago in the late Miocene, when Australia was drying out.
Smaller, less specialized species, such as Genyornis newtoni, lasted into the Pleistocene.
A changing climate long before human arrival probably doomed Palorchestes painei, which gave way in the Pleistocene to Palorchestes azael, better suited to dryland vegetation.
After 70 years, one of the world's most elusive mammals has at last been tracked down, thanks to a camera trap set on the eastern side of Tanzania's Udzungwa Mountains National Park.
Although Gaul doesn’t think a bunch of E.T.s are walking the Earth, he doesn’t rule out the idea that other beings exist, “I believe there’s life on other planets,” he said.
Description on ads This actual photo of a Flying Saucer taken bv the Brazilian Navy, is similar to the one seen hovering <£»r Giant Wir . a ™‘ a * Hv6y the | THE DESERT SUN | DESERTSUN.COM Contact Continued from A1 Aug. in Joshua Tree.
In the past, the media would laugh at tbe subject, poke fun and make jokes about “little green men,” he said.
The reality is, most people, we have normal lives, but we just happen to be interested in unusual subjects.
Mami Wata Mami Wata is represented as one of the most powerful goddesses in the African religion of Voudun (not to be mistaken to the newer and more heavily publicized Voodoo) and is today celebrated as a goddess that must be both loved and feared.
She is often portrayed as a long haired beautiful mermaid, half human and half fish, but sometimes she can walk the earth in more human body Colors of Mami Wata’s attire carry great significance in African people.
Red symbolizes the color of blood, violence and death, and white symbolizes spirituality, beauty and female body.
In the mermaid form she is always represented naked, sometimes combing her long hair and looking at herself in the golden miiror.
Stories of the encounters with the Mami Wata are widespread across entire Africa.
In most common version, she stalks the shores of the ocean and abducts men and women while they are swimming or traveling in a boat.
If the goddess thinks that the captive is worthy of her attention, she will return them to the shore, completely dry and with changed attitude toward spirituality and religion that can often make them rich, attractive and famous.
Other encounters tell the story of her leaving her comb and mirror in the presence of sailors.
After they took the items she would haunt their dreams, requesting the return of the items in an exchange of eternal sexual favors.
Invisible CO z Gas Killing Trees at Mammoth Mountain, California Since 1980, scientists have monitored geologic unrest in Long Valley Caldera and at adjacent Mammoth Mountain, California.
After a persistent swarm of earthquakes beneath Mammoth Mountain in 1989, geologists discovered that large volumes of carbon dioxide gas were seeping from beneath this volcano.
This gas is killing trees on the mountain and also can be a danger to people.
The United States Geological Survey continues to study the C0 2 emissions to help protect the public from this invisible potential hazard.
Mammoth Mountain is a young volcano on the southwest rim of Long Valley Caldera, a large volcanic depression in eastern California.
The Long Valley area, well known for its superb skiing, hiking, and camping, has been volcanically active for about 4 million years.
Because of this, the United States Geological Survey operates an extensive network of instruments to monitor the continuing unrest in the Long Valley area.
Numerous small earthquakes occurred beneath Mammoth Mountain from May to November 1989.
Data collected from monitoring instruments during those months indicated that a small body of magma was rising through a fissure beneath the mountain.
During the next year, United States Forest Service rangers noticed areas of dead and dying trees on the mountain.
After drought and insect infestations were eliminated as causes, a geologic explanation was suspected.
USGS scientists then made measurements and discovered that the roots of the trees were being killed by exceptionally high concentrations of carbon dioxide gas in the soil.
The town of Mammoth Lakes, just east of this volcano, has not been affected.
Mammoth Mountain, a young volcano in eastern California, sits on the southwest rim of Long Valley Caldera.
In 1994, scientists detected high concentrations of C0 2 gas in the soil on Mammoth Mountain.
This invisible gas, seeping from beneath the volcano, is killing trees on the sides of the mountain and can pose a threat to humans.
In this photo, large areas of dead and dying trees are visible near Horseshoe Lake, on the southeast flank of Mammoth Mountain.
When United States Geological Survey scientists investigated, they discovered that the trees are being killed by high concentrations of C0 2 gas in the soil.
The seepage of C0 2 gas from below Mammoth Mountain and the continued occurrence of local earthquakes are signs of the ongoing geologic unrest in the area.
Although leaves of plants produce oxygen from C0 2 during photosynthesis, their roots need to absorb 0 2 directly.
The high C0 2 concentrations in the soil on Mammoth Mountain are killing trees by denying their roots 0 2 and by interfering with nutrient uptake.
When C0 2 from soil leaves the ground, it normally mixes with the air and dissipates rapidly.
C0 2 is heavier than air, however, and it can collect at high concentrations in the lower parts of depressions and enclosures, posing a potential danger to people.
Breathing air with more than 30% C0 2 can very quickly cause unconsciousness and death.
Therefore, poorly ventilated areas above and below ground can be dangerous in areas of C0 2 seepage.
Where thick snowpacks accumulate in winter, the C0 2 can be trapped within and beneath the snow.
Page 4 of 7 C0 2 gas seeping from the ground at Mammoth Mountain is likely derived from magma beneath the volcano.
In 1989, rising magma may have opened cracks, allowing large amounts of trapped C0 2 gas to leak upward along faults.
C0 2 gas is heavier than air, and when it leaks from the soil, it can collect in snowbanks, depressions, and poorly ventilated enclosures, such as cabins and tents, posing a potential danger to people.
In 1989-90, trees in this area on the south side of Mammoth Mountain volcano began dying from high concentrations of C0 2 gas in the soil.
High C0 2 concentrations in the soil kill plants by denying their roots 0 2 and by interfering with nutrient uptake.
In the areas of tree kill at Mammoth Mountain, C0 2 makes up about 20 to 95% of the gas content of the soil.
Page 5 of 7 Geologists have detected C0 2 emissions, like those at Mammoth Mountain, on the flanks of other volcanoes, including Kilauea in Hawaii and Mount Etna in Sicily.
Measuring the total rate of C0 2 gas emissions on the flanks of volcanoes or within calderas is difficult and labor intensive and is commonly done using portable infrared C0 2 detectors.
This value varies on both short (days to weeks) and long time scales because of changes in atmospheric conditions and in the rate at which gas is being released from beneath the volcano.
Carbonisotopic analyses of the annual growth rings in trees near the margins of the treekill areas imply that the gas-emission rate reached a peak in 1991, subsequently declined, and then has been relatively stable since about 1996.
C0 2 and other volcanic gases, like helium, seeping from Mammoth Mountain appear to be leaking from a large reservoir of gas supplied by repeated intrusions of magma.
Tree-ring evidence from near springs on the mountain's flanks shows that some C0 2 gas was leaking before 1989 and dissolving in the ground-water system.
It is likely that the latest intrusion of magma opened deep fractures, increasing the rate of gas seepage.
The continuing occurrence of small earthquakes and C0 7 seepage beneath Mammoth Mountain are only two of the many signs of volcanic unrest in the area.
Earthquakes and ground uplift are also occurring within the central part of Long Valley Caldera, only a few miles east of Mammoth Mountain, and the Mono-Inyo Craters volcanic chain to the north has had small volcanic eruptions every few hundred years for the past 4,000 years.
Scientists with the USGS Volcano Hazards Program are closely monitoring C0 2 emissions and other geologic hazards at Mammoth Mountain.
According to a report o n Scotsman.com.-year-old Anthony Stallard was seen inside the cemetery kicking a football around with a friend after the two had been drinking.
Authorities say the two were shouting, singing, and being disrespectful.
I'm assuming he was pretending to be a ghost,"" Tim Concannon, prosecuting at Portsmouth Magistrates' Court, told Scotsman.com.
The article says Stallard was undergoing testing for autism at the time of the incident.
Mysterious sightings of lights turning . tf f on and off, and wisps of smoke in the m Scf' 5 . 0 firefighters crossin w* Atrium Building on Commercenter Street.
Haberfelde Building haunted, on Things have been seen moving by 17th and K Street. |% themselves at the Vaudeville Express "" Melodrama Musical Theatre on North Ghost of A,fred Harrel ,n the Chester Avenue & China Grade Loop & 17th Street c "" a,k tapping on the chalkboard in the jii sc hoolhouse display at the Kern County Museum on North Chester Avenue & 36th Street.
THE ""TRUTH"" Marconi experimented with wireless telegraphy in his native Italy, before transmitting signals across the English Channel in 1898, and the Atlantic in 1901.
His company established a world-wide radio telegraph network, and he won the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1909.
His status as the Father of Radio, however, has long been under attack.
In Russia, Alexander Popov is often named as the true begetter of wireless, in 1896, while many Americans (not all of them Net-dwelling conspiracy buffs) champion Nikola Tesla , who lost out to Marconi in United States patenting battles which owed as much to politics and business as they did to scientific rigour.
Tesla is Marconi's most famous rival, but the full list of those with credible claims to have achieved radio transmission pre-Marconi is a long one.
Whatever his scientific debts, though, Marconi was certainly the first entrepreneur to properly understand and exploit the new technology.
Legend states that if the shutters were not closed on the painting at night, the patients who fell asleep under the painting would fall ill, some even died as a result.
The painting was stolen in 2001 and to this very day it's whereabouts are unknown.
King, however, remained on the fringe, playing a now-you-see-him-now-youdon’t game with ufology.
In the 1990s he re-appeared again, this time announcing that he’d been working for a top-secret psy-ops unit which had infiltrated British ufology in order to spread disinformation.
King’s other claims included his detailed knowledge of alien/ government bases in the UK and a host of other tantalising fragments of information including mind control and the activities of the secret state.
King is the closest UK ufology has to a Bob Lazar figure, and just as weird.
But research has revealed that Britain had its own ‘flap’ six months before Arnold’s report was splashed across the world’s media.
Formerly secret files reveal how on several occasions that winter radar stations detected “unidentified aircraft” approaching England’s east coast from the direction of the North Sea.
Fighters were scrambled and one Mosquito crew chased what was called a “ghost plane” for nearly one hour before it disappeared.
These early military encounters were briefly mentioned by the Condon team experts were unable to debunk the photographs British press, but were played down by the Air Ministry.
It was on a tiny farm near the Oregon town of McMinnville on an evening in May 1950 that Paul Trent and his wife Evelyn saw one of the ‘flying saucers’ they had read so much about in the newspapers.
Evelyn was feeding rabbits when it appeared and alerted her husband, who had enough time to retrieve his camera from the house and take two photographs of a discshaped object speeding across the sky.
The story goes that the couple said nothing, fearing they had seen some secret experimental aircraft.
When news leaked out to the local newspaper the couple searched their farmhouse and found the pictures, which had been stashed in a desk drawer.
Trent’s photos were the biggest news story ever to hit McMinnville, and when they appeared in Life magazine the story went global.
The tiny local newspaper, the McMinnville Telephone-Register, which had a circulation of just 4,000, received so many inquiries it was forced to put out a special press run of 10,000 copies.
Experts from the Condon team looked at the photos in 1969 but were unable to debunk them, and proponents such as Bruce Maccabee, who spent years studying the case, concluded the couple were too dimwitted and unimaginative to perpetrate a hoax.
We will never know for sure as the couple died in the late 1990s, and the house where the photos were taken has long since been torn down.
For the 50th anniversary a local historian revived the story to coincide with the opening of a new hotel in McMinnville.
One of the visitors was retired journalist Bill Powell, who broke the original story.
He said thel950 headline “At Long Last Authentic Photographs of a Flying Saucer "" should be read carefully.
A4 The Bakersfield Californian The Louis Vuitton bag and its contents that was found — and turned in — by John Suhrhoff.
Man returns million-dollar purse BY JUSTIN M NORTON The Associated Press SAN FRANCISCO — John Suhrhoff found the Louis Vuitton bag on a Sausalito park bench during a lunch stop in the scenic city following a weekend hike.
But the respiratory therapist didn’t think of heading to a pawn shop — he returned the bag to Sausalito police headquarters on Monday afternoon after failing to track down the owners.
The bag is en route to the Ghannadian family of Toronto, Canada, who were in Northern California for a daughter’s wedding.
The Ghannadians told the Marin Independent Journal of Novato that their flight to Toronto was scheduled for Sunday evening, so they decided to visit Sausalito.
The town is known for its waterfront views of San Francisco and is a tourist hub.
Shahla Ghannadian briefly left her husband in charge of the purse, which contained jewelry she wore at the wedding, according to the paper.
Ghannadian started crying when she returned to her San Francisco hotel and realized the bag was gone, the paper said.
The family went to Sausalito police headquarters and didn’t have any luck — and were told chances were slim the bag would be returned.
Kurtis Skoog said it’s rare to find someone so honest that they’d pass up a bag of expensive loot.
Many others would have tried to pawn the contents off for a fraction of their value, he said.
Suhrhoff is happy the bag is headed back to Canada but couldn’t help wondering why the family was taking such pricey items on day trips to begin with.
D epending on which opinion polls you read, there’s a core of “Apollo Moon flight"" disbelievers even within the United States perhaps 10 per cent of the population, and up to twice that in specific demographic groups.
Overseas, the results are similar, fanned by local attitudes toward the United States in general and technology in particular.
Some religious fundamentalists Hare Krishna cultists and some extreme Islamic mullahs, for example declare the theological impossibility of human trips to other worlds in space.
Resentment of American cultural and political dominance clearly fuels other ‘disbelievers’, including those political groups which had been hoping for a different outcome to the ‘Space Race’ for example, many Cuban schools, both in Cuba and where Cuban schoolteachers were lent, such as Sandinista Nicaragua, taught their students that Apollo was a fraud.
Like a counter-cultural heresy, the ‘Moon hoax’ theme had been lingering beyond the fringes of mainstream society for decades.
A self-published pamphlet here, a ‘B-grade’ science fiction movie there, or a radio talk show guest over there for many years it all looked like a shrivelling leftover of the original human inability to accept the reality of revolutionary changes.
But, in the last 10 years, an entirely new wave of hoax theories has appeared on cable TV, on the internet, via self-publishing, and through other ‘alternate’ publication methods.
These methods are the result of the technological progress that Apollo symbolised, now ironically fuelling the arguments against one of the greatest technological achievements in human history.
NASA’s official reaction to these and other questions was both clumsy and often counter-productive.
The poor TV impression he gave a know-it-all ‘rocket scientist’ denouncing each argument as false but usually without providing supporting evidence may have been due to deliberate editing by the producers to make the ‘NASA guy’ look arrogant and contemptuous, but to a large degree it accurately reflected NASA’s institutional attitude to the entire controversy.
The disappointing results of participating seemed to strengthen the view within NASA that the best response was no response avoid anything that might ‘dignify’ the charges.
Dr Roger Launius, then the chief of the history office at headquarters, was an excepNASA WASHED ITS HANDS OF THE PROJECT tion to NASA’s overall unwillingness to engage with the issue.
As an amateur space historian and folklorist, I had been discussing with him for years the need for NASA to fulfill its outreach charter and to issue a series of modest monographs on various widespread cultural myths about space activities.
Launius, nearing retirement in early 2002, decided it was time for a detailed response to the Apollo hoax accusations, and offered me a sole-source contract to write a monograph that analysed why such stories seemed so attractive to so many people.
Launius departed NASA soon thereafter, leaving the project in the care of a junior historian, Dr Stephen Garber.
My requests for input from various NASA offices and public educational organisations soon reached the ears of news reporters, and some print stories appeared in late October.
Although NASA officials were somewhat taken aback by the publicity, they were at first inclined to defend the project on educational grounds.
What Plait had actually said was that he felt it was proper for NASA to respond, but that it did seem ""beneath their dignity” to be forced to do it.
Contrary to Jennings's account, Plait fully supported the monograph contract.
Their dignity called into question, and fearing angry telephone calls from congressmen returning to Washington after the election, they decided to revoke the contract.
They paid for work done to date, and washed their hands of the project.
And to me, the Moon hoax controversy was not a bothersome distraction, but a unique opportunity.
And the localised success of the hoaxist arguments thus provides us with a detection system to identify just where these resources are inadequate.
I intend to complete the project, depending on successfully arranging new funding sources.
The popularity of this particular myth is a heaven-sent (or an outer-space-sent) opportunity to address fundamental issues of public understanding of technological controversies.
The reaction “is crystal clear and has brought to our attention the unintended reaction of you and other conscientious friends of ours to the exhibition,” Knowles wrote in the cancellation notice.
LVtatt Sender, the gallery's creative director, resigned in protest. nr rritipQ The 6 -foot sculpture was the victim of “a strong-arming from people who haven't seen the show, seen what we're doing,"" Sender said.
The hotel and the gallery were overrun Thursday with angry phone calls and e-mails about the exhibit.
Sender said the calls included death threads over the work of artist Cosimo Cavallaro, who was described as disappointed by the decision to cancel the display.
The sculpture was to debut Monday evening, the day after Palm Sunday and just four days before Christians mark the crucifixion of Jesus Christ on Good Friday.
WWW.ALBUM-ONLINE.COM The fine art of torture and out, they became unbearably hot during the day.
The plank that served as a bed was at a 20-degree angle, making it impossible to sleep without falling to the floor.
If the prisoner tried to walk around, he would stumble over bricks and other objects scattered on the floor.
The only option left to prisoners was staring at the walls, which were covered with optical illusions, cubes, coloured circles and spirals.
Lighting effects gave the impression that the dizzying patterns were moving.
Laurencic told the military court that he had been commissioned to build the cells by a prominent anarchist who had heard of similar ones used elsewhere in the republican zone during the civil war, possibly in Valencia.
Also, according to the prosecutors, a jail in Murcia in south-east Spain forced prisoners to view the infamously disturbing scene from Dali and Bunuel’s 1929 surrealist film Un Chien Andalou, in which an eyeball is sliced open.
As a supporter of Franco, he was an of so-called “degenerative SPANISH ART HISTORIAN JOSE Milicua has uncovered what is alleged to be the first use of modern art as a deliberate form of torture.
In the Barcelona jails constructed by the CNT (Confederacion Nacional de Trabajadores, the anarcho-syndicalist trades union) during the Spanish Civil War, new ways were devised of making prisoners crack up and spill their secrets.
Bauhaus artists were said to have inspired a series of secret cells built in 1938 under the direction of a 37-year-old Frenchman of Austrian parentage called Alfonso Laurencic, a double agent posing as a CNT supporter.
He swindled both sides in the war, making huge amounts of money by smuggling people out of the Republican zone.
Milicua’s information came from an account by RL Chacon of Laurencic’s trial before a Francoist military tribunal in 1939.
Laurencic so-called “coloured cells” were hidden from foreign journalists who visited the makeshift jails on Vallmajor and Saragossa streets.
His “psychotechnic” torture techniques were allegedly inspired by ideas of geometric abstraction and surrealism and by avant garde art theories on the psychological impact of colours, developed in the Bauhaus era by Paul Klee, Wassily Kandinsky and Johannes Itten.
Green produced melancholy and sadness, which was why this was used for the glass in the cell windows.
Covered with tar inside enemy art”, including the output of the Bauhaus and the surrealists.
THE EDITOR, FORTEAN TIMES, IFG LTD, 9 DALLINGTON STREET, LONDON EC1V0BQ, UK OR TO DAVID.SUTTON@IFGMAGS.COM Moha-moha revisited The old cryptozoological yarn of the moha-moha may have arisen from a real aboriginal tradition argues ULRICH MAGIN A B C 67.
Three views of the moha-moha, 1890, according to Miss S Lovell ULRICH MAGIN has written books on ufology, geomancy, cryptozoology and Charles Fort.
O n 8 June 1890, Miss S Lovell, standing on the beach of Fraser Island, Queensland, Australia, saw a most mysterious beast.
The story can be read in a number of classic books on sea-serpents, from Commander Rupert Gould’s The Case for the Seaserpent to Bernard Heuvelmans’ classic In the Wake of the Sea-serpents.
She claimed that the natives she asked had seen the creature previously and were very much afraid of it, as it had been known to attack people.
The tale of the moha-moha is a cryptozoological classic, but it is also a controversial one.
Gould thought the story authentic, but Heuvelmans was sure it was just a hoax based on Indian legends.
He had good reasons for his opinion the sighting report is full of inconsistencies, the measurements do not fit, the creature behaves in a fashion that defies normal biology, and it has features (such as horizontal lines of large overlapping scales) that, from a mechanical point of view, simply won’t do.
What’s more, the moha-moha was never ever seen again it remains a unique sea-serpent, a one-off, something never repeated.
But there is evidence overlooked as far as I am aware that the natives knew their moha-moha well.
Whether their moha-moha was identical to the sphinxlike composite observed by the Australian schoolteacher is another question.
Miss Lovell wrote several (not completely consistent) letters about her curious encounter.
Enter the “mochel-mochel” which is also discussed in Smith’s book, although he doesn’t notice any connection.
In the 1850s, Thomas Hall reported on this Queensland version of the bunyip, a local Australian lake monster, when he heard rumors of it in the Darling Downs.
It was a water creature the natives were very afraid of, and they alleged it had eaten all the fish in a waterhole.
There were probably other white witnesses on other occasions, but their descriptions have not come down to us.
Therefore, there might actually be a genuine aboriginal mythical beast behind Miss Lovell’s sighting on that day in June 1890.
This doesn’t explain what she sawit remains an impossible creature, a fantastic beast but it means that at least there appears to be a genuine Australian tradition of a water beast which is called moka-moka or mochel-mochel, no matter what really lies behind it.
Miss Lovell did not pluck her adventure out of thin air, but based it on something she would have heard from the natives.
Drawing of Miss Lovell's moha-moha from Heuvelmans’ In the Wake of the Sea Serpents.
Now they have been unchained from their chain; they salivate; they are merry.
This is what Jamukha, the stepbrother of Genghis Khan, said of the bloody Universal Ruler and his fellow fighters.
Jamukha, a relative and clan chief, helped Temudjin free his family when it was kidnapped.
Years later the “hounds” captured Jamukha, who rebelled against Genghis Khan, and they murdered him.
When they captured Jamukha, Genghis Khan did Jamukha the honor of killing him by rolling him up in a carpet and crushing him with boulders, so that the blood would remain in the body.
In the years that followed, the hounds also killed millions of people throughout the world and crushed thriving civilizations, for their conquest was a terrible disaster of the Middle Ages.
The Mongols of the 13th century laid waste to nations, cities, towns, and villages.
Their cruelty was but a part of the comprehensive strategy of conquest.
The Mongols instilled fear and sought to convince the world that resistance was futile.
They made sure that the tales of their savagery and merciless slaughter had preceded them.
A Cart Unlike Any Other The Mongols carried their tents on four-wheeled carts, and they also used twowheeled carts covered with black felt thoroughly treated with tallow to waterproof it.
The carts provided them with enhanced and rapid mobility, for the Mongols carried their families, belongings, supplies, and provisions in the carts.
Ancient Mongol records tell that Subudai Bagatur, one of the “hounds,” had a habit of resting in a special vehicle during his military campaigns.
This vehicle was made of a special metal, and no arrow could penetrate its walls.
Not long ago, according to Viktor Nikitin in Tayni inikh mirov , a twowheeled, covered, metal vehicle was unearthed during archaeological excavations in the vicinity of Pusan, South Korea.
A chemical analysis of the metal indicated that it was alloyed steel, with an admixture of molybdenum and tungsten.
I made inquiries about this vehicle, writing letters to archaeologists in South Korea and others in the United States who study Korean archaeology.
I received no replies and have not been able to ascertain the veracity of the find.
The conquerors from the steppes borrowed technology from the conquered nations, from the Chinese, Arabs, and Persians.
Their armies were accompanied by wise and learned foreigners, as well as forcefully conscripted soldiers from among the vanquished people.
Tungsten and Molybdenum Let us look at the metals that were admixed into the alloy.
A well-known Nazi artillery piece, “Big Bertha,” contained molybdenum as an essential component of its steel.
Native molybdenum does not occur but is obtained principally from molybdenite.
To get pure samples of the metal, metallurgists first dissolve the oxide in ammonium hydroxide to make ammonium molybdate and afterward reduce the molybdate with hydrogen to form the metal.
China is reported to have about 75 percent of the world s tungsten resources.
Tungsten has the highest melting point and lowest vapor pressure of all metals, and at temperatures of more than 3,000°F has the highest tensile strength.
Tungsten has excellent corrosion resistance and is attacked only slightly by most mineral acids.
Tungsten compounds are used for cutting tools and high-temperature lubricants.
The first attempts to produce tungsten steel were made in 1855, but industrial use was not possible because of the high price of tungsten metal.
Tungsten occurs in the natural state only in the form of chemical compounds with other elements and is usually mined underground.
The ore is first crushed and milled to liberate the tungsten mineral crystals.
Tungsten carbide is, quantitatively, the most important tungsten compound.
Because of its hardness, it is the main constituent in cemented carbide.
Its main constituent is tungsten monocarbide , with a hardness close to diamond.
By the way, the most promising area of growth for tungsten demand in the military arena is in the manufacture of armorpiercing projectiles, particularly for smallcaliber ammunition.
Mongolia was a horse-based culture, and the Mongolian steppes and deserts were not centers of advanced metallurgy.
Fame Measured in Blood In the 13th century, Mongolia was one of the most powerful states in the world.
Temudjin, one of the most famous conquerors of history, extended his empire across Asia to the Adriatic Sea.
A warrior and ruler who started from obscure and insignificant beginnings, Genghis Khan used the military prowess of his united tribes to create a nation that spanned from China to Turkey and Iraq, from Egypt to Russia, all the way over to Korea and down to Vietnam.
Their warlords, cruel but brilliant military leaders, created the largest empire known to man.
The Mongol military machine is the basis for every military in the world today.
Of all the commanders who arrived from Mongolia, Subudai Bagatur was the greatest.
He led the Western onslaught of the Mongol army against Russia, Europe, and the Caucasian countries.
Subudai outlived Genghis Khan and continued to serve his people under Batu Khan and Ugedey, the second son of Genghis Khan.
Mongol Conquests Genghis Khan conquered the northeastern part of China in the years 1211 through 1215.
Subudai and another trusted general, Chupe Noyon, each with a battal16 Fate / April 2003 ion-size military unit, terrorized the Chinese countryside, cleverly using the rich technology of the Chinese empire against them.
The detachment of the Mongol army, led by Jebe and Subudai, the same detachment that had made war on Muhammad and his son Jalal-ad-Din (12001231), attacked the kingdom of Georgia several times in the early 1220s.
In 1221, a reconnaissance detachment of 15,000 Mongols separated from the Central Asian expedition and traveled around the Caspian Sea, exploring the lands on its western shore.
It was Subudai who led the Mongol horsemen when they met with a superior Russian force and their Kipchak Cuman allies.
Batu Khan sent Subudai to quell a revolt led by Jiku and Baian in 1238 and 1239.
Next, Subudai s forces descended upon the Ukrainian steppe, conquering Polovtsy in 1239 and Kiev in 1240.
In 1241 the Mongol invaders charged into central Europe and defeated the combined armies of Germany, Poland, and Bohemia in the battle of Liegnitz.
Other parts of Subudai’s force descended into Hungary from the Carpathian Mountains from several directions.
The Hungarian king fled, and the Mongols conquered the country, establishing garrisons to enforce their control.
Only the news of the death in Mongolia of the Great Khan Ugedey saved Western Europe from Subudai Bagatur and his merciless, disciplined, fearless Mongol hordes.
Mongols Invade Korea Korea is an ancient country with a history of more than 5,000 years.
But it experienced many bloody periods, and Mongol invaders caused one of them.
In 1231, the Mongols invaded Korea, forcing the Goryeo royal family to flee to Kanghwa Island near Seoul.
After the death of the last Mongolian Emperor Mongke in 1259, the Mongol Empire broke up into the Golden Horde of Batu Khan , inhabiting the Russian lands; the Kingdom of Ugedey , who had conquered East Turkestan and Uzbek lands, and the Yuan State of Kubla Khan, which included the Mongolian and Chinese territories.
Once Kubla Khan had pacified China, he turned his sights on other countries of Asia and conquered the empires where Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, and Indonesia are located today.
He invaded Korea and used it as a base in an attempt to conquer Japan, but he failed.
Unlike Genghis Khan’s, his army consisted mostly of infantry, with little cavalry, and he was also the first Mongolian ruler to have a navy.
Perhaps he also had in his possession Subudai’s two-wheeled, covered vehicle made of molybdenum and tungsten.
Technological Wonders of Ancient China Based on my research, I have come to the conclusion that the Mongols brought the mysterious metal vehicle from China.
Subudai shed enough blood and spent sufficient time in China to loot the country of its treasures.
At the same time, we need to remember that the Mongols did not persecute people for being Muslim, Buddhist, or Christian.
Their capital of Karakorum contained a Muslim mosque, a Buddhist temple, and quite possibly a April 2003 / Fate 17 Donne P Crane Donne P Crane Gifts being presented to Genghis Khan by Russian dukes.
Theirs was a ruthless, merciless empire, yet it assimilated other cultures and tolerated other faiths, unlike some of the modern nation states.
At one time in its history, China was the world’s most technologically advanced society.
Indeed, for much of ancient times and the Middle Ages, China was significantly more advanced than Europe.
Many important innovations were developed in ancient China, such as the mariner’s compass, papermaking, the clock, the wheelbarrow, the crossbow, the animal harness, the printing press, ink, playing cards, gunpowder, and paper money.
Ancient Chinese scientists possessed knowledge of protochemistry and alchemy.
On September 18, 2000, China’s newspaper, People's Daily . ; informed the world that Chinese geologists had discovered world-class mineral deposits in what used to be part of an ancient Silk Road, the Hexi Corridor, in northwestern China.
The actual reserves of nickel, copper, cobalt, platinum, tungsten, and gold in the corridor could be twice as much as the verified discoveries.
Luoyang, one of the seven ancient cities in China, lies in the northwestern part of Henan province.
Jiangxi Province in southeast China also has rich mineral resources, including tungsten, selenium, tellurium, rubidium, and lithium.
The ancient Chinese developed methods for the manufacture of steel that have only recently been matched in the West.
The Chinese were able to develop a method for converting cast iron into steel by blowing air on the molten metal, which reduced the carbon content.
The ancient Chinese developed technologies that were fantastically advanced for the time.
According to the Xinhua Agency , Chinese surgeons were able to perform a craniotomy, the surgical opening of the skull — difficult even in modern times — as early as 4,000 years ago.
Such great minds of Soviet science as Ivan Efremov lend credence to the legends that the ancient Chinese possessed a medical device capable of seeing inside human bodies, non-intrusive, and made of special glass.
We have yet to find evidence of the ancient production of tungsten alloys.
If we do, then the mystery of Subudai’s impenetrable vehicle will be solved.
There is another interesting episode of Subudai’s biography that involves a search for the treasures of Genghis Khan.
A Pearl of Central Asia Kyrgyzstan is nestled between Uzbek deserts, the Kazakh steppe, Tajikistan, and the outback of Western China.
The majestic Tian Shan and Pamir mountain ranges stretch across this country.
Lake Issyk-Kul, a turquoise, unspoiled water reservoir, is located at an altitude of 5,291 feet and occupies the central part of the valley surrounded by the snowcapped Kungey Ala-Tau and Teskey AlaToo mountain ranges.
This vast lake lies in northeastern Kyrgyzstan, near the borders with China and Kazakhstan.
It doesn’t freeze in winter; its waters are surprisingly warm and exceptionally transparent.
It is the second largest highland lake in the world, after Lake Titicaca in Peru.
The lake’s length is 1 10 miles, its width about 40 miles, and it has a maximum depth of 1,1 10 feet.
Associated with it are Neanderthal camps, ancient burial mounds, clusters of cave drawings, mysterious dolls made from stones, and the ruins of strange settlements, towns, and graves hidden beneath the warm waters.
There are more than 100,000 petroglyphs on the shore of Lake Issyk-Kul dating back to the Neolithic period.
Different nomadic tribal cultures that dwelt in the area left artifacts of their vanished ways of life.
Archaeologists of Central Asia are aware of more than a dozen ancient and medieval sunken settlements on the bottom of the lake.
One example is the town of Chigu, capital of the once powerful state of the Usuns.
Investigators have discovered ceramics, earthen pottery, and bronze and copper artifacts, coins, and items from the Mongol period.
The latter had their own name for Lake Issyk-Kul; they called it Lemur-u-nor.
The Great Silk Road and the Mongols The Great Silk Road functioned as an extremely important trade route from China to the Roman Empire in the second century B.c.
The road was about 4,300 miles 18 Fate / April 2003 Fishermen on Issyk-Kul lake in Kyrgyzstan. long.
Before the discovery of the sea route to India, the Silk Road was the most important connection between the Orient and the West.
The most valuable commodity imported from China was silk; hence, the entire transcontinental trade route was named the Silk Road.
Religion, too, was a precious commodity of the great Silk Road, for Buddhism came to China from India along the northern branch of the trade route.
And nowadays, scattered throughout the mountains and valleys of Kyrgyzstan, are ruins of numerous Zoroastrian, Buddhist, and Nestorian Christian monuments.
The geographic location of Kyrgyzstan assured its significance on the Great Silk Road.
Thus, from the very beginning, three branches of the road ran through the area.
In the 13th century, Mongol warriors under Genghis Khan invaded and devastated Kyrgyzstan.
They destroyed irrigation systems, laid waste to towns, and turned farms to dust.
There were settlements and caravanserai on the shores of Issyk-Kul, along the Silk Road, from the seventh century B.c.
The towns prospered, the trade thrived — and then came the vicious and merciless Mongol hordes.
The devastation inflicted on the territory was so harsh that the populations and cultures of Central Asia did not begin to recover until the Russian expansion there in the 19th century.
But before their prosperous towns were annihilated, the rich inhabitants hid their treasures, either in the soil or on the bottom of the beautiful lake.
The Templars on the Lake The search for the treasures has never stopped since the Mongols arrived on the shores of the lake ages ago.
None other than Subudai Bagatur searched for the treasures in Issyk-Kufs waters.
The legends had it that the Nestorian Christians had reached the lake and founded a monastery on the northern shore.
The ancient cemeteries discovered in the area cover the period from the middle of the 13th to the middle of the 14th century.
But the plague did not enter the Silk Road at the time of the Subudai s sojourn at the lake; the first victims were recorded in 1338.
Apparently, the Nestorians were aiding the Templars in building a castle somewhere on an island in Issyk-Kul.
Here, supposedly, was the place where the Templars brought their fabulous treasures.
The Knights Templar were a tremendously influential and powerful religious monastic military order that was formed as a result of the Crusades.
Their wealth, limitless powers, and influence caused them to have prominent enemies.
They were destroyed by Philip IV of France and Pope Clement V, and by 1314, they were gone, but not forgotten, from the European scene.
We will not explore the countless myths and legends about the order, but it would be of great interest to historians to find out what the fearsome Mongol commander knew about the Templars.
They did meet on the Polish battlefield of Liegnitz, but the knights were no match for the Mongol armies.
Perhaps one of the imprisoned knights knew too much about the treasures hidden by his order in the Issyk-Kul and revealed the information under torture.
Treasures of the Nestorians Nestorian Christianity flourished in China for several hundred years.
The sect s followers spread out from Syria and founded colonies in the cities along the Silk Road through Central Asia.
When Emperor Constantine made Christianity the official religion of the Roman Empire in the middle of the fourth century, he suppressed Hellenistic teachings and alchemy, among other things, as being pagan.
The Nestorians, a sect of dissident Christians, smuggled out forbidden manuscripts to Persia ind.0.
In 1218, Genghis Khan sent his “hound” Jebe and a large military detachment to the Chu Valley.
Ugedey, one of the sons of the Ruler of the Universe, was a participant in the military operation.
This town appeared in the ninth to eleventh centuries and became the capital of the Karakhanid Kaganat of Central Asia.
Local Christians, together with monks of the Suyab Abbey near Balasagun, knew quite well the enemy that was coming their way and fled, taking their treasures with them.
This place is 4200 feet above sea level in a cul-de-sac formed by the Tian Shan, Pamir, and Kunlun ranges.
The Christians never reached it, because another Mongol detail was approaching from the Santash mountain pass, over the watershed between the Ili and Issyk-Kul basins.
There was a river that ran into this cave, and the Christians were able to divert its waters for a while.
They hid the treasure in the cave, probably underground; then they placed stone slabs over the hiding place.
They marked one slab with a cross and then covered everything with soil.
The river was again allowed to run into the cave, and the treasure was saved or lost, depending on ones point of view.
Treasures of the Universal Ruler In 1227, Genghis Khan was severely injured and died shortly after falling from a horse.
Some legends have it that he was buried on the Ordos Plateau (Inner Mongolia) of China and that a shrine was built there.
There are conflicting accounts of why the Universal Ruler chose the area.
Some state that because of its beauty, he chose it as the place to be buried.
There were to be no tombs for Mongol noblemen after their death, but imperial temples were built in order to permit commemoration of royal ancestors.
The exact gravesite of Temudjin is one of archaeology’s lasting mysteries.
Virgins (their precise quantity undetermined) were entombed with the Mongol leader.
The Mongols rode horses back and forth over his grave to forever hide it, and the treasures buried with Temudjin.
As a rule, when any Mongolian nobleman died, his burial immediately became a taboo subject, but not to the extent of Temudjin’s.
There have been reports recently that American scientists have found a possible Temudjin gravesite in Mongolia, but could not proceed with their investigations because of problems with Mongolian authorities.
Universal Recognition China has had a special relationship with the legacy of the Universal Ruler.
Most rulers of China, including the Ming and Qing Dynasties, the Kuomintang Republican regime, and the Communists, gave official recognition and support to the founder of the Mongol Empire — even after the collapse of the Mongol-established Yuan Dynasty of China.
The Red Guards of the Cultural Revolution had no such respect and did destroy some important artifacts from Genghis Khan’s times.
Even today, one can learn much from the visit to Dongsheng, China, and Genghis Khan’s mausoleum.
For example, there are experts in China who discount Mongolia as a burial place 20 Fate / April 2003 of the Ruler of the Universe.
One skeptic is Luo Xinyou, a professor at the Institute of Minorities at China’s Academy of Social Sciences in Beijing.
Scientists in Kyrgystan believe that the treasures and the body of the Universal Ruler were actually hidden at the bottom of Lake Issyk-Kul.
Hiding the Treasure There are old Kyrgyz legends about how Ugedey, one of the sons of Genghis Khan, prepared a coffin made of a very hard and durable material.
His father’s body, along with treasures of gold and jewels, was put into the coffin and buried on the bottom of the lake.
But there were more Mongol treasures to hide, and that is precisely what the son did.
He placed the jewels and gems in a mountain cave that was later flooded.
There are reports that the KGB and the Geological Council of the Kyrgyz SSR were engaged in the search for Genghis Khan’s treasures.
Pravda , the well-known Soviet newspaper, ran an article on August 24, 1975.
Titled “Return to the Secret,” it informed the Soviets that the Ministry of Internal Affairs was searching for Genghis Khan’s treasures in Lake Issyk-Kul.
It was conducted by the Geological Department of the Kyrgyzstan Soviet Republic, based on a map the Red Chinese gave to their Soviet allies.
However, it is unclear whether the treasure the Soviets were trying to find was that of the Nestorians (most likely, because the people who hid it were described as being chased by nomads) or the Mongols.
Soviet Hunt Is Ended The map was very poor and nothing was discovered, probably because the local inhabitants secretly and skillfully sabotaged the work.
The area was surrounded by barbed wire, and guards were placed to protect the treasures.
The biggest obstacle, however, was Stalin’s death in 1953 and the turmoil that followed.
In 1973, a popular Soviet newspaper, Trud , published an article about treasures hidden throughout the Soviet Union.
Tyup was mentioned as the location where Genghis Khan’s treasure was buried.
The information was based on Soviet secret police files from the 1930s.
Other fascinating developments can be found at www.agatfreenet.kg/agat/index.htm Some hushed-up activities, conducted by Kyrgyz geologists, took place in 1976 and 1977.
The geologists researched ancient legends and looked for the treasure in the area of Kurmentu Canyon.
There were once gold and silver mines, but the geologists were looking for treasures, and apparently, found some proof, but they needed input from archaeologists.
There have been free-lancers as well, especially after the fall of the USSR, because the new Civic Code of the Kyrgyz Republic states that anyone who finds the treasure has the right to 50 percent of the treasure’s value.
Do Not Disturb Whatever one’s opinion of the Mongol conquests may be, I think we can all agree that looting or disturbing sacred ancient graves is not the answer to finding out the truth about the past.
Modern Mongolians will not look kindly at anyone who would disturb the burial ground of their ancient leader.
This is their tradition — no one is allowed to lay hands on the bones of their ancestors — and their obedience to the will of Genghis Khan.
He did not want any sign of his grave to be left after his death lest his everlasting peace be disturbed.
T Paul Stonehill is a California-based writer, lecturer, researcher and consultant.
April 2003 / Fate 21 CIA — The World Factbook The popular view of the Mesolithic era as a time when humans lived on a diet of nuts, berries and shellfish may need revising after the discovery of a thighbone in the River Trent in Nottinghamshire of a woman who died about 7,700 years ago.
Nitrogen levels in the bone were measured at 9,3, on a scale running from 6 for herbivore cattle to 10 for wolves.
Additional tests carried out on the thighbone indicate that the Mesolithic woman's diet contained no marine food at all, contrary to the cliche of the seashoredwelling Mesolithic hunter gatherer.
MORE NEW MONKEYS Brazil-based Dutch zoologist Dr Marc van Roosmalen continues his extraordinary success at discovering and describing new species of Amazonian primates with his recent formal naming in the journal Neotropical Primates of two additional finds of the furry kind a pair of lately-revealed titi monkeys the size of small cats.
Callicebus stephennashi, or Stephen Nash's titi, is predominantly silver in colour, but with contrasting red sideburns, chest, and inner limbs, plus a black brow.
The two newly discovered and named titi monkeys, Prince Bernhard's titi and Stephen Nash's titi , with their distinctive red sideburns.
John Holmes shot this video footage of what might be Morgawr while filming his wife.
IN THE EARLY EVENING OF 1 AUGUST 1999, John Holmes of St Austell, Cornwall, who worked for the Natural History Museum for 19 years, was in the Gerrans Bay area, on the Cornish coast south-east of Truro, filming video footage of his wife as she swam close to the beach.
At first he thought it was a basking shark or a killer whale, but as he focused on the object through the zoom lens of his video camera, he saw it was an unfamiliar long-necked creature.
He estimated the length of the head at 25 cm , with a mid-neck diameter of 21cm , becoming much broader where the neck entered the water.
The creature appeared serpentine, with a flattened and very mobile reptilian head.
Mr Holmes only filmed a short sequence before the creature dived out of sight.
Back home, watching the footage in slow motion mode, he noticed the head and neck arch over to the side, followed by what appeared to be a rhomboid anterior flipper.
One suggested it might be a floundering oarfish, but couldn't be sure because the video was too indistinct.
ALOW, ROUNDED BACK BROKE THE WATER'S SURFACE Two experienced seamen believe they may have seen Morgawr this year near the Manacles off The Lizard.
Dan Matthew, cox for the St Piran patrol boat who works for Cornwall Sea Fisheries, was on a small boarding boat travelling from the Manacles towards Maenporth at around 10.30am on 8 May when he saw something strange.
I’ve boated in the Fal for many years and I’ve never seen anything like this.
Four days later, Mike Bedford, chief engineer aboard the patrol boat, was at the quayside in Falmouth chatting to 82-year-old fisherman George Vinnicombe, who said he had also seen something strange on 8 May.
For more on Morgawr, see FT 16:17 -19 , Mortsafes Mortsafes were contraptions designed to protect graves from disturbance.
The necessity for medical students to learn anatomy by attending dissections of human subjects was frustrated by the limited allowance of dead bodies the corpses of executed criminals granted by the government.
As such, there had been bodysnatching close to the schools of anatomy in Scotland since the early 18th century.
Many people were determined to protect the graves of newly deceased friends and relatives.
The rich could afford heavy table tombstones, vaults, mausolea and iron cages around graves.
The poor began to place flowers and pebbles on graves to detect disturbances and dig heather and branches into the soil to make disinterment more difficult.
Large stones, often coffin-shaped, sometimes the gift of a wealthy man to the parish, were placed over new graves.
Friends and relatives took turns or hired men to watch graves through the hours of darkness.
Watching societies were often formed in towns, one in Glasgow having 2,000 members.
These were iron or iron-and-stone devices of great weight, in many different designs.
Often they were complex heavy iron contraptions of rods and plates, padlocked together examples have been found close to all Scottish medical schools.
A plate was placed over the coffin and rods with heads were pushed through holes in it.
These rods were kept in place by locking a second plate over the first to form extremely heavy protection.
They were placed over the coffins for about six weeks, then removed for further use when the body inside was sufficiently decayed.
And the man will remain a quietly anonymous fixture of the landscape, camouflaged to the point of near invisibility.
That description relies on a few 7 unknowable assumptions, obviously, but they’re relatively safe.
The man’s isolation has been so well-established— and is so mind-bendingly extreme— that portraying him silently enduring another moment of utter solitude is a practical guarantee of reportorial accuracy.
He’s an Indian, and Brazilian officials have concluded that he’s the last survivor of an uncontacted tribe.
They fust became aware of his existence nearly 15 years ago and for a decade launched numerous expeditions to track him, to ensure his safety, and to try' to establish peaceful contact with him.
In 2007, with ranching and logging closing in quickly on all sides, government officials declared a 31 -square-mile area around him off-limits to trespassing and development.
History offers few examples of people who can rival his solitude in terms of duration and degree.
The one that comes closest is the ""Lone Woman of San Nicolas’’— an Indian woman first spotted by an otter hunter in 1853, completely alone on an island off the coast of California.
Catholic priests who sent a boat to fetch her determined that she had been alone for as long as 18 years, the last survivor of her tribe.
Certainly other last tribesmen and -women have succumbed unobserved throughout history, the world unaware of their passing.
But what makes the man in Brazil unique is not merely the extent of his solitude or the fact that the government is aware of his existence.
Advanced societies invariably have subsumed whatever indigenous populations they've encountered, determining those tribes’ fates for them.
If peaceful contact is established with the lone Indian, they want it to be his choice.
After years of often-tragic attempts to assimilate into modern life the people who still inhabit the few remaining wild places on the planet, the policy is a step in a totally different direction.
Government field agents specializing in isolated tribes soon found one of his huts— a tiny shelter of palm thatch, with a mysterious hole dug in the center of the floor.
As they continued to search for whoever had built that hut, they discovered that the man was on the run, moving from shelter to shelter, abandoning each hut as soon as loggers— or the agents— got close.
No other tribes in the region were knowm to live like he did, digging holes inside of huts— more than five feet deep, rectangular, serving no apparent purpose.
He was unclothed, appeared to be in his mid-30s (he’s now 7 in his late 40, give or take a few years), and always armed with a bow-and-arrow.
On one occasion, the Indian delivered a clear message to one agent who pushed the attempts at contact too far. an arrow to the chest Peaceful contact proved elusive, but those encounters helped the agents stitch together a profile of a man with a calamitous past.
In one jungle clearing they found the buEdozed ruins of several huts, each featuring the exact same kind of hole— 14 in all— that the lone Indian customarily dug inside his dwellings.
They concluded that it had been the site of his village, and that it had been destroyed by land-hungry settlers in early 1996.
Just months before the agents began tracking the lone Indian, they made peaceful first contact with two other tribes that lived in the same region.
The rest of the tribe, explained the chief, had been killed during a raid by men with guns and chainsaws.
If you go to Rondonia today, none of the local landowners will claim any knowledge of these anecdotal massacres.
But most aren’t afraid to loudly voice their disdain over the creation of reserves for such small tribes.
They will say that it’s absurd to save 31 square miles of land for the benefit of just one man, when a productive ranch potentially could provide food for thousands.
That argument wilts under scrutiny, in part because thousands of square miles of already-cleared forest throughout the Amazon remain barren wastelands, undeveloped.
The only economic model in which increased production absolutely depends on increased clearing is a strictly local one.
The government agents know this, which is why they view the protection of the lone tribesman as a question human rights, not economics.
He eats mostly wild game, which he either hunts with his bow-and-arrow or traps in spiked-bottom pitfalls.
He grows a few crops around his huts, including com and manioc, and often collects honey from hives that stingless bees construct in the hollows of tree trunks.
Some of the markings he makes on trees have suggested to indigenous experts that he maintains a spiritual life, which they’ve speculated might help him survive the psychological toil of being, to a certain extent, the last man standing in a w r orld of one.
I get Facebook updates telling me what people half a world away are eating for breakfast.
Corporations and governments are pushing deeper and farther than ever in search of bankable resources.
Some Brazilians believe that the rapid spread of technology itself might protect his solitude, not threaten it.
The agents who have worked on the lone Indian’s case since 1996 believe that the wider the story of the man’s isolation spreads —something that’s easier than ever now— the safer he’ll be from the sort of stealthy, anonymous raids by local land-grabbers that have decimated tribes in the past.
Technologies like Google Earth and other mapping programs can assist in monitoring the boundaries of his territory.
Instead of launching intrusive expeditions into the tribal territories to verify the Indians' safety, Brazilian officials have announced they will experiment with heat-seeking sensors that can be attached to airplanes flying high enough to cause no disruption on the ground.
He mentioned the man as an aside, giving me a rundown of the latest attempt to force contact with him— the expedition that ended with an agent getting shot in the chest with an arrow.
I traced a huge star and three exclamation points in the margin of my notebook as he moved onto another subject.
Those flags— don 't forget to come hack to this!— were pointless, because 1 couldn’t stop thinking about the lone man and those daredevil expeditions to contact him.
Maui, Kanaloa and Kaneapua, Waha-nui, and Makali‘i are the mythical names belonging to his period.
The names Pua-Nawao and Ku-ma-menehune refer to him as ancestor of the Nawao and Menehune people.
The name Kane-hoa-lani, Malo equates with Kane-wahi-lani and calls him a god who rules the heavens, i It is the name given to the phallic stones called ""stones of Kane"" set up at the place of family worship, where prayer and sacrifice are offered to an ancestral deity for help in time of need.
A legend is told of Lua-nu‘u to explain why the highest peak rising cone-shaped from the ridge back of Kualoa on the north side of Oahu has the name of Kane-hoa-lani and the two lower peaks those of Ku-pulupulu and Pili-lua-nu‘u.
He sails in his canoe with ""his son Ku-pulupulu and his servant Pili"" to the ridge back of Kualoa on Oahu and here performs the sacrifice.
Mu and Menehune People Page 2 those who go to the upland forest for tree felling and by the multitude at the ohia-ku procession when bringing down a tree for the god of a newly dedicated heiau.
Any man who comes into the path of such a procession may be seized for sacrifice.
O Ku-a-mu, go thou to , Enter him, head and tail, Let him become your bread and meat, Return not again until he is devoured of worms.
During this period and under Lua-nu‘u, according to Fomander, the use of incision was introduced, s and from such a reference to the rite as occurs in the Palila legend it is at least possible to infer that incision began during this time to distinguish the Kane people from the ""wild"" and was regarded as a necessary step to becoming a marriageable member of the ancestral stock.
Ku-pulupulu, the son of Lua-nu‘u, is Kolo-i-ke-ao or Laka on the Kumuhonua genealogy and the name itself refers to the wild fem growth of those damp forests of which Laka is patron.
The word pili is a term applied to an indirect relation, a sort of hanger-on.
The Kumuhonua genealogy descends from Pili to Papa, the Kumuuli from Laka to Wakea, husband of Papa.
On the side of mythology, Stokes thinks that Wakea's infidelity to Papa in the affair of Ho‘ohoku is a misplaced episode belonging to Tiki in the south islands and should be related of Ki‘i, who appears twelve generations down the line on the Wakea genealogy as father of Ulu and Nana-ulu from whom descend the high chiefs of the Hawaiian group.
It is in fact likely that the whole Kumuhonua line down to Wakea is a mere threefold duplication of the Wakea line down to Ki‘i.
Kolo-i-ka-po and Kolo-i-ke-ao, bom to Kumuhonua's wife after the two were driven out of their home by Kane's bird, duplicate Haloa the taro plant and Haloa the son, bom from the unfortunate affair of Wakea with Ho‘ohoku, from which, however, sprung the line of ruling chiefs.
Wakea's sin was not one of incest, but of breaking the tapu upon intercourse with women during the tapu of the god.
This may be the explanation of the ""excellent laws"" made by Kumuhonua, alluded to by Kamakau, which were the cause of his being driven out of the land.
They were laws of Kane and as such any infringement was punishable by death.
Stories of the Mu and Menehune forest livers, who are placed by genealogists among the early generations of Kumuhonua' s offspring, also include a legend of migration, but generally not pictured as compulsory, away from their home on this group to some mysterious other world of the gods.
Besides this tradition of migration there have gathered a number of traditions about these Mu and Menehune people, most of them from Kauai and Oahu, all of which represent the two groups as former inhabitants of the islands, sometimes as aborigines but more often as introduced from abroad and living in upland forests.
The Menehune are called ""human"" as distinguished from the ""wild"" Nawao people, most of whom they are said to have exterminated.
To the Menehune, or sometimes to the Mu, is ascribed the building of old heiaus, fishponds, and other stonework found about the island.
The legend of the Kauai chief Ola is connected with these people, and that of the Oahu chief Ka-hanai-o-ke-akua, the ward of Kane and Kanaloa at Waolani.
It is hazardous to attempt to untangle from these legends the actual interweaving of fancy and fact which has gone to their shaping.
The ""wao"" is that part of the mountainside inhabited by spirits alone and it is tempting to regard the Mu and Wa of the Nawao family as nature spirits represented in the silent and noisy living creatures who dwell there, like the rat and the gecko who play so important a part in Hawaiian aumakua legends.
But these aumakua creatures had their human offspring as well from whom Hawaiian families count descent, and it is possible that certain short, stocky family types of very primitive culture were referred to such ancestry.
On the other hand, Hawaiians speak of eepa spirits who are tricky rather than helpful to mankind.
A family story told in Kau district on Hawaii illustrates the benevolent activities of the Menehune spirits and many examples occur in old legends like those of Laka, Hainakolo, and Kawelo.
STORY OF KEAHIALOA Ke-ahi-aloa is adopted by an older sister of her mother and taken to Kauai, where she is neglected, until finally she is taken in by an aged couple who find her nibbling raw potatoes in their garden patch and pity her starving condition.
When she arrives at marriageable age her parents in Kau are made aware of her aunt's neglect and the father goes to seek his child, encouraged by a propitious dream in the form of his guardian shark who assures him of protection.
Meanwhile the land agent of the district has chanced to see the beautiful girl and fallen in love with her.
The Menehune people, her family gods, are preparing a sumptuous marriage feast.
Her father arrives in time to give his blessing, and she decrees that never again shall an older sister be allowed to adopt a niece, but only a younger sister, and this rule is observed in the family to this day.
After the deluge there were left three peoples who made their home on Kauai, the Mu , the Wa , and the Menehune.
Kualu-nui-kini-akua and his son Kualu-nui-pauku-mokumoku (Kualu of the broken rope) are chiefs of the Mu people in Kahiki.
They travel from Ka-paia-ha 4 a to Ka-ma-wae-lua-lani and there Ola is bom.
The Mu are banana-eating people of Kuaihelani, one of the divisions of the floating land of Kane-huna-moku.
A few of them divide from the Menehune at Pele-iholani on Kauai and travel over the ridges to a rocky gulch called Laau in the mountains of Wainiha where they live with their wives and find water in abundance and till the soil of the uplands.
They are dwarf people, banana planters and hairy, with round stomachs as distinguished from the Menehune, who are smooth people with distended stomachs.
After the work is completed for their chief Ola, all return to the floating land of Kueihelani and never return, but two Mu are left asleep under banana leaves, jj.
When Paao comes to Hawaii he first visits Kahiki and brings thence the Manahune-nuku-mu-ai-maia (Bugmouthed Menehune banana eaters), so called because of their small mouths, and they land in Puna.
The Mu-ai-maia are aborigines of Kauai, already there when ’’the first people"" come to the island.
They are a short stocky race with bushy hair, beards, and eyebrows, active runners, and with a guttural way of talking different from the Hawaiian.
They live at Laau at the headwaters of the Wainiha where the wild bananas still grow which were their food.
Campers must be on their guard lest these little people steal up and make off with food that is cooking by piercing it with sharp sticks.
Hawaiians still fear to camp on the small plateau above the valley where the Mu made their home, believing it to be still haunted by their spirits.
Their trails along the Kauai cliffs can still be seen and the hollows where they planted.
The sports in which they indulge are top spinning , quoits , shooting arrows , hide-the-thimble , foot races, sled races, hand wrestling , and diving off a cliff.
Kahunas, soothsayers, astrologers belong to the company of the chief ""Story-tellers, fun-makers, minstrels, and musicians"" furnish him amusement.
The nose-flute and the ti-leaf trumpet, the ukeke stringed instrument, and the shark-skin drum are their accompaniments.
The Menehune migrate under their chief Maoli-ku-laiakea with Hema to New Zealand, hence the name Maori for the New Zealanders, and Raiatea for a place there.
They return to Kauai to serve Ola as expert builders and craftsmen when he becomes ruling chief in Waimea, and increase in such numbers that the grown men can form two rows from Makaweli to Wailua.
A ""bowlegged, deep-voiced"" Menehune named Weli is sheriff for the chief and planted the breadfruit trees on the plain of Lumahai.
A Menehune named Maliu once lingered in a Hawaiian house and was missed from work, but escaped punishment because he was able to report the discovery of a new spring of fresh water.
After living some time in the Lanihuli valley the Menehune are commanded to migrate because they are being troubled by thieving and the men are taking wives among the Hawaiians and destroying the purity of the race.
Along the route they traveled, offerings of leaves are still made to certain rocks which mark the petrified body of one or another of their number who was so changed because of disobedience or folly, and who is still supposed to have control over the weather.
Mewa-lani has two sons, Lonohoonewa, father of Paumakua, and Kahano-a-Newa, Paumakua's uncle.
Ku-leo-nui is their leader ""whose voice was heard all over the island"" summoning them to work.
Waha-nui, ruling chief of Honua-ilalo, oppresses the Menehune, and their god Kane sends Kanaloa and Kaneapua to lead them away from Kapakapaua-a-Kane, the place where Kumuhonua’s sons Laka and Pili have taken refuge, to the Aina-momona-a-Kane , or Ka-one-lauena-a-Kane, or Ka-aina-i-ka-houpo-a-Kane, the original continent which once connected all the island groups before it was overwhelmed and broken up by inundation.
Ola is the son of Kualu-nui-pauku-mokumoku and the chiefess Kuhapu-ola from Pe 4 ape 4 a on the Waimea side above Hanapepe, whom the chief meets clandestinely.
Desiring to bring water to the taro patches of the Waimea flats, he is advised by his kahuna Pi to proclaim a tapu and summon the Menehune people to his aid.
They camp on the flats above called Kanaloa-huluhulu, plant taro (which is still growing on the cliffs of Kalalau), and build a big oven between Kalalau and Waimea.
They also make a road of sticks through the swamps of Alakai to the height above Wainiha.
The chief priest of Ola's father's time is a powerful and designing man who causes any nominee from the chiefs party to be assassinated.
Ola is therefore brought up in retirement as if under the displeasure of his father and only at the age of twenty-four when he is able to defend himself by warlike skill is he publicly elected for the succession.
The chief priest recognizes the youth as he appears before the people and hurls at him the sacred javelin, but Ola wards it off and the priest takes his own life.
Pi is the chief of Waimea who gets the Menehune to construct for him a dam across the Waimea river and a watercourse leading from it to a place above Kiki-a-ola.
Hulukuamauna the priest hears from Kane that only through Kanehunamoku and his people can the dam and water-course of Waimea be constructed.
Kanehunamoku receives from Kane a branch of red fruit as a token of the god’s consent and grants the request.
The Waimea chief also asks for the sacred chiefess Namaka-o-ka-hai for his wife, but this request is refused.
After the completion of the work, Namaka and Kanehunamoku depart with the Menehune and the Mu from Laau to the floating land of Kueihelani and never return.
A curious resemblance between some of the incidents in these Kauai stories and episodes in the legend of Umi on Hawaii may be merely fortuitous or may point to interchange of legends between the two islands.
The story of the birth of Umi, although more fully elaborated, resembles that of Ola.
UMI STORY On a journey into the country, Liloa finds a beautiful woman at her bathing pool and makes her his wife.
He gives her his loincloth, whale-tooth necklace, and war club as tokens for the child.
Umi becomes a nuisance to his supposed father because he gives away food lavishly, and his mother sends him to Liloa wearing the tokens.
The chief makes him a favorite and eventually Umi usurps the place of the legitimate heir.
OLA STORY Ola’s father has an affair with a chiefess from Pe‘ape‘a on the Waimea side above Hanapepe and leaves his malo and whale-tooth necklace for the child who is to be born.
The child grows up mischievous and the mother sends him to the father living in Waimea.
An incident in Rice’s story of the M Bird-man of Wainiha"" who handles invaders at a narrow pass resembles the account of how Nau held back Umi when he came to invade Hilo.
UMI STORY Seeing the water muddied as it flows into the sea, Nau goes up into the hills to investigate.
There he hides at the defile and thrusts each man with his spear until Pf imaiwa c a leaps down from above and kills him.
WAINIHA STORY Lahi and his uncle Kane-alohi live in the Wainiha valley and go up to Kilohana to catch uwa‘u birds for food, a kind of bird that seeks its nest in the cliffs by day, blinded by the light.
Their next is the chief with ""four hundred"" soldiers who objects to the depredations among the birds.
The boy hides at the pass and throws all four hundred men over the cliff.
The chief comes last and, recognizing Lahi as his own son, invites him to the village.
Mu and Menehune People Page 7 trap, but this the boy discovers and, burning down the house with his treacherous father and followers within, takes over the rule of the land.
A bird catcher from the village below becomes friendly with them and marries a pretty banana eater.
Their beautiful daughter is sought as wife by the chief from her father’s village, but is too wild to consent to leave her old home.
Her father, who desires the match, conceals the chief in the house, rolled up in a mat.
In a cave below a waterfall at Holua-manu in the mountains above Makaweli lives a mo‘o.
The family however wish to recover her and succeed in trapping her in a net.
She is carried to Waimea where she becomes gradually reconciled, grows into a beautiful woman, and marries the ruling chief.
OAHU CANOE LEGENDS Kahanai -o-ke-akua is brought from a foreign land and reared by the gods Kane and Kanaloa who live at Waolani heiau, Kahanai lives at the heiau of Kaheiki built by the Menehune and presided over by the kahuna who founded the priesthood called Mcfo-kahuna.
The Menehune get the work done first, hence the Na-mu-na-wa leave their canoes in the ditch, where they long remain.
On his return, both classes of little people welcome him with shouts, the eepa in the uplands, the Menehune at the shore to lift the travelers from the canoe and later to prepare them houses.
When the fish tree Makalei is brought to Oahu the little people shout so loud that the tree falls where it stands and cannot be brought up to Waolani.
Mata-iteite comes seeking a husband and finally finds one to her liking.
She begs to have a boat built and asks Tagaloa to send her boat builders.
One day the women, when they bring them food, slip in upon them secretly and they fly back to heaven.
They are naked and have no axes but work with their teeth.l_ Heiau said to be ""built by the Menehune"" are to be found among the oldest temple structures on each island.
On Molokai they built a heiau on the cliff at Waikolu valley near Kalaupapa which no one has been able to reach either from above or below, and the Luakini heiau of Pakui between Ualapue and Manawai, said to be dedicated to Hina.
On Maui the Pihana heiau at Wailuku was built by the Menehune ""in a single night"" from stones brought from Paukukalo beach.
Mu and Menehune People Page 8 much like our own bam raisings in pioneer life.
The time element is important in these Menehune structures, especially as the workers themselves become purely mythical beings and night is the time of their activity.
Those manahune who remained agriculturists later formed the lowest social class of plebeians and were used for sacrifice.
The warriors became chiefs and their families intermarried with the royal family of Opoa in Ra'iatea.
Archaeological remains preserve the records of these changes in population.
In the western Tuamotus the ""Manahune"" are known as ancient people of Tahiti, and former adversaries of the Tuamotuans, say the eastern Tuamotuans.
They are sometimes spoken of as giants, as at Tatakoto and Vahitahi, but in Tatakoto as friendly giants.
In New Zealand the Patu-paierehe are a wild race of spirits who inhabit the mountains.
When Maui fished up the south island of New Zealand he left Kui in charge.
The Turehu, a fairy-like people, came over the ocean and annihilated the Tutu-mai-ao people.
The descendants of Maui now came to the island and lived among the Turehu and after ten generations exterminated them and today they are the Patu-pai-a-rehe dwelling in the mountains.
They have reddish skin, hair with a golden tinge called uru-kehu , eyes black or blue.
They are full-sized, dress in white, are not tattooed, and nurse children in their arms.
They are a very numerous people, merry, cheerful, singing like crickets.
Mu and Menehune People Page 9 Moorea in the Tahitian group is the island of ""fairy folk"" with golden hair.
The little lizard called mo‘opuapua, which lives on flowers, is the shadow form of these spirits among the flowers.
In Mangaia, ""fairies"" of the underworld associated with Miru come through special apertures from Avaiki to take part in a dance performed in honor of Miru' s son Tautiti.
They bathe at sunset in the stream Aupara in the northern part of the island or in the stream Vaipau or Vaikaute in the southern, and dress their hair on the height above.
When they dance upon the fresh-cut banana leaves prepared for them at one end of the dance floor the leaves are not disturbed.
The Tapairu or ""peerless ones"" are the four daughters of Miru, sisters of Tautiti.
Ngaru learned from the fairies of the underworld the art of ball playing which he taught in Mangaia.
In Fiji, spirit people, invisible save to worshipers, pygmies with ""fuzzy mops of hair"" like themselves of former days in miniature, live in the woods and caves on wild bananas and kava.
Young people of Fiji formed a sect who were supposed to become votaries of these spirits and learn song and dance from them.
At their dance places a votary would sweep the place with fans and hang garlands in hope of a vision.
The Kakamora are said to be from six inches to three or four feet in height, from fair to dark, go naked with long straight hair to their knees, are strong as three or four men, and fond of dancing and singing.
They are described as harmless but tricky, or as malicious and dangerous, and are differently named all along the coast.
The Masi are strong and stupid, easily tricked, but otherwise like people.
Their descendants are skilled craftsmen and canoe makers and carvers in stone.
Their work may be left unfinished because the craftsmen are called away by some trivial matter.
They were rushed to hospital, but medical tests failed to pinpoint any causes for their malady.
Two 14-year-old girls also needed medical attention in March last year after visiting the museum, and two months later a school party of 10, plus their teachers, also felt unwell while visiting the museum.
Many complained of a strange pungent smell coming from the exhibits before they fainted.
The theme of the mummy’s curse has been traced back to Jane Loudon Webb, 25, who witnessed the unwrapping of an Egyptian mummy near Piccadilly Circus in 1821 and was inspired to write a science fiction story called The Mummy.
Set in the 22nd century, it featured an angry, vengeful mummy who came back to life and threatened to strangle the book’s hero, a young scholar called Edric.
This was followed in 1828 by an anonymous English children’s book, The Fruits of Enterprize , in which mummies were set alight and used by intrepid explorers as torches to illuminate the interior of an Egyptian pyramid.
Not surprisingly, the mummies were portrayed as looking particularly vengeful.
This work was itself lost and only recently rediscovered in the periodical collection of the Library of Congress.
Back in America, he presented the seeds to his fiancee who planted them.
Inhaling their scent, she fell A CAME FROM THE EXHIBITS into a coma and became a living mummy.
This literary motif of the mummy’s curse was copied by several other novelists in Britain and America for some 30 years from the 1880s.
The death, two weeks later, of Lord Carnarvon, the chief intruder into the tomb, made the curse concept front page news; a so-called “ancient Egyptian” inscription “Death shall come on swift wings to him that toucheth the tomb of Pharoah” was invented; and any death associated with the expedition, however remotely, was put down to the curse.
However, only six of the 26 people present at the opening of Tutankhamun’s tomb died in the decade following the discovery; and there are no known genuinely ancient Egyptian curses related to opening tombs or removing objects from them.
Independent on Sunday, 31 Dec 2000; D Express, National Post , 18 Jan 2002.
The Egyptian authorities have asked for the return of two ancient mummies that are buried in the foundations of a McDonald’s restaurant in Tamworth, Staffordshire.
The mummies were obtained by the Rev William McGregor who travelled to Egypt in 1885 to improve his health and returned with a large number of antiquities, which he exhibited at his house, Bolehill Manor, near Tamworth.
After a few years in the damp Midlands climate, they started to deteriorate and McGregor buried them in his back garden.
The foundations of the Palace Cinema, which was being built in Tamworth in 1935, looked like the kind of burial sites that McGregor had seen in Egypt, so he asked the building foreman if the mummies could be deposited in the foundations.
McDonalds bought the building a decade ago, but the presence of the mummies has only recently been revealed by the former owner of the cinema.
Republican Banner , October 4, 1847 1 QJTJ We understand that a murder was committed on the 30th ult., in Smith county, on the road near Brush Creek Meeting-house, on the body of Isaac H Davis.
Some persons near the road hearing cries for help, ran towards the place, when the murderer left, but not before he was recognized as a man named Wm.
Davis was dead when he was found, having been cut in thirty-four places.
Our informant states that officers were in Nashville on Saturday, in pursuit of Hale.
The Proclamation of the Governor, offering a reward for his apprehension, will be found in another column.
Murillo Onza Carcass Origins of Mysterious World Trade Center Ship Revealed In July 2010, amid the gargantuan rebuilding effort at the site of the World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan, construction workers halted the backhoes when they uncovered something unexpected just south of where the Twin Towers once stood.
At 22 feet below today's street level, in a pit that would become an underground security and parking complex, excavators found the mangled skeleton of a long-forgotten wooden ship.
Now, a new report finds that tree rings in those waterlogged ribs show the vessel was likely built in 1773, or soon after, in a small shipyard near Philadelphia.
What's more, the ship was perhaps made from the same kind of white oak trees used to build parts of Independence Hall, where the Declaration of Independence and United States Constitution were signed, according to the study published this month in the journal Tree-Ring Research.
TSee Photos of the Ship and Its Tree Rings] Archaeologists had been on-site throughout the excavation of the World Trade Center's Vehicular Security Center.
They had found animal bones, ceramic dishes, bottles and dozens of shoes, but the excitement really kicked up when the 32-foot-long partial hull of the shin emerged from the dirt.
The vessel was quickly excavated, to prevent damage from exposure to the air.
Piece by piece, the delicate oak fragments were documented and taken out of the rotten-smelling mud.
The timbers were sent to the Maryland Archaeological Conservation Laboratory, where they would be soaked in water to keep the wood from cracking and warping.
Regional ring patterns arise from local rain levels and temperatures, with wetter periods producing thicker rings and drier periods producing smaller rings, he said.
Martin-Benito and his colleagues at Columbia's Tree Ring Lab narrowed their search to trees in the eastern United States, thanks to the keel of the ship, which contained hickory, a tree found only in eastern North America and eastern Asia.
The ship's signature pattern most closely matched with the rings found in old living trees and historic wood samples from the Philadelphia area, including a sample taken during an earlier study from Independence Hall, which was built between 1732 and 1756.
Historians still aren't certain whether the ship sank accidently or if it was purposely submerged to become part of a landfill used to bulk up Lower Manhattan's coastline.
Oysters found fixed to the ship's hull suggest it at least languished in the water for some time before being buried by layers of trash and dirt.
Previous investigations found that the vessel's timbers had been damaged by burrowing holes of Lyrodus pedicellatus , a type of ""shipworm"" typically found in high-salinity, warm waters — a sign that the ship, at some point in its life, made a trip to the Caribbean, perhaps on a trading voyage.
Martin-Benito speculated that the infestation might have been one of the reasons the ship met its demise just 20 or 30 years after it was built.
T HERE IS something mighty queer about that old quarry on Bredon Hill, yonder.
More than one man who has done so has felt something take him by the throat and try to push him over the edge of the field into the quarry.
The speaker was a farmer in the vale of Bredon, on the borders of Gloucestershire, England.
I was talking to him last summer in an old-fashioned inn just above a deep cut through which roar the expresses on the main line of the Midland Region of British Railroads.
It was about three miles away across a vale of fruit farms and pasture lands.
These remains include a weird stone, like a squatting elephant, used for a purpose which is no puzzle to those who have seen similar ancient remains in Mexico and South America.
My father, 40 years ago, was on an inquest into a mysterious death in that same quarry.
I can’t remember when stone last was cut there, for it’s been abandoned for years.
I did not know then that the mysterious quarry would prove to be linked with my objective on top of Bredon Hill.
My brother was with me and as we set out along the quiet country lanes, with the June sun shining warmly, it was hard to associate that vividly green hill with mysteries and tragedies.
As I walked I took from my pocket one of several newspaper clippings which I had collected in regards to strange deaths in the quarry.
Margaret Wilson said death was caused by asphyxia, due to pressure of collar and tie.
He apparently stood on top of a large boulder to have a look around and slipped.
I later met this coroner’s officer, who is a pretty hefty policeman, certainly not unduly imaginative or given to nerves.
He said, “I fell twice there, when the coroner was with me, and I’m a man used to pretty rough walking.
He had quit to take a position as a clerk and accountant on the staff of the town clerk of the municipal borough of Tewkesbury, which position he had held for 26 years.
He was an athlete and for years had played on local football, hockey and cricket teams.
His wife pointed out at the inquest that he enjoyed very good health and certainly had no motive for committing suicide.
But as often happens with Rugby football players, one of his legs was a little shorter than the other, due to a slight displacement of the cartilage in an accident while playing football.
It is a steep ascent of two miles, requiring an able body and good wind in the climber.
From the hilltop there is a wonderful view, in which connection it might be noted that stone age folk always selected the most beautiful sites for their religious rites and monuments.
So fond was Dean of this hill that, said his wife, he had planned to camp there with her in the summer of the year of his death.
But instead of going home he boarded a bus running from Tewkesbury to Evesham.
It put him down at the hamlet of Woodmancote, from which a steep ascent led in a climb of two miles to the summit of Bredon Hill.
His wife became alarmed when he did not return home that night and went to the local police, who with people in Tewkesbury organized a search party.
From midnight until dawn they roamed the hill, which extends for miles and would take a man the best part of a day to cover.
Some time after dawn on Wednesday, May 10, 1939, the police entered the quarry and found Dean lying dead at the foot of a boulder.
The boulder is a large one and stands on the level floor of the abandoned quarry, about four feet from a nearly sheer cliff wall, which reaches to a height of about “Seems as if something tripped me up.” 30 feet.
The wall is studded with rock ledges and bushes and its edges are ringed with pines.
The local coroner held an inquest into the death, which sat at Tewkesbury on Friday, May 12, 1939.
Their job is a salaried one, to which they are appointed by the Lord Chancellor of the British House of Lords.
With very rare exceptions, coroners are unimaginative men, who pay little heed to testimony that touches on the supernormal.
Witnesses who give such testimony are regarded as merely fanciful or superstitious.
At the inquest two local men gave testimony about queer experiences which they had near the quarry.
The quarry has high walls, with ledges and sides covered with bushes and brambles.
I was walking close to the edge in the circle of pines and on a sudden something took me round the neck, tried to choke me and pushed me toward the edge, where there is a drop of 30 feet to the quarry floor.
I struggled with all my might, tore my throat free and got out of its grasp.
He said folks around in the vale of Bredon say the place has a bad repute.
Margaret Wilson said she had examined the body of Dean and supposed his death was consistent with his having apparently climbed a big boulder in the quarry, perhaps to look around, when he may have slipped, and in falling was choked by his collar and tie.
Saunders, who held the inquest, said he was sure that Dean did not fall more than three feet.
He had no doubt slipped off the boulder, displaced the cartilage of his knee and fainted, whereupon his collar and tie had choked him, in the unfortunate position in which he fell.
The jury who are, in England, forcibly impanelled to serve at coroner’s inquests and get not a cent for their time, are usually not of the highest intelligence and regard service as a nuisance.
It does not seem to have struck either the coroner or the woman doctor that an athletic man like Dean, falling only three “...on a sudden something took me round the neck ” 72 Fate / September 2003 feet from a boulder, was in the highest degree unlikely to have been accidentally choked to death in these circumstances.
The two witnesses, Moore and Maynard, suggest a supernatural and evil entity at work in the quarry — and in the month of May.
Another improbability is why Dean should, as suggested by the coroner, have climbed the boulder in order “to look around” when cliff walls 30 feet high shut out every view.
I have photographed the boulder, have even climbed it, and I have no hesitation whatever in asserting that the coroners suggestion is absurd.
True, Dean was found lying dead near the foot of the boulder, but it is highly probable that he was dead — choked to death — before his body fell at the foot of the boulder.
Dean, who knew Bredon Hill well, had ascended to the summit, where stands the ancient human sacrifice or slaughter stone, locally called the Bambury stone.
It is significant to those with a knowledge of prehistory that the name “Bambury” has sinister meaning.
In this case, “anointed” with the blood of human victims in ancient fertility rites.
Dean walked the two miles of steep ascent from where he got off the bus.
In the dusk, he returned the way he came, along a very ancient path in the turf, which runs past numerous still unopened tumuli, or barrow graves of the early Neolithic age.
He may have been looking around for a suitable place for the camp he planned later in the year.
In the May dusk, as the evening stars came out, Dean, unknowing or not believing in the sinister repute of the quarry, wandered through the pines at the edge of the hill, where some diabolical entity took him by the throat.
Dean was caught by surprise, and in the struggle was precipitated into the quarry 30 feet below.
This appears borne out by the significant fact that his death took place in the month of May.
After a stiff climb of about an hour, I stood in the mysterious quarry.
It is situated in a deep glen on the hill and has a completely flat floor.
One would think that it had been paved with flagstones, except that wild flowers and bushes were growing there.
Four boulders stood on this flat floor, oriented almost north, south, east, and west.
One of them resembled a huge capstone and might have been an ancient altar.
Not ...some diabolical entity took him by the throat. one of the four boulders could have fallen from the sides of the quarry, or been placed there by modern quarry-men.
This was the stone of the mysterious and fatal accidents — a series of them in 10 years — always happening in May.
It seemed incredible to me that a healthy and active man could have died in falling from it.
One had to leave the old quarry by the same route as that by which one entered.
Outside the quarry was a pathway in deep turf, which led from the quarry, across the shoulder of the hill, and to a weird stone resembling an elephant with a flat back.
This odd-shaped stone stands in an ancient camp, or fortified hill stockade, in which have been found 50 j skeletons of young men with hands, legs and heads removed, all barbarously mutilated.
They appear to have been the defenders of peaceful ancient folk who lived below the hill and who, when attacked by enemies, stockaded themselves inside this ancient fort.
It is ages older than the fort and must have been an object of awe and mystery to the old hill men.
It is strongly reminiscent of the flat stones on the tops of teocallis, or pyramids, on which Aztec priests cut open the hearts of sacrificial youths and maidens.
The Bambury stone undoubtedly was the center of bloody rites which took place on the dawn of May Day.
These rites were performed to propitiate the dark gods of harvest and fertility and have left behind them an aura of evil.
Memories of these grim rites lingered for ages afterward in the vicinity of Bredon Hill.
It is a puppet made of wheat straw, which until about 1860 was carried around at harvest festivals by the farmers.
It is, of course, a substitution for the original victim of the human sacrifice on the Bambury stone.
At five inquests in some 10 years up to 1939, substantially the same story has been told.
I point to the sinister history of this hill and to the facts disclosed at the inquests.
No coroner has advanced any theory to explain these oddly identical tragedies.
Perhaps because the only theory that could cover all the facts is that in May, the time of the ancient rite of human sacrifice, some evil, unseen entity, which resents the presence of intruders, is actively dealing in death in the quarry. flfj Marlborough Page 1 of 4 The Mystery of the Marlborough Tragic loss by fire of the Cospatrick, by Anthony G Fiude ©2002.
There were many tragedies and losses in the old sailing days, when a voyage across the world from England to New Zealand was a great adventure for some.
Others, not so fortunate, experienced a terrifying journey, the ship running into violent storms when the passengers were battened below decks for their own safety, or the nightmare of dodging large icebergs in the frozen waters of the Southern Ocean under reduced sail.
The ""Marlborough"" was a beautiful ship which had made fourteen successful passages with immigrants from London to New Zealand during the period of 1876 to 1890.
Under Captain Anderson from 1876 until 1883, she carried a crew of twenty-nine, returning to London with cargo's of frozen meat and wool.
Launched in Glascow in 1876, she was subsequently sold to the Shaw, Saville & Albion Company.
Captain Herd took over command of the vessel in 1884 and was on the vessel at the time of her voyage back to London from Lyttleton in 1890, when she totally disappeared without trace.
The vessel left New Zealand waters on the 11th January and two days later was hailed by a passing vessel.
No news of her came and so after many months had passed by, Lyoyds shipping in London posted her as ""missing"", presumed sunk by icebergs after rounding Cape Horn.
This coastline was notorious for violent storms and freezing conditions.
Why the incident was never reported at that time seems strange, but corroborates the story told by a British vessel homeward bound from Lytleton, New Zealand.
The coves were deep and silent and the sailing was difficult and dangerous...with jagged rocks on the landward side.
The stillness was uncanny and it was a weirdly wild evening with the sun low and setting over the horizon.
There was no movement aboard and not a living soul appeared to be around.
With their eyeglasses they could see that the masts and spars were green with decay and that the vessel lay between rocks where she was held fast as if lying in a cradle.
Treading warily on the rotting decks, which cracked and broke in places as they walked, they encountered three more skeletons.
In the messroom were the remains of ten more bodies and six others were found, one alone, possibly the captain, on the bridge there were mouldy, dank smelling books in the cabin and a rusty sabre sword "" The first mate was sent forward to examine the still faint letters on the bow of the derelict vessel.
As though striking a chord in others who heard about this amazing report, an American from Seattle, named Captain Burley, recalled to mind a happening which he had personally experienced, telling the story to one of the skippers of the Shaw Saville liners later in the same year.
In it he was able to give a good description of the wreck that they saw.
The skipper listened as Captain Burley recalled that in his youth and early days at sea, he was aboard a ship that had been wrecked off Staten Island, near Cape Horn, and that he and the only other survivor had set off to look for a whaling station, thought to be on the island.
Lying nearby were the skeletons of twenty men and heaps of shellfish which told how they had tried in vain to fight off starvation.
Again this story did not come to light until many years after the captain saw the wreck and heard of the newspaper article.
He had not reported what he had seen as there were no survivors, but his story is likely to be close to the truth and was almost certainly the same ship.
Although her disappearance was not so dramatic as the Marlborough, another vessel sailing from New Zealand to London was lost two months later and possibly under similar circumstances.
The barque and well-known immigrant ship Dunedin, left Oamaru for her return passage to London with a crew of thirty-four and a cargo of wool and frozen meat in March, 1890.
Seen once, before reaching Cape Horn, it was believed that she foundered in a storm off the rocky coast of the Cape or was sunk by the many icebergs encountered in this vicinity.
ONE of the worst disasters in the history of sail, struck a crowded immigrant ship bound for Auckland, New Zealand, in the year 1874.
The well known shipping firm of Shaw, Saville and Company, began a regular service of sailing vessels between New Zealand and England in the year 1860, when fifteen sailing ships a year plied the route, the passage taking between four and five months.
This period of time was shortened in later years as the iron steamships, Crusader, Helen Denny and the Margaret Galbraith came into service.
In the year 1873, the Shaw Saville company bought the barque Cospatrick and sent her, laden with cut kauri timber, on a second voyage under their flag, to the Port of London.
The Cospatrick sailed from the river Thames dockyards, under the command of Captain Elmslie, on the 11th September, 1874.
Making good sailing time, the Cape of Good Hope, South Africa, was sighted on the 19th November when the vessel was making headway in light northwesterly winds.
Henry Macdonald, the ships second mate, went below after keeping his watch and was alerted by a strong smell of smoke.
Going back on deck to raise the alarm, he found that fire had broken out in the bosun's store, where oakum, tar, paint and ropes were stored.
The crew were immediately called to rig the fire engine, while the Captain turned the ships head before the wind to take the smoke and flames forward and try to contain the fire.
In the confusion that followed in fighting the blaze, the ship drifted back to her previous course, allowing the flames and suffocating smoke to be fanned back towards the vessel’s stern.
In less than an hour and a half, the hull, masts, yards and sails were alight and burning fiercely.
Meanwhile, panic had spread rapidly among the passengers, who rushed to get into the lifeboats, one of which was capsized before it could be launched, pitching the passengers into the sea below.
The longboat was gone, aflame from end to end, while to add to the panic, the main and mizzen masts crashed in flames onto the crowded immigrants gathered on the stern.
Two lifeboats managed to get away containing about forty passengers each, but they found they had no oars or sail, both lost overboard in the confusion.
The boats were forced to drift in the vicinity of the ship, watching the stricken remaining passengers jumping overboard into the sea through the dense smoke only to disappear beneath the waves.
Captain Elmslie was the last to be seen from the boats, gasping in the sea, trying to keep himself and his wife afloat while hanging onto a blackened spar.
Two days later a strong wind sprang up and the two lifeboats became separated from each other.
As the days wore on, thirst claimed some of the men and women, others went mad and threw themselves overboard.
After ten days adrift in the burning sun and without water, many of the survivors had died.
Finally the British ship Sceptre, bound for Dundee from Calcutta, spotted the lifeboat drifting aimlessly in the swell.
A boat was sent to investigate, when they found the remaining three survivors and brought them on board.
The second mate and two able seamen were later landed at the island of St.
Helena, where, after regaining their health, they were to obtain final passage back to Auckland to tell their story.
There was no news of the second lifeboat and its passengers and all were presumed lost.
Thought to have been first discovered during General Sully s expedition of 1864, two solitary granite boulders now rest in a modern shelter, each carved with mysterious symbols that may have been the work of prehistoric man or possibly early explorers from the last millennium.
Referred to as petroglyph rocks by archaeologists and considered sacred by Native Americans, the larger is locally known as “Writing Rock,” or Hoi-Waukun (Spirit Rock) by the Sioux and Assiniboine tribes.
It is about five feet high, three and one-half feet wide and two feet thick, weighing approximately ten tons.
Deposited on a high ridge by a glacier, it is ideally placed for monument purposes.
It is considered to be of an earlier origin and the symbols, although similar to Writing Rock, are somewhat different and are badly eroded.
Outlines of the bird, showing its wings extended and surrounded by abstract designs, appear on both rocks.
In Plains Indian mythology, such beings as the Thunderbird often combat snake-like water monsters, but since the rocks are many miles from any significant body of water, we can only guess its true meaning.
It is also interesting to note that the Thunderbird motif is not only common, but very ancient.
It is found throughout the northern plains on bone pendants, pottery, and shells dating from before the time of Christ.
While it is easy to dismiss Writing Rock as simply another example of what may be the random chiseling of prehistoric nomads, scholars have proposed some interesting theories.
One such theory points to the similar30 Fate / June 2002 and they were known variously as “elf cups” or “self-bored stones” by country folk.
Either way, their otherwise-inexplicable appearance associated them with elf-lore rather than with whirlpools, much as Meaden and crop-circle mystics — and indeed crop-circle hoaxer proponents — see more than just Nature as being responsible for such doings.
View Into Elfland In some cases, it was believed that one could see into the elfin world by looking through these “potholes” as portholes.
In fact, the elf-cup tradition itself seems to have been the actual underlying origin of the good-luck horseshoe custom, for after shod horses and their worn shoes became more common, such similarly rounded, moreavailable iron horseshoes took the place of the rare, hard-to-find elf-cap stones as safeguards — although exactly why either was considered protective is less clear.
In any case, “elf cups” or “potholes” sometimes occur on small, coconut-size stream stones.
These can be found at times among the supply of rounded, streamsmoothed stones sold as yard decorations for arid Western suburban front yards.
Residents are probably unaware of their origin — and of the good luck which such stones were once believed to bring to their households.
California Indians carved pothole-like mortars in boulders for grinding acorns.
Yet, unlike the whirlpool-caused versions, these are always deeper than they are wide.
Small, coconut-size ""elf-cup"" stones were once looked upon as good-luck charms in British folklore.
June 2002 / Fate 29 Writing Rock shelter. ities between the symbols on Writing Rock and an ancient class of carvings known as “cup sculptures,” linked to a people who practiced sun worship.
These carvings are found in Ireland, Scotland, Wales, England, Denmark, Germany, Brittany, and Sweden.
If this is true, these early settlers would have had to make friends and intermarry with the local Indians in order to survive in such a hostile land.
They may also have migrated into the interior of the continent where their ancestors were discovered, as some historians believe, 45 miles north of present-day Bismarck, North Dakota, by the Verendrye Expedition of 1738.
These early explorers were surprised to find bearded, light-skinned Indians living in large buildings surrounded by fortress walls with drawbridges, long before the American Revolution.
Not only did they live in huts and communities that “were not Indian,” they were fairskinned, with light hair and blue eyes, and their language contained words similar to Welsh.
Unfortunately, in the late 19th century, the Mandan Nation was nearly destroyed by smallpox and the migrating Sioux, virtually becoming extinct when they were forced to unite with the Arikara Nation.
Of course there are many clues to support the conjecture that Vikings migrated to the interior of the continent via Hudson Bay many years prior to the possible arrival of Prince Madoc.
But the evidence of early Norse settlements tends to l found in the eastern part of North Dakota and western Minnesota, closer to the Red River of the North.
Although the carvings on Writing Rock appear Scandinavian in nature, there is little evidence that Vikings journeyed this far to the west.
Whatever its origin, neither the Indians native to the surrounding area nor white men have been able to decipher the lines, dots, bird symbols, or circles containing dots carved on Writing Rock, yet it has always been regarded as sacred by the Indians.
Legend of the Eight Warriors One Indian legend most often associated with the rocks tells of eight warri( who stopped for the night near the rock and heard a voice calling in the distance as they were ready to sleep.
Fearing an attack June 2002 / Fate 31 ""Small"" Writing Rock. by neighboring tribes, they investigated the sound but found nothing.
The following morning, they heard a womans voice in the distance and again searched in vain for the source.
While searching, they came across the larger rock and found it engraved with a picture of eight warriors with their packs on the ground and realized it was themselves.
Later, returning home, they again passed the rock and saw that the in'iption had changed.
Upon returning nome, they told the village of the myste>us rock, and the whole village moved near it, only to find the picture changed once again, showing a village of tepees.
From that time on, the rock was believed to foretell the future and became an object of mystery and worship.
Eventually, white men settled the area and moved the smaller of the two Writing Rocks, allegedly dissipating its power.
After years of discussion, the North Dakota Historical Society purchased Writing Rock and developed a park on ten acres donated by local farmers in 1936.
A shelter was built in 1956 to protect Writing Rock and picnic facilities were added later.
Once thought to foretell the future by changing their shape, the Writing Rock symbols stand silent now.
Although Native American shamans no longer make pilgrimages to the site for ceremonial purposes, they come, together with people of all cultures, in surprising numbers each season, to ponder the mystery of the stones at Writing Rock State Park.
The first impression one gets is the peculiar sensation that these carvings do not belong to North America.
They resemble tenth-century runic carvings found in Scandinavian countries, yet appear to have a Celtic motif.
Modern scholars agree that the Celts at one time inhabited much of Western Europe and influenced Nordic culture to a great degree.
However, as I mentioned earlier, it is unlikely that Viking explorers visited this area.
Besides, the carvings on these rocks appear much older and cause us to marvel as to how many times North America was discovered, and by how many different peoples.
Whatever their origin, these symbols struck an important chord, not only with Native Americans, but with the Scandinavian and German settlers as well.
Even today, these mysterious symbols seem to connect with some primitive awareness in each of us.
Through them, we can bridge the eons and touch the hand of our ancient kinsmen.
On this solitary hill, we can share the same unchanged horizon, feel the same prairie wind, and touch the same earth as those nameless travelers from the distant past.
We are all spiritual warriors seeking our own personal grail of enlightenment, and Writing Rock has something significant to tell each of us.
It may well be a site of great power or merely a signpost for the weary traveler, but it is for each of us to decipher the symbols as they apply to our own quest.
I Don Kaufman and Nan Belknap are freelance writers currently residing in Estes Park , Colorado.
According to the World Wide Fund for Nature, years of investigating the trade in rhino horn has produced no evidence that it is prescribed for any sexual purpose; such applications are absent from the traditionalist's pharmacopoeia.
Conservationists say that the mistrust caused by the perpetuation of this Western myth the cultural origins of which seem depressingly obvious is an obstacle to field work.
It's not for us, you understand it's for a friend. strange days BY MAT COWARD RHINO HORNS THE MYTH In traditional Chinese medicine, rhino horn is used as an aphrodisiac.
MYTHCHASER Prince Charles's populist campaigns against ""political correctness"" and ""red tape"" have raised several juicy hares worth Mythchasing.
Archetypically daft is the story of a regulation requiring care homes to strengthen the auto-closing mechanism on internal doors, with the predictable result that in one unnamed home the doors are now so strongly sprung that the residents cannot open them.
A subsequent BBC Radio investigation failed to uncover either the home or the ruling.
Presumably, Charlie heard an urban legend at a dinner party, swallowed it whole, and promptly wrote to his MP about it just like any other saloon bar pea-brain.
JHFJi. ijii* i-iiAti^Lur^ ’^xr^ mirai rjuna Ml Family comes face to face with naked Witch © SUNDAY, 12 JULY 2009 12:15 EDITOR NEWS By Vincent Gono in Masvingo A Zimbabwean man was stunned to silence after he came face to face with a naked old woman vampirically sucking his daughter's breast in the middle of the night, The Zim Diaspora can exclusively reveal.
The shocking incident has left people in headman Masunda’s area, Chivi district, Masvingo dumbfounded and horrified.
Although the case was not reported to the police, headman Chinodya Jongore Masunda confirmed the incident and said he presided over the matter at his community court last week.
Headman Masunda told our correspondent during a visit to the district last week that the man claimed to have come face to face with the witch who then quickly vanished into the thickness of the night.
The man, headman Masunda said, claims that his daughters were always complaining of breast pain and he decided to visit a prophet who gave him some holy water that he sprinkled in the house before they retired to bed.
The holy water was meant to give him power to see the witch when she came into the house.
They then went to sleep and at midnight the man claims to have seen the woman stark naked going into his children’s bedroom and he followed her.
He claims to have seen the woman kneeling down sucking the breasts of his teenage girl who had allegedly been complaining of breast pain.
The man claimed that he moved closer but the woman felt that something was wrong and she quickly got up and vanished into the dark night leaving the man stunned in horror.
In the morning, headman Masunda said, the man got up early, took his axe and went to the forest where he cut a branch of a tree known in Shona as ""chizhuzhu” that he took to the woman’s house and blocked the entrance to her kitchen.
The headman told the our correspondent that the branch of the tree had a cultural significance that meant that the man was convinced that the woman was a witch.
The headman said the man was therefore accusing the woman of witchcraft.
The woman, however, was well aware of the significance of the branch of the tree that had been put by the man and reported the matter to the village head who in turn referred the case further to the headman’s court.
Headman Masunda, however, said the man, despite talking with so much conviction, failed to prove his allegations when he was brought to the headman’s court and was charged for witchcraft accusation.
He said the problem was that the man failed to catch the alleged witch in the act so this presented a problem to the court.
The headman said the man, who believes that he was being punished unjustifiably, had not yet paid anything.
The man, however, failed to prove his case against the woman and my court convicted him.
He was alleging that he had so much faith in the prophet who gave him the holy water and was so convinced that he saw the woman kneeling and sucking the breasts of his teenage girl.
Attempts by our correspondent to get a comment from the man were fruitless as he was said to have gone to Mashava.
Since Orwell was oblivious to this, it is very curious that he gave the name O'Brien to the character in 1984 who wins the confidence of Winston Smith before betraying him.
Reports of an unusual monument on Leskernick Hill on Bodmin Moor, Cornwall, comprising a large boulder raised partially off the ground by smaller boulders wedged below it first came to light in the early 1990s.
With no precedent for the undated monument, it was noted as an interesting anomaly.
However, further fieldwork carried out on the moor over the last decade has shown that the monument is far from unique.
Similar monuments, now dated tentatively to the Early Neolithic period and called 'propped stones' or 'pseudo-quoits', have been identified on Bodmin Moor and further afield on the Scilly Isles and Dartmoor.
Many of the monuments appear to have been astronomically orientated or aligned to significant natural features visible from the sites.
Adams by some exceedingly interesting and instructive experiments with the telephone, manipulated by Prof.
Lovewell conducted the experiments at the other terminal on the line, which was the spacious gallery in front of the residence of Mrs.
Polk-the connection having been established by a delicate copper wire stretched across Union street.
Speaking through the mouth-piece or tube— speaking trumpet fashion-the vibration produced by the voice forces the delicate wire coil against the sensitive metal plate which surmounts the magnet.
TliL esta kli s hes the current, and the corresponding battery at the other end of the wire is similarly effected and the sense vibrations produced and the utterances repeated at a distance of a whole block, or some two or three hundred yards off.
By holding the mouthpiece close to the ear after sending a message, in an instant the response is heard, quite distinctly, though not loud.
Pieces of music played on the piano at Mr Adams’ were easily recognized at Mrs.
Polk’s and vice versa-the little battery having first been placed upon the wire over the sounding board of the instrument.
Fall and Miss Sadie Fall presided at the piano at the latter point, and Mrs.
Gwynn and Miss 1 /-""i 1 le y< in cc ur ca Telephone Call Adams at the residence of Mr Adams.
Polk sucrried in getting an intelligible mesmgm She then requested some music. 7re music came, and Mrs.
Polk could re-r it. like the distant strains of a music x but could not make out the air.
I S— "" That’s not very respectful.” 7re distant battery promptly apologized.
It was played distinctly and very artistically — equal to any operatic music.
The music and conversation was kept up for some time, attesting practically to all who enjoyed the experiment, the great success and wonderful possibilities in the not distant future.
Mummified remains of 27 women were found in the flat in Nizhny Novgorod, a police source told government newspaper Rossiyskaya Gazeta.
He is believed to have dug up the remains of young women at various cemeteries and put dresses on them.
An official statement on the case is not expected until after Friday, a public holiday in Russia.
The remains are believed to have been stolen from local graves in Nizhny Novgorod, a city on the Volga.
The suspect may be charged with desecrating human remains, according to Rossiyskaya Gazeta.
He apparently specialised in exploring cemeteries and was planning to publish a guide book, it adds.
Differing figures for the number of sets of remains found in the flat were given by Russian media, from ""more than 20"" to 27, as reported by Rossiyskaya Gazeta.
The dozen scratchings were uncovered during a three-week excavation at Nevern in Pembrokeshire.
Archaeologists think the stars and other designs were made by a serf, labourer or soldier some time between 1170 and 1190 when the castle was built.
They say they also give an insight into the beliefs of medieval working men.
Work is under way cleaning, revealing and recording the images and further research is being carried out by the university’s department of archaeology.
Phil Bennett, the Pembrokeshire Coastal National Park Authority's head of archaeological heritage, said it was hoped to keep the slates in Nevem.
It was the fourth year that the site has been excavated ""These drawings connect us with the lives and beliefs of masons or labourers who built the castle.
The dig also unearthed information about the phased building of parts of the castle and revealed that a round tower thought to have imprisoned Lord Rhys in 1194 was also the quarters of high status members of the castle household.
It was the fourth year that the site has been excavated in a partnership project between Dr Caple, the National Park Authority, Dyfed Archaeological Trust and Nevem community council which owns the site.
Elcomercio Enlarge — While flying over the famous Nazca desert recently, pilot Eduardo Herran Gomez de la Torre spotted some geoglyphs that had not been seen before.
He believes the geoglyphs or Nazca Lines, as others call them, were exposed after recent sand-storms carried away soil that was covering them.
The Nazca Lines have become world famous, showing up in paintings, movies, books and news articles.
They exist on the floor of the Nazca desert in a southwestern part of Peru, near the ocean.
The natural objects include animals such as birds, camelids, or snakes.
It is believed the lines were created by removing ironoxide coated pellets to a depth of four to six inches — that left the lighter sand below in stark contrast to the surrounding area.
In fact, they can be seen quite easily when standing on nearby mountains or hills.
The newly revealed figures discovered by de la Torre are of a snake , a bird, a camelid (perhaps a llama) and some zig-zag lines.
They are actually on some hills in the El Ingenio Valley and Pampas de Jumana near the desert floor.
The reason for the creation of the geoglyphs is still uncertain, though a host of possible explanations have been offered, many centered around religion and or water.
Interestingly, all of the figures are believed to have been created using a single line that never crosses itself Similar to how a picture might be drawn with a pencil, never lifting it from the paper.
It has also been noted that many of the images depicted by geoglyphs also appear on pottery made by people over the same time period, and, archeologists have found evidence of wooden stakes used to help create the images, suggesting they were made using very simple techniques.
Field study suggests geoglvnhs in ancient Peru were made to lead travelers to trade fairs More information: via Elcomercio New tree species discovered in Ethiopia BY THOMAS H MAUGH II Los Angeles Times As many as 10,000 new species of plants, animals and insects are discovered each year, but usually they are isolated individuals or small clusters of specimens hidden away in forests or other isolated areas.
But on recent visits to Ethiopia, Swedish botanist Mats Thulin discovered a new species of tree that covers an area of more than 3,100 square miles, an area the size of the island of Crete.
Botanist David J Mabberley of Britain’s Royal Botanic Gardens in Kew described the new tree in a report Friday in the journal Science/noting that it probably has been overlooked by botanists because few have visited the region where Ethiopia’s Ogaden National Liberation Front is fighting for self-rule.
The area is also difficult to get to, he said, and the trees can be seen from drivable roads in only a few places.
The newly identified tree, called Acacia fumosa, grows to about 18 feet to 20 feet tall, with a canopy that spreads 24 feet to 30 feet in diameter.
It differs from closely related species in the color of its flowers and in its gray, smooth bark, among other things.
The total number of trees in the region “must be in the millions,” Mabberley wrote.
Champagne reception, three-course dinner and midnight viewing of the planetarium show.
Tell your friends “you slept under a blue whale and watched the birth of the universe/’ says the museum’s Brad Harris.
Jayne Clark Tokyo launches samurai and ninja tour News from Elsewhere media reports from around the world, found by BBC Monitoring 10:01 UK time, Monday, 21 July 2014 Japan's largest travel agency is launching a bus tour around Tokyo that will feature flying ninjas and sword-wielding samurais, it seems.
Then it moves on to the historic Asakusa entertainment district, where street performers dressed as samurai warriors and black-clad ninjas leap out of the shadows as the bus cruises by.
JTB travel agency and the SGRS events planner say that at one point there will even be a fight between the historical characters.
Samurai warriors and ninja spies and saboteurs are iconic figures from the Sengoku civil war period in 15th Century Japan.
Contrary to their popular image ninjas did not routinely dress in black, but rather were masters of disguise.
News from Elsewhere media reports from around the world, found by BBC Monitoring 12:18 UK time, Wednesday, 30 July 2014 Travellers along one of Kenya's busiest highways have been warned not to give alcohol to baboons, it is reported.
The Kenya Wildlife Service says it is ""irresponsible and careless” to offer intoxicating drinks to the primates, The Nation newspaper reports.
He was speaking in Naivasha, a town on a motorway linking the city of Nakuru with Kenya's capital, Nairobi.
The area is sandwiched between several nature reserves, where wildlife abounds.
It is not clear how common it is for people to give alcohol to monkeys, but up to 7,000 baboons are believed to live outside nature reserves.
Meanwhile, locals have been complaining about the nuisance tipsy animals are causing.
Saturday, may 2, 2009 You Report Cotton didn’t take root in Bakersfield BY GEORGE GILBERT LYNCH Contributing writer I n August 1871, one year after the post office was established naming our town Bakersfield, the entire town was sold by its owners, Horatio Livermore and Julius Chester.
They sold Bakersfield and 100,000 acres south of town for about $5 per acre.
The California Cotton Growers and Manufacturers Association was composed of Californians and Englishmen, who, after examining the San Joaquin Valley, had selected the Bakersfield area as the site of operations and purchased the town.
Horatio and Charles Livermore, wealthy San Francisco drug wholesalers, in partnership with Julius Chester, a Bakersfield merchant and land owner, had accumulated countless thousands of acres of southern valley property, and downtown Bakersfield was part of their holdings.
The grand idea was to create a Southern cotton plantation type of operation, but instead of using slaves, the plan was to hire Chinese laborers to plant and harvest 1,000 acres of cotton the first year.
These pioneers of industry were banking on the new railroad to transport their cotton, wool and manufactured goods to national markets.
The hired management was ineffective, and many cotton fields were lost by too much or too little water and failure to plant tire seed at the proper time.
After six years of failure, a San Francisco investor was sent to Bakersfield as trustee of the corporation.
After finding the company’s books in a mess, he began dissolution of the corporation.
In 1878, Tevis and Haggin’s Kern Land Company purchased the property from the dissolved corporation and began selling it as small farms to immigrants from England and the East Coast.
The administration banned sales of the products, citing concerns over English-only and poor labeling, which it said were attracting young sippers.
It misleads customers and damages the health of youth,” the CFD A statement said.
The administration also called for strict monitoring of similar products.
United States shows such as “The Vampire Diaries” and “True Blood,” readily available in China on popular video sites Sohu and Youku, have spurred Chinese teenagers’ fascination with vampires and supernatural characters.
One vampire-themed cafe in Liaoning, in northeast China, gained international media attention earlier this month after it began serving red wine and cherry soda in blood bags, with staff dressed as doctors and nurses.
Nyami Nyami is believed to protect the Tonga people and give them sustenance in difficult times.
Variously described as having the body of a snake and the head of a fish, a whirlpool or a river dragon, the Nyami Nyami is seen as the god of Zambezi Valley and the river before the creation of the Kariba Dam.
Barack Obama fell deathly silent in the middle of a speech on education before the Wisconsin related ar Teachers Union Tuesday, his failure of words reportedly a result of the Democratic nominee's forward-looking tendencies l' m Kaine j* suddenly bringing him a harrowing glimpse of a future world shaped by madness and horror.
AUGUCT While spokespeople from the Obama camp have suggested that the candidate's recent comments about magnets being ""our Clinton Bias only hope for survival"" were taken out of context, they did confirm that he has canceled all future appearances in New Mexico, Slamming f especially those taking place during the month of October.# septembe Ochosi The divine hunter and embodiment of justice amongst the orishas.
While he can find his way in and out of the jungle where others get lost, he does not live there.
He is an urban orisha and lives in Obatala’s castle as his personal hunter.
He is an orisha of high moral and ethical standards and encourages his worshippers to be law-abiding, upstanding citizens.
He helps his followers to “hit the mark” when they strive to attain goals, and to do so with integrity.
He is frequently called upon for issues of injustice and for court cases and legal issues and is considered the patron of police officers and court officials by many followers.
Mayor Kasim Reed says the massive Atlanta Cyclorama painting, which has been on display in Grant Park for the past century, will be moved to the Atlanta History Center in the city's Buckhead neighborhood.
OLD NEWS is published bimonthly, for $17 a year, by Susquehanna Times & Magazine, Inc., 3 West Brandt Blvd., Landisville, PA 17538-1105.
Second-class postage paid at Landisville, PA 17538 and additional mailing office.
News from Elsewhere media reports from around the world, found by BBC Monitoring 1 1 :34 UK time, Thursday, 26 June 2014 A woman in western China claims to have just celebrated her 128th birthday which would make her the oldest person in recorded history.
Almihan Seyiti, from the Xinjiang region, lives in a village near the city of Kashgar.
A member of the Uighur Turkic minority, she is vigorous, and enjoys singing, playing the dutar musical instrument and occasionally helping out on the f arm > Xiniiang TV-2 reports.
But no one outside China is likely to accept Mrs Seyiti's claim at face value.
Birth records in the outlying regions of the 19th Century Chinese empire were sparse and unreliable, especially for the ethnic minorities, and China has reported Uighurs living into their 120s before without any solid evidence.
The oldest verified person was a Frenchwoman, Jeanne Calment, who died in 1997 aged 122, but Mrs Seyiti enjoyed her party nonetheless.
Associated Press Skeleton competitor Noelle Pikus-Pace poses fora portrait Sept. 1 , 2009, during the USOC Media Summit in Chicago.
Pikus-Pace keeps a picture of her 2-year-old daughter in her helmet and a tracing in marker of the child’s hand prints on her sled.
Olympic superstitions include lucky undies, socks By MEGAN K SCOTT and NICHOLAS K GERANIOS m Associated Press m n ara Years of training, special diets and elite coaching may not enoU gj 1 to ^ Olympic medal.
Superstition runs deep in humans, even those jocks seeking to represent the United States in the Vancouver Olympics.
Many are looking for a slight edge, and sometimes they look in some strange places.
As a result, he tends to keep the fortunes he likes, with a supply of 25 to 30 on hand.
See Olympic, L> Olympic Continued from D I * You have baseball players who refuse to discuss a no-hitter in progress.
Skeleton racer Noelle Pikus-Pace keeps a picture of her 2-year-old daughter in her helmet and a tracing in marker of the child’s hand prints on her sled.
Skier Michelle Roark wears the same perfume to each race, and makes the scent herself.
That was after her sports psychologist suggested she visualize skiing well with all five of your senses before events.
She found she could hear, see, taste and feel success, but not smell it Dissatisfied with fragrances she tried, she started her own perfume and cologne manufacturing company called Phinominal which are all-natural.
Sports psychologist Jerry May of Meadow Vista, Calif, said superstitions don’t really help performance.
Such routines keep them focused on the moment, rather than wandering to the past or future, he said Superstitions also can be a hindrance, Maniar said “If your superstition is you only perform well on a sunny day, and it's not a sunny day, that’s a problem,” he said.
Cross country skier Liz Stephen solves that by rotating a couple pairs of lucky socks, but wears the same gloves for races.
In order to believe in omens a specific prior belief is absolutely necessary — that the future is knowable, in other words, that everything that is to be has been foreordained.
From far back in recorded history many changing aspects of nature have been noted as harbingers of good .or ill; it is interesting that most forebode ill.
The probable origin of superstitions of this kind was mankind’s attempt to know the future and perhaps, through fore-knowledge, to avoid disaster.
Omens have always formed a basis for action rather than an indication of inexorable fate.
In the ancient world an omen did not have to be an extraordinary happening, like a comet foretelling misfortune.
Very important w 7 as the direction from which a sign first came; it was this that indicated whether it predicted good or evil.
In Ancient Greece an owl hooting on the left was an unlucky omen while one hooting on the right was lucky; in Roman society the values were reversed.
The anomaly could have arisen from Rome’s early national struggles for power in the Mediterranean, leading to the belief that an omen that was bad for Greece was necessarily good for Rome.
In the Western w r orld belief in omens has survived down the centuries and is still with us today, linking us to our distant magical past.
Many find it very hard to shrug off belief in prognostic signs that for thousands of years were part of the survival strategy of human beings and have now become ingrained — so much so that in today’s scientific world omens are frequently presented in a pseudoscientific guise.
These omens are likely to be more correct than not when we realize that “sky at night” means sunset in the west, and “sky in the morning” means sunrise in the east, and that, in Britain and the northwestern United States, the prevailing winds come from the west.
So, at sunset if the sky is sunny and bright in the west, the clear, moisturefree air between the observer and the horizon is scattering predominantly red light towards the shepherd.
This means the weather will remain dry for many hours whilst the wind moves towards the east.
At sunrise,, however, when the red sky is in the east, there is no guarantee that these conditions will remain for long, because the prevailing winds will soon blow the clear air away and the next weather front carrying rain clouds will likely blow in from the west.
But rain clouds might not come in from the west, so red sky in the morning is not as reliable a shepherd's warning as red sky at night.
U ganda cop shoots ’aggressive* tortoise News from Elsewhere media reports from around the world, found by BBC Monitoring 12:56 UK time, Monday, 07 July 2014 A police officer in Uganda has reportedly shot a tortoise dead after being attacked by the ""aggressive"" creature.
The incident happened in the Nebbi district in the north of the country near the Congolese border.
The officer named as Charles Onegiu by the New Vision newspaper said the animal entered his home and attacked him while he was enjoying a post-work cup of tea.
I took a stick to chase it but it instead became more violent,"" he told the paper.
After attempting to fend off the tortoise with a plastic chair, he said he ""instinctively"" drew his firearm and shot it dead.
After consulting local elders and police colleagues, Mwesigwa appealed for calm ""from the residents and police officers, maintaining that their lives are not in danger as they may have assumed"", New Vision reported.
ONTOGENY AND PHYLOGENY Theory that relates the development of an individual to its biological past.
The phrase “ontogeny recapitulates phytogeny” was, during the 19th century, one of the main arguments of scientific racism in the Western world.
Individuals of a species do seem to develop characteristics associated with other animals.
Human embryos, for instance, develop gill slits on their necks, a three-chambered heart (which expands to four chambers), and a tail.
These characteristics seemed to prove the 19th-century idea that evolution was a ladder of progress with humans at the top of the ladder.
Recapitulation theory even placed human races in a biologically determined hierarchy.
Some races were ranked superior to others; white Western Europeans and Americans were placed on top.
Scientists theorized that other human races could be understood by studying the behavior of white children.
When 20th-century biologists replaced the model of evolution as a ladder with one of a manybranched bush, they no longer had a place for recapitulation theory, and it was discredited. j 7 ONZA A large feline, unrecognized by zoologists, whose main habitat is reportedly the Sierra Madre Occidental range of northwest Mexico.
Among the animals of folklore being considered by CRYPTOZOOLOGY but yet to be officially recognized by biologists is the onza.
They clearly distinguished it from both the jaguar and the puma, the better-known and recognized large cats from the same area.
Europeans first saw the animal in the Aztec emperor Montezuma’s zoo, where it was distinguished from the puma by its wolfish appearance.
Dale and Cecil Lee, and a client, oseph K Smirk, killed a strange cat on a jaguar-hunting ixpeditior. in Mexico.
When they described the animal to J.S. zoologists, their story was ridiculed.
They received ittie attention until the story’ was included in the 1961 door The Jnzc, bv Robert Marshall.
Within a very’ few years, ;everal skulls had been located in various collections, and n 1986 a complete specimen was obtained for dissection dy ISC secretary J Richard Greenwall.
The specimen fit he traditional description of the onza, with distinguishng long ears, body, and legs.
What remains to be estabished is whether the onza is a totally new species or nerely a local, if extreme, variation of the puma.
It clearly iemonstrated that the descriptions of indigenous people can be quite literal and accurate.
The story of the onza has given cryptozoologists hope that specimens of some of the other mysterious animals reported to exist in remote corners of the world also will eventually be located Onza Orunmila The orisha of divination.
He is the “eleripin” — the witness of destiny — who knows everything that awaits us as part of our fate.
He has a very close working relationship with Eleggua and together they intercede on behalf of humanity to alter people’s destinies, ward off death and other misfortunes, and guide us to cultivate good character.
His worship is primarily centred around the Ifa tradition, both in traditional African worship and in the African Diaspora in the new world, where his initiated priests, called awos, babalawos, iyanifas or oluwos, act as diviners for the greater community.
He is petitioned for help with making wise descisons, opening roads, healing and protection from evil.
He is a powerful wizard, master of all spell craft and is found out in the wild, untamed areas of nature.
Without Osain, none of the ceremonies in the religion can happen; it is his magic that is used to conjure the shrines of the orishas.
Osain is commonly understood to be Shango’s godfather who taught him how to spit fire and throw lightning.
Consequently he is petitioned for any purpose where unconquerable magic is required.
He has one eye, one hand, one foot, one tiny ear that can hear even a pin drop, and one ear larger than his head that hears nothing.
She does, however, have a horrific temper, one which she seldom ever loses but which causes untold destruction whenever she does She is often depicted as a mermaid that resides in the river Oshun in modem Nigeria in the Osun state.
During her yearly festival she is said to choose one or more young women to represent her in the dance of the sister of the waters. ouija A device marketed as a game in which answers to questions are divined.
The Ouija was invented as an oracle game in 1892 by an American, Elija J Bond.
The name is derived from the French and German words for ""yes,"" oui and ja.
The user asks a question, places fingertips on the pointer and then allows the pointer to spell out the answer.
Most likely, the user moves the platform subconsciously without realizing it, but many people feel the movements are directed by discamate beings and spirits of the dead.
Shortly after its invention, the Ouija enjoyed great popularity due to the interest in Spiritualism and to the thousands of bereaved people after World War I who tried to find ways to communicate with their loved ones who had been killed in the war.
Since then, its popularity often has coincided with popular interest in the occult.
Since 1966 the Ouija has been marketed by the Parker Brothers game company of Beverly, Massachusetts, which states that it is a game for entertainment purposes.
In experimenting with the Ouija, some users find that they can do automatic writing with it.
Skeptics contend that such writings really come from the user's own subconscious.
Others, however, theorize that such users might have natural mediumistic abilities, and the Ouija has enabled them to contact discamate beings or spirits of the dead.
Some critics contend that such contact is inherently dangerous, and that any beings who communicate through such a device are likely to be demonic and attempt to possess the user.
However, many cases of Ouija use in automatic writing and alleged communication with spirits of the dead have been benign, even productive, in nature.
The entity Seth, popularized by the writings of Jane Roberts in the 1960s and 1970s, initiated his communication with Roberts through a Ouija board.
The communication then rapidly progressed to direct automatic writing with a pen and then into trance mediumship in which Seth allegedly used Roberts' vocal cords to speak.
The Ouija also served as the initial means of communication with alleged spirits of the dead in 1913 for Pearl Curran , and in 1919 for Stewart Edward White and his wife, Betty.
After initial contact was made through the Ouija, Betty began using automatic writing and then trance mediumship, in which the spirits allegedly used her own vocal cords.
They are all that remain of a private zoo assembled in the 1980s by Pablo Escobar, the cocaine baron shot dead by police in Medellin in 1993.
Most of the animals were confiscated, but the hippos remained and became naturalised.
Saint Padre Pio's stigmata ’exposed' by new book Italy's Padre Pio used carbolic acid to cause bleeding wounds on his hands that he claimed were replicas of Christ's, according to a new book.
AP 11:11AM GMT 16Nov 2011 Pio, a former monk who died in 1968 aged 81, wore gloves because his hands bled constantly for 50 years in what were revered as stigmata wounds.
He became Italy's most loved saint after he was canonised by Pope John Paul II in 2002.
But a new book has heaped more scorn on the claims that his wounds were duplicates of those suffered by Jesus during the crucifixion.
Italian historian Professor Sergio Luzzatto has discovered documents including a letter from a pharmacist who arranged carbolic acid for Pio.
Miracle and Politics in a Secular Age that it was the corrosive acid that caused the bleeding on the saint's hands.
He also said many Popes had expressed doubts and suggested the Vatican only canonised Pio real name Francesco Forgione because of public pressure.
His claims were dismissed by the Catholic Anti-Defamation League in 2007.
Masked gunmen stole two paintings from a museum, including a work by surrealist Salvador Dali, officials said.
Police said several robbers threatened a guard at the Scheringa Museum for Realism in Spanbroek with a gun before making off with two paintings.
O III ® e-% 0*0 2 3j£ o B o o 3 3 73 SS3 o ^ 3 I 3 O So 3 o o s:o 0 S 2 00 33 o 0^3 Ilf1 ""s o .cr 4 ^ 0^0 w Ot) 3 3 ►-• O 05 O 3 * w ®“S-o3-5 O 3 0 0-0 £> Bg*| 51 a a o 3 ■ff 2.5-5 o &3 3 Cj s^lS 5 f <?-S 8 73 73 O O 3 »3 r+ 3 5' O 00 2.
O 3 3 Jrt>a O-tC^ ^ g O a’ 3 <« o c/d^h o • CfQ L* a ™ 3 ft, P ^ tr r-. 2 d3 o ct ^ 5.
T CO C/3 O^B'S’S 3-S Cm “■ 3 a P ^ 3 era ft P* 73 2 o os € >o o 03 3 era r+ cc oq 31 O03 3 r^ 3 a a o o-crq 2 P -03 B ^ o o cr WB f -2 O 3 * 03 OO rrt 73 O P 2 2 a O 3 Br-t o 3 a 4 9.
BK WfcKlC Of flVf \*At# Pancawara is the five-day week of the Javanese calendar.
This system structures time around trade and commerce, and in Bahasa Jawa is also called pasaran hari, or the “market day” cycle.
The chart shows the ngoko names of the days, each of which is associated with certain images, colors, and directions.
For example, evenings where Kliwon coincides with Friday are considered sacred.
More » pays homage to G< Margit Chiriaco Rusche and her father, Joe Chiriaco, stand by a rock monument, photo provided by general patton memorial museum Museum iy Denise Goolsby he Desert Sun The General Patton Memoriil Museum in Chiriaco Summit just off Interstate 10 near lesert Center, about 30 miles :ast of Indio — is home to nunerous artifacts collected from he nearby training grounds mce commanded by Gen.
Black and white photos and World War II-era news cliprings cover the walls of the museum; vintage armament, uniforms, and troop history books ire among the many items that ’ill the museum’s glass display ;ases.
Artifacts from other wars — ;rom World War I to the present var on terror — are also included in the collection.
The history of the General Patton Memorial Museum begins with the Chiriaco family.
Joe Chiriaco, the founder of the desert landmark, came west in 1927 from his home state of Alabama to see the Crimson Tide play Stanford in the Rose Bowl in Pasadena.
Incidentally, the game ended in a 7-7 tie, the last Rose Bowl game to finish in a draw.
Chiriaco never returned to Alabama, opting to remain in Southern California, where he found a job as a surveyor with the Los Angeles Bureau of Water and Power.
He made his first trek to the desert when his work brought him to an area known as Shaver Summit the name was changed to Chiriaco Summit in 1958 when a rural branch of the United States Post Office was opened.
With rumors of a new paved road between Indio and Phoenix, Joe began constructing a building, and on Aug., 1933, he opened a gas station and general store.
That same day, the new two-lane blacktop, United States 60, opened, passing in front of Shaver Summit.
Joe married his wife, Ruth, in 1934, and the couple worked 18hour days providing service to the traveling public.
Patton established the Desert Training Center, with its headquarters at Camp Young, adjacent to Shaver’s Summit — the only place of its kind “on limits” to the soldiers for many miles.
The availability of water to the Desert Training Center was one of the main reasons Patton selected the area and placed camps accordingly.
The center, created by one of America’s most demanding generals, is considered the largest military training facility in the history of military maneuvers, stretching over 18,000 square miles of rugged desert terrain from Southern California into Arizona and Nevada.
From 1942 to 1944, more than one million soldiers trained at the center, populated by thousands of tanks, trucks and selfpropelled artillery units.
Almost all of the facilities at the camp were non-permanent tent cities.
Seventy years later, vestiges of the camp remain and mementos of its historic past have been preserved and are on display at the museum, which was established next door to Joe Chiriaco’s original establishment, which is still in operation.
The museum was first conceptualized in 1985 by Margit Chiriaco Rusche, daughter of Joe and Ruth Chiriaco, and Leslie Cone of the Bureau of Land Management, the agency that manages the land upon which the training center existed.
The duo put a small team together that eventually evolved into the General Patton Memo_£ *7 A1 / vlao ‘ I ao/ George Patton , Patton Memorial Museum in Chiriaco Summit.
The first year was spent orizing and trying to find locas to house and process the facts,” Rusche said.
In 1986, five re modules were purchased, ating a 7,000 square foot a to serve as the museum lding.
Construction folks nt to work converting the dules into one cohesive ucture.
One of the museum’s first jfessional exhibits — it still nains one of the museum’s iterpieces — was the donated jtropolitan Water District tographical map, featuring the st regions of Southern Calirnia where the massive aqueict was installed.
Early expansion of the museum was financed by World War I and World War II veterans purchasing bricks that make up the two half-circle remembrance walls at the base of the Gen.
Margit Chiriaco Rusche, Michael Pierson, General Patton Memorial Museum, Bureau of Land Management, chiriacosummit.com USA SNAPSHOT Only United States president to resign Nixon resigned on Aug. , 1974.
USA TODAY erence TODAY IN HISTORY Today is Friday, August 8, the 220th day of 2014.
During the Second Sino-Japanese War, Japan completed its occupation of Beijing.
President Harry S Truman signed the United States instrument of ratification for the United Nations Charter.
Britain’s “Great Train Robbery” took place as thieves made off with 2. million pounds in banknotes.
The Republican national convention in Miami Beach nominated Richard Nixon for president on the first ballot.
President Richard Nixon announced his resignation, effective the next day, following damaging new revelations in the Watergate scandal.
Sonia Sotomayor was sworn in as the United States Supreme Court’s first Hispanic and third female justice.
A study in the Journal of Applied Social Psychology found that students who have read the Potter books are less prejudicial toward traditionally stigmatized groups, such as immigrants, gays and refugees.
Arabs launch attacks on Jews in Palestine over disputes on Jewish use of Wailing Wall in Jerusalem, considered holy by both Jews and Arabs.
Allies inform Japan that its surrender offer is acceptable as World War II in Pacific nears end.
Prince Hussein is proclaimed King Hussein of Jordan on termination of King Talal's reign.
RacerionDeginHrHhe Watts section of Los Angeles, United States, lasting six days.
United States officially ends combat involvement in Indochina, the same day the Viet Cong charge that 71 prisoners of war turned over to them by South Vietnam are not Communist supporters but want to return to Saigon.
George Washington created the Order of the Purple Heart, a decoration to recognize merit in enlisted men and noncommissioned officers.
The famous feud between the Hatfields of West Virginia and the McCoys of Kentucky erupted into full-scale violence.
The already opened Peace Bridge connecting Buffalo, N.Y., and Fort Erie, Ontario, Canada, was officially dedicated.
The United States launched the Explorer 6 satellite, which sent back images of Earth.
First lady Jacqueline Kennedy gave birth to a boy, Patrick Bouvier Kennedy, who died two days later of respiratory distress syndrome.
Congress passed the Gulf of Tonkin resolution, giving President Lyndon B Johnson broad powers in dealing with reported North Vietnamese attacks on United States forces.
The Confederate ironclad CSS Arkansas was scuttled by its crew on the Mississippi River near Baton Rouge, Louisiana, to prevent capture by the Union.
Austria-Hungary declared war against Russia and Serbia declared war against Germany.
Gertrude Ederle became the first woman to swim the English Channel, arriving in Kingsdown, England, from France in 14/2 hours.
During World War II, the United States dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima, Japan, resulting in an estimated 140,000 deaths.
The DuMont television network went off the air after a decade of operations.
Soviet cosmonaut Gherman Titov became the second man to orbit Earth as he flew aboard Vostok 2.
A court found two former top East German officials guilty of failing to stop the killing of people trying to escape across the Berlin Wall and sentenced them to probation.
Funk legend Rick James, whose life and career were marred by cocaine addiction and a prison term for assault, died in Los Angeles at age 56.
President Barack Obama said during an appearance on NBC’s “The Tonight Show” that he was “disappointed” that Russia had granted temporary asylum to National Security Agency leaker Edward Snowden, defying administration demands that the former government contractor be sent back to the United States to face espionage charges.
STICKING WITH LINCOLN* BOWt TAKE OUR PENNIES On this month in 1909 the Lincoln penny mode its debut the first . co,n bearing a real person's irnage.
Though there have been heated debates in recent decades about whether to get rid of the coin, the public has remained steadfastly opposed to eliminating it.
Polls in 1992, 1997 and 2006 all showed more than AP two-thirds of the public wanting the penny to stick around.
By News from Elsewhere media reports from around the world, found by BBC Monitoring 11:46 UK time, Thursday, 07 August 2014 A Chinese priest during Mass China says it may try to create a theology based on Christianity that integrates the religion with Chinese culture and is compatible with the country’s socialist beliefs, it's been reported.
Wang zuoan, a senior official for religious affairs, says China supports the development of Christianity within the country.
His comments came at a conference for Sinicization of Christianity in Shanghai.
It's thought there are about 23 million to 40 million Protestants in China 1.7% to 2.9% of the total population and that each year, about 500,000 people are baptised as Protestants.
It cites experts and church leaders saying they believe the authorities are alarmed by the quick growth of Protestantism in the area, and are trying to suppress it.
A 120pound bell that went imssrng from a local church has been returned.
The Kingman Daily Miner reported tod the brass bell was brought oack to St.
Mary Catholic Church on Wednesday by a man who wished to remain anonymous.
Church parish coordinator Donna Wicker says (he bell was caked in dirt, indicating it had been buried.
I I DESERTSUN.COM ^ E7 TODAY I IN HISTORY Today is Sunday, August 10, the 222nd day of 2014.
French forces under Cardinal Richelieu begin siege of La Rochelle, held by Huguenots.
Three-quarters of its inhabitants die of starvation during the 15month siege.
The Swedish warship Vasa capsizes in Stockholm harbor on its maiden voyage.
Truce of Vasvar ends war between Turkey and Holy Roman Empire, whereby rival armies are to withdraw from Transylvania.
Lord Ashley's Mine Act prohibits women and children under 10 from working underground in Britain.
Leo Daft opens America's first commercially operated electric streetcar, in Baltimore.
A young researcher at German chemical firm Bayer, Felix Hoffman, first synthesizes acetylsalicylic acid, aspirin's active ingredient.
Bulgaria gives up its claim to Macedonia in a peace treaty signed in Bucharest, ending Second Balkan War.
France declares war on Austria-Hungary at the start of World War I 1919: Anglo-White Russian forces defeat Soviet forces in North Dvina.
Japan offers to surrender in World War II if Emperor Hirohito is permitted to keep his throne.
Someone surprised the parks department by leaving a mystery piano in Shoreview Park.
The piano is not authorized in the , i park and has no weather protection.
Police say thieves have made off with hundreds of ears of com from two farms in Connecticut.
WTNH-TV reported that workers at Green Acres Farm here went tc pick corn to sell at a market Sunday and discovered that the stalks had been all but picked clean.
Another official begged for calm on November 2, saying there was plenty of toilet paper for everyone in the country a worry no one had thought to have before.
Suddenly, the Japanese became worried about a toilet paper shortage, and the entire country began hoarding as much toilet paper as they could.
By the time the crisis came to an end, most people had stocked up on at least a year s worth pf the stuff.
They do, as they drink stuff they need, they must get rid of the old stuff so they are new and the vampire stays healthy.
Blood is their source of food, and only blood much like the vampire bat.
Another key difference is that Vampires are not a species like the vampire bat is but rather a mutation caused by a virus, which is the best explanation I’ve been able to find, which also explains why vampires can’t have children but are able to infect others with vampirism.
I do not think that simply being bitten by one is enough to infect you, but you must drink vampiric tainted blood.
United States OFFICIALS RETURN ANCIENT COINS TO GREEKS Some ancient coins were returned to the government of Greece on Monday after the New ork prosecution of a prominent collector from Rhode Island.
The main criticism of this method is that it is too gruesome for the American public.
My answer to this is to allow only law enforcement, other prisoners and victims to witness the execution.
For prisoners who do have hope of becoming better citizens, sentences should be reduced for good behavior and outside services provided to encourage communication with family and potential employers and landlords such as the new startup Pigeonly that was the subject of an article in the Sunday USA Today section.
But little could they have guessed, from those fragile early shoots, that the whole wild continent would be tamed in just a few short centuries.
The tree did outlive all witnesses to its planting as well as generations and generations that followed.
By 1763, colonists noted that the tree, dubbed the Endicott pear tree, was already “very old” and showing signs of decay.
But yet it persisted and continued to bear fruit, in 1809, the tree had such notoriety that even President John Adams is said to have received a special delivery of its pears.
Such a wonder you may see; For the patriarchal tree Blossoms still, the living thought Of good Governor Endicott.
Through several more strong hurricanes, and even a vandal attack in the 1960s, the tree never stopped bearing fruit.
Although its pears have been described as “medium in size, unattractive, and coarse textured”, the tree’s shortcomings have been more than made up for by its resilience a legacy that will carry on even after the sands of time eventually wither its branches.
The USDA’s National Clonal Germplasm Repository, a seed bank, successfully produced a clone of Endicott’s pear tree.
There are few surviving remnants of those earliest days in American history, when European settlers arrived to the wild lands of the New world.
But as their centuries-old headstones have weathered and crumbled with time, and their names and stories have become lost to the ages, it’s reassuring to know that history is rooted by more than human memory and fading ink and that a living monument has been fruitful through it all.
Saturday, 10th April 2010 Panda print Two billboards in Marsa advertising the Pope's visit to Malta got the unlikely addition of two stencilled images of what looks like a panda.
It is not clear why the ""artist"" in question juxtaposed the bears with the Pope.
The organising committee was alerted yesterday morning and it plans to erase the images.
Comments Christian cachia(13 hours, 54 minutes ago) That is a significant figure, and a message to the Catholic Church.
Real Estate Cars Jobs Dating Newsletters Fairfax Media Network Perth man who didn’t ’mind the gap’ 1 August 6, 2014 Freed l Read later Brail article Print Video will begin in 2 seconds.
Play now Don't play Autoplay ON OFF Video feedback Video settings Passengers rescue man from train gap Train passengers push a train carriage to free a man whose leg was caught in the gap at a Perth train station.
Dozens of passengers have had to rock a train carriage back and forth to free a man whose leg was caught in the gap at a Perth station.
Public Transport Authority spokesman David Hynes said the man was boarding the train into the city at Stirling Station on Wednesday morning when he stepped awkwardly, causing him to slip down the gap.
He said it was an impressive feat because the gap between the train and platform was less than five centimetres.
Nicotas Taylor/Twitter Passengers were asked to stand to the other side of the carriage to push the weight away from the man but it was not enough to free him, Mr Hynes said.
Renae Bryant/Face book He warned people to ""mind the gap"" and not to stand near the doorways of arriving trains A passenger, known only as Nic, said the man appeared to be in shock but not in pain, and was lifted to safety by Iwo other passengers once the gap widened.
Paramedics treated the man but he was not badly injured and caught a later train.
Petersburg, Russia I n St Petersburg, if you walk towards the river Neva along Nevsky Prospekt, you will eventually come to the world-famous Hermitage museum.
This is a big house containing old statues, old paintings and old furniture.
Many European monarchs collected strange and grotesque things, but Peter’s is perhaps the only collection which is still open to the public.
While he was travelling around Europe, studying ships and engineering, and contemporary Western customs, he also indulged a fascination for the natural world.
He haunted auction rooms and markets, buying old, once-living things like sea-shells and stuffed animals.
Then, in 1697, in Amsterdam, he visited the workshop of Frederik Ruysch, who at the time was renowned as the greatest embalmer in Europe.
Peter’s idle curiosity and casual 76 FT172 20,000 gulden for the entire collection and had it transported to St Petersburg.
It became the foundation of the museum he had just commissioned, the Kunstkamera, the first public museum in Russia.
Ruysch, who was then 79 years old, immediately set about assembling a new collection.
In 1718 he issued his famous ‘monsters decree’, obliging his subjects to bring ‘monsters’ and ‘ugly ones’ from all over the empire to his museum.
For 10 years, monsters were delivered to the Kunstkamera, and Peter’s collection came to include live dwarves and mutated animals as well as dead ones.
People who, for whatever reason, attempted to conceal their ‘monsters’ were subject to a hefty fine.
Visitors to the museum could see an eightlegged lamb, a three-legged infant, and a sheep with two mouths and two tongues.
But the most celebrated of all Peter’s freaks was Foma Ignatiev, a dwarf who lived in the museum.
In 19th and 20th century carnivals he would have been billed as a lobster boy.
For those who wondered why Peter was putting such horrors on display, his stated goal was “to instruct and teach about Nature living and dead and about the artistry that shopping for the inanimate was about to enter a new, darker, much more obsessive level.
He looked at the corpses of children and saw that they were terribly pretty.
So he dressed them in lace, placed them in little coffins adorned with beads, flowers and small candles and made them beautiful.
He looked at the skeletons of foetuses and thought they would look wonderful mounted in dioramas illustrating allegorical themes.
So he took the little bones and stuck them together in morally instructive combinations.
Ruysch opened his workshop twice a week so the public could marvel at his handiwork.
Peter’s was only one of many famous signatures in the guestbook, but his fascination with what he saw there was profound and intimate.
He was so affected by the beauty of a dead infant “embalmed so masterfully that it seemed the child was merely sleeping” that this giant of a man could not help but kiss her.
Legend has it that visitors to the museum were offered a free glass of vodka and a slice of salo (salted pig’s fat) as an incentive to come inside and learn.
There are no live exhibits now, and what survives of Peter’s collection is divided between two rooms.
Circular, with multiple exits and entrances, its walls are lined with wooden cabinets which contain (among other things) a stuffed, two-headed lamb; the skeleton of a two-headed baby; the skeleton of Peter the Great’s giant footman (Peter had it mounted and put on display as soon as the guy was dead); and some specimens of Ruysch’s artistic handiwork.
There’s a severed hand made curiously elegant by the addition of a lacy frill, and a child’s head with the cap of the skull sawn off.
They peer out through the aged, yellow glass as hordes of curious schoolchildren look down into the twisting coils of its brain.
Drained of all colour, they float there, pale and soft and squishy, as if in suspended animation, awaiting the day they will be woken.
There is a wide variety of abnormalities for the connoisseur of such things, from microcephalies with tiny heads to macrocephalics with great, swollen, balloon-skulls.
There is a child born with his brain outside his skull, and infants whose faces appear to have collapsed in on themselves.
There are creatures from mythology also, a fleshy mermaid, labelled a ‘siren’, and a cyclops.
And then there are the grimacing Siamese twins, who appear locked in a deadly struggle to wrench themselves free of one another.
It’s impossible not to imagine the grief and terror of the mother when she saw the monster that had come from her womb, or to wonder how she was treated by her community, highly superstitious FI172 77 as it was.
There are more Siamese twins babies joined at the face, at the waist, end to end, scalp to scalp.
There are piles of skulls, elongated skulls, a mummified baby, and etchings of Ruysch’s foetal skeleton dioramas by the engraver Cornelius Huyberts.
This room is sometimes included in the overall price of the museum ticket, sometimes charged as an extra.
On my most recent visit it The babies occasionally go on tour around Russia was included in the overall price.
The nearest metro station to the Anthropological Museum is Gostiny Dvor/Nevsky Prospekt, but even then a mile long walk is inevitable.
The museum also operates the less than enlightened practice of charging non-Russians a higher rate of entry (approximately $3.00, compared to 75c), although if you say nothing and just hand over the exact Russian price you might get away with it.
As a final point, it is also worth noting that the babies occasionally tour Russia and can sometimes be seen in other cities.
I have stumbled upon them in a tent in Moscow’s All-Russia Exhibition Centre and in a little building near the Kremlin in Kazan, capital of Tatarstan.
MAMMOTH DEATH ORGY... in which Daniel Humphries continues his tour of St Petersburg’s odder museums with a visit to the Zoological Institute and its unique collection of woolly mammoths.
Currently based in Moscow, he's working on various projects, among them a book about some of the more bizarre republics that constitute the Russian Federation.
The Editor, Fortean Times, IFG Ltd, 9 Dallington St, London EC1V OBQ or to david.sutton@Hgmags.com PHANT OM CRASH Police investigating a reported crash find a wreck and a decomposed body Around 7pm on 11 December 2002, two motorists called police to report seeing a car veering off the A3 with its headlights blazing at Burpham, near Guildford in Surrey.
At first nothing was found, but a more thorough search uncovered a wrecked maroon Vauxhall Astra nose-down in a ditch, concealed by dense undergrowth 20 yards from where the car had been reported leaving the southbound lanes of the busy dual carriageway.
The lights were off the car’s battery had long since died and the driver’s body was badly decomposed.
On 12 December, Surrey police said they believed the crash happened five months earlier.
The driver, who appeared to have been trying to escape from the wreck, was identified as Christopher Chandler, 21, from Isleworth, who was being hunted for an alleged robbery.
He had been reported missing by his brother David after last being seen in London on 16 July.
THINK PINK Monitor lizards or goannas, as they are popularly termed in Australia are not readily associated with the colour pink, or so herpetologists thought.
However, scholars say Poe looked far more vigorous, perhaps even dashing, in his earlier years than he does in the well-known series of daguerreotypes taken in the final years of his life.
Smith, one of just three surviving portraits of the author, which will be shown publicly for the first time Saturday and is expected to fetch tens of thousands of dollars at auction.
Poe sits at a desk with pen and paper in hand, seemingly at the height of his creative powers.
While the portrait has been authenticated, much of its history remains unknown, the details of its creation a mystery that even Poe's famed detective, C Auguste Dupin, would have trouble unearthing.
Smith was a miniaturist who worked at various times in Philadelphia and Baltimore, cities where Poe also lived, and Poe sat for the watercolor in 1843 or 1844 — five or six years before his death.
Smith drew another sketch of Poe around the same time that served as a model for an engraving that was printed in Graham's Magazine in 1845.
It is unclear what Poe thought of the finished watercolor — though he was not fond of Smith's sketch.
In 1844, he wrote to James Russell Lowell, ""You inquire about my own portrait.
It has been done for some time now — but is better as an engraving, than a portrait.
It's unknown who paid the artist, and the painting's whereabouts before 1978 are unknown.
That's when Krainik bought the portrait from a collector's vast estate in Charlottesville, Va.
He knew immediately that it was Poe and paid only a few dollars for it, he said.
Now, Krainik plans to sell the Smith portrait at auction, and he's picked an auspicious time.
A rare copy of Poe's first book, ""Tamerlane and Other Poems,"" sold in December for $662,500, a record for American literature.
Before the auction, scheduled for June at Cowan's Auctions in Cincinnati, the portrait will be unveiled in conjunction with Poe's birthday celebration in Baltimore.
Tuesday is the 201st anniversary of Poe's birth, and the portrait will be on display Saturday and Sunday at Westminster Hall, the former church adjacent to Poe's grave.
Krainik claims money is not his goal in unveiling the portrait, but auctioneer Wes Cowan said he expects it will sell for at least $30,000 and perhaps more than $50,000.
Mr Uzuk was puzzled because there hadn’t been any caribou reported in the area for nearly a century.
Laboratory analysis discovered that the dung, the product of innumerable ancient migrating caribou herds, had been frozen in a glacier for thousands of years, and only recently exposed as the glacier retreated.
Wheely old Slovenian archaeologists are claiming that an ancient wheel , found in a prehistoric marsh settlement near the Slovenian capital of Ljubljana, is the oldest wheel in the world.
However, “general consensus” places the invention of the wheel in Mesopotamia, at least 15,000 years ago.
POT AND KETTLE Speaking at the Non-Aligned Movement summit in Kuaia Lumpur in February without a hint of irony, President Mugabe of Zimbabwe questioned the legitimacy of President Bush's election victory.
Lees mark the spot News from Elsewhere media reports from around the world, found by BBC Monitoring 10:58 UK time, Wednesday, 02 July 2014 A group of artists in Kazakhstan has come up with a novel way of highlighting potholes on the streets of the country's former capital, Almaty.
The Guerrilla creative house has placed fake legs sticking out of 10 holes around the city, giving the impression someone has fallen in head-first.
The aim is to alert pedestrians and also lets drivers see the hole from a distance, the artists told the Tengrinews site.
The artists dressed the legs in brightly-coloured socks to make them all the more visible.
They are made of papier-mache, and so can't cause pedestrians many injuries.
This should solve the problem after a while,"" a Guerrilla activist said, perhaps optimistically.
The artists scored a hit with an earlier campaign, when they drew bullseyes around litter bins to help people dispose of rubbish accurately.
His books survive in fragments; NG Wilson ( Photius , Duckworth, London, 1994, pp54-78) provides a generous English sampling.
While his Persian History is sober, with the odd weird moment (e.g. man crushed by falling hailstones), his India is a non-stop avalanche of amazing stories.
He wrote just before Greeks went there with and after Alexander the Great.
Livy himself could sometimes rise above this level, while insisting that what people believe is always important in context; cf.
FB Krauss, An Interpretation of the Omens , Portents, and Prodigies recorded by Livy, Tacitus, and Suetonius Pliny addressed his Natural History to Prince Titus.
This “lunatic enterprise” serves up fortean fodder alongside mundane fare, often without discrimination, though Pliny does enjoy lambasting “Greek credulity” regarding werewolves.
Aulus Gellius exemplified the contents of some dilapidated Greek volumes of Mirabilia acquired in Brindisi cannibals, dog-faced and one-legged men, hermaphrodites and sex-changes from female to male in modern tabloid spirit, claiming “disgust with such worthless writings” while eagerly devouring them.
His emphasis is on giant bones, human freaks, multiple and monstrous births, and sexual oddities, especially women becoming men for an 18th century French parallel to this last, see the Gentleman's Magazine, 4 Aug 1734, p455.
Known technically as Paradoxography, Phlegon’s stuff is compared by Hansen both to Ambrose Pare’s Renaissance tract On Monsters and Marvels and to supermarket tabloids.
The Byzantines had their paradoxographical cake and ate it, perpetuating the pagan material whilst subordinating it to the Christian strain.
Gellius, Livy, Obsequens, and Pliny are all translated in the Loeb Classical Library series . tion.
He was buried a short distance from the grave of a younger man, who, according to tests, probably came from the Bristol Channel region.
The two men shared a rare genetic trait, but one which was probably unknown to them.
Bones at the top of the instep that are usually unarticulated were found to be articulated in both men, suggesting that there was a family link between them.
The proximity to Stonehenge of the two incredibly rich graves, as well as the discovery that the archer probably travelled a considerable distance to get to Stonehenge, have led to suggestions that the monument may have been the focus of a European tribal elite and that the Amesbury Archer may have been a prehistoric pilgrim.
Whatever the outcome of these latest findings, it is clear that the influence of Stonehenge in antiquity extended far beyond the bounds of central southern England.
More details about the ‘Amesbury Archer’ [see FT163:22] have been revealed by post-excavation analysis.
The most plausible hypothesis is that they were made by a giant, alienlooking slug.
However, a team reporting in the journal Geology last year announced that a rock found in central India, bearing tracks of a complex animal, had been radiometrically dated to 1. billion years.
All these fossils just go to show how little we know about life on Earth.
FOOTPRINTS PUZZLE PALEONTOLOGISTS A slab of fossil footprints from Argentina poses an interesting puzzle for palaeontologists.
The footprints, an inch or two across, come in clusters, impressed in what was once wet sand or mud on the margins of ponds and streams.
The three main toes are widely spaced, sometimes with the impressions of narrow claws, and the occasional trace of a “big toe” touching the ground, pointing in the opposite direction to the other digits.
The prints are reminiscent of waders and shore birds paddling along, looking for worms and other food.
Ricardo N Melchor of the Universidad Nacional de La Pampa, writing in Nature , notes that while the prints look very like those of birds, there are no signs of holes made by beaks probing for worms, and there are other features that seem unbirdlike.
These long, ribbon-like impressions can extend for several feet and have a fairly consistent width of an inch or two.
As today is the seventh of July according to the Chinese lunar calendar, it’s a special day for single women and couples alike.
Literally meaning “The Night of Sevens”, Qixi celebrates the love, loyalty and commitment between lovers, as well as every single lady’s right to wish for her own Prince Charming to enter her life.
In recent years, Qixi has become known as Chinese Valentine’s Day, but it is by no means the exact equivalent of the Western day of romance.
As you may already have guessed, the couple are realty just personifications of two stars that lie on either side of the Milky Way.
For observers in the northern hemisphere, face south and took up right above your head around 10m local time.
The Milky Way should appear as a glowing band scorching the sky from north to south.
Look for a bright bluewhite star to the west of and above the Milky Way — this is Zhinti Xing (£K'ic M, the Weaving-girl Star), the estranged wife of the love story.
They swiftly get hitched and have two children on earth, but the Queen Mother of Heaven wangmu niangniang) is furious to discover this forbidden celestial-mortal love and separates them on either side of the aforementioned river.
If you happen to see a meteor shoot across the Milky Way tonight, it is said to be a lantern held by one of the couple as they cross the bridge to meet the other.
On Niulang Xing’s left and right are two slightly dimmer stars, representing the couple’s two children.
In modem astronomy, Zhinti Xing is known as Vega, the brightest star of the constellation Lyra.
Being the second-brightest star of the entire northern celestial sphere, after Arcturus, Vega should be feirty easy to spot.
Niulang Xing is known as Alpha Altair, the brightest star in the constellation Aquila.
The supposed children of Niulang and Zhinii are Beta Altair and Gamma Altair.
Take a took at the picture and see if you can find the triangle for yourself The truth about Zhinii and Niulang is nothing like the Qixi legend.
The two stars are approximately 16. light years away from each other and show no signs of getting closer.
Now that you’ve found these stars, you may be interested to know that traditional Chinese astronomy operates under an entirety different system of stars and constellations than that recognized by the International Astronomical Union.
As tong as 4,300 years ago, an astronomical officer was already regarded as an important position in a tribe.
His duty was to ,” or www.theworldofchinese.com/201 2/08/qixi-a-tale-of -astral-amour/ 1/ , Enif Epsilon Peg Equuleus Eltanin* Gamma Dra Oelphinus Alpha Aql > Aquila observe and record the movements of celestial objects, and formulate a calendar to guide the daily lives of his people, especially their agricultural activities.
As early as the Shang Dynasty (2070 B.C. 1600 B.C.), the sky was divided into 3 1 regions, each consisting of a group of stars.
The Three Enclosures formed the centerpiece of the northern night sky, and can be observed all year around.
Ancient Chinese thought of them as the residence and work place of the Jade Emperor and his ministers, as well as the busy downtown streets they governed, Surrounding these central three regions are the remaining 28 star clusters, known as the TwentyEight Mansions , which can only be observed at certain times of the year.
They were forther divided into four groups of seven, one for each of the four cardinal directions.
Collectively, they are known as the Four Symbols , and were used by ancient Chinese to represent the four main points of the compass.
Besides the folk story, Niulang Xing and Zhinii Xing are important stars in officials record, too.
Both belong to the region of the Black Tortoise, though they appeared under different names.
Together with the two nearby stars, they were thought to be the ■ v drums used by the heavenly troops as they rested by a river.
A 45-year-old man was found murdered in central Delhi on Saturday morning.
The incident took place near a park in Jhandewalan, close to the Videocon Towers.
We have sent the body to Lady Hardinge Hospital mortuaiy where it will be preserved for identification.
We are questioning some locals and eunuchs for leads,"" said a police officer.
To ensure that Shackleton could not cheat that he was really using esp and. not arithmetic to score his ‘hits’ Soal should have made sure that, at any point in the sequence, the chance of any one of the card symbols being next in line was the same as that of any other symbol.
The mathematical definition demands that vou use a mechanical method, independent of human bias.
The easiest way is to throw a die repeatedly and to record the number on the uppermost face each time.
But this is a slow and laborious method and, besides, a die has only six sides.
In laboratory experiments standard lists of random numbers, generated on computers by a variety of methods, are oftenused; ernih, for instance, selects Premium Bond numbers by ingeniously translating the haphazard motion of electrons in a diode into random numbers.
In the days before it was possible to use computers to generate long sequences of random numbers, logarithmic tables were used to obtain ‘pseudo-random’ sequences.
Guided by Jimi On one of my first visits to Seattle, my roommate and I decided to visit the grave of Jimi Hendrix.
As we drove toward the cemetery, we turned the radio to an oldies station and “Purple Haze” blared through our one good speaker as we cruised around the graveyard.
The majority of the graves were of the flat marble variety, impossible to read as we drove slowly around.
We had no idea where Jimi's grave was, but we noticed that each time we drove past a certain spot, the radio went dead.
Acting on a hunch, we parked there and found Jimi’s grave a short distance away.
There were no nearby wires or anything that would have interrupted the radio signal.
Rhias K Hall By email Vanishing doll Here’s an oddly creepy story that happened to me some time around 1995 in San Francisco.
My wife and I, along with our five-year-old son and our new baby, shared a single bedroom and loft near the beach.
One night, I came home from work, walked through the living room towards the kitchen where my wife was cooking dinner.
As I passed the bedroom, I noticed a new addition to my wife’s collection of stuffed animals.
A large, at least three foot tall Raggedy Ann doll sat on the bed, facing the bedroom entrance.
After a moment or two, I asked where she had gotten the new Raggedy Ann doll.
I repeated myself, but she still didn’t understand, so I dragged her to the bedroom doorway to show her the doll.
Less than five minutes earlier, a rather large Raggedy Ann doll had been there, and no one could have moved it, as they would have had to walk past me to get to the bedroom.
The more I thought about what had happened, the more freaky the whole scenario seemed.
The doll had been looking right at me, with those big, black, empty Raggedy Ann button eyes, and smiling in the way for which that type of doll is famous.
Raggedy Ann dolls have a distinctive look, and are not easily mistaken for another doll.
I have never been able to look at Raggedy Ann (or Andy) in quite the same way since then.
Three times a week, I would commute back and forth using United States 35.
Just east of there, on the south side of the road, were the remains of an old farm.
However, because five or six trees were still standing on the lot, I could tell where the house had been.
Because of my interest in buildings, I was curious about the house that had been there.
The next spring, I was taking a trip to Columbus, Ohio, and decided to go that route even though it was longer, because I needed to pick up a transcript from Ball State on the way.
As it worked out, I was travelling through Economy about 8:30 that night.
As I passed the farm, I was excited to see that someone had built a house on the lot where the old house had been.
The windows were lit up, although the curtains were drawn so I couldn’t see inside.
It was very simple a basic rectangular shape, front door in the middle, two windows on either side, five windows along the second floor, very close to what I would have assumed to be there originally.
As I was running late, I continued on and didn’t think much more about it.
On Sunday afternoon, I was returning home the same way and, approaching the farm, I was glad that it was daytime so that I would be able to see more of the house.
However, as I got closer, I realised that there was no house on the lot; just the barn and the trees.
I’m very sure I wasn’t dreaming or imagining the house as I had just stopped to put my top up (not an automatic one, I had to get out and physically put it up) and was wide-awake.
Toxicology tests done by Central Valley Toxicology in Fresno show Cotton had 10. nanograms of LSD per milliliter of blood in his system, 10 times what is considered potentially toxic and twice what is considered potentially fatal, according to Humboldt County Coroner Frank Jager.
The official cause of death will be determined by Ken Falconer, the doctor who performed Cotton's autopsy, and it will probably be released next week, Jager said.
I've never seen someone overdose on LSD, so this is pretty unusual, if that's what it is,” Jager said.
Craig Hill, senior program manager for Mental Health Branch Dual Recovery Programs, said LSD is rare in Humboldt County, and overdoses are exceptionally rare anywhere.
Cotton died in custody just hours after being involved in several altercations in front of the Eureka Rescue Mission, including one with Eureka police officers.
From many accounts, Cotton was agitated and combative from the moment he arrived at the mission.
The Eureka Police Department was criticized by some in the ensuing weeks for not taking Cotton directly to the hospital after the altercation.
Some have also alleged that officers on the scene used excessive force.
In a statement released Thursday, Eureka Police Chief Garr Nielsen said while Cotton's death was tragic, the toxicology report reaffirms his view that his officers acted appropriately given the situation.
Legend has it that one of Robin Hood's many exploits involved evading capture by the Sheriff of Nottingham by escaping through an underground tunnel . . which led from Saint Mary's church in Nottingham to a prison which stood on the site of the city's Galleries of Justice.
Now archaeologists have found evidence that there may be something to the tale.
A survey of the Galleries of Justice and cave system that lies underneath the city discovered a previously unknown tunnel when archaeologists accidentally broke through a rotten wooden floor.
The tunnel led all the way to Saint Mary's church as suggested in the Robin Hood legend.
Their hair color is caused by a mutation in the skin’s melanocortin-1 receptor gene, which may ""inadvertently activate” similar receptors in the brain that process anxiety and pain, says Anthony G Doufas of the Outcomes Research Consortium of clinical anesthesiologists.
The consortium tested this theory and found that redheads required 19 percent more gas for general anesthesia.
They’re also more sensitive to thermal pain and more resistant to local anesthesia.
In the incredibly overheated, paranoid environment of the Cold War, anything seemed possible.
Senator Joe McCarthy saw Communists hiding in every broom closet, Julius and Ehtel Rosenberg were executed as spies — although the evidence we have today suggests that Ethel, at least, wasn't guilty of anything of the sort — and the Federal Bureau of Investigation launched COINTELPRO, a series of covert actions spying on and disrupting various political organizations, including civil rights leaders and Vietnam war protesters.
After receiving a rather flimsy tip from an unnamed informant in Brazil, the FBI spent several years quietly looking for the bomb.
It's a treasure trove for government materials, some dull, some hilarious, and some just plain weird.
A redacted version of the document was declassified and released to the public in 2010.
In the summer of 1950, an FBI informant whose name we still don't know arrived in Brazil.
While he was there, the informant received the following tip, which he relayed to the agency.
The bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki by the United States are the only time a nuclear attack has actually been carried out.
But the United States government was understandably preoccupied that such a thing could happen here.
And so the tip from the Brazil-based informant set off a mad hunt through the city.
That includes the Soviet Mission to the United Nations, which sat in a stately home on Park Avenue until 1965, as well as the Hungarian Consulate, the Polish Consulate, and the Czechoslovakian United Nations Delegation, all clustered along East 67th Street.
They also had informants at the Amtorg Trading Corporation, a company set up in the '20s to bolster trade between the USSR and the U.S., which may have actually been stealing trade secrets from American companies.
Tass, a Soviet news agency with an office at Rockefeller Plaza had also been infiltrated by informants, as had the Soviet Mission's diplomatic retreat on Long Island, a country estate called Killenworth.
The FBI began asking their informants at each of these places whether they'd seen anything that looked like atomic-bombmaking materials.
None of them had seen anything of the sort, except for the person at the Hungarian Consulate, who wasn't entirely sure.
They also asked the Atomic Energy Commission to let them know what a disassembled atomic bomb might look like, should they have come across one.
The FBI did learn that the Polish Consulate had recently ordered some armor-plated cabinets; the special agent reporting on them said he would track them if they ever arrived in the United States From the start, though, it seems the FBI wasn't sure whether the tip from the Brazilian informant was real or just a Communist plot designed to provoke a panic.
The information may be true, in which case we have a major security menace on our hands; or the information may be false.
In the latter case the possibility exists of it having been disseminated from a Communist source for the purpose of producing panic.
It is even possible, if the information is false, that it was disseminated in the hope of finding out what we would do in such a situation; that is, what means we would take to find out if it is true, what informants we may have in various Consulates, etc.
Soviet submarines were supposedly going to covertly drop the bombs off in a bay off the west coast of Mexico.
H>W>A Request Rec<mV)ntnrmaii<m Diewmination Section 1 70 Marrd Drive Wim-lioter.
His focus is less on fighting crime than on making the city a better place by feeding the homeless and doing other good deeds.
He's holding a recruitment drive Saturday at Capes Kafe, a Des Moines comic book shop.
Larry Crane is the Red Shadow. radlMctiw 1 shadow 0eSn t ^ ***' He **** haVe superhuman length, and he wasn't bitten a He's 18-year-old Larry Crane, who wears a red mask, black motocross gear and a cape while doing his work.
Crane agreed to reveal his identity and meet for an interview on the porch of his Des Moines home.
Like Superman Crane dons a pair of glasses while in his civilian identity.
P ’ Crane said he mostly gets weird looks from people driving by, along with occasional honks and waves But when he first visits an area he hopes to help, it isn't in costume.
Before starting a local Xtreme Justice League, Crane reached out to the group's founder — a man calling himself Mr . treme, who started safety patrols, homeless outreach and public safety services in San Diego.
The group has more than 25 members, with names like Blue Buzzard, Crimson Crow and Shadowstar.
Larry Crane, aka the Red Shadow Mr Xtreme responded to questions from The Register about Crane's efforts through an email listed on the Xtreme Justice League Facebook page.
Jason Halifax said he hasn't heard of the Red Shadow , but what Crane does isn't breaking any laws.
You need to be really clear with yourself what may or may not happen if you take these roles on.
You also open yourself up to litigation if you use force, as well as injury.
Crane carries a stun gun and pepper spray, but stressed they're only for self-defense.
He's called police to report gunshots and fights, but has not made any physical interventions himself.
With the formation of Des Moines' Extreme Justice League, Crane said he isn't looking for a posse to back him in battles.
The plan is to conduct safety patrols around the city, similar to a neighborhood watch group.
The costumes serve as a visible deterrent to crime, and XJL members would call police to report any suspicious activity.
Crane doesn't expect potential superheroes to show up with costumes and fully formed personas.
The more people that join up will find it to be a fulfilling thing in its own way.
Even if we can't save the world, we could save someone's day or their life.
Well, that's not what the people in East Delhi, India, thought last year.
In May, just such a creature was repeatedly spotted, instilling terror and claiming two lives.
The craze got to a point where vigilante groups armed with sticks patrolled the streets at night on the lookout for the creature and police announced a 50,000 rupee reward for information leading to its capture.
Hey, Hey, We're The Mortkees Reports of the ""Monkey Man,"" as the press promptly baptized it, first reached the local police office on May 13, 2001.
According to one report"" the masked man had appeared in the village of Ghaziabad around 8:30m. and had remained there till 4:00m., terrorizing the residents.
Vineet Sharma, grandson of the first victim, said that that night, when he and his brother were sleeping with their grandmother, a masked man had entered the veranda and attacked the old lady and pushed her.
Then the assailant went into the neighbor's house and injured a child, finally disappearing in the dark lane before villagers could be aroused.
After that first blitz, dozens of individuals in a number of areas in East Delhi claimed to have been hurt in subsequent attacks and pictures of scratched victims started to appear in daily newspapers.
Some said it wore a skin-tight costume, while others stated it was a bandaged figure with a helmet.
What’s certain, however, is the fact that two people died because of this creature-or at least, because of the panic created.
Early May 15, at 2:30m., a pregnant woman in East Delhi fell down some stairs after being awakened by the shouts of neighbors saying that the Monkey Man had arrived.
She died in a hospital, as did another unfortunate soul, who died in similar circumstances.
During the past century there have been tales of strange creatures or men with properties similar to this Monkey Man, such as the glowing eyes and the ability to suddenly disappear in front of witnesses.
The Spring-Heeled Jack as depicted by one of Victorian London's so called 'penny dreadful’ newspapers.
Jumping Jack Flash According to legend, the first reports of a strange leaping figure sighted in London date back to 1837; some descriptions tell of a strange monster, half-man half-bat, complete with wings and horns.
Others refer to a powerfully built man in a shiny suit with a helmet and cloak, spitting fire.
Whatever its features, it seems that it was a series of sudden and unexpected aggressions that led an anonymous citizen to write a letter giving details of an attack by a mysterious ""Spring-Heeled Jack,"" to Sir John Cowan, the Lord Mayor.
Cowan drew public attention to the letter and his acceptance of the rumors led to a flood of letters from individuals reporting their own previous encounters with the terrible Jack.
Young Jane Aslop, for one, told the press that one evening she answered a violent knocking at her front door.
Excited, Jane fetched a candle and hurried it out to the gate but nobody could be seen.
Suddenly, two arms grabbed her neck and began to rip up her dress and body.
It was only thanks to the arrival of Jane's sisters, alarmed by the struggle, that she was able to break free wearing only a few scars on her neck and arms.
Two months later, another girl, Lucy Scales, was returning home with her sister.
As they entered a dark, empty alley, a tall, cloaked figure leaped from the shadows, belched blue flames into Lucy's face, blinding her, and then disappeared again.
In the ensuing years sightings of Spring-Heeled Jack multiplied and through the 1850s and 1860s he was spotted all over England.
The few times when he was cornered he was able to escape thanks to one of his fabulous leaps.
In both cases a mysterious character, half-man and half-something else, on whom descriptions rarely agree, attacks defenseless people unprovoked and then disappears in an impossible way.
No traces of his passage can ever be found but there are many who claim to have seen it, or at least to have felt its presence.
It is in fact only on the basis of a feeling that the attacker was pursuing them that two people jumped off a roof.
Statements from the victims change overnight and are vague and often contradictory.
Like in the old days, when sensationalistic newspapers’ accounts fueled sightings of Jack, the same thing happened again recently.
Usually, it all starts when, in an uncomfortable environment-dark and foggy alleys in Victorian London yesterday, degraded neighborhoods with unrepaired street lights and scarce | drinkable water in New Delhi today-something unusual happens.
In London, it is quite possible that some street assaults actually took place, since there have always been similar assaults anywhere in the world, but it was only following an anonymous letter that the culprit was identified as the improbable Spring-Heeled Jack.
In New Delhi, likewise, it may be that some aggressive, roaming monkey got too close to some people sleeping and scared some child.
In Victorian London the imaginary exploits of Spring-Heeled Jack were soon forgotten and replaced in popular culture by the real and horrible ones of another Jack, the Ripper.
In New Delhi, on the contrary, the wave of panic resulted in street lights being turned on, plentiful buckets of water being distributed, and better police-guarded streets.
Hindustan Times, 16 May 2001; Mainichi Shimbun, 2 May 2001; Daily Pioneer, 16 and 20 May 2001; Times of India, 17 May 2001, 19 May 2001.
About the Author Massimo Polidoro is an investigator of the paranormal, author , lecturer, and co-founder and head of CICAP . the Italian skeptics group.
Tony Williams found the knife amongst the possessions of his distant relative Sir John Williams, a chief suspect in the murders.
Sir John was working as a surgeon to Queen Victoria at the time, but left London soon after the slayings.
Tony, Sir John's great-great-great-great nephew, has now written a book to explain his theory.
Sir John Williams, left, and distant relative Tony Williams with knife Tony believes the blade he discovered also fits the description of the one used in the attacks.
Sir John moved to Aberystwyth after the murders, and later founded the National Library for Wales.
It was here that Tony discovered the knife after stumbling across an archive of Sir John's belongings.
River in China Mysteriously Turns Bloody Red Overnight Jui 25,2014, 1:09 PM ET By YAZHOU SUN via Good Morning America A waterway in eastern China has mysteriously turned a blood red color.
The really weird thing is that we have been able to catch fish because the water is normally so clear,” one local villager commented on China’s microblogging site Weibo.
Inspectors from the Wenzhou Environmental Protection Bureau said they have not found the cause of the incident, although water samples seem to indicate the suspicious color was a result of illegal dumping in the river.
Xiao said there is a paper manufacturer, a food coloring company and clothing-maker a long the river.
FIRST COLONY FOUNDATION Roanoke was geographically located in the crux of sociopolitical friction between the Secotan — who held sway over Roanoke — and the Chowanoke. who controlled the nearby waterways.
Tensions were especially high between the colonists and the Secotan tribe.
There was fighting between "" — both among the tribes, and between some of the native peoples and the English settlers.
It didn't help that the English attempted to explore the area multiple times.
The group that arrived prior to the lost colonists were driven back to England, which meant when the ill-fated third group of colonists showed up, some sour feelings remained.
Whether groups of Secotan banded together to rid themselves of what they saw as interlopers is anyone's guess, he said.
The area does seem to hold clues to contact between local tribes and European colonists in the 16th and 1 7th centuries.
Remote-sensing techniques have unearthed clues to the fate of settlers who mysteriously disappeared.
Theories about the disappearance have ranged from an annihilating disease to a violent rampage by local Native American tribes.
Previous digs have turned up some information and artifacts from the original colonists but very little about what happened to them.
The lost colonists were the third group of English arrivals on North Carolina’s Roanoke Island, settling near the modem-day town of Manteo.
The first group to arrive, in 1584, came to explore and map the land for future groups.
A second group, which arrived in 1585, was charged with a military and scientific mission.
He says that this second group was driven out in 1586 by local tribes angry that the colonists were taking up good land and resources.
Entire families came with children — 17 women and 1 1 children accompanied a party of 90 men.
That meant the group wanted to settle in the New World and was not a military excursion, which would have included only male explorers.
A Map With Secrets A clue uncovered in a long-forgotten, centuries-old map of the area called ""La Virginea Pars"" — drawn by the colony's governor John White — kicked off a reexamination of the fate of the lost colonists.
An artist and employee of explorer Sir Walter Raleigh, White was later appointed governor of the new lands; he was also the grandfather of Virginia Dare, the first English child bom in the New World.
Two patches on the map made Brent Lane of the First Colony Foundation (the group behind the latest archaeological trip and a National Geographic grantee) in Durham, North Carolina, wonder if they might hide something beneath.
Scientists at the British Museum looked into the patches and discovered a tiny red-and-blue symbol.
The research team thinks that when the crisis — whatever that may have been — hit, the colonists split up into smaller groups and dispersed.
The prevailing theory has been that the colonists abandoned Roanoke and traveled 50 miles south to Hatteras Island , which was then known as Croatoan Island.
Furthermore, archaeologists have identified the nearby site of a small Native American town named Mettaquem, which may have adopted some of the colonists.
After the map's secret was revealed, Klingelhofer, along with the First Colony Foundation, which studies the first attempts at colonization in the New World, proposed a return trip to the area, with a twist.
The process began earlier this year with a satellite survey of the site.
Researchers look for similarities between the old maps and the current geography of the area.
Once they identify where the spots on the map correspond with today's landscape, a painstaking process of laying out a grid and systematically searching it with their GPR ensues.
The technology emits radio waves into the ground and measures the echo as the signal bounces off of various things buried underground.
Essentially, it measures the depth that signals travel before hitting something that causes a measurable bounce back.
In other words, signals potentially indicate a hidden object underground.
Graves and coffins are also detectable, because they contain voids with different densities and poorer conductive properties than the surrounding soil.
LeCompte and his colleagues found a previously undetected pattern that may indicate the presence of one or more structures, possibly made of wood, under about three feet of soil.
Perhaps the wood of the structures collapsed over time, leaving impressions in the surrounding soil, LeCompte speculated.
Much more sensitive than a metal detector, the device can spot objects buried about 13 feet underground.
Hie device measures distortions of the Earth's magnetic field due to the presence of various objects buried underground.
Swindell, for his part, thinks there may also be remains of a palisades that would have been used by farmers to keep wild animals away from crops.
The presence of the buried structure and the fence strongly indicate that there was some sort of colonial presence in the area.
What complicates the story further is the presence of later colonial sites in the area through the 1700s.
Unfortunately, neither piece of technology has shed light on the role of Native American populations in the area.
It's Complicated In the days of the Roanoke Colony, relations with the local Native Americans were mixed.
GO www.theleafchronicle.com The Leaf-Chronicle Friday, October 30, 2009 D3 Roxy’s ‘Poe’ captures minds, hearts of students Play being staged for 2 shows only on Halloween By MARIA RICE McCLURE The Leaf-Chronicle “Teens love the writings of Edgar Allan Poe but complain they have trouble visualizing Poe’s stories in action,” Laurie Stansbury, an English teacher at Northwest High School, wrote in an e-mail to The Leaf-Chronicle.
THE CAST Jay Dooiittle Brendan Cataldo Phil Perry Jonathan Hopkins Ted Jones on harp “‘Poe Unearthed’ is 99. percent pure Poe,” said TnLn A/f/->nnmW OT+ictrr> rlivv licit uuoy ci ju»i sc;c;ii.
The show that the students raved about is being staged for the public for two shows only, 2 and 8 m. on Halloween, of course.
McDonald and Tom Thayer, managing director of the Roxy, frequently send out e-mails to teachers asking what the Roxy could do to help further the education of their students, McDonald said.
The play is being staged for the public for two shows only, 2 and 8m. on Halloween.
This past summer McDonald and a crew of volunteer interns — Webb Booth, Elizabeth Coleman, Andrew Hulse, Michelle Lebkeucher, Angela Scott, Spencer Williams and Amy Wyer — workshopped the play, and later Thad Wallus “added his expertise to this,” McDonald said.
The end result, “was really awesome,” said Northwest student DeSean Saine.
They didn’t have to do this, but it made better,” said Diana Roberts-Santiago.
All agree that the most riveting scene in “The Tell-Tale Heart” is when the murderer (Jay Doolittle) goes berserk and confesses his sin.
McDonald is pleased that his adaptation of Poe’s writing has inspired these students, and he hopes to inspire some adults this very Halloween.
Skeletons in the Royal closet The death of the Queen Mother attracted a huge amount of media coverage, but only GARRICK ALDER was prepared to delve into some of the odder corners of a long, strange life.
Growing up in a stately pile like Glamis Castle, haunted by no less than nine ghosts, the Queen Mother came from a lineage that, in time-honoured fashion, had a skeleton in the closet almost literally.
On 21 October 1821, Charlotte, the wife of Thomas Lord Glamis, gave birth to a child that was recorded as “born and died” on the same day.
The child survived, but was so deformed that he could never inherit the title and estates.
However, he had been baptised as a Christian and so was not surreptitiously disposed of but instead confined to a secret room, 10 ft by 15 ft , in the ly thick castle walls.
He was unseen anyone other than a trusty keeper fed him through an iron grille, unfortunate ‘Monster’, “his chest an enormous barrel, hairy as a his head straight into his shoul ders and his arms and legs toy-like; became a source of family dread, defying expectations and surviving, we are told, into old age, unloved and feared.
In the 1870s, a workman at Glamis came upon “a door opening a long passage,” and was “alarmed” by what he found there.
He told the Clerk of Works, who immediately cancelled the repairs and informed the 13th Earl (the Queen Mother’s grandfather) and the family lawyer.
As we know, the Abdication of King Edward VIII in 1936 propelled his reluctant younger brother, Albert, Duke of York, onto the English throne.
Newly installed in her post-reign home at Clarence House, she sent for the noted medium Lilian Bailey, who conducted a seance to establish contact with the dead King.
What King George’s spirit had to say remains unknown, but in a life of otherwise orthodox Christianity it must have been a pressing problem that drove the Queen Mother to such unorthodox methods.
The stresses of such a high-profile life and the responsibility of acting as figurehead and father of the nation during the dark days of World War II had increased the King’s addiction to cigarettes.
This feud with the Duchess touches on the second, non-paranormal but still fortean, aspect of the Queen Mother’s life a role in the parapolitical life of Britain almost second to none.
The Duke and Duchess of Windsor claimed they were the victims of persecution emanating from Buckingham Palace and driven by the implacable hatred of the Queen Mother a claim that leads us into surprising territory.
During the early evening of 16 October 1946, the country home of the Earl and Countess of Dudley was burgled.
The Duke and Duchess of Windsor were houseguests at the time, and the intruders made off with the contents of the Duchess’s jewel case, including several priceless uncut emeralds left to the Duke by his grandmother, Queen Alexandra, on condition that they should be worn by his future wife, who would become the Queen of England.
The Windsors were sure that the jewels had “been stolen by the British Secret Service, acting on the orders of the King and Queen, in order that the Royal Family might regain possession of the disputed emeralds.
YCTiile no proof of intelligence involvement has ever emerged, one may feel that an ex-King’s suspicions of just how far a Royal order for direct action might go are not simply wild fantasies.
Adolf Hitler christened her “the most dangerous woman in Europe” — and he should have known.
Before and during World War II, Sir Walter Monckton was a close friend of both the Queen Mother and the Duke of Windsor, as well as being head of Churchill’s private intelligence taskforce.
Speculation among historians was that the missing items had been suppressed because of strongly-worded disapproval of the Duchess of Windsor.
But, according to ‘a senior government figure’, they concerned the Queen Mother’s desire for the preservation of the monarchy in the event of a Nazi occupation.
How these papers were ‘weeded’ for such incriminating evidence of Royal quislingism remains a mystery but the obvious conclusion is that it was carried out by MI5 or MI6 at the behest of the Palace.
Peter Wright’s Spycatcher refers to a mysterious assignment undertaken by Anthony Blunt on behalf of the Palace, possibly to recover minutes of the still-shadowy meeting between Edward VIII and Hitler on 22 October 1937.
For instance, the fact that in 1998 Princess Margaret persuaded the Queen Mother to bum several refuse sacks full of decades worth of correspondence — to the understandable horror of historians suggests that some Royal insights are not for public consumption.
Andrew Roberts, 'Sitting on secrets for a daft amount of time', Sunday Times, 31 Jan 1999.
A number of towns from Chelyabinsk in central Russian to the Moscow region have suffered, with the death toll from the latest attack reaching 30.
He was immediately struck by the manner of the killings ripping the sheep’s back tendons to cut their arteries and suck out their blood a trademark of the legendary Chupacabra, a blood-sucking carnivore rumored to inhabit Central and North America.
Most of the rest Velikodnev had to relieve of their suffering with his own hands after calling the authorities.
Speaking with RT, the head of local administration, Svetlana Telnova, dismissed some of the wilder speculation, saying stray dogs were the most likely culprits.
All the sheep had a working heart muscle, so there is no Chupacabra, ” she added.
However, Velikodnev believes that the vets have not delivered the final word on the savagings, and shepherd Aleksandr ruled out the theory of the stray dogs.
And dogs or lynxes would have eaten at least one of the sheep, while the attacker in question merely bit each of them in the same spot.
As for the migrant workers no signs of an unauthorized entry were found at the farm.
A significant quantity of blood — 30 creatures were virtually drained! — vanishing without a trace, led locals to the conclusion that the unknown attacker had consumed it on the spot, which would have taken a healthy chunk of time.
The sheep were kept in a spacious fold, so catching each would have taken at least two to three minutes, according to Velikodnev, which means the intruder was present for more than an hour.
Just days after the incident in Kolomna region a similar case was reported in a small town near Chelyabinsk, where an unknown attacker broke into a rabbit cage and tore its inhabitants apart.
Rabbits have been dying in their dozens following two similar attacks in other small towns in the Chelyabinsk region.
The first reports of the Chupacabra vampire being spotted in Russia appeared as early as April 2006.
Other reports of similar incidents in various parts of Central America came to light followed by more in other regions of the world.
According to some, it is a reptile-like creature with a pronounced spinal ridge.
Others say it looks like a hairless dog bred with a kangaroo, with the latter’s ability to jump up to six meters.
Unlike conventional predators, the Chupacabras are believed to drain the prey’s blood and/or internal organs and never touch the flesh.
However, all the carcasses examined by scientists were found to be coyotes infected with a parasite that left them with little fur and thickened skin.
One of the greatest Brazilian footballers of the early 21st century, Ronaldinho, was nicknamed Chupacabra for his unusual appearance in the early days of his career. bludstone wrote in *S* wtf inc , @ 2008 -05-19 14:47:00 4 + # «-3 § ^ £> Flying Penis Disrupts Press Conference Life imitates 2nd life.
Russia’s witches and wizards face ad ban to protect cancer victims Witches, wizards and faith healers are to be banned from advertising in Russia over concerns that they are giving false hope to cancer sufferers.
One report claims almost one in five Russians have consulted occult ‘healers’ but MPs have warned they are risking their health and possibly their lives by trusting in such quackery.
Cancer specialists complain that many of the patients they see have already spent their life savings and wasted precious time on trying to cure the disease with a witch or a wizard.
When the money runs out, they say the mystic informs the unfortunate patient that it is “God’s will” and tells them there is nothing more that he or she can do.
The bill, which needs to pass two more votes before it can become law, would also oblige anyone claiming to be able to solve people’s health problems to prove their claim and get a licence to operate from the health ministry.
MPs say such licences would only be conferred upon genuine practitioners of alternative medicine and that nobody would be licencing witches or wizards.
The story of the Salton Sea begins with the formation of a great shallow depression, or basin, which modern explorers have called the Salton Sink.
Several million years ago, a long arm of the Pacific Ocean extended from the Gulf of California through the present-day Imperial and Coachella valleys, then northwesterly through the Sacramento and San Joaquin valleys.
Mountain ranges rose on either side of this great inland sea, and the whole area came up out of the water.
Oyster beds in the San Felipe Mountains, on the west side of Imperial Valley, are located many hundred feet above present sea level.
Slowly the land in the central portion settled and the area south of the San Gorgonio Pass sloped gradually down to the Gulf.
California’s Overlooked Treasure,” in a 1995 issue of The Periscope, a publication of the Coachella Valley Historical Society in Indio.
The river deposited vast quantities of silt into the Gulf, creating a delta, from Yuma to the rampart of the Cocopah Mountains, that separated the region from the Pacific Ocean — turning that area into a great salt water lake covering almost 2,100 square miles.
The depression was about one hundred miles in length by thirtyfive in width.
It’s unknown how long the ancient sea-bottom remained dry, but many thousands of years ago, the Colorado River proceeded to refill the dry basin.
Then the river changed course, cutting a channel to the Gulf through the eastern part of the delta plain.
From 1824 to 1904, Colorado River flows flooded the Salton Basin no fewer than eight times.
For example, an 1840 flood created a salt lake three-quarters of a mile long and a halfmile wide and, in June 1891, another outpouring of Colorado River water created a lake 30 miles long, 10 miles wide.
It is uncertain as to how many times water has filled the basin over the centuries but human intervention is responsible for inundating the basin only once.
In 1901, the California Development Company, seeking to realize the Imperial Valley’s potential for unlimited agricultural productivity, dug irrigation :y of overflow i the Colorado River to stop the water from flowing into the Salton Sink. canals from the Colorado River.
Heavy silt loads, however, inhibited the flow and new residents of the valley became worried.
This prompted the engineers to create a cut in the western bank of the Colorado to allow more water to reach the valley.
Unfortunately, heavy flood waters broke through the engineered canal in 1905, and nearly the entire volume of the Colorado River poured into the sink, unimpeded, for over 18 months.
The raging river flooded thousand of acres of farmland and destroyed large portions of Calexico and Mexicali.
Approximately 11,000 acres of Torres Martinez Desert Cahuilla Indians tribal land was flooded.
The Southern Pacific Railroad was forced to move its lines several times as the sea rapidly grew in size.
Four separate projects were started to try and stop the hemorrhaging river all ending in failure.
The last trainloads of rock were dumped, cars and all, in a lastditch effort to quell the flow of the river.
On Feb., 1907, 2 million cubic feet of rock and $3 million later, Southern Pacific closed the breach and the river once again headed toward the Gulf of California.
Agricultural drainage from the new farms in the Imperial Valley to the south kept water flowing into the newly christened Salton Sea.
Samebito 6/13/99 12:41 PM Samebito A black monster with green glowing eyes and a spike beard from Japanese mythology.
On the Long Bridge the monster encountered the hero Totaro, but instead of attacking him, the monster entreated him to give it food and shelter.
Totaro took the monster with him and gave it a lake near his own palace where he fed it.
Some time later, Totaro fell in love with the beautiful Tamana and intended to marry her.
Tamana's father however, had set the bride price at 10,000 precious stones.
Unable to come up with such an immense fortune, Totaro went home and lay ill until he was dying.
When Samebito learned of what happened to its benefactor, it shed tears of sadness until the monster discovered that its tears had turned into pearls, rubies and emeralds.
With these precious stones Totaro was able to pay the bride price and marry the lovely Tamana.
Now meet the Krampus, a boozy goat-horned menace that whips children around Europe.
Clay Risen meets a group of Krampuses and learns why they’re great at a party.
Santa Claus may be a wonderful symbol of the holiday spirit, but time and consumer society have warped him to the point where he makes little sense.
The idea behind Santa, originally, was to carrot-and-stick little boys and girls into good behavior— he’s got a list, he’s checking it twice, and if you fall under the ‘naughty’ category it’s switches and coals for you.
Spock and Mattel are high on the list— Santa’s beneficence is a fait accompli.
Nick’s job was split— while the jolly old elf delivered the goods, an evil, goat-homed spirit called the Krampus brought switches and bad dreams to the boys and girls of Austria, southern Germany, Switzerland, and far northern Italy.
And while many regional European traditions are giving way to international consumer culture (the fat, red-bedecked Santa is in fact quickly replacing the rad-thin St.
His success is certainly thanks in part to the lack of a parallel in American society.
But he has stuck around mostly because Krampus Fest, like most holidays in alpine Europe, is a beloved excuse for small towns to get together and drink their brains out.
According to Mannfred Kapper of the Austrian Cultural Forum, the Krampus was initially a side note to the St.
A while back I spent a year in Jennersdorf, Austria, teaching English at the local high school.
Jennersdorf is a stone’s throw from nothing, a southeastern village of 3,000 people a few miles from the Hungarian border.
There I experienced a host of unimaginable traditions— I watched a man be wedded to a tree, for instance— but nothing quite compared to the weekend of drunken merriness and satanic symbology that is the Krampustage.
A few men in each town dress up in furs, heavy boots, and a ghoulish mask topped with horns— with a switch in hand.
Then they go to all the houses with small children, and when the parents open the door they run in and act menacing— growling and cracking their switches.
After everyone’s had a good fright, the parents invite the men to sit down and have a few shots of kirsch or schnapps, which they always accept.
Not surprisingly, by the end of the night the Krampuses’ growls are a little slurred, their switch-cracking is a little too close to the children, and parents have to make sure their kids don’t look out the window, lest they catch a glimpse of the Krampus puking in a gutter.
But Krampus Day soon morphed into Krampus Weekend; it’s likely that villagers got jealous of the lucky few who got to run around town in costumes, act like idiots, and get plastered.
Thus was born the Krampusfest— or, as it is known in southeast Austria, the Kranchen.
The Kranchen I attended was sponsored by my school’s junior class to make money for the seniorball.
Jennersdorf didn’t have a facility large enough to hold the party, so the kids rented a hall a few towns over.
There were two rooms— in one, the main hall, a band played on a stage at one end, fronted by a dance floor; to the side ran a long bar, staffed by students backed by multiple cases of beer.
The band played Top-40 hits, which in Europe is a mix of angsty, American punk-lite and goofy dance tunes.
The other, much smaller room was the ‘ Hard Core Saale/ featuring low lighting, mixed drinks, and rap.
Most of the night I drifted between the two rooms, though toward midnight I setded at a long table with a bunch of my sophomore students.
When I asked what their parents thought of all this, Eva, 16, told me her father was sitting three tables over.
Fortunately, the Kranchen's organizers were prepared— within five minutes the school’s star volleyball player— and, now, custodian— was over with a mop and bucket.
For a little while I wondered if I should do something adult-like, say, find the principal and get Thorsten a ride home.
Five of six guys, dressed in full goat-god regalia— switches in hand— ran into the hall and began whipping people.
A few party-goers fought back, but most everyone— Krampus and non-Krampus alike— were too gone to care.
After 10 minutes of this, the Krampuses took off their masks, everyone laughed, one of the bartenders brought over a round for them and the drinking recommenced in earnest.
The author, drunk with Krampus At 2:00 am, when I left, the hall was still packed, reeking sofdy of overworked heating, spilt beer, and vomit.
A few younger students left with me, two of them on either side of one of their semi-conscious comrades.
And yet I wondered, as we drove back through the darkness, how the the Krampus had devolved— from a spirit meant to shock children into good behavior— into an excuse for wild inebriation, and in much the same way that Santa Claus had been co-opted by crass commercialism.
Not to mention the way that Christmas itself, meant to celebrate the birth of a savior, had become an excuse for mass consumption— material, alcoholic, or otherwise.
But, leaving out the discussion of this purely sentimental aspect of the matter and coming down to brass tacks and tangible assets, it is indisputable that women hold the winning hand in marriage.
This photo was shat on Church Street atNES looking toward the city’s skyline.
Satan’s Burial In Auditorium Draws Throng By Francis Meeker Nashville Banner, February 5, 1979 M lliey preached the devil’s funeral in South Nashville Saturday night.
Satan was laid to rest with spirituals sung to the music of tambourines, a piano and an electric guitar.
Marion B Southall, minister of the Truth of Life Foundation To Share the Light, who started his congregation in 1976 in an abandoned church at 1212 First Ave.
S Saturday night he called his congregation, his relatives and at least a half dozen other churches to help him with his task of getting rid of the devil.
For only $30 a year you can have The Nashville Retrospect conveniently delivered to you in the mail every month.
See Page 2 for instructions. y-IXPERIE rH where ] JL-iFrom oi activities pro that Hohday When you m< sped Whether it's a ""check engine"" light or a funny noise, putting off having your car checked could leave you stranded.
At Link Automotive, wo specialize In all typos of vehicle repair#, including engines, transmissions, electrical systems, suspension and brakes.
Wo also offer a full line of over RUTOMOTIV6 SERVICE /PARTS (STONES, assign the true place where the power is that produces the phenomena-the persons who give the statements, agree the time and the effect is nearly the same as felt here, and we see no difference more than the same man might be supposed liable to make if placed in different situations; and the people in each part of the union, seem to be equally alarmed. moments of amusement in the wake of the horrific quakes.
While staying in a large log house belonging to a physician as the guests celebrated a wedding, Audubon witnessed something shocking to propriety.
The sleeping guests rushed outside ' * v '* v v ' 4 cl ing key over the mantelpiece.
Its swinging could tell them the degree of danger and whether evacuation was necessary.
With an estimated 150,000 acres of timber destroyed in the quakes, it seems a blessing that the area was sparsely populated at the time.
Louis and Memphis in the central Mississippi in a mass preparedness drill.
George Zepp is author of the book Hidden History of Nashville and wrote the “Learn Nashville” column for The Tennessean from 2002 to 2010.
A black hearse from Dawson’s Mortuary in Franklin waited at the front door.
The moumers-or celebrators-were ushered into the auditorium and took their seats in front of the gray casket which was flanked by a dozen colorful funeral wreaths against a backdrop of flaming candles in two seven-branch candelabra.
The flowers were on loan from Ed’s Flower and Plaque Shop on Lewis Street.
Seniors 55 and older are needed to tutor children in reading in grades K-4 in Davidson County / public schools.
If you * ' ' love to read and want to make a difference in a child's life, call 743*3422, Training classes hrgllt late stage with him were a dozen speakers-black and white, men and women, young and elderly.
The minister led the audience in singing Victory, Victory Shall Be Mine, with the audience clapping in time to the minister’s tambourine.
Abbott, a tall, slender woman dressed in a pink formal, sang a spiritual, accompanying herself on the electric guitar.
Nannie Haley, a member of Meharry Boulevard Church of God, beating her.tambourine, gave a rousing rendition of Satan, I Put You Out of My Life.
Spiritual Temple, Southall gave the obituary of the devil, telling of the havoc he has wreaked in lives from the time he met Eve in the Garden down through the ages to today.
The minister’s mother, known in her son’s congregation as Mother Susie Pilcher, spoke on the need for a positive spirit in life rather than a negative one.
Collection cups were passed among the audience to receive contributions for the renovation of Southall’s church.
S tones River Manor, sponsored by area churches of Christ, is Rutherford County's only faithbased, not-for-profit senior living community.
We are a full-service senior living community offering independent living apartments, stepped-care assisted living, memory care, adult day care, respite care, physician and clinic services, and complete nursing and therapy services.
Oklahoma approved the erection of a Ten Commandments monument on the State Capitol grounds in 2009.
Staff writer / December 8, 2013 ACLU challenges 10 Commandments use in Oklahoma A group of Satan worshippers says the Oklahoma Legislature's decision in 2009 to allow a privately funded monument to the Ten Commandments on the state capitol grounds means they should have equal access to build a monument of their own.
Legal precedent suggests that federal courts might not take the same view about Oklahoma 's Ten Commandments monument or Satanists' claim of equal rights.
In a 2005 case, the U S Supreme Court unanimously ruled in favor of Satanists and followers of white-supremacist religions, saying that a federal law designed to protect prisoners' religious liberties protected theirs, too.
Ohio officials had argued that protecting Satanists' religious rights would undermine prison security by drawing more prisoners to that faith.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg noted that government often makes concessions to accommodate the free exercise of religion, such as allowing Jewish military personnel to wear yarmulkes.
Justice Ginsberg made clear that her ruling dealt specifically with the federal law in question.
In two other cases decided the same year, the Supreme Court issued a split ruling on the specific question of religious monuments on public property.
On one hand, the court decided 5-to-4 that a monument to the Ten Commandments on the grounds of the Texas Capitol could remain.
But Justice Stephen Brever. writing for the majority, noted that the monument had existed for 40 years before eliciting any legal complaint.
Moreover, the grounds of the Texas Capitol include a variety of monuments.
This, in Justice Breyer's view, made the monument more historical than religious.
That experience helps us understand that as a practical matter of degree this display is unlikely to prove divisive,"" Breyer wrote.
On the other hand, the court decided 5-to-4 that copies of the Ten Commandments on the walls of two Kentucky courthouses ran afoul of the constitutional separation of church and state.
In a concurring opinion, Breyer noted that the Kentucky monuments sparked legal action almost immediately.
Similarly, in 2010, the court let stand a lower court ruling that ordered the removal of a Ten Commandments monument from the grounds of a county courthouse in Oklahoma.
The American Free Church of Satan has proposed a theme park, provisionally called Perdition, with features based on the devil, black masses and heavy metal music.
The group sees it as an antidote to the Christian theme park currently pulling in vast crowds in Florida.
A rush to save a species Rick Hampson @rickhampson USA TODAY hampden, mass.
The New England cottontail, the only native rabbit east of the Hudson River and once a dietary staple of Pilgrims and bobcats, has become a candidate for the federal list of endangered species.
Despite rabbits' famed fecundity — and the abundance in the region of an almost identical species, the eastern cottontail — government agencies and conservation groups have embarked on a two-decade, $55 million effort to restore the New England KELLY BOLAND, NEW ENGLAND COTTON TAILORG New England cottontail, candidate for endangered species. cottontail's dwindling habitat and increase its shrinking numbers.
Peter's problem, surprisingly, is not just Old Man Coyote, Reddy Fox and Farmer Brown.
To avoid predators, cottontails need protective ground cover — bushes, thickets, briar patches — that appear in the ""new growth"" period after farm fields are abandoned or forests burn or blow down.
Friday, July 18, 2014 A North Bay teenager is launching a campaign to pick up where a World War II veteran, now in his mid-nineties, left off.
Santa Rosa sophomore to-be Cameron Whiteside is mounting the campaign to preserve what he calls a city icon.
The icon, a hillside cross, was built long before the 15-year-old was born but the teen says he feels a connection to it.
S a l0t ° f mountains in Sonoma County, but this one adds character because there is something on it,” Cameron told Cameron’s mother, Paula Whiteside, says her son’s first visit to the cross didn’t go so well.
UP ^ e [ e wh ® n he . was 5 ~ years ' old and he § ot a § ood case of poison oak out of it.
But he enjoyed knowing he could be there,” Whiteside said. y 8 The cross was built by 96-year-old retired SFPD Lieutenant Arvo Kannisto more than 30 years ago.
The cross is made up of thousands of stones, all hand-placed by Kannisto, it was built to honor his fellow World War II comrades who never made it home.
Two years ago Kannisto spoke to KTVU after he’d been told by the property owner that he could no longer go up on the hill to maintain the cross.
Camer ° n Said he WaS researching the cross online when he stumbled across the 2-vear-old story of Konnisto’s The teen grabbed a couple of friends, Josh and Vincent Mead and the three began canvassing nearby neighborhoods The teens are hoping to drum up enough support to allow Cameron or an interested group access to the cross so that they could regularity maintain the memorial.
I feel it is my duty after I've enjoyed it for so many years,” the teen said.
Konnisto got emotional when he learned of the teen’s campaign to save the cross.
Saved from the Titanic is a 1912 silent motion picture short starring Dorothy Gibson, an American film actress who survived the sinking of the RMS Titanic on April 15, 1912.
She had been one of around 28 people aboard the first lifeboat to be launched from Titanic and was rescued about five and a half hours after leaving the ship.
On returning to New r York, she co-wrote the script and played a fictionalized version of herself.
The plot involves her recounting the story of the disaster to her fictional parents and fiance, with the footage interspersed by stock footage of icebergs, Titanic’s sister ship Olympic and the ship’s captain Edward Smith.
To add to the film’s authenticity Gibson wore the same clothes as on the night of the disaster and her rescue.
It was the first film to be made about the disaster and premiered in the United States just 29 days after the ship sank.
The film was released internationally and attracted large audiences and positive reviews, though some criticized it for commercializing the tragedy so soon after the event.
It is now regarded as a lost film, as the last known prints were destroyed in a studio fire in March 19 14.
It is also the last film that Dorothy Gibson ever made, as she suffered a mental breakdown after completing it, apparently due to the mental strain that it caused her.
Miles away, many other sea articles and artifacts are stowed away in a storage space at an office building in Oasis.
These historic materials were at one time on public display at the thriving Salton Sea History Museum, established at the North Shore Beach & Yacht Club in May 2010.
The museum moved into the yacht club following a $3. million renovation of the Albert Freydesigned building — a 6,500-square-foot, two-story facility built by the renowned architect in 1959.
When the museum lost its place at the yacht club in June 2011, due to a dispute about the organization’s nonprofit status, it reopened in February 2012 at a bungalow at the Torres Martinez Desert Cahuilla Indians Wetlands property near the sea.
MEET THE PEOPLE Visit DesertSun.com/SaltonSea to watch a compelling video about the people in the story who live along the shores of the state's largest lake.
You can also view engaging photo galleries of the beauty that is the Salton Sea.
A6 THE DESERT SUN | DESERTSUN.COM | Museum Continued from A1 The Kellys and other volunteers spent months renovating the old bungalow — donating hours of their own labor — and supplementing some of the cost with their own money — only to be asked to leave a year later.
Jennie Kelly said it was because they were told they used too much electricity.
Now the fate of the museum, much like that of the sea itself, is up in the air.
Behind him, a large Salton Sea History Museum sign and other museum memorabilia filled the space in front of the fireplace.
Jennie Kelly has lived in North Shore, just blocks from the Salton Sea, for 30 years.
The museum’s director, she’s spent years carefully collecting material and creating an extensive archive relating to the history of the Salton Sea.
Former Riverside County 4th District Supervisor Roy Wilson, who died on Aug. 26, 2009, encouraged her to establish a museum.
She said 17,000 people visited the museum during its first year in operation.
The Salton Sea was created in its current form starting in 1905 when an irrigation channel off the Colorado River was breached and water flooded into the basin.
The water kept flowing until 1907, when engineers were finally able to stop it.
Since then, the lake has been sustained largely by plentiful runoff from Imperial Valley farms.
But that runoff has been decreasing and is set to decline dramatically after 2017, when more water will be transferred to San Diego and cities in the Coachella Valley under the nation’s largest agriculture-to-urban water transfer.
The receding water levels will leave more of the lake bed exposed to winds that can kick up dust, which could increase air pollution and affect the health of people living in the surrounding areas.
A drying sea can also negatively affect the health of migratory birds who stop to rest at this vital habitat situated along the Pacific Flyway.
A short run Despite its success, 13 months after opening, the museum and its volunteer staff had to leave on June 3, 2011.
County officials said at the time the museum needed federal nonprofit status to stay open.
In a letter dated July 24, 2011, the museum was granted the designation by the Internal Revenue Service.
Tom Freeman, spokesman for the Riverside County Economic Development Agency, which manages the yacht club, said the museum never presented documentation of the nonprofit status by the deadline requested.
The county bought the yacht club property from Desert Alliance for Community Empowerment, known as DACE, with the goal of restoring the rundown building.
In the 1960s, it was a social center for those enjoying fishing and boating at the sea and where prominent entertainment figures, including the Beach Boys, Jerry Lewis and the Marx Brothers, docked their boats.
The museum was asked to pay rent, about $1,300 per month, which was an excessive amount for a fledgling organization, Kelly said.
Freeman said the North Shore Beach & Yacht Club has become a thriving community center.
In the past week, more than 50 children and teens have been participating in morning and afternoon sessions of the North Shor4 Summer Arts Program in the multipurpose room, Freeman said.
Fifteen more children are enrolled in Desert Recreation District’s summer camp, Summer by the Shore, in the computer room.
Throughout July, the center has been serving breakfast and lunch, free of charge, to about 50 children, ages 18 and younger.
Throughout the year, the community center holds Zumba classes on weeknights and food distribution to needy families on Friday mornings,” he said.
The building also is rented out for private events, including weddings and bridal showers, and is often used for community events and meetings of the Salton Sea Authority, North Shore Community Council and other organizations that meet monthly with residents.
SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 2014 community center in North Shore since she moved to the area and worked at the yacht club during the construction phase to make sure it met the needs of the museum and the community.
Upstairs is a large space known as the Compass Room, which is completely empty.
Freeman said the museum moved its archives into the space, without permission, and was asked to vacate the room because another public program was planned for it.
It’s not compliant with the Americans with Disabilities act because it’s a registered Historic Site.
Alterations, such as adding an elevator, would “negatively impact the historic, character-defining features of the Yacht Club,” the Palm Springs Modern Committee wrote in a memo, dated May 6, 2011, to the Economic Development Agency.
On a visit to the yacht club in July, a couple dozen teens participating in a summer program took up a small fraction of the sprawling, lightly furnished building.
Linda Beal, a local historian and museum volunteer, hopes the situation will soon change.
It’s a special place, and the yacht club was the perfect location for the museum, she said.
People from all over the world stopped by to talk about and learn about the sea.
Beal said people requested tours of the area, asked questions about local agriculture and real estate.
Others were interested in finding a * particular location for photo shoots.
Jennie Kelly hopes the county and the museum can work together to bring the resource back to the sea.
Still, artists do die — and what may surprise a visitor to Italy is how accessible, and how moving and beautiful, are the tombs and other formal memorials to artists that Italians dutifully and sometimes touchingly maintain.
Some of these we sought out during a recent visit, but others my wife Lucy and I such as the spot in a chapel of Venice’s Basilica of Santa Maria Gloriosa dei Frari where the composer Claudio Monteverdi rests under a marble marker on which some music lover had laid a longstemmed white rose.
In the Pantheon in Rome, similarly, an admirer had left a fresh laurel wreath at the gleaming tomb of Raphael, Michelangelo’s rival.
Perhaps the most awe-inspiring expression of Italians’ reverence for their departed artists is Florence’s cavernous Basilica of Santa Croce.
The grand tomb of Michelangelo in Santa Croce church in Florence, Italy, which enshrines the remains of many artists, the associated press ccolo Machiavelli, the political theorist and writer, is buried.
At composer Gioachino Rossini’s handsome sarcophagus, his overture to “William Tell” (or the “Lone Ranger” theme) inevitably plays in a visitor’s head.
Those conjurings change to mental images of hell and purgatory nearby, where the epic poet Dante Alighieri peers sternly at passing visitors.
This, however, is a memorial, not his tomb, which is in the city of Ravenna.
It’s a near-riot of marble panels, vivid paintings and sculptures with downcast expressions, all of it rising to a pinnacle far up the stone wall.
At the Frari church in Venice, besides Monteverdi’s slab, you’ll find the pyramid-shaped mausoleum of the sculptor Antonio Canova, containing, it’s said, only his heart.
In Rome, near the Pyramide subway stop in the NonCatholic Cemetery, many artists are buried, and many of them were English.
Indeed, passing through the gate you step from noisy Roman streets into what could be a tranquil corner of Britain, with pruned hedges, stately shade trees and bright lawns strewn with violets.
Here, understatement marks the headstones of painters and poets, including two immortals of literature. ^ciuDeiPSftkiniy oy ms gravestone, the cemetery’s most visited.
Many next climbed a small rise to the grave of the poet Percy Bysshe Shelley, who drowned in Italy.
He completed the human-sized angel not long before his own death and burial here.
It represents the angel of Grief, in utter abandonment, throwing herself with drooping wings and hidden face over a funeral altar.
Buy one of these custom art tanks and the likelihood mk jox E6 THE DESERT SUN | DESERTSUN.COM | SUNDAY, JULY 20, 2014 Tombs Continued from E5 London’s Westminster Abbey, legends of the art world share space here with statesmen and other notables.
So, for instance, Santa Croce honors Galileo, sculpted grasping his telescope.
His remains were grandly re-entombed here after being kept elsewhere for nearly a century following his death, because his astronomy was deemed unbiblical.
Along another wall, Niccolo Machiavelli, the political theorist and writer, is buried.
Michelangelo Buonarroti. “nia Via prpnfp that himThe answer takes you to a museum attached to Florence’s great Duomo cathedral: It houses the sculpture that Michelangelo actually planned for his tomb, a somber depiction of Christ being lowered from the cross.
The story is that the sculptor, then in his 80s, became displeased with it and, in frustration, smashed part of it with his hammer before abandoning the work.
The fragments were gathered and later reattached, and today you can clearly see the cracks.
Here, understatement marks tVip hpaHstnnps nf naintFollow the gravel path to the simple corner grave of John Keats, whose odes and sonnets are among the finest in English.
Suffering from tuberculosis, he traveled to Rome at the recommendation of doctors who hoped in vain that the climate would improve his health; he was just 25 when he died here in 1821.
On a recent sunny day, a steady stream of literary pilgrims paused silently by his gravestone, the cemetery’s most visited.
The Chicago Sun-Times reports that police found the body of 4 7-yearold Ronald Opilka on Tuesday.
Neighbors had called their alderman to complain about an odor coming from the home.
In 2011, the decomposed body of Cecylia Opilka — the man's 80-year-old mother — was found buried under piles of debris by workers who also were responding to complaints of a bad smell.
Neighbor Kathy Cooke says she hadn't seen Ronald Opilka for weeks and that he hadn't been able to accept his mother's death in 2011.
It's an age-old fearthafs prompted some of the more paranoid to invent contraptions to Newkirk allow to escape their graves, should they awaken underground.
In this day and age, it might seem irrational to worry so much about being mistaken for a stiff, but medical science wasn't always so advanced, and there were numerous cases where unfortunate souls flew underthe radar, only to wake up entombed.
One such case inthe sad tale of Julia Legare and the haunted mausoleum where her claw marks can still be found on the walls.
Tucked away on Edisto Island, a beautiful plot of land on the southern coast of South Carolina, lived the Legare family, a long line of wealthy plantation owners.
The family had two children, an older son and a younger daughter, and together they lived happily on their land (at least much happier than their slaves) until their daughter, Julia, began to fall ill.
In this time, just a few years before the Civil War, Diptheria was still notwidely understood.
Unbeknownst to the Legares, Edisto Island, with its vast quantities of stagnant water, turned out to be the perfect breeding ground for Diptheria, and Julia was stricken with the illness.
Slowly, Julia began to suffocate, and her family could only watch in horror as her throat began to close shut.
Eventually, she closed her eyes, seemingly for good, and the Legares mourned the loss of their daughter.
In those days, the morgues that we're familiar with today didn't exist, and the persistent high temperatures and swampy atmosphere meant that decompisition set in quickly and ferociously, leaving the dearly departed no choice but to deal with their deceased as soon as possible.
As the story goes, the Legares took their daughter's body to the family crypt, remarking at how peaceful she looked, almost as if she was sleeping.
Julia's father laid her on the stone slab inside, and when they had said their goodbyes, the family closed the heavy doors, sealing the crypt's keyhole with wax.
Years later, Julia's older brother was killed during the Civil War, and for the first time since Julia passed, the Legare family Fiickr Edisto Island via "" South By Sea "" gathered again at the family crypt.
As they turned the key and pulled open the heavy door, the entire family was horrified as Julia's bones came tumbling out of the opening, her leathery skin still hanging from her gaping jaw.
Claw marks covered both the door and the floor of the mausoleum and the bones of Julia's fingertips were shattered, signs that pointed a frantic attempt to open the sealed door.
Distraught by what they had just discovered, the Legares quickly laid their son to restand slammed the door shut.
Determined notto make the same mistake twice, the Legares again visited the crypt shortly after burying their son, only to be met by another surprise.
They replaced it, only to return and again find the door broken, lying at the foot of the mausoleum.
The replacements kept coming, but no matter what they attempted, the crypt's doors refused to be closed, leading the Legares to believe that Julia's spirit was attempting to keep others from suffering her fate.
Today, you can make your way to the historical Edisto Island Presbyterian Church and pay visit Julia's doorless crypt, where the deep claw marks are still visible on the floor, a morbid reminder of a horrible mistake.
Greg Newkirk Head writer at Roadtrippers, professional monster chaser with Planet Weird, curator of the fantastic & the bizarre.
L Massachusetts Shakespearean theater needs $2.3M to survive LENOX, Mass. — A nonprofit consultants’ report states a Shakespearean theater in Massachusetts needs to raise $23 milli on to continue operations until next year.
In the report released Tuesday, the Nonprofit Finance Fund said Shakespeare & Company in Lenox also needs to raise $8.15 million to restructure long-term debt.
Shakespeare & Company says it is creating a new business model and negotiating to restructure its debt.
Last March, the theater company laid off seven employees and shifted others to part-time roles to cut costs.
Year-round employees also took 10 percent pay cuts, and its founders gave up their salaries for two months.
The 32-year-old company says it’s also working to “produce more plays with less money” at its three theaters. — Associated Press King of the orisha pantheon, rules over thunder, fire, drumming, dancing and male virility.
Shango is actually a deified king who was once the Fourth Alafin of the city-state of Oyo.
He is one of the most worshipped orishas in the pantheon and his legends are numerous and speak to the human experience.
Obba his first wife who was faithful but unattractive so Shango withdrew his affections from her, Oshun his favourite lover, Oya his equal in strength and power, and Yewa the virgin daughter of Obatala whose purity was stolen by Shango.
He is the the owner of the sacred drums, a powerful sorcerer who wields fire and lightning, and loves to seduce women, drink and dance.
Shango has a special relationship with Babalu Aye as he was the only orisha to offer him assistance when he was sick and homeless.
Shango is often considered the son of Yemaya and his fatherhood is either credited to Ogun or Aggayu.
Shango was a very impulsive youth and was quick to anger, and legend has it that Obatala taught Shango the art of diplomacy and gifted him with the white bead that is now a part of his necklace.
In nature, Shango is said to live at the top of the royal palm tree and his offerings are commonly placed at the foot of palm trees.
Shango is petitioned for help with protection, enemies, sexual, business success, and good fortune.
The Associated Press bryan The recovered remains of a ship belonging to the famed French explorer Rene-Robert Cavelier Sieur de la Salle, which sank off the Texas coast more than three centuries ago, were launched on their final journey Thursday.
Texas Historical Commission archaeologists found the shipwreck in 1995 in 12 feet of murky water, built a dam around the site and pumped it dry.
Researchers dug through up to 6 feet of mud to retrieve the nearly intact hull and some 700,000 items, including three cases of rifles.
Archaeologists also found a skeleton, believed to be the remains of a crewmember or settler among the 40 or so people aboard.
The mud that covered the hull prevented its destruction by salt water and wood-eating mollusks, worms or bacteria, said Donny Hamilton, director of the Conservation Research Laboratory.
Human remains found by a 10-yearold girl in Mountrail County have been returned to the earth after the state medical examiner determined the bones were likely from the 1500s or 1600s.
Oil sa log liOrBAlNrONlm^ item ms on 4 voyage ^oss bauntel ocean sas, in Ac first instalment of 4 t-wo-p art Illustrations by ALEC SEA ERIN. etween 1959 andl966, 1 managed to cross most of the Seven Seas and r n to cross most of the Sevens f f 1 i learned to respect the ocean.
Nevertheless, there is no much a personal selection ® Y na S o we’ll forego ‘ghosts’, but all decld ®*^ of Davy Jones’ over-roasted detailed dlscussl """" ° coup i e of them out of the old chestnuts but let s gei a way at the outset. piyingDutchman.
The So, who was this libidinous, i’ d Wagner in legend was certainly we n^ ^ pn egen de Hollander. 1843 when he wrote his P been a fine w ay to Phantom shl P St °""^ g Ven w henl was at sea.
Irving’s version has { ion with the legend of • , and there is a “’ h entury captain, another, and definitely M ™ 0 f his ship exchange for a fast voyage.
Of course, when he vanished, it was said that the devil had called the debt in.
Sir Walter Scott got in on the act in Rokeby , where the Dutchman is carrying gold and silver, the plague breaks out among the crew, no port will accept her and. . . well, we know the rest.
Next up on the horizon, and always worth a quick re-run, is the heavily barnacled brigantine Mary Celeste.
She was found abandoned and adrift by the British brigantine Dei Gratia between Portugal and the Azores on 4 December 1872.
Although there was some damage to her sails and a few feet of water in her holds, her cargo was intact but for nine damaged barrels.
There was plenty of food and drink on board, the crew’s belongings were still there, but no sign of crew or captain.
What really happened will probably remain a mystery, but a small sailing vessel crossing the Atlantic could be prone to any number of disasters.
Apart from a C/Ufyf night watchman on the gang/ DITl way, out of a 30-plus crew, | I 7he re would probably be only fcjjOCK W o or three of us on board.
It was a November night l’d seP J ^ tied down in my bunk with a Vi w mug of cocoa and the latest Hank Jansen, when I heard a e UJi‘ scream along the alleyway.
I * knew there was a junior stewHq^) ard on board, so 1 dashed to ) his cabin, where I found him „ naked and trembling m the W open doorway.
Tlx Bw Hamburg’s Blohm& Voss shipyards tmrned out two beautiful barques in 1905 Passat and the ^^ ^^VeAs OOOsq f -r^SS^asa, eel for the German Mercnam training vessel fo Captain Diebitsch Service.
In command was CaPta sea with a 35-strong crew, lugmenti ^ cadets aged between 1 carryin g 3,790 ^““^WFiVe hundred miles tons of barley “ September, she met up with I Hurricane Carrie.
Four years later, another sail-trainer, the E smereld, from Chile, was battling a o am ir The Esmereld’s report was v^ a'Lge Pinch of salt until some , later, when the yachtsman Ree d ^ vessels Islands, u , Wnrweeian ‘ Heavy hurricane 45 degree list • y need When the United States Saxon arrived at last position, all lifeboat The next wa s 80 souls had An old rattler, the Halifax was a happy, ancient diesel-powered tramp.
He brought on board with him such a tangible atmosphere of aggression that noone could share a cabin with him.
Eventually, the bosun opened up the sick bay and he enjoyed the luxury of a . single berth.
He had just one set of clothes, which he washed on his watch off, sitting around naked beneath the Pacific sun.
He refused to eat with us, and after one blistering row with the Larnptrimmer (yes, we still had such a rank on board in those days), he walked into the mess-room and told us he had placed a curse on the ship.
No doubt he was a bona fide seaman with a discharge book, but we w ere glad to see ‘The Pharaoh’ go. ’ ,_r, owner of the Ion.
The President sailed During the early hours London, BenWebster’s sturbed butler awoke his jrm with the news that Mr Twone Power was drowned because along ^President, he vanished without a trace, never arriving in Liverpool.
A year later, she with engineer Peter Jones c; maintenance work alone m boiler’s feed pump began to knocking noise.
C j%c Presided i fine combination of sail and l was expected to make the York to Liverpool in 16 days.
Among s was the grandfather of one of greatest film stars -Tyrone Power, ancestor, also a famous thespian, ne.
The remaining i she had left England in 1761 on :hina but had become trapped m 'th Alaska and yet here she was, r, adrift off Greenland on the of the continent.
After clearing p snowdrifts on the ^ Octavius's deck, they wrenched open the f ^ TJ 1 fo’c’sle door and dis/ j M covered inside 2 8 ^ Jf ^ fully, clothed * l; f ' * death.
W jA cabin the skipper still TPt 4 2$ sat, frozen solid, his hands on the desk.
In the adjoining cabin 1 A lay a woman, frozen ~ — „ , N ■ in a calm posture.
Her head rested on her elbow, eyes w] open, staring across the room at anothei corpse, a young man, sitting cross-legge< feet a pile of wood chippings.
Under a r reefer jacket they found the brittle bod small boy. , In their blind panic to get back to th< Herald, the crew lost the centre section oilskins night up top.
ROY BAINTON is the {A author of Honoured by Ht Strangers, a biography of Ell WWl submariner, diplo“ mat and spy Capt Francis regular FT contributor.
I is a Belgian illustrator and ’ work can be seen in a travelling ulogne sur Mer at the end of June.
Mark Severin, was responsible for the Chilean coast in his epic The Last of The Windjammers.
The late Gaddis was an avid collector of strange fortean yarns but often fails to give sources, although many of the stories in this out-of-print tome certainly warrant a researcher’s further attention. deployment of every available inch of sail.
This is as fine a piece of maritime research as any sceptic could wish for -a truly thorough examination of everything from the Mary Celeste to the Lusitania; highly recommended.
In the mid-1950s my father took a bunch of us neighborhood kids to see it at the now-gone Belmont Theater on 21st Avenue in Hillsboro Village.
The goofball Bowery Boy, Sach , had his mind, such as it was, transplanted with the monster’s brain.
Shrieks and laughter abounded in that historic cinema as hundreds of youngsters spilled popcorn and candy throughout the aisles.
The original classic horror movie Frankenstein, staring Boris Karloff, was released by Universal Studios in 1931.
It was not until the mid-1950s rerelease that I saw it for the first time at the Princess Theater downtown on Church Street by the L&C Tower.
I remember getting up from my seat and retreating back up the aisle to the lobby just so I could see some people in the daylight and escape Karloffs clutches.
Nightmares followed, which prompted my parents to explain that everyone I saw in the movie was acting.
The first atom bomb test in 1945 started it all, and the war-ending attack on Japan displayed the devastating catastrophe it could cause.
Notice the “Mystic Circle’’ effect. atomic holocaust and outer space invasions.
The Blob, Battle in Outer Space, and The Amazing Colossal Man come to mind.
In the fall of 1958, WSIX-TV Channel 8 decided to liven up Friday nights by launching a program called “Shock Theater,” which initially featured mostly horror classics from Universal Studios.
Ken Bramming, already recognized for his broadcast voice and personality, was chosen to introduce the movies.
Classics such as Frankenstein, Dracula with Bela Lugosi, the Lon Chaney Wolfman series, and my favorite, Son of Frankenstein starring Basil Rathbone, made up the feature list.
According to Bramming, “Shock Theater” even beat out the “Tonight Show” with lack Parr during that period.
Much of that jump came from Bramming’s idea to introduce a macabre Master of Ceremonies, live skits during breaks in the evening s feature, and some Dave Brubek jazz tunes to placate the adults.
Shock” became almost a ritual as several neighborhood kids would gravitate to my home and enter into our large, isolated playroom from our backyard.
We would set up in front of our portable TV set, the kind with the built-in rabbit-ear antennas.
Usually me, Dave, Sam and others would wait anxiously for the introduction from Dr.
On the small, black-and-white screen, an ominousCT, OCTOBER 2011 imming on the “Shock Theater” set called the Purple Grotto, which featured a lined with bloody handprints. used a high-schooler at the time named Corky Savely who regularly appeared as Granny Gruesome, Frantic Freddy the Hipster and Cyril Songbird.
Back then all the skits were live, and viewers could often hear a stagehand’s muffled laughter in the background.
Donovan’s Brain with Nancy Davis was about a brain kept alive in a tank.
However other movies were just plain awful, so much so that they were laughable.
One in particular, Missile to the Moon, used the same soundtrack for the screams that was in another classic, Attack of the 50 Foot Woman.
The scenery did not match in the background and the huge, fake spider had clearly visible wires controlling it.
The monsters, huge walking rocks, moved slowly, and the acting itself was pitiful.
On Oct., 1960, the TV listing was called “The Mystic Circle” with emcee Dr.
On a cool October night in 1961, my friend Sam and I watched The Ape with Boris Karloff.
It was not really that scary but believable enough to make us boys wonder if the ape could be lurking about in trees or in the bushes within the neighborhood.
The familiar position of heads down on your desk is still a vivid memory.
However there were some pluses, particularly if you enjoyed scary-monster and sci-fi picture shows.
Throughout the 1950s and into the 1960s science-fiction, monster and space movies abounded, albeit most were of the grade “C” variety.
Theaters and the relativelynew medium of television capitalized on the fears and began showing films exaggerating the after effects of an ies were also part of the fare.
Nashville TV’s Tasteful Transylvanian,” historian Jeff Thompson details the show’s history.
He quotes Bramming as saying, “We knew we would get a young audience on those nights.
The figure ws man sporting an eye patch, a cigar holder, a thin, dark mustache slicked-back hair.
Often in the background one co see the Purple Grotto, one of the m famous sets, which featured a door ered in bloody handprints.
Lucifur spoke in a dialect re niscent of Bela Lugosi in the or nal Dracula movie and some* resembled famed horror actor Vine Price.
Sam lived across my backyard, through some hedges and at the other end of Herbert’s Field, which at that hour of night in the autumn was quite dark.
As he stepped out through the back door and into the darkness, I let out a scream.
I could hear him spouting obscenities as he scampered at full speed through the hedge row and out of sight.
I later on received an extra helping of vulgarities from Sam, who was none too pleased with my send off.
During the early-1960s, “Shock Theater” was so popular the show was re-aired again on Sunday afternoons around the lunch hour.
It was called “Shock Jr.,” and I often ate on a TV tray and took in a horror classic, usually right after getting home from church, much to the chagrin of my mother.
Lucifur gained such popularity that he appeared at several downtown department stores during those years.
As I got a little older I had been conditioned, through my experience with Frankenstein , to take these films and actors for what they were-actors.
Lucifur, I knew, was only Ken Bramming in make-up, but he was still a specter and not easily forgotten.
Us kids eventually became highly entertained by the whole proceedings, especially when the skits took place.
True Whig, October 4, 1849 lOyflQA beautiful display of Fire1041; works will be exhibited by hose accomplished Pyrotechnists, dessrs.
Muller and Catoir, on Friday, to-morrow) evening, on lower Market treet.
The exhibition will be highly nteresting alike to the scientific and :urious. ... again at the helm of a weekend horror movie on the independent station WMCV-TV 17.
Channel 17 even threw a Halloween party for kids in October 1968 in which Bramming appeared as Dr.
However a new Saturday-night horror telecast on WSM-TV Channel 4 came on the scene in the early-70s.
Lucifer was in the studio, Ken Bramming provided the introduction in his inimitable voice.
College days came along and that entire period became a childhood memory.
Tom Henderson is a native Nashvillian who grew up in Woodmont Hills and now preserves personal memories from the 1940s through the 1970s.
Our thanks to Jeff Thompson for the use of his article and photographs.
Youth Guidance Major George Currey said this will mark the third year of “Operation Safe Treat,” a program designed to make trick-or-treating safe for the kids.
He added that children should not eat candy until it is taken home and inspected by their parents.
On reading the report, about strange electrical disturbances taking place in the Somerset home of an elderly Burma veteran, I was puzzled.
DON FARRALL/GETTY IMAGES uncountable number of fuses had blown and lampshades had burst into flames.
From a purely scientific point of view, the case seemed to be worthy of investigation.
I decided to write to the Area & % s Manager of SWEB (South Western Electricity Board), the electricity supply authority.
I enquired whether there were any inducing fields in the area of sufficient magnitude to cause such a large emf and asked whether the surges were confined to the consumer’s side of the meter.
He didn’t mention that the phenomena had been extant for some five VERY HIGH VOLTAGES WERE INVADING FRANK PATTEMORES HOME AT IVERSON COTTAGE years.
Why should such an earthing fault, even a difficult one, take five years to rectify I wondered.
In his reply dated 29 September, he completely ignored my questions and stated that the Board’s investigation had been completed.
This was not what Frank Pattemore had been telling me in correspondence and not what the local Press had been reporting.
I contacted others who had been involved, in various ways, with the Pattemores; one of these was Roy Jones, a local businessman and former chairman of Somerton Parish Council who had tried to solve the mystery himself.
Although he had the assistance of the media, all Roy’s efforts proved to be in vain and, in some desperation, he wrote to Robert Boscawan, the MP for Somerton.
In a letter, dated 17 January 1990, Roy pointed out that, despite the ongoing phenomena, “nobody wished to become involved or to express an opinion except in dark and mysterious sentences,” and that “Mr Pattemore is convinced, rightly or wrongly, that some military or supernatural phenomena are responsible.
Roy shared his correspondence with the authorities with me, and it was his letter of 3 May 1990, addressed to Mr Nicol, Chairman of SWEB, that finally decided me to visit Somerton for myself.
This is the first time in 30 years that my findings have been rejected.
I wish I could help you’ ” This statement was corroborated during a telephone conversation I had with Jim Lees, a senior engineer based at SWEB Head Office in Bristol.
The mystery deepened further when he said that SWEB employees had been told not to park cars or vans immediately outside Iverson Cottage because there had been problems with ignition systems and vehicles had to be pushed along the road before they could be started.
TEA, BISCUiTS AN© BLACK STREAMS During my first visit to Somerton I was accompanied by a physicist, an electrical engineer, a radio engineer and some rudimentary apparatus a lkV multimeter, an ionising radiation detector, a surge clock, an oscilloscope and a search coil.
By 2pm. we were introducing ourselves to Frank Pattemore and his son Nigel, and were welcomed into the living room to meet Mike, an investigative journalist, and his photographer Brenda.
Over tea and biscuits we began to listen to a general outline of the case.
Frank told us that about 11 months earlier, someone from SWEB had located a force of some kind running diagonally from the kitchen door to the front door.
The unidentified official was using an instrument that lit up as it was moved along this diagonal.
Hamish Miller, the well-known dowser and author of a recently published book The Sun and the Serpent , was going to arrive at about 3.30pm. so we decided to break off the conversation to see what we could find with our search coil.
We were not disappointed; there was still a definite field extending diagonally across the living room and the effect was confined to a narrow beam, which peaked at floor level about 1. m from the front door.
Hamish and his co-author, photographer, writer and earth mysteries expert, Paul Broadhurst would be able to locate this same force field with a pair of dowsing rods.
We watched in awe as Hamish, brandishing his dowsing rods, walked across the living room.
The movement of the rods was meaningless to us but there was no doubt that they were moving, apparently of their own accord.
He had found, with a pair of dowsing rods made in his forge for a couple of pounds, exactly what we had discovered with our search coil and a SWEB engineer had found with some kind of field detector.
Hamish then asked whether he could dowse Frank and Nigel, who cheerfully agreed.
As Nigel was approached, the rods moved perceptibly denoting, we were told, a considerable concentration of bio-energy; but as the rods moved closer to Frank, they swung violently.
Hamish remarked that he had never witnessed a bio-energy field of this magnitude surrounding anyone and suggested that Frank might be inadvertently affecting the supply voltage to the cottage.
We had embarked on a scientific investigation and were now confronted with Hamish’s dowsing rods and a lengthy recitation on dangerous Earth energies.
Hamish informed us that there were such things as ‘negative leys’, known as ‘black streams’, which could appear following major road works or quarrying and that these negative streams could cause havoc.
All this was far removed from the scientific explanation we were seeking for the weird events at Iverson Cottage, but we were willing to consider anything.
The events which we had been witnessing fell into the realm of the paranormal and, although it was difficult to comprehend how any paranormal force could conjure 2000 volts onto the mains, we had at least to consider this possibility.
Following the departure of Hamish and Paul, we sat down with the Pattemores as they continued their — ► FT171 51 story.
Frank had bought the cottage in 1976, following separation from his wife, and had enjoyed a good electrical supply until 1982 when problems began to emerge.
Since then, nearly a decade had passed and, during this time, the Pattemores had endured at best a totally unreliable and dangerous installation and very often no electricity at all.
Wiring was constantly blown apart, consumer units have melted, molten metal has dropped from ceiling roses, switches have been welded and appliances, including seven TV sets, have been damaged beyond repair.
Surprisingly, the phenomena were not limited to the mains; batterypowered clocks switched themselves on and off as though they had minds of their own and the telephone persistently rang of its own accord.
This was a particularly strange quirk because the ringing tone sequence is generated at the exchange.
The journalist, Mike, had been using a small batterypowered tape recorder to record the Pattemores’ story.
It was resting on a table where it was working perfectly until Mike moved it about 25cm towards the table’s edge to better record Frank’s pleasant but quiet Somerset voice.
Mike, believing the end of the tape had been reached, was about to insert a new one when it was observed that about half of the tape was still unused.
It occurred to me that the recorder had been moved into the line of the strange field we had detected earlier.
Moving the recorder to its original position solved the problem; we repeated this six times, using three different tapes, with the same result.
The mystery deepened when the electronic flash on Brenda’s camera would not function anywhere in the front room but operated perfectly outside.
This was a perplexing and persistent problem which scuppered every hypothesis put forward; it was highlighted by the Cook Report, in which radar was considered a likely candidate for the problem but had to be ruled out because other properties, in the line of sight, should also have been affected but weren’t.
Frank showed us a meticulously kept log of the number of units of energy consumed; very 24 hours; the intermittent and random recording of up to 44 units in a single period was reflected in the enormous quarterly bills which he received.
This vast conTWO MEN, IN A DARK COLOURED CAR FOLLOWED NJCEL TO WORK sumption of energy is equivalent to a three-bar electric fire burning continuously for 15 hours.
It was therefore surprising that SWEB had not been concerned about this when they knew that Frank was unable to use a small 25W bulb at the same time as boiling water in an electric kettle.
THE ELUSIVE MR DICKINSON, I began by writing another letter to SWEB’s Mr Dickinson, asking for his comments on points that had emerged during my visit to Somerton.
A small selection of damaged components from Iverson Cottage (clockwise from top left): A miniature circuit breaker with metal components melted and plastic burnt; two shots of a lamp holder -all its brass components have been melted and its springs and contacts have fallen out; ring main cable showing severe damage to outer sheath, neutral conductor insulation completely burnt off and phase conductor insulation beginning to break down SWEB was equally bizarre: the socalled ‘Capenhurst Report’ was invoked time and again in an attempt to impede my investigation.
The report was guarded with extreme tenacity by SWEB, who had commissioned it, to the extent that Frank’s MP, Mark Robinson, was denied even a peep at its contents.
ERDC say that evidence from SWEB engineers substantiates this but when, in 1991, 1 met Alan Bennett, the engineer responsible for the daily change from mains to generator, he told me that Frank’s electrical supply was trouble free when the generator was used and later confirmed this in a signed statement.
Within days of completion in November 1993, all the phenomena had reappeared and, once again, they were typical of those caused by high voltage surges.
They both refused and vehemently disputed the existence of high voltage surges, although these had been abundantly clear from the beginning.
Martyn Stevens, the Home Improvements Manager at SEC, also confirmed, during a telephone conversation, the existence of the surges on the neutral conductor and the fact that SEC’s sales rep had seen the meter recording before the tails were connected.
When I asked him to confirm this in writing he declined, but following my letter telling him that our conversation had been recorded, I received a letter from Vincent O’Sullivan, Contracting Services Manager at SEC, stating that Martyn Stevens had repeated hearsay rather than making a statement of fact.
MEN m BL ACK FBGM THE DTI Things then took a turn for the very strange.
They remarked that it was encrypted computer data being transmitted at speed and asked whether they could borrow the tapes, promising to return them after they had been analysed.
The tapes were never returned but, three days later, two men in a dark coloured car followed Nigel to work.
Nigel was driven to Yeovil police station, under the pretext of attending a meeting concerning the electrical supply at Iverson Cottage, where he was closely questioned concerning the recording of interference with radio reception.
Nigel was eventually bailed for causing criminal damage to SWEB property at his home.
During the time that Nigel was in custody, a posse of police and SWEB officials was searching Iverson Cottage, under warrant.
The search was very thorough but, in the end, only a screwdriver and a soldering iron were taken away.
SWEB said that the police initiated the search of Iverson Cottage; the police claimed that SWEB initiated it.
He left a contact telephone number that proved to be that of a garage on the A487.
Judd arrived unannounced and appeared to be completely familiar with all the problems at Iverson Cottage.
He took an envelope, bearing the name and address of Lady Zinia Judd, from his pocket and wrote a contact telephone number on the back of it.
He eventually spoke to someone purporting to be Robin Judd who said that he was a farmer who had only been to Somerset once to sell some sheep in a market.
Ian Sawyer, Nigel’s probation officer, wrote to him to say that Robin Judd was Lady Zinia’s brother-in-law and was some kind of electrical engineer.
He confirmed this to me and claimed that the information came from a Special Branch friend who had also told him that Stewkley Grange, Lady Zinia’s home, was used by the security services.
Further events totally unconnected with the power supply added to the mystery of Iverson Cottage.
The most bizarre involved one of the many letters I wrote to Frank Pattemore.
The letter was sent by first class mail in a hand-addressed envelope but, when it arrived at Iverson Cottage, my letter was missing and in its place there was a letter from David Tomlinson in Kent to Lt Col Brounlie in Dorset.
And so my investigation ended; if anything, there were now more unanswered questions than when I’d first become interested in the case.
An experience during his RAF service fostered a keen interest in the paranormal.
On leaving the RAF, he completed teacher training at St Mary's College, Strawberry Hill and spent 23 years teaching in schools and colleges.
Since leaving teaching, he has promoted the holistic way of life by writing and lecturing.
Her legs are so short that when she's standing on a marshy riverbank passers-by keep thinking she's sinking in mud and then call 999.
This has meant that fire crews have been called out four times now to 'rescue' her and led to Mayflower getting the Shorty moniker from locals.
The pony's short legs create the illusion that she's sunk up to the knees Mr Phillips, of Hampshire Fire and Rescue Service, said: ’Every time we get there we can see very quickly what we were dealing with a pony with short legs that looks like a dwarf.
The pony is oddly shaped but it is fit and healthy and there is no reason to worry about it.
Mr Phillips, 50, said the pony must have inherited its unusual proportions from two different breeds.
However, owner Sandra Whitcher today insisted Mayflower is a pure-bred 12-year-old Shetland.
When they get here Mayflower sees them and just runs off so they realise she's not stuck at all.
Shetland ponies, known for their short legs, typically grow to between 2ft 4in and 3ft 6in tall.
New Forest ponies are larger, tending to be between 4ft and 4ft lOin, and more normally proportioned.
During the search earlier this year in the Pearl River Wildlife Management Area's swamplands, southern Louisiana, for evidence that the supposedly extinct ivorybilled woodpecker still survives, a series of distinctive double-raps was not only heard by the searchers but also taped.
As such sounds were characteristic of this dramatic species, ornithological hopes of its continuing existence duly received a considerable boost.
Analysis of these tantalising sounds has revealed that they were merely distant gun shots, whose reverberations sounded to human ears like drumming.
J linen, place the Sick Call Set and have crucifix inserted in a slot at top of base.
Also, have on the table a glass of water, a spoon, the communion cloth, and the bottle which is supplied, filled with Holy water.
In addition to the above have a small plate containing crumbs of bread, and make up five small balls with the | absorbent cotton furnished in the set.
ACROSS THE USA Be sure this birthday cake’s candles are out victim to a wildfire in Hoai-Tran Bui USA TODAY He’s an American icon on par with Mickey Mouse and Batman.
But other than that, little has changed for this symbol of fire safety.
Smokey Bear is the face of the longest-running public service campaign in the United States Smokey was created in 1944 by the United States Forest Service, the National Association of State Foresters and the Ad Council in response to public fears that enemy shelling during World War II would cause forest fires in the West while all the firefighters were overseas.
Even with drier conditions this year, the extent .of wildfires has greatly decreased since Smokey was first created.
The loss of forest to wildfires has been reduced from 22 million acres in 1944 to about 6. million acres annually today, Conlon said.
Smokey’s voice has changed over the years, recorded mostly by various radio hosts.
Smokey is “definitely an outc . . ^ doorsman, like all those WestService in the Department of ern characters I’ve played all Agriculture.
And Elliott u than We did today ” knows personally the cost of With the current drought in fires.
His home in Malibu California and the increase in ~ lightning-induced wildfires, it’s easy to forget that the majority ° — * — j — x i was a pretty norrinc of wildfires are started by huthing,” Elliott said.
I 1 me leiiiiebbee oiaie ran lias iuu good of a tradition to let it die,” Briley declared as flames leaped several hundred feet skyward, showering sparks throughout the fairground area, igniting concession stands.
Large Ball of Flame Young Fields, one of the injured, said he was standing near the Woman’s Building when he heard a loud noise.
But apparently there still were some exhibitors inside the huge wooden Woman’s Building.
As the flames spread, firemen and Livestock Exhibit OK; Smoky The Bear Lost Poultry , Fish Fall Prey To Fire By Jesse Safely Nashville Banner, Sept., 1965 The largest poultry exhibit in the State Fair since it was resumed after World War II fell prey Monday night to the devastating fire that claimed most exhibits other than livestock.
And ironically, Smoky the Bear, an animated fire prevention exhibit by the Davidson County Soil Conservation District, was also lost.
Throughout the day “Smoky” had been lecturing to a full house about the importance of handling fire with care.
This particular educational exhibit was on loan from the Soil Conservation Service in Washington.
Exhibitors took precautionary measures by moving their animals from under the barn to the outer edges of the Fairgrounds.
Dairymen followed suit with the only light available being from the fire.
Glen G Summer, for nearly 40 years superintendent of the livestock division, said this morning that as far as he can find out not an animal was injured.
The excessive heat caused some fear because animals tied in the building were cut loose and allowed to go free.
This coupled with the fact that cooperative fellow exhibitors helped lead animals from the building, kept exhibitors up most of the night.
In the Agriculture Hall, which was completely destroyed, Felix Knight, manager of that division, said financial losses would run high especially in the Future Farmer of America division.
Davidson County Home Demonstration Club women, who had more than a score of educational booths of one type or another, lost all their wares which included thousands of items they had made throughout the year for sale at the fair.
The tent which housed the wildlife exhibit escaped the blaze, except for one corner nearest the fire.
This tent was within a few yards of the Woman’s Building which was completely destroyed.
Even the shavings under a portion of the tent were blackened by the excessive heat, yet today the tent still stands.
We loaded i the deer into a station wagon and then secured the poisonous snakes.
We moved our bears in their cages down by the stock yards until the stockmen threatened to have them shot because they were making the cattle nervous.
Some of the aquariums broke and some of the fish cooked while others swam around in boiling water as if nothing had happened.
Hawkins said a number of Vanderbilt students were of invaluable assistance in removing the animals.
Game and Fish Commissioner guard Norman Bates, 23, of Franklin, said he carried a wild boar from the scene i n the trunk of his car.
Evidence suggests the mother snake has had multiple virgin births, producing 22 baby snakes that have no father.
Our finding up-ends decades of scientific theory on reptile reproduction Biologist Dr Warren Booth Virgin births do occur among animals.
Many invertebrates, such as insects, can produce offspring asexually, without ever having mated.
They usually do this by cloning themselves, producing genetically identical offspring.
But among vertebrate animals, it remains a novelty, having been documented among less than 0. 1% of vertebrate species.
In 2006, scientists discovered that two komodo dragons , the world's largest lizard species, had produced eggs that developed without being fertilised by sperm a process called parthenogenesis.
Then in 2007, other scientists found that captive female hammerhead sharks could also reproduce without having sex.
Not including genetic material from the father essentially having just a single biological parent reduces genetic diversity and makes it more difficult for organisms to adapt to, for example, changed environmental conditions or the emergence of a new disease.
Novel beginnings Now, a team of scientists and snake experts based in the United States has identified the first case of a boa snake having a virgin birth.
What is more, the female snake in question has produced offspring the like of which have never been seen before.
Special babies In the two years following 2007, the captive-born female Boa constrictor produced two litters of live offspring, at the same time as being housed with four male snakes.
This colour is a rare recessive genetic trait, which is carried by the mother but not by any of the potential fathers.
So Dr Booth and colleagues conducted a series of genetic tests on the snakes to solve the enigma.
DNA fingerprinting revealed that the offspring had a number of genetic differences from any of their potential fathers, which ruled out all the males as sires of the litter.
That confirmed the first instance of a known virgin birth among boa snakes.
Sex chromosomes are packages of DNA that drive the development of sexual characteristics; they essentially make animals genetically male or genetically female.
Humans for example have X or Y sex chromosomes; females have two X chromosomes and males have a combination of an X and a Y chromosome.
In place of X and Y, snakes and many other reptiles have Z and W chromosomes.
This was further proof that the snakes inherited all their genetic material from their mother, as only females carry the W chromosome.
That is because the baby snakes have inherited two copies of one half of their mother's chromosomes, including one W chromosome.
More astonishing though, is that no vertebrate animal in which the females carry the odd sex chromosome has ever been recorded naturally producing viable WW offspring via a virgin birth.
In such species, all known examples of babies that are the product of parthenogenesis are male, carrying a ZZ chromosomal arrangement.
The only previously known animals to carry this WW chromosome pairing were created by scientists in the laboratory, using intricate genetic techniques to artificially alter the way animal eggs develop.
One other mystery is what prompted the female snake to give birth this way.
Event volunteer Bruce “Zen” Benefiel, an author and speaker, matter-offactly shared details of his otherworldly encounters.
Orphaned as a child, Benefiel, 57, was adopted when he was 5, and at the time, he started questioning where he came from — wondering about his biological father and mother.
Every so often, he said, he sees visions of “three tall Zetas” — humanoid aliens first reported in 1947, according to the UFO-Alien database.
He said they’re watching us now, observing us from afar, and will one day return.
But it’s a different time now, and he encouraged the crowd to speak up and talk about their experiences.
Harris said the history of the area’s connection to UFOs dates back to at least 1947 when George Van Tassel — an aircraft mechanic and flight inspector who worked for Douglas Aircraft, Hughes Aircraft and Lockheed — left Southern California’s aerospace industry and moved his family to Landers, where they lived out at the Giant Rock.
As the story goes, Van Tassel began having visions or connections with gnflPP hoiniJg_frnm_VpnilS . liig. aivp c/cuiit/ xx viii — wondering about his biological father and mother.
He remembers waking up in the corner of his room and watching his body get out of bed, climb out the window and walk across a large pasture.
Although he never knew what happened in the cloud, he always woke up happy.
In 1981, while walking through a metaphysical book store in Muncie, Ind., a book fell off the shelf and landed at his feet.
George Noory, host of the nationally syndicated radio talk show, “Coast to Coast AM”; Giorgio A Tsoukalos, host of “Ancient Aliens”; and Erich von Daniken, author of “Chariots of the Gods,” are among the headliners of this year’s event, which features a lineup of nearly 40 speakers.
Among them is local historian Barbara Harris, who has studied the Morongo Basin communities, specifically Morongo Valley, Landers and Joshua Tree for the past 30 years.
In his book, published in 1968, Von Daniken examines ancient ruins, lost cities, space-ports and scientific data that point to extraterrestrial intervention in human history.
He explained that UFOs visited Earth before the great flood, before Noah boarded the animals AAVSVV, UUU »/llVVV*iVl b V\* the crowd to speak up and talk about their experiences.
An historic site Some of the estimated 2,000 attendees — including volunteers and staff— arrived on Thursday, before the official start of the conference.
On Thursday night, Barbara Harris, a local historian, took a group of 40 people on a tour out to Giant Rock in Landers — thought to be the largest free-standing boulder in the world.
Harris hopped into in her yellow, Toyota FJ Cruiser and led a caravan moved his family to Landers, where they lived out at the Giant Rock.
As the story goes, Van Tassel began having visions or connections with space beings from Venus.
Van Tassel put on openair conferences called the Interplanetary Spacecraft conventions, which began April 4, 1953.
The group gathered close as Harris expounded on the history and mystery of the rock.
There used to be an airstrip nearby, where people with planes — including Howard Hughes — flew in to visit and to dine at a restaurant that used to sit just yards from the rock.
The dismembered chunk rests on its back next to its 25,000-ton behemoth parent.
Harris encouraged people to lean up against the rock fragment . — which itself is a massive boulder — and feel its warmth and energy.
As the sun set behind the mountains, those in the group gathered together.
Sitting on camping-style chairs, they focused their attention on the skies.
This is the earliest depiction of the Thessalian Kyzikos, the son ot Apoiio ana me iounuer the famous city of Kyzikos located at the Sea of Marmara, where the tuna fish catch was so important mat th animal became the characteristic feature of this city’s coinage.
The reverse shows a quadripartite incuse squi A rare and very 7 fine com.
The entire trade m grain as well as slaves in die Black Sea Region was transacted with eiecirmn coins irum Kyzikos such as this for many decades.
The site of ancient Kyzikos is located in the modem Balikesir Frovn of Turkey.
It was located on the shoreward side of the present Kapidag Fenmsula (the Classical rircioniie&usj tombolo which is said to have originally been an island in the Sea of Mannara only to be connected to me mainland in historic times either by artificial means or an earthquake.
A PALER SHADE OF DARK The American black bear Ursus americanus has several different colour morphs (non-taxonomic colour varieties), including the exotic-looking glacier bear, whose pelage can vary from cinnamon to blue-grey usually.
Although its existence had been known for a few years to Alaskan biologists, this coat-coloured contradiction, nicknamed the spirit bear by Costello, had previously succeeded in avoiding public notice.
A labama's creaky old mansions and mossdraped cemeteries provide the backdrop for the state's tradition of spinetingling storytelling and history of paranormal activity.
This haunting season , find a multitude of tours and treks to the state's most spirited attractions. i MOBILE AREA Little goblins flock to the Bellingrath Gardens and Home' Balloon Glow in the Garden, when the Great Lawn is illuminated by hot air bal and inflatable monsters.
Festivities include food, live music, and trick-or-treatinc Event is October 26; admission is $6 for adults, $3 for children.7-8420 ; beihngrath.org.
Over at Fort Conde, Mobile's reconstructed 1 8th-century fort, Mobile's Own Ghost Stories offers a motorized tour of the city's haunted histo spots.
Available year-round. $20 per person, reservations required.8-55 baycityconventions.com.
From June through October, catch guided family-friendly ghost walks and trolley tours through old downtown with Huntsville Ghost Walk.
Living souls cruise [ with the Haunted Hearse Tours of Montgomery, which glide past the city's creepiest sites, including Hank Williams' grave at the Oakwood Cemetery Annex.
Owner and tour guide Shannon Fontaine blends comedy and tragedy with his tales, such as his retellings of the Capitol building murder, Huntingdon's Red Lady, and the otherworldly little boy who scares downtown workers — and, sometimes, the folks riding in Fontaine's hearse.
Available year-round; after dark till midnight. $15 cash per person, reservations required.4-4457; haunt edhearsemgm. com.
For information on other spooky Halloween happenings around the state, visit alabamahauntedhouses.com.
JoBeth McDaniel is a freelance writer who once bobbed for apples during -Andalusia's East Three Notch Halloween carnival. school September/October 2013 | Alabama Journey 23 forum necrophilia A fine and private place For most males getting a girlfriend is a healthy pursuit, but not for Karl von Cosel.
JAMES E CONLAN tells the scarcely-credible story of a man who loved too well and none too wisely.
KARL VON COSEL CUT A CONTINENTAL figure when he arrived in Key West, Florida in 1930.
In his mkh50s, he spoke with a German accent, sported a cane, monocle, and wore tennis shoes with no socks.
Obviously well-educated, he referred to himself as a ‘doctor’ having a medical degree.
He was working as an X-ray technician when he met 23 -year-old Elena Hoyos Mesa, a beautiful Cuban woman dying of tuberculosis.
Although she was extremely ill, Elena’s parents took her to a local Hallowe’en parade, believing that she needed some fresh air.
She had to be rushed home, coughing acutely, and died several hours later.
After her funeral, Karl visited Elena’s grave daily, and sometimes nightly.
He received pennission from her parents to build an ornate mausoleum to hold her mortal remains.
Two years later, he removed her coffin, taking it, first, to his home a shack that was once a slaughterhouse then into the cabin of a grounded airship that he owned.
His grand plan was to reconstruct the airship, resurrect Elena, and fly to a South Pacific island.
They lived together, undisturbed, for seven years... until Elena’s sister began to suspect she was not in the mausoleum.
To placate her, the ‘doctor’ invited the sister and her husband to his home.
He intended to show them that Elena was much better off with him than moldering away in her coffin.
It was well equipped with scales, microscopes, and shelves, full of various chemicals and glassware.
The second room had a very large bed. . . with Elena sitting up on it, wearing a satin gown, wedding band, and tiara.
Her hair, adorned with a myrtle wreath, was all that was left of the original body; its brown glass eyes stared off into space.
Horrified, her sister notified the sheriff and Karl was promptly locked up.
Men tended to believe that he was a combination of failed Dr Frankenstein and Phantom of the Opera and his ‘treatment’ of Elena sounded more like quackery.
In his memoirs, Karl describes placing an “electrode on her chest, gradually increasing the high frequency current until the milliamperes showed 400.
However, a surprising number of women thought von Cosel was a complete romantic, totally obsessed with his eternal love.
The statute of limitations meant Karl could not be charged with illegally exhuming a corpse; he was, however, accused of grave robbing.
Exactly six months from the day of his release from jail, he left town.
Five hours later, Elena’s mausoleum was destroyed by a mysterious blast.
Settling elsewhere in Florida, he survived by writing for pulp magazines and selling postcards of his beloved.
The really ghoulish details of Karl’s obsession were only revealed 20 years after his death by the hearing’s medical examiner during a magazine interview.
He stated that the replica’s breasts felt real and, between her legs, was a padded tube in which traces of sperm were found.
This information was never disclosed as there was no trial and therefore no testimony given.
This medical examiner was not part of the team that gave the psychological examination.
Perhaps of greater fortean curiosity is a mysterious spill of mercury from a pump which contained 501bs of the stuff that happened while Karl was a college student.
He blames a ‘poltergeist’ but, whatever the cause, it would be, today, considered a major toxic waste spill.
NOTES Karl von Cosel's memoirs are recorded in Ben Harrison's Undying Love (St.
JAMES E CONLAN lives in Connecticut, USA and is a longtime FT correspondent.
If the patrons of your establishments complain that their toes stick out from under the sheets, you had better be careful.
That is the warning sounded today by Sam I Bolton, director of the Division of Hotel and Restaurant Inspection of the Department of Conservation.
Bolton said his department was going to prosecute all hotels, tourist courts and other places taking guests for the night that do not have sheets at least 99 inches in length.
The penalty, Bolton said, is a fine of from $10 to $25 for every undersize sheet.
I therefore caution all persons from trading with or harboring her on my account, as I will pay no debts of her contracting.
I also forbid any person purchasing said mare or receiving any articles taken from me.
Fugitive Slave Disguises Herself As White Man by Paul Chrastina After their wedding in 1846, William Craft and his wife, Ellen, often discussed ways that they might escape from slavery in Macon, Georgia.
William Craft was a dark-skinned man who worked as an assistant to his owner, a white cabinetmaker.
Ellen Craft was a light-skinned woman who worked as a housemaid for her owner, a white physician.
Because they belonged to different masters, the newlyweds were able to visit one another for only a few hours after each day’s work was done.
They talked of fleeing to the free northern states, where they could begin a new life and raise a family.
She saw that the laws under which we lived did not recognize her to be a woman, but a mere chattel, to be bought and sold, or otherwise dealt with as her owner might see fit.
Using the savings from a small allowance paid to him by his master and wages from his part-time job as a waiter in a Macon restaurant, William secretly began purchasing the clothing needed for Ellen’s disguise.
He delivered them to her, and she kept them in a locked chest of drawers in her room.
As Christmas approached, William and Ellen made the final preparations for their escape.
The couple decided that Ellen would his master at the ticket counter— he pose as a wealthy young slaveholder had apparently become suspicious that named William Johnson, and that they William might be trying to escape, would use public transportation to William’s master spoke briefly to travel from Macon to Philadelphia, the ticket clerk and then began looking The only problem with this plan was into the windows of the train carriages, that at the time neither William nor “Fully believing that we were caught,” Ellen could read or write.
The cabinetmaker looked into steamships that would take them to Ellen’s carriage, but did not recognize freedom.
Fortunately, the train began to were pondering this difficulty when leave the station before the cabinetEllen had an idea.
Ellen, meanwhile, found herself in My wife raised her head, and an equally alarming situation.
It then occurred to her that got underway, Cray turned to Ellen and the smoothness of her face might said, “It is a very fine morning, sir.” betray her; so she decided to make Ellen stared out the window and another poultice, and put it in a made no response, white handkerchief to be worn Cray repeated his comment in a under the chin, up the cheeks, and louder voice, but Ellen continued to to tie over the head.
This nearly ignore him. hid the expression of the countenance, as well as the beardless chin.
To complete the disguise, William bought a pair of dark-green sunglasses for Ellen to wear, and cut her hair.
At dawn on December 21, 1848, William and Ellen made their way to the Macon train station.
Purchasing tickets to Savannah under the alias “William Johnson,” Ellen boarded a passenger coach, while William took his place aboard a baggage car.
As the train was about to leave the station, William looked out the window of the baggage car and was shocked to see William Craft. page 15 Annoyed, Cray turned towards some of the other passengers, who had taken notice of his attempt to start a conversation.
Ellen turned to Cray with a polite bow and said, “Yes,” then resumed looking out the window.
The remainder of the two-hundredmile trip to Savannah passed without incident.
That evening William and Ellen boarded a steamer bound for Charleston, South Carolina.
Ellen quickly retired to her cabin, leaving William to sleep on the deck of the ship.
The next morning William found Ellen having breakfast in the ship’s galley.
Disguised as “Mr Johnson,” she was seated at the right hand of the captain.
Because Ellen still had one hand In a slm S’ 11 w as William’s duty to Carve her ur n.
I think you are very likely to spoil your boy by saying ‘thank you’ to him, a young military officer snoT en f d -“ IaSSUreyOU ’ sir ’ not hing vom’ /h ^ 6 S ° SOOn 38 Sayin S> ‘ th ank y u and if you please’ to him ” The Vnnmt _ i 11 c “ x, wad William S duty to vnn’ nnrl ‘-r r "" tnan * carve her food.
L fl t f ° Phlladel P hia for medical said to her “v^„ 1 P ain treatment at all. bin tr, L Mj e manJced f nd he J eft the table.
The captain hn ° er ’ You have a very attentive boy sir; but you had better watch him like a hawk when you get on to the North.
The slave trader then offered to buy William. reDlied 0 ""^ t0 SeII> sir ’” Ellen replied.
I cannot get on well without i or medical oa a n n l at all bUt f ° Visita health spa in Arkansas instead.
There were a large number of persons on the quay waiting the arrival of the steamer,” William wrote, “but we were afraid to venture out for fear that someone might recognize me; or that had heard that we were gone, and had telegraphed t0 have us stopped.
However, after You will have to get on without him otheTZl “ ^ ^ UntiI a11 the if you take him to the North,” the slave n,. passen S ers were gone, we had trader said.
Ced °"" a triage], me take him down to Orleans a 1 k my master ’ by the arm He wil, do you n0 good ' if ^ a Me difficulty he hobbled across Mason’s and Dixon’s line T ’ g0t and we drove off.” can see from the cut of his eye that he wher^ fh° UPle proceeded t0 a hotel, is cerfa.n .. here they remained for a few hours before arunrr . is certain to run away.
The slave trader brought his fist )wn on t foki, ' a lew nours before going back to the wharf intending to board a steamship bound for Wilmington, North Carolina.
Ellen excused herself from the table, thanking the captain for his advice The slave trader followed her onto the deck of the ship, which was approaching Charleston harbor A small crowd gathered as he followed EHen, repeating his offer to buy Wilham.
The other passengers joined in, advising Ellen to sell, or at least to treat William with harshness to escape""^ 6 ^ ^ ^ thoughts of page 17 nnfl f . a UCKec ror himself and one for his slave to Philadelphia.
The man then asked Ellen to sign the ship s register for the tickefs. [°' n n ""Y° Imaged right arm, ElleUfUsked the mau to stgu f or her.
The young officer awkwardly shook Ellen’s bandaged right hand and loudly announced that he knew “Mr Johnson” very well.
He thanked him kindly, and the young officer begged my master to go with him, and have something to drink and a cigar; but as he had not acquired these accomplishments, he excused himself, and we went on board and came off to Wilmington, North Carolina.
After arriving in Wilmington on the morning of December 23, the Crafts boarded a train for Richmond, Virginia.
As before, Ellen rode in a passenger car while William rode with the baggage.
Before the train got started, the conductor questioned William about his master and their destination.
The explanation seemed to satisfy the conductor, who arranged for Ellen to move to a sleeping compartment.
Arriving in Richmond a few hours later, the Crafts changed trains to Fredericksburg, traveled by steamboat up the Potomac River to Washington, D.C., and took another train to Baltimore, Maryland, successfully repeating their well-rehearsed deception at each new ticket counter.
After Ellen boarded one of the carriages, William was about to step into a baggage car when a train conductor stopped him.
I stepped into “my master’s” carriage, to inform him of the difficulty.
As soon as he looked up and saw me, he smiled. page 18 I also tried to wear a cheerful countenance, in order to break the shock of the sad news.
He was aware that if we were fortunate we should reach our destination at five o’clock the next morning, and this made it the more painful to communicate what the officer had said; but, as there was no time to lose, I went up to him and asked him how he felt.
He said, “Much better,” and that he thanked God we were getting on so nicely.
I then said we were not getting on quite so well as we had anticipated.
The conversation drew the attention of other passengers waiting to board the train, several of whom expressed their disapproval, “not because they thought we were slaves endeavoring to escape,” William wrote, “but merely because they thought my master was a slaveholder and invalid gentleman, and therefore it was wrong to detain him.
Attracted by the exchange, the conductor of the train that William and Ellen had just left walked up to the ticket counter and helpfully confirmed that “Mr Johnson” and his slave had come together on his train from Washington.
A few seconds later, a bell rang, announcing the departure of the train to Philadelphia.
He then told the clerk to run and tell the conductor to ‘let this gentleman and slave pass;’ adding, ‘As he is not well, it is a pity to stop him here.
We will let him go.’” page 19 Ellen thanked the man, and “hobbled across the platform as quickly as possible,” William wrote.
On the final leg of their journey William met a free black man who was also traveling from Baltimore to Philadelphia.
The man gave him the address of a boardinghouse that was owned by abolitionists, and he said that William could find refuge there if he wanted to run away from his master.
On Christmas morning, four days after leaving Macon, the Crafts arrived in Philadelphia.
He said he thought not, but he would call in some persons who knew more about the laws than himself.
With the help of the Philadelphia abolitionists, William and Ellen moved further north to Boston, where they became well known for their successful and daring escape from bondage.
William found work as a cabinetmaker, while Ellen worked as a seamstress.
In September of 1850, less than two years after the Crafts’ arrival in Boston, Congress passed the Fugitive Slave Act, under which slave hunters could legally capture and return escaped slaves to their former owners.
Boston abolitionists, along with members of the city’s politically active free black community, helped the Crafts to elude the slave hunters and moved them to England, where they were assisted by members of the English antislavery movement.
They raised five children and attended school, learning to read and write.
In 1860 William wrote an account of their escape titled Running a Thousand Miles for Freedom.
Ten years later— five years after the end of the United States Civil War— the Crafts returned to Georgia, settling near Savannah and starting an agricultural school for former slaves.
Faced with increasing financial problems, segregation, and the rise of the Ku Klux Klan during the late 1870s, they were forced to close the school and move in with a daughter who lived in Charleston, South Carolina.
SasrJsSai iSM Mi jha**f^ ""3 1 1 15 f : •§*<£ V* n y _ Pj 1> aj P d *g O E -o o B <0 n <5 2 J( ■5 52 _• 3.
The 25-minute storm caused widespread damage to houses, vehicles, trees and power supplies, particularly in the capital, Zhengzhou, and in Luoyang.
Most of the fatalities were caused by buildings collapsing under the weight of the hail, but at least seven resulted from direct hits.
Freak hailstorms have previously hit towns in Nigeria, Australia and Russia, with some reports claiming hailstones the size of footballs.
Juan Carlos Oseguera, 19, died when he was hit by ""baseball-size"" hail in Fort Worth, Texas, sometime around March 2000.
Two suicide notes in her handbag complained about her unfaithful husband and apologised to her family.
WILLIAM POTOGI, 33, WAS GIVEN A ritual bath by a witch doctor in Paramaribo, Surinam, to make him bullet-proof.
He asked the witch doctor's assistant to test whether it had worked and was shot dead with his own sawn-off shotgun at point-blank range.
AN IRANIAN BEHEADED HIS SEVENMoustafa Mohammed, 35, who had reported Yosra, 19, missing, confessed to police that he had killed her.
EDWARD McBRIDE, 37, WEIGHED DOWN with more than 501b of stolen cameras and CDs, among other items, drowned when he refused to let go of his loot while swimming across the Arkansas River on 16 August.
Police from Tulsa, Oklahoma, were chasing him when he jumped into the muddy water with a duffel bag containing the goods.
RORY GRAHAM, 22, DIED AFTER FALLING into the sea from a cliff on Ibiza on 19 May a week after his parents in Bridge of Allen, Stirlingshire, received a hoax call claiming he had been killed.
He was pulled unconscious from the water by the crew of a local fishing boat and died later in hospital.
A THAI WOMAN JUMPED TO HER DEATH into a pool at the Samut Prakan Crocodile Farm near Bangkok on 11 August as tourists prepared to feed the crocodiles with buckets of chicken.
Somjai Serabul (or Setabul, Setabal, Setboon or Sethboonwas), 32 , put down her handbag and a bottle of water before jumping off a bridge into the water.
She appeared to hug the first crocodile that clamped its jaws around YEAR-OLD daughter after suspecting her uncle had raped her.
POLICE ARRESTED AN EGYPTIAN FARMER who buried his unmarried sister alive in an ""honour killing"" after she became pregnant.
SHIRLEY STOCKSDALE, 75, GOT HER arm caught in a sofa bed in Cape Coral, Florida, in August 2001.
Though she was just inches from a telephone and a whistle, she was stuck for at least two days and died, probably from dehydration and stress.
She might have been trying to lift the bed out of the sofa, perhaps to pick up something that had fallen under it.
Classical compositions performed by the Philadelphia Orchestra, conducted by Leopold Stokowski, are the soundtrack for dazzling Disney animation.
It's been re-released a few times and was required viewing for every pothead I knew in high school.
Originally, there was a little female centaur named Sunflower who was pretty much a handmaiden/personal assistant for the tall, beautiful white, blonde, dare I say 'Aryan' centaurs.
Sunflower is drawn along racist lines to be a ""pickininny Negro"" big lips, nappy hair and all.
She was removed from the 1960 release of Fantasia, and edited out of the 1990 50th Anniversary edition, and laser disks.
The 50th anniversary DVD is so badly edited that after removal of the third appearance of dear Sunflower, the sound track isn't matching up with the film any more.
Fortunately, people who are more evil than Disney can find a copy of it.
I vaguely recall a few Bugs Bunny cartoons being withheld from release on some recent Big Deal Anniversary because it was decided they were racist or unacceptable, going by today's standards.
If you pay close attention to Disney's animation now, they're still full of racism and sexism.
I am greatly indebted to correspondent Larry Tribula for sharing the following intriguing discovery with me.
While recently dining at a rustic restaurant called 'Antlers' in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, which was filled with taxiderm exhibits, Larry noticed one very unusual specimen He describes it as being a bear on all fours, displayed near to some black bears.
However, this particular individual, roughly the size of a juvenile black bear, was golden brown in colour and, departing significantly from the typical ursine form, sported a long bushy tail, resembling that of anteaters but not quite as large.
Larry did not consider it to be a hoax, and hopes to take a picture of it, should he ever return there.
C4 The Bakersfield Californian Eye street You Report Teachers from 1896 required to be top-notch PHOTO COURTESY OF JACK HOOK This postcard shows teacher Millie Gardett Munsey on her horse Grasshopper in 1896.
Applicants had one shot at passing rigid test BY JERRY KIRKLAND Contributing writer Before being issued a credential, prospective teachers today must devote years to completing a host of classes and then apply what they have learned during two quarters of student teaching.
At some point, they must also prove their proficiency in reading, writing, and math by passing the California Basic Education Skills Test, CBEST for short.
In 1896, a test called simply “the Teachers Examination” was given in May just before the opening of school.
It’s possible that some of those who took that test in 1896 had completed all or part of a two-year program at one of California’s two teacher training colleges, called “normal” schools in those days.
Your performance on the Teacher Examination was the sole determination of whether or not you were granted a certificate.
All sections had to be passed at a proficiency level of 60 percent or greater.
Today, students may retake any failed section of the SHARE YOUR STORY Submit stories or photos at Bakersfield.com/ youreport.
But in 1896, failing one section meant that you had failed the test and you were not allowed to continue.
The 1896 exam covered spelling, arithmetic, physical geography, physiology, music, civil government, geometry, literature and drawing.
Geometry was next, and takers had to “describe how a line is generated.
If you were seeking a teaching certificate in Kern County in 1896, you had to know a lot of stuff about a lot of stuff that you would never use in the classroom.
Only the most astute could handle teaching 10, or 20, or 40 kids from all grade levels in one large room that was difficult to heat in January and impossible to cool in May or June.
But passing the test meant a generous sSary of $75 a month, perhaps as much as $85 if you would agree to haul in water and fire wood and sweep the floor once a week.
Jerry Kirkland is a retired elementary school principal who has been researching the history of Kern school districts for 12 years.
Most of the schoolhouses were oneroom affairs with all grades being taught by a single teacher.
Without buses, schools had to be built near Harrell clusters of people.
Most were, but eight of the 86 teachers were men and 15 of the women were married.
Stockton, who would later serve as county superintendent of schools; Alfred Harrell, who would become publisher of The Bakersfield Californian ; and Millie Gardett, who would become the Millie Gardett Munsey who has a school named in her honor.
Pat Gracey, who was 23-years-old at the time, said it felt like her house was dancing.
It was an old house, it was built in the 1880s, anyways it was doing a dance, and I started screaming,” Gracey said.
Another resident, Betty Freeman said she had to convince her husband that they weren’t being bombed.
She said, 6C My husband thought he was back in World War II being bombed.
While most residents were terrified by the vigorous shaking, some, like Bob Burgeis, were not.
The main shock lasted just under a minute, claimed 13 lives, and devastated the town.
Joann Johnson, who owned the local newspaper with her husband, explained what it was like to see Downtown Tehachapi after the earthquake.
Fear of another big earthquake and even the aftershocks that followed, many people slept outside for weeks and even months.
Joann Johnson said, “We slept outside on our families front yard, for about a week.
And while the 1952 earthquake caused massive damage to the town, everyone we spoke to agreed that it made Tehachapi stronger.
White often told her grandchildren of Civil War events and her last days as a slave.
She was the oldest member of an Old Age Club at Bethlehem Center and a member of Mt.
Carmel Baptist Church and the Union of the First Street Baptist Church.
Survivors include one son, James White of Nashville; 15 grandchildren; 62 great-grandchildren; and 37 great-great-grandchildren.
After a frantic hunt, a missing girl in New Zealand was found safe in a van that was part of the search party.
Yona Hou, seven, had fallen asleep in the back of her family's van after leaving a chip shop.
After reporting her missing, Yona's mother drove the van around Waiuku, south of Auckland, looking for her.
Irish Independent , 13 April 2002 , The Banshee Harbinger of Death by Andrew M Scott T he Irish have always had a way with death.
Few other nations can measure up to the Irish in the number and variety of folklore, traditions, and stories about death and dying.
Another explanation exists, though, one less concrete, yet equally dramatic and historical.
Many of the Irish customs of death and dying are ancient holdouts, remnants of the pre-Christian Celtic society that at one time inhabited not only the Western Islands, but a great deal of Europe.
They have been altered in constant retelling over many centuries, but they retain that element of Celtic pagan belief once so common.
A body of Irish folklorists and scholars will explain — not without opposition of course — that the tiny and mischievous leprechaun is actually Lugh of the Long Arm, the ancient Celtic god of light and the arts, and the mysterious Irish fairy known as the pucha is a distortion of Epona, a Celtic horse goddess.
As our modern technological society continues its unending march across the globe, traditional folk belief and custom is crushed beneath its merciless tread.
One of the old beliefs that still lingers in the more rural areas of western Ireland is the legend of the death omen — most famously known as the banshee.
Even in the face of the recent technological and economic boom Ireland is experiencing, the idea persists in some quarters that a supernatural being lingers in the very shadow of death.
Bean means woman and Si designates the fairies; quite simply, a Bean si or banshee is a fairy woman.
As such she is a visitor to our world, making her abode in the Tir na nOg , or “Land of Eternal Youth” — a place few mortals have visited, and from which even fewer have returned.
The banshee, while sharing some characteristics with spirits, is not a ghost.
She never lived as a mortal human, but exists as a creature with her own purpose.
Traditionally the banshee has held a particular function — to chaoin over the recent or impending death in a noble Gaelic family.
In this mode, the banshee is not menacing, but rather a sympathetic otherworldly figure who feels sorrow and offers condolence.
Like many of the fairy legends, the story of the banshee suggests an older origin.
The ancient Celts believed that their kings and chieftains were not the owners of the land, but rather the human manifestations of it.
As the king was responsible for the health of the land, so famine, plague, drought, or crop failure were likewise blamed on the king and his rule.
On his inauguration, the new leader was symbolically wed to the local goddesses of sovereignty in any number of ceremonies.
His misrule would anger the goddess, causing her to punish her “husband” and the land he oversaw.
At the death of the leader, the goddess might manifest herself to grieve along with his human widow.
Goddesses Afoot This theory of the banshee’s origins is further bolstered by the legend that accompanies the epic Battle of Clontarf in 1014.
The night before the Irish king Brian Boru was to give battle to the Danes, he was visited by the goddess Aoibheall, a deity native to the region around County Clare.
Aoibheall foretold the death of the king and announced his son Donnchad as successor.
This would seem a likely origin of the banshee as a female being who follows royal Irishmen.
This term may refer back to the Celtic war goddess Badb, again demonstrating the banshee’s pagan origins.
Not every death is heralded by the fearful wailing of the banshee, thankfully enough.
Folklore tells us that the banshee is attached only to very 46 Fate / lan-Feb 2002 important families, usually of Gaelic stock.
Yet stories of the banshee come, not only from Gaelic families, but from septs with distinctly Saxon surnames.
While it is not at all surprising to find a banshee legend attached to the O’Keefes, Aherns, Clancys, and Hegartys, it runs counter to expectation to find that the Potterton family, the Cartwright family, and even the English family all have a keening woman.
In fact, the most oft-told tales of the banshee come from Anglo-Irish family traditions.
One of the more famous examples is also an example of a variation on the traditional banshee legend.
The viscounts of Gormanston, who came to Ireland from Lancashire in the 1300s, occupied an estate in County Meath.
It has been said that on the death of the viscount, gangs of foxes assembled near the castle to wail and bark.
This unusual event has been reported as recently as the deaths of Edward, 13th viscount, in 1876; Jenico, 14th viscount, in 1907; and Jenico Edward, 15th viscount, in 1925.
Piercing Screams The keening of the banshee is what made the spirit such a feared being.
Unlike the keening of mortals, which, while highly emotional, was an intelligible dirge, the cry of the banshee was most often described as a piercing scream or shriek.
The banshee s wail was such that deep terror was evoked in the listener, not so much by the death it forewarned as by its very sound.
Far less often does the banshee appear to be merely sobbing or crying, she being a particularly demonstrative creature.
Though the spirit is heard more often than seen, it was accepted that the banshee always took the form of a female — sometimes a young woman combing her long tresses with a blue comb, other times an old hag tearing her hair from its roots.
A particularly bold young man saw the banshee one night, sitting by the roadside combing her hair.
Rake that he was, he stole up behind her and snatched the comb out of her hands.
The banshee remained outside his door, wailing and shouting for the return of her property.
The terrified man at last passed the comb out the window using the tongs from the fireplace.
Scotland’s version of the banshee, the Bean nighe, appeared as a woman washing bloodstained shrouds in a stream, a theme not unheard of in Ireland.
Another variation has her appearing as the bloodied corpse of a girl killed centuries before by the family’s rogue ancestor; this would make her more of a ghost seeking to torment the living for revenge.
Not Extinct While the traditional folk beliefs of the Irish people have mostly passed into distant memory, in an unguarded moment one might still find some willing to retell a chance meeting with the old girl.
An acquaintance of mine from the rural coast of Donegal disclosed her own brush with the sorrowful specter.
As a teenager she had gone to visit her grandmother in the Gweedore region of Donegal.
Soon after nightfall, an ungodly moan was heard from across the fields.
The terrifying cry drew closer and closer to the little cottage and soon seemed to be moving in a circle around the building itself.
Despite her own fears, and her grandmother’s entreaties, my friend rushed outside.
As she stood in the darkened yard of the whitewashed cottage the wailing sound rounded the comer of the house and moved towards her.
These are some of the intriguing questions investigated in the pages of Ancient American, a unique, bi-monthly magazine describing overseas’ voyages to our continent hundreds and even thousands of years before Columbus.
New discoveries and the latest theories about prehistoric contacts with the Americas appear in each issue.
They choose a boy instead and have him dressed in the clothes of a Tudor era female.
The question as to why is one which plagued Bram Stoker, author of Dracula, who, when he heard of the strange custom, sought to get to the bottom of it in his lesser known work Famous Impostors.
Stoker uncovered a local legend that told how, around 1543, Queen Elizabeth I, then a princess, was sent to Bisley to take in the country air, when suddenly she fell ill and died.
Henry had recently had his wife, Catherine Howard, beheaded and, famously ill-tempered and unpredictable, no one wanted to upset him further.
As such, the governess hurried to find a replacement but no girl of similar appearance to Elizabeth could be found.
The governess had him put on the princesses’ dress and presented to the King.
In fact, the trick worked so well the King was never informed and the boy grew up to become Queen Elizabeth I In 1870 the vicar of Bisley claimed he had uncovered the coffin of a girl dressed in Tudor clothes but had reinterred the remains in an unmarked grave so it did not become a shrine.
Stoker cites a series of 16th century letters which detail ‘secrets of great moment’ between the Queen and her closest companions; her refusal to marry and apparent inability to bear children; her baldness; a change in the style of her writing from before and after the apparent swap; her refusal to see any but one doctor; and her instruction that there be no post mortem on her body when she died.
Of course, all these things can be explained away much more simply, but, whatever the truth, everyone loves a conspiracy.
The Cat Who Killed Them All The Stephens Island Wren has a rare place in ecological history.
Not only was it one of only three flightless songbirds in the world, it also holds the distinction of being the only known species on Earth to be entirely wiped out by a single being.
Stephens Island * Stephens Island, or Takapourewa to the Maori, covers an area of 2.6km 2 and is the most distant island off the northern tip of New Zealand 's South Island.
Named in honour of Admiralty Secretary Philip Stephens by Captain James Cook , the island was located on a shipping route and hence deemed an appropriate place to build a lighthouse.
So, in 1894, Stephens Light became the residence of one Mr David Lyall.
Tibbies the Cat A companion to Lyall, the lighthouse keeper, Tibbies the cat soon made Stephens Island her home and hunting ground during 1894.
It was not long before she was presenting her master with gifts of local wildlife in particular, a small bird which was unlike any that Lyall had ever seen.
Eleven of the birds were brought to Lyall by Tibbies in almost pristine condition, as she seemd to enjoy the act of the chase and the kill rather than eating the birds.
The discovery quickly found its way to Sir Walter Buller, New Zealand's ornithological expert at the time.
A duly excited Buller reported the find to the British Ornithologists' Club in London after classifying the bird as a member of the wren family.
Due to Tibbies' expert mousing skills , the wren colony on Stephens Island, perhaps < total of ten mating pairs, was extinct within the year of discovery.
The lighthouse cat had possibly single-handedly disposed of the bird, a feat exasperating in its seemingly senseless execution.
The 'Lyall' Wren The wrens that made up Tibbies' nighttime entertainment were, before becoming extinct like the Dodo of Mauritius, thought to have originated from a time when Australia and Antarctica made up the ancient landmass known as Gondwanaland.
The Stephens Island Wrens lyalli, sometimes referred to as the Lyall wren) were typical of most New Zealand wrens.
Nocturnal birds, the wrens made their nests in holes or under rocks, much like the puffin, and fed upon small insects.
Seen to scamper about at night, much like a mouse, this is perhaps why Tibbies was so keen on hunting them downi.
It is also interesting to note there is a British tradition of hunting the wren ' performed, coincidentally, on St Stephen's Day.
Legend has it that when St Stephen was hiding from his enemies in a bush, he was betrayed by the chattering of a wren and thus captured and stoned to death.
Perhaps Tibbies was thinking her actions would bring good luck to the island, or maybe the small birds were unwittingly named after European wrens in honour of this custom.
In Memoriam From fossilised remains found all over New Zealand, proof was obtained of the species once inhabiting the entire country.
It was most likely killed off on the mainland by rats introduced by the Maori and other groundbased predators.
Although pretty to look at, it is more saddening that their song will never be heard. Evidence suggests that other cats introduced to the island may have assisted in Tibbies' work right up until 1899.
It became known as the H 12 j ftik Curse of the Crying Boy"", and even made . jfjMfe j I headline news at one point.
There were at that time more than one of these paintings around and each seemed to have the same effect.
The home and all contents would be totally destroyed but the painting of the little crying boy would not show any sign at all of going through a fire.
The newspaper began receiving telephone calls from people all over the area that had similar stories to tell about the crying boy painting.
One person that called the ""Sun"" was Dora Mann of Mitcham and she has been quoted as saying ""Only six months after I had bought the picture, my house was completely gutted by fire.
After one month of hearing all the tales, the ""Sun"" gave their readers the chance to bring their crying boy paintings and agreed to have a very large bon fire to rid everyone of this cursed or jinxed painting.
All paintings that were brought to the newspaper were in fact burned and everyone rejoiced.
The picture itself was a portrait painted by a Spanish artist of an orphan.
It is said that his studio burnt to the ground, and the boy was later killed in a car crash.
The picture is one of the first to be mass produced in the UK, there are several thousand of them in circulation, but the curse still appears to apply to all the copies.
It is said that the curse will only effect Someone if the owner of the painting becomes aware of it.
Some psychics have claimed that the painting is Haunted by the spirit of the boy it depicts.
There have been reports of the crying boy painting being found in charred homes untouched since 1985 and as recent as 1988.
The footprints are known locally as ‘devils' trails' , and arc considered to bo of supernatural OF^in in local folklore.
They are about 3:n long and 4 m [lOcmJ wide, suggesting shat ihe people who made the footprints were only about 4ft Sin U..30IT1) tall, perhaps indicating, that they ware marie by juveniles.
Untitled The ghosts of Spook Bridge May 28, 7:40 PM • Add a Comment in many of the winding backroads of rural Pennsylvania there are bridges notorious for their vivid and terrifying hauntings.
The bridge was made up of only a couple flat bench logs stretched across the Shamokin Creek temporarily so that people could walk along the footpath. in the rough and rural area of Gosstown, there were few social events for people to attend.
However, on occasion a party would be planned and the entire area would turn out to drink hard cider, applejack and socialize.
Late one summer, Mr Dunkelberger announced that he was holding a gathering.
He invited everyone in the area and Martin Goss and his wife looked forward to the event.
His wife was substantially younger than he was and she was most excited about the party.
On the night of the event, Martin accompanied his wife to the Dunkelberger house.
He told his wife that he was going home and excused himself from the party.
Sometime later in the night a group of revelers made their way to the bridge.
He had apparently slipped on the slippery bridge and fallen to his death.
He was possibly too inebriated to extricate himself or else he could have struck his head.
The revelers ran back to the Dunkelberger house where they broke the news to Mrs.
A group of men conferred and it was decided that the acting coroner should be sent for.
The coroner’s home was several miles away and someone was dispatched to fetch him back to the scene.
Meanwhile, the men built several bond fires so that the area would be well lit for the coroner. when the coroner arrived, he called out that someone should remove the body from the water.
No one made a move to do so and in disgust the coroner made his way out onto the footbridge and reached down to pull the body up on the wooden structure by his shirt collar.
Suddenly, the assembled men plunged into the water and helped remove the body.
The coroner turned to the men and demanded to know why they had refused to touch the body until he had.
One of the men explained that they didn’t want to touch a body because the first one to touch the body might have been haunted by him forever after.
After that night the bridge became known as “Spook Bridge,” and for many years people claimed that Martin Goss haunted the bridge where he had died.
But time does march on and the town named for Goss forgot about him and changed its name.
CARTOONS Hart Island does not appear on the MTA's subway map or the Department of Transportation's bicycling maps.
The AAA map in my car shows the blue dotted line of a public ferry from City Island to Hart Island, but the ferry closed to the public in 1976.
It can be seen only on clear nights, only from the east and by inference, when lights from the city bounce off the water of the Sound and leave the island backlit.
Hart Island can be found on Google Maps, which labels the northern half of the island ""Potter's Field,"" a term commonly used to refer to a place where unknown or unclaimed bodies are buried.
When the city bought Hart Island for $75,000 in 1868, the new potter's field was set on 45 acres at the island's northern tip.
Administration was handed over to what was then called the Department of Charities and Correction, which operated a prison and a technical school for delinquent boys on the island.
Inmates were given the job of burying the dead, a practice that continues to this day.
The Department of Correction estimates that more than 850,000 people are now buried on Hart Island, noting that the actual number may be somewhere between 750,000 and a million, a standard deviation that is far ring when you think about it.
In the last few years the old cemetery filled up, so the burials moved to Hart Island's south side.
The other grave, for fetuses and stillborn babies, will be loaded with 1,000 miniature coffins buried five deep.
In Matthew 27:3-10, Judas cast the 30 silver pieces he received for betraying Jesus onto the temple floor, and then hung himself in shame.
The priests, concerned that adding blood money to the temple's treasury would violate church law, ""bought with them the potter's field to bury strangers.
We are lucky the name ""potter's field"" stuck, since printing the alternative on maps would be rather purple.
Lots of unidentified people are buried on Hart Island, and lots of poor people, too.
It's reasonable to assume that Slylce was laid in the ground by inmates because the wife of Fred Bartels, the island's first warden, recorded the burial on April 20, 1869.
Haggins was buried as an unidentified body in 2004 even though he had received food stamps, spent time in prison, and lived in city shelters, which meant at least three government agencies held his fingerprints on file.
One person who is buried on Hart Island who should not be is Laurie Grant's daughter.
Grant was an obstetrician and gynecologist with a successful private practice in Westchester County.
She felt nauseous for months, became dehydrated and malnourished, and required a feeding tube.
The epidural numbed only one side of her body, leaving the other half in stabbing pain.
Grant would be able to visit the grave, which would be marked with a number instead of a name.
She was on so much medication she was barely conscious. ""1 don't remember signing any papers. was really out of it,"" says Grant, who is now 59.
As a doctor, Grant easily could have afforded private burial in the cemetery plot her family already owned in the Valhalla area of Westchester County, a few minutes' drive from her current home.
Grant was too sick to think if it, however, and hospital staff did not ask her relatives about other burial options.
So the baby's body was placed in a pine coffin and buried in a mass grave on Hart Island.
Grant's experience was typical, says Melinda Hunt, an artist who has been fascinated with Hart Island since the early 1990s, and went on to publish a book and produce a fLlm about it.
Many families were told by hospital nurses or social workers to ""Let the city handle it,"" Hunt says, maybe to smooth the ordeal's fagged edges, and possibly to speed things along.
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner and the police department's missing persons unit use personal records, prescription bottles and fingerprints to identify people who die in hospitals, nursing homes and on the street without identification.
Of the nearly 1,200 people buried on Hart Island last year, only about fifteen were unidentified, says Dan Stevelman, deputy commissioner for operations at the medical examiner's office.
But some advocates doubt whether officials are as diligent about tracking down next of kin as they are about identifying the deceased.
Hunt regularly receives emails from family members who can easily afford an individual grave in a private cemetery, but who never received word that a loved one was dead.
Leonard Melfi, an influential playwright in the 1960s, was buried on Hart Island by mistake when he died in 2001.
Amy Koplow remembers a man who was buried on Hart Island despite his sizable pension from his career as a backstage technician at CBS television studios.
The man had the misfortune of dying on Presidents' Day weekend; that meant city employees responsible for locating his family did not get to his case until the man was already buried on Hart Island.
Elaine Joseph's daughter Tomilca was born premature at Beth Israel Hospital during the blizzard of 1978.
With the subways closed and all transportation to Manhattan shut down, Joseph called the hospital morgue for four days, getting no response.
When someone finally answered, Joseph was told that she had signed papers allowing Tomilca to be buried in the potter's field.
This was impossible, since the storm had prevented Joseph from ever getting to the hospital.
It's just a bunch of bums,""' says Joseph, 58, who went on to serve 23 years in the Navy and retire as a lieutenant commander.
Narratively is an online magazine devoted to original in-depth and untold stories.
Each week , Narratively explores a different theme and publishes just one story a day.
Unlike most college towns around the country, Arkadelphia plays host to not one, but two highly acclaimed schools that have been at odds with each other for many years.
In the early days of their existence, these two medium sized universities had very large differences when it came to religion and values.
It was that difference which sparked the ghost story known as The Lady in Black.
The story begins in the 1920s when a young man named Joshua met the love of his life, Jane.
Jane was a student at Ouachita, and Joshua, being from Henderson, never gave a second thought to dating her.
His friends however were not as understanding, because they began to ostracize him and threatened to never speak to him again if he didn't end his relationship with Jane.
According to Mary Jo Mann, a Henderson graduate and local historian, the reason Joshua was given such a hard time by his friends was probably because Jane was highly religious and wasn't the outgoing type.
Jane and Joshua managed to hold their love together, until the day came when Joshua finally gave in to his friends' hazing.
He broke up with Jane right before the annual homecoming dance at Henderson, which made the news even more devastating for her.
She went back to her dorm room at Ouachita to put on a black dress and veil, because she felt that nothing was worth living for if she couldn't have Joshua.
She then began walking to one of the many cliffs that line the Ouachita River, where she plunged to her death moments later.
From that time forward on homecoming night at Henderson, the girl that has become known as The Lady in Black has haunted the campus searching for the ones who made Joshua break up with her.
This ghost story is still very predominant in the Henderson community today, as Mann can attest.
Each year Mann tells the story of The Lady in Black at the Pine Tree speech that welcomes incoming freshman to the Henderson campus.
Welch also added that when she and a group of friends were walking back to the girls dorm around midnight on homecoming of last year, she saw a faint figure dressed in black exiting the building.
With Mann's knowledge of the ghost and unique story telling ability, the story has become known not just in the community of Arkadelphia, but state wide as well.
Numerous news organizations throughout the state have covered The Lady in Black, the most widely known report being in the 1980's by Chuck Dovish, from KTHV Channel 11 in Little Rock, for his weekly special Travling Arkansas.
Officials at Ouachita would not comment on the validity of The Lady in Black ghost, stating that she is merely a rumor.
And the cliff where she is said to have jumped off — which is owned by Ouachita — has been sealed off preventing anyone from entering it without a university escort.
With this new influx of wealth many Dutch needed new ways to spend their new found wealth.
In the mid 16th century the tulip was introduced to Europe from the Ottoman Empire.
After several decades of study by botanists, it was found that tulips thrived best in the Netherlands.
The tulip trade thrived to the point that be the 1630’ s people were even making careers out of growing, breeding, and selling tulips.
The flower became a status symbol among well to do and wealthy Dutch as breeders created tougher and more beautiful species of flowers.
Eventually the tulip became more than just a mere flower, but a source of wealth and prestige for the Dutch upper class.
In the 1630’ s the tulip became a securities instrument as . i nvestors . pumped their money into tulip growing and breeding.
The profits made in the tulip business attracted more and more investors who sought to get rich quite.
During that time it was recorded that one tulip transaction involved 40 bulbs being sold for 100,000 guilders.
In one transaction 12 acres of land was traded for a single Semper Augustus bulb.
Some people risked all of their savings to buy just one rare bulb, which was hoped to bring fortune and wealth as the price continued to rise and rise.
By the height of tulip mania, the average tulip was selling for 5,000 guilders per bulb.
By the spring of 1637, the price of tulips became so inflated that the vast majority of Dutch buyers and investors could not afford to buy a single bulb.
Tulip auctions ceased to sell their bulbs as buyers could not come up with the money to cover the inflated costs.
Between February and April of 1637, tulip prices crashed to l/20th their price at the height of the mania.
Investors lost everything as their precious bulbs became instantly worthless.
Many people had their entire wealth wiped out in what would become one the first economic bubbles in history.
Those who burrowed money to invest were doubly screwed, as they now owed thousands of guilders to creditors and lenders.
By summer of 1637, the price of tulips dropped to the point that hundreds of bulbs could be bought for a single guilder.
At an international conference he stood up and claimed to have found a man who had a first class maths degree and an IQ of 126, but whose skull did not contain a brain.
If, said Lorber, you placed a torch against one side of his skull then the whole head would glow like a light bulb.
To prove his point, Lorber produced Xrays that showed a black void where the man’s brain should have been.
The man, named Roger, had 95 per cent of his brain missing but was, according to Lorber, normal in all other respects.
What Lorber had discovered was an adult example of the neurological disorder known as hydranencephalus.
This is normally associated with birth defects, such as spina bifida, and means that at an early stage the skull fills with fluid so that the brain never develops.
Hydranencephalus is a severe condition and usually renders infants severely disabled, assuming that they can survive at all.
The case of Roger, the man with no brain, seemed to fly against conventional brain science and after his announcement Lorber immediately came under suspicion from his colleagues.
Lorber himself used the example of Roger to ask a fundamental question.
Others have been less reticent and see Roger as being the final proof that the mind and brain are in fact two separate entities.
Many Christian groups and proponents of an independent ‘soul’ have taken Lorber’s work to be proof that human consciousness can survive death.
By 1982 Lorber had found at least two others with hydranencephalus, and at last count he believed he had traced as many as 50.
He died in 1996 and it seems that the neurological community’s interest in adult hydranencephalus died with him.
None of them had ever even heard of Lorber’s research, let alone encountered an adult patient such as Roger.
After some effort, I tracked down one of Lorber’s co-workers, who wishes to remain anonymous.
All this suggests that the case of Roger may not be as straightforward as it first appears and maybe even places doubt on the whole idea that an adult can live without a brain.
However, in 2002, Sharon Parker, a hydranencephalic woman from the north of England, was discovered to have nearly 90 per cent of her brain missing and yet was perfectly normal in all other respects.
Early tests suggest that her brain keeps working by using a complex and little understood form of rerouting and jobsharing between those few parts that still remain intact.
Sharon Parker is at last tangible proof that Lorber’s work was not complete fiction, as some have suggested.
In fact, Lorber’s claim that there were a great many people walking around with next to no brain inside their skulls could well be true.
Be careful the next time you call somebody a ‘pea-brain’ you might just be telling the truth.
Paul Chambers is a TV producer and freelance science writer living in Hertfordshire.
It's difficult to associate a cemetery with a place of happiness and celebration when all you can think about is how much you miss the person when you visit their grave.
However, a man named Stan loan Patra$, from the small village of Sapanta in Romania, have found a way to turn cemeteries into joyful places meant to celebrate the lives of loved ones, rather than grieve their loss.
Patra^ founded the aptly-named Cimitirul Vesel, or Merry Cemetery, in the 1930s.
He began creating colorful, cross-shaped tombstones and writing epitaphsfor the village people who had passed away.
Each tombstone is painted with a base of a signature blue color, and then detailed with brightly-colored lines and patterns.
The epitaphs are silly but meaningful lyrical poems that describe something significant about the person's life.
A TRAIT 82 5EAI KrlSS Along with the poems, paintings of scenes from the person's life are included as well, usually having to do with their occupation or some other striking characteristic, such as a teacher at a desk oran alcoholic drinking.
The epitaphs and paintings are often whimsical, and sometimes even satirical.
Patra$ himself passed away in 1977, and he is now buried in the Merry Cemetery with a colorful tomb and a poetic epitaph to call his own.
The Merry Cemetery has its roots in the local Dacian culture, which views death as an adventure, a joyful passing to the next life.
It's quite the contrast to our Western view that death is a tragedy that should be grieved and mourned.
It's definitely not something most of us are used to, but it's pretty refreshing to see a place that's usually so weighed down with grief become so light-hearted and celebratory.
Now a popular tourist attraction, the Merry Cemetery is a beautiful way to keep the village of Sapanta alive and running, long after the members have passed.
Their memories are cherished and celebrated as this cemetery provides a link between this world and the next.
The mummy’s curse The fungus is suited to the conditions in Egyptian tombs O n Friday the thirteenth of April 1973 a team of intrepid scientists entered Wawel Castle in Krakow, Poland.
They were heading towards the chapel in order to open the tomb of King Casimir IV, sealed since the King’s death in 1492.
On entering it, the team found nothing unusual and, after making their various studies, sealed the grave once more.
Twelve men entered King Casimir’s tomb but within a week four of them were dead.
The death toll continued to mount until only two of the original team remained alive, Drs Edward Roszyckim and Boleslaw Smyk, both of whom were to suffer from ill-health for years afterwards.
It very much looked as though the scientists had been the victims of a curse from beyond the grave.
In the 1920s the Curse appeared to pass from fiction into fact after several members of Howard Carter’s archaeological expedition died following their discovery of King Tutankhamen’s tomb most famously, the expedition’s financial backer Lord Carnarvon in April 1923, two months after entering the tomb.
Since then, many people have sought to find an explanation for the alleged high mortality rate associated with opening of ancient tombs such as those of Kings Tut and Casimir.
The symptoms were particularly severe in those people that had been involved with the excavation or study of objects from ancient Egyptian tombs.
Dr Taha laid the blame on a type of fungus named Aspergillus which could release airborne toxins that can affect the lungs and other major organs.
It was found that the Aspergillus fungus is well suited to the conditions found in Egyptian tombs and is very resilient, capable of surviving for thousands of years.
Dr Taha subsequently announced that he had solved the myth of the Mummy’s Curse and placed the blame firmly on Aspergillus.
A decade later Dr Boleslaw Smyk, one of the two surviving scientists from King Casimir’s tomb, was also puzzling over the fate of his colleagues.
Shortly before exiting the tomb he had taken the royal insignia from the king’s coffin.
One of these revealed the presence of Aspergillus, leading him to conclude that he and his colleagues had suffered after inhaling deadly fungi toxins.
In the coming years further proof of the potential dangers of tomb fungi came from a number of other studies.
One of the most famous was performed on the mummy of Rameses II which, in 1977, was found to have 89 species of fungi on it, including a deadly Aspergillus strain.
Other studies, mostly by German scientists, have confirmed that the environmental conditions in ancient tombs can suit some types of toxic fungi very well indeed.
The combination of a warm, dark and damp space with plenty of organic remains (in the form of wood, food offerings and the bodies themselves) would ensure that the fungi were well looked after.
If the food runs out then the fungi simply become dormant, remaining in stasis for thousands of years awaiting the arrival of archaeologists.
Dr Boleslaw Smyk believes that toxic fungi have more to answer for than just the death of a few Egyptologists.
He has linked Aspergillus fungus with ‘leukaemia houses’ which are individual dwellings whose occupants have a vastly increased chance of dying from this disease.
The distribution of these toxins through air conditioning vents has been linked to the headaches and respiratory infections that are commonly reported in episodes of sick-building syndrome.
Despite all this weight of evidence, it is quite possible that scientists may have found the answer to a problem that never actually existed.
In 2002 Mark Nelson traced the fate of all 25 people who had been present at the opening of King Tut’s tomb and discovered that despite the ‘curse’ they continued to live for an average of 21 years.
He concludes that the incidence of death associated with King Tut’s tomb was no higher than average.
Merchants, thrift stores, and booksellers may be at risk if they sell older volumes, or even give them away, without first subjecting them to testing— at prohibitive expense.
Many used-book sellers, consignment stores, Goodwill outlets, and the like have accordingly begun to refuse new donations of pre-1985 volumes, yank existing ones off their shelves, and in some cases discard them en masse.
The problem is the Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act of 2008 , passed by Congress last summer after the panic over lead paint on toys from China.
Combine this measure with a new ban on playthings and child-care articles that contain plastic-softening chemicals known as phthalates, and suddenly tens of millions of commonly encountered children’s items have become unlawful to resell, presumably destined for landfills when their owners discard them.
Penalties under the law are strict and can include $100,000 fines and prison time, regardless of whether any child is harmed.
Not until 1985 did it become unlawful to use lead pigments in the inks, dyes, and paints used in children’s books.
Before then— and perhaps particularly in the great age of children’s-book illustration that lasted through the early twentieth century— the use of such pigments was not uncommon, and testing can still detect lead residues in books today.
The day before, the Consumer Product Safety Commission published guidelines telling thrift stores, as well as other resellers and distributors of used goods, what they could safely keep selling and what they should consider rejecting or subjecting to lead testing.
Confirming earlier reports, the document advised that only “ordinary” children’s books printed after 1985 could be placed in the safe category.
Older books were pointedly left off the safe list; the commission did allow an exception for vintage collectibles whose age, price, or rarity suggested that they would most likely be used by adult collectors, rather than given to children.
Since the law became effective the very next day, there was no time to waste in putting this advice into practice.
People who deal in children’s books for a livelihood now face unpleasant choices.
Jacobsen has contacted the CPSC and her congressional representatives for guidance, but to no avail.
Jacobsen also worries that any temporary forbearance on the part of the CPSC, which has said that it does not plan a reseller crackdown any time soon in the absence of evidence of risk, could be abrogated without notice in the future.
For one thing, new commissioners appointed by the Obama administration are expected to show less sympathy in regulating business than the current commission.
In addition, the 50 state attorneys general have been empowered to enforce the law on their own, and frequently take much more aggressive legal positions than those of the federal government, sometimes teaming with private lawyers who capture a share of fines imposed.
Under the law, they’re liable if their products will commonly be understood as intended for children’s use, even if not labeled as such.
A further question is what to do about public libraries, which daily expose children under 12 to pre-1985 editions of Anne of Green Gables , Beatrix Potter, Baden-Powell’s scouting guides, and other deadly hazards.
The blogger Design Loft carefully examines some of the costs of CPSIA-proofing pre-1985 library holdings; they are, not surprisingly, utterly prohibitive.
The ALA now apparently intends to take the position that the law does not apply to libraries unless it hears otherwise.
One can hardly blame it for this stance, but it’s far from clear that it will prevail.
For one thing, the law bans the “distribution” of forbidden items, whether or not for profit.
In addition, most libraries regularly raise money through book sales, and will now need to consider excluding older children’s titles from those sales.
One CPSC commissioner, Thomas Moore, has already called for libraries to “sequester” some undefinedly large fraction of pre-1985 books until more is known about their risks.
The threat to old books has surfaced so quickly in recent weeks that the elite press still seems unaware of it.
The wider pattern of CPSIA’s disruptive irrationality and threat to small businesses has been covered reasonably well by the local press around the country.
Some papers have investigated particular aspects of the law— the Los Angeles Times has tracked its menace to the garment industry, and the Washington Post and Wall Street Journal the general plight of thrift stores— but almost no one has cared to consider the law’s broad array of unintended consequences, let alone ask what went wrong in the near-unanimous rush to passage of this feel-good law.
On Wednesday, the Times ran an editorial solemnly condemning “book banning”; on inspection, the editorial turned out to praise an ACLU lawsuit against a school district that had removed a library book from the shelves because of its allegedly over-favorable view of Castro’s Cuba.
In any wider and more systematic prospect of book banning, the paper has shown no interest.
Whatever the future of new media may hold, ours will be a poorer world if we begin to lose the millions of books published before our own era.
They serve as a path into history, literature, and imagination for kids everywhere.
They link the generations by enabling parents to pass on the stories and discoveries in which they delighted as children.
Their illustrations open up worlds far removed from what kids are likely to see on the video or TV screen.
The recording sponge WILLIAM SUTTON AND JOHN SUTTON relate the strange tale of Captain Vosterloch and the long-playing sponge WILLIAM SUTTON is a novelist and Latin teacher who appeared in Ken Campbell’s fortean epic, The Warp, and plays cricket for Brazil.
If a mysterious Parisian pamphlet of 1632 can be credited, your warblings may be played back the next time it is squeezed.
A certain Captain Vosterloch, relates the CourrierVeritable, discovered a sponge used by natives of the southern seas to communicate across long distances.
Bald fact or pure fiction, the source material is as obscure as the science.
But if Vosterloch did not exist, it seems a tremendous lark to have invented him.
For, as myth, this fantastic portrayal of sound and porosity forces us to re-examine not only the humble sponge, but also the history of sound recording, and our notion of memory itself.
The phonographic poriferum , regarded as myth, takes its place in a venerable tapestry of historical science fiction.
Ancient China, Greece and Egypt all produced magical devices to duplicate sound or make statues speak, involving bellows, for instance, or simply a hidden person.
The 1589 speaking tube of Giovanni Battista Porta prefigures the 1,000 mile speaker, a sealed wooden tube invented by Chian Shun-hsin in the 17th century.
Cyrano 4 convincingly describes talking books with watch-like gears instead of pages.
A needle placed on the desired chapter produces a quasi-human voice speaking the lunar language, of course.
Whereupon we remember that Cyrano also claimed to have visited the Moon.
Our South Sea setting raises f amiliar questions about the colonial fascination with wonders.
At the Paris Exhibition of 1900, the Dane’s answering machine was lauded for sound quality far outstripping the phonograph.
B esides its value as myth and technological barometer, our supersponge is also a historical metaphor for memory.
In the struggle to account for the vagaries of remembering, such metaphors relate intriguingly to prevalent technologies.
But memory has been likened to such diverse containers as the rooms of a house and the stomach of a cow.
These primitive metazoa (and their synthetic counterparts) provide a familiar image for forgetting, not retaining, information.
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy, in name and effect, has unnervingly reinforced this folk notion.
But porifera a group successful since preCambrian times through reproduction both sexual and asexual, viviparous and oviparous are prized by biologists for clues they provide about the evolution of more complex systems.
With thenextraordinary cellular structure, they also offer fruitful comparison with current models of the brain.
Just as our neural pathways form and reform in a fluid evolution, so their mobile cellular systems carry out all vital functions, without developed tissue organisation.
Perhaps we should hesitate, however, before writing off the spongiform answering machine as myth or metaphor.
Consider, behind fantastical sightings of sea monsters, the core phenomena of whales and giant squid.
Vosterloch saw voices soaked up, just as Rabelais imagined them freezing.
Perhaps one day you’ll buy the White Album again, but on long-playing sponge.
Valdemar Poulsen’s answering machine, the Telegrafoon, exhibited at the Paris Exhibition of 1900.
Le Courrier Veritable, April 1632 ‘In this land, reports Captain Vosterloch, nature has furnished men with certain sponges which retain sound and articulated speech, just as our sponges do with liquid.
For instance, de Filippis locates Vosterloch’ s voyage ‘ dans les terres australes au large du detroit de Magellan.
Draaisma says Sorel in 1632, Marty goes for 1633, but Levin states that neither author nor publisher is marked.
The only scrap of information that he was a Dutch sea-captain comes from Wojciech Waglewski, former singer of Polish band, Voo Voo.
Joe Doran Some stories are remarkable, while others are so filled with hyperbole that, despite how amazing they might be, a small part of you can’t help but question their factual value.
Other stories, though they might be written like real history, are clearly more legend than they are truth.
In the interest of full disclosure, I am compelled to admit that the protagonist of this tale is never actually stated to be a werewolf Our hero was a man, sumamed Su who — if he even truly existed — is said to have suffered from a very real, very serious genetic disease called hypertrichosis, which caused the hair on his body to grow out of control Su’s legend begins with his birth in the mid19th century.
His was a world with neither Wikipedia nor the joys of Internet self-diagnosis, and as such, his parents misunderstood his condition, denounced him for a demon and abandoned him as a baby in a forest.
And there he might well have died, had things not taken a turn so common to kung fu movies that it’s practically a cliche.
Being the righteous, honorable guys that Shaolin monks tend to be, the first thing they did was try to find an adoptive family for the young Su.
Even Shaolin monks without hypertrichosis are pretty darn impressive Most likely aware that if he left the temple, he’d probably be burned alive by an angry mob with torches and pitchforks , Su had little else to do with his time other than study the ways of Shaolin Normally, a student chose just one art to which they dedicated themselves, but Su chose all of them, learning from each of the Shaolin masters in turn.
From there, the accounts of his skills become increasingly fantastical.
At a meeting with 12 Shaolin masters from across China, Su entered the room and was greeted with customary bows from all of the gathered.
He did not bow in return Instead, Su pulled out a knife and hurled it into the ceiling.
We can go ahead and assume that there was a dramatic pause between the knife being hurled and the infiltrator dropping down. www. theworldof chines e . com/ 20 1 2/07/legend-of -t he-s haolin-werewolf / 10/24/12 Legend of the Shaolin Werewolf | The World of Chinese Su had realized the assassin was hiding in the rafters when, upon entering the room, he could hear 13 people breathing, rather than just 12.
How he managed that with all that hair around his ears is beyond me, but then I’m not a quasilegendary Shaolin Grandmaster. . .yet.
When Su wasn’t discovering assassins with echolocation, he was fighting bears in the forest for practice.
In fairness, the bears may well have taken him for a skinny secondcousin and then were completely blown away when he came at them with kung fir moves.
And when he wasn’t fighting bears, Su was leading his fellow monks in the defense of Fujian Province’s coastline against Japanese pirates, which they did to great success.
After all, even pirates will shriek like little girls and turn tail when confronted with a haircovered Shaolin Grandmaster.
And those that didn’t run. . .well, it’s unlikely Su wasn’t putting that Death Touch technique into practice.
The story goes that Su’s success against the pirates, and the subsequent love it earned him and his fellow monks from the common people, garnered him the attention of the Imperial government, who saw the monks as potential rebels.
So a force was dispatched to “deaf’ with the monks — armed with gunpowder weapons.
That already made it an unfair fight, because as awesome as these quasimythical monks were, they probably couldn’t dodge cannon fire.
And just to make sure the monks didn’t try to pull any “mystical kung fu stuff”, a renegade Shaolin Master was sent to strengthen the attackers.
The monks dealt with the cannons and the missiles using only their skill and guile, while Su and the Shaolin Master faced-off in an epic, hand-to-hand, flying through the air, backflipping, frontflipping, sideslipping, highkicking, one-on-one battle.
Warned of the impending attack and realizing that, in actuality, they were no match for a superior force armed with modem weaponry, the monks chose to take all the valuables out of the temple and then bum it down before the bad guys arrived.
But before you condemn the decision as cowardly — going against all the rules of kung fir courage and honor that you remember from your diligent research into Shaolin tore — bear in mind that the monks didn’t relocate to a cushy back-up temple, they went to live in the mountains.
Su died in 1 928, at the age of 7 1 , leaving a legacy that — as you can see — is far, far more legend than it is reliable history.
Spring Festival's Cleaning Day www. theworldofchinese.com/2012/07/legend-of-the-shaolin-werewolf/ MILWAUKEE MAN GETS 3 V * years for violin theft A Milwaukee man whose stun gun was used in the theft of a $5 million Stradivarius violin in January has been sentenced to 31/2 years in prison.
Universal K Allah pleaded guilty in May to being party to felony robbery.
Milwaukee County Judge Dennis Moroney told hhn Thursday it was “disconcerting that he would engage in a crime that caused so much pain to his community.
His plea hearing was postponed Thursday after his public defender withdrew from the case for unspecified reasons.
L Prosecutors say Salahadyn used Allah's stun gun to attack a concertmaster and steal his violin after a performance.
Someone will have to eat crow, says JEFFREY VALLANCE JEFFREY VALLANCE, prolific artist and simulacrum hunter, has contributed to FT since 1989.
R ecently I moved back to the San Fernando Valley in California, where the tranquillity is broken only by the squawking of a profusion of crows.
Their crowing often wakes me up with a jerk first thing in the morning.
While half-awake one early morning, I thought I heard a crow on my window ledge talking to me.
She cocked her head and screeched, “Jeffrey, by virtue of your Nordic heritage, you will understand what I reveal to you.
Hark, the mighty warrior Goran is on a crusade to the East to kill the last dinosaur and devour its heart.
This brutal deed will begin a blood-bath the likes of which the world has ne’er seen.
If crows are caged, they will begin to “talk” or mimic words, and can acquire vocabularies larger than those of parrots.
The terms ‘raven’ and ‘crow’ are almost interchangeable, but they have a few notable differences.
The scientific name for the American crow is Corvus brachyrhynchos, and the common raven is Corvus corax.
Ravens prefer forested areas where they can feed on abundant carrion, while our omnivorous crows are more at home in the urban landscape hence the Valley.
In mythology, the crow is one of the most common trickster figures, as well as a messenger and creator deity.
Because of their jet black colour, crows and ravens have been omens of death, destruction, and spirits of divination.
The Vikings interpreted the cries and movements of birds as a method of divining the future.
Even without divination, it is said that Vikings could understand certain crow distress calls, for example the alarm call for a person approaching from a specific direction.
Similar to the valkyries, the raven is called “Chooser of the Slain,” deciding which warrior must fall.
Thus, a hero must be trained to understand the language of birds as a key to enter the World of the Raven (the underworld), where victory or defeat is ordained.
With God’s help, both King Solomon and Saint Francis of Assisi understood the language of birds.
Correspondingly, the knowledge of bird language can also be attained by slaying a dragon and eating its heart.
At night, they return to perch on his shoulders and tell him what they have heard and seen.
Related is the “crow’s nest” on ships, a perch for lookouts to gather intelligence.
In Celtic mythology, the Morrigan who often appears as a grim, hooded crow is the goddess of battle, strife, and fertility.
She appears as both a single goddess and as a Ravens hold prophetic knowledge of war trinity.
The trio took part in battles, influencing thenoutcome by causing great pandemonium.
According to legend, St George was an English knight on crusade to the Holy Land.
In the Middle East, he 54 Fun encountered a dragon which he slew with the Holy Lance.
The patron saint of England, soldiers, and Boy Scouts, he is invoked for protection against syphilis, herpes, and predatory beasts.
Like the saint of old, George Bush is on a crusade to the Middle East to kill the last dinosaur Saddam Hussein.
Like his namesake-daddy, George W wants to slay the craven dragon and plunder his oil.
He hungers to consume the dragon’s oily heart to become invincible in war.
The dragon has a slender body covered with scales, a long, tapered tail, and a serpentine neck.
Curious flaps of skin are attached to the back of the serpent’s head, along with a lethal horn.
Some cryptozoologists claim the Ishtar dragon was the last living dinosaur.
The Babylonians penetrated deep into Africa and by chance may have captured a specimen of the Mokele-Mbembe, a huge reptile from the Congo.
Accordingly, King Nebuchadnezzar may have kept this living sauropod dinosaur in the Temple of Marduk, whose symbol is the dragon.
Certain Christian creationists point to the biblical Behemoth as the dragon of Revelation.
They believe that the dinosaurs did not die off millions of years ago and may have become extinct only relatively recently.
Saint George may have killed one of the last of these terrible lizards.
As I write, the tree overhead is teeming with crows, raucously jabbering as if they know I am recording their tale.
A flock of crows is called a “murder” of crows, from the folk belief that crows form tribunals to judge and punish delinquent crows.
During the Gulf War, Ravens launched from Dhahran Air Base, Saudi Arabia, patrolled the skies over southern Iraq.
The EF-111A Raven built by Grumman Company is an aircraft with electronic jamming equipment and a processor to detect hostile radar emissions.
America’s ally in the war against Saddam is Great Britain, a country whose destiny is likewise linked with ravens.
A curious superstition dating from the time of Charles II prophesies that when ravens no longer roost in the Tower, the kingdom will fall.
Perhaps as a key to assured victory, the monarchy still maintains ravens to know what they have seen.
As the enchanted Valley crow proclaimed, the United States and Britain have been itching to storm Iraq (using intelligence gathered by Ravens) to subdue the terrible tyrant of Babylon.
Bans inflatable toad reports amid mockery fears By News from Elsewhere media reports from around the world, found by BBC Monitoring 23 July 2014 Last updated at 05:47 ET China's censors seem to have banned internet reports about a giant inflatable toad floating in a Beijing park, amid mockery on social media comparing it to ex-president Jiang Zemin.
One paper the official China Daily dismisses the toad as a ""poor attempt to replicate the success of an original work"", but fails to mention the still-powerfiil Jiang who was nicknamed The Toad during his 13-year rule.
There has been a nationwide fad for huge blow-up animals ever since a Dutch designer floated an enormous rubber duck in Hong Kong harbour last year.
In fact, the giant duck triggered so much discussion on social media that the government banned online searches for 'big yellow duck' after Sina Weibo mini-blog users posted photo mock-ups of the iconic lone Tiananmen Square protester facing down not a column of tanks but a parade of bath toys.
As for the toad itself, a traditional Chinese symbol of good luck, it is still floating in the park lake, and a spokesman told Channel News Asia there are no plans to remove it.
One learns of Saint-Roch, near Cape Mouraska there is a werewolf who runs the coast as a beggar, who, with the talent to persuade it ignores, and by promising what he can not hold to that to get what he wants.
It is said that this animal, with the help of his two hind feet, arrived at Quebec on 17 last and that he replied on 18 below, with the intention to follow its mission till Montreal.
This beast is said to be in his case as dangerous as that which appeared last year in the Gevauclan * which is why we urge the public to be wary as a ravening wolf.
Kamouraska, December 2, we learn that a werewolf, riding in this province for many years and has done much damage in the district of Quebec, has received considerable number of attacks in October last by various animals that had been armed and unleashed against this monster, and, in particular, on 3 November following, he received a furious blow with a little animal fat, which is believed to be completely delivered from this fatal animal, since he remained some time retired to his den, to the great satisfaction of the public.
But we just learned, the more fatal misfortunes that this animal is not completely defeated, on the contrary, he began to reappear more furious than ever and makes a terrible carnage wherever it strikes.
Beware So all the tricks of this malicious beast, and beware of falling between his legs.
We say that popular tradition in Quebec, more than half of the story revolves around individuals turning into a werewolf after failing to confess or make their Easter for seven years.
Other stories also mention people who have sold their soul True Tales of Pamphile Lemay.
Artwork by Henri to the devil or leading a ""bad life "", that is to say having a pipe outside the precepts of the Church.
To unmask the werewolves, just monitor those who, every night, eclipsed at the same time.
If we can hurt the animal, man is wounded in the someplace the next day.
One way to issue a werewolf s curse is to reach the front, its weak point, which he received the holy water of baptism.
It is also possible to reach the werewolf using a gun stuffed blessed branch, or a string of bullets dipped in holy water.
In Europe At the same time as the werewolf prowls the Kamouraska in France the Beast of Gevaudan which were attributed to several deaths Conclusion The werewolf is a key figure of legendary Quebecois as well as the devil and many others.
The legends of werewolves we show how the church was important in society.
The central phantom is “Yankee Jim"" Robinson, who was executed in 1852 for attempting to steal the only pilot boat in the San Diego harbor.
Robinson was sentenced to be hanged on the property where the Whaley House was to be built.
According to legend, the hanging scaffold was not properly constructed.
Robinson dropped only 5 feet instead of 15, and thus did not die immediately of a broken neck.
Instead, it took about 15 minutes for him to be strangled, an agonizing death in which he kicked and struggled while dangling from the rope.
Two of his accomplices were later caught, but they received light sentences.
The Whaley House, commissioned by businessman Thomas Whaley for his bride, Anna Eloise deLaunav, was completed in 1957.
Family members, however, long believed that Robinson's ghost stalked the mansion, still upset over his brutal death.
The last of the children, Lillian Whaley, lived in the house until her death in 1953 at age 89.
After her death, the house fell into disrepair and eventually was scheduled for demolition.
A citizens' committee saved it, and the Whaley House is now an historic home furnished with period pieces and open to the public.
In the 1960s, San Diego City College students staged an original play, Yankee Jim, in the courtroom of the Whaley House.
Various psychics and mediums who have visited the house claim that it is home to a menagerie of ghosts of men, women, children and animals.
Anna Eloise Whaley, seen walking about the rooms carrying a candle and checking windows and locks.
Poltergeist phenomena reported include burglar alarms being set off, windows opening and closing, a rotating chandelier, a baby cradle that rocks by itself, and a windmill that runs on a mysterious icy wind.
The engaging theatrical performance by Konstantinos Dellas and Ills theater company “boulouki,” narrates the story of Greek vampires, based on reports in medieval and modem Greek literature.
While relying on the musicality of speech and the action of their bodies, the three actors provide a theatrical essence to the mainly narrative texts.
I was impressed because until that time I wasn’t aware that such extreme incidents; exhumations of the dead, burning of hearts or mass incidents of paranoia, had taken place all over Greece,” said Dellas in a report in the Greek edition of euronews.
On being asked about research involved in the play, Dellas referred to several reports by travelers, urban legends from various regions of Greece, articles from local newspapers, literature, folklore and ecclesiastical texts.
Together with material found on the internet, Dellas used the reports to create the play.
A person may be transformed into a vampire for many reasons, in Greek called “vrikolakas,” said Dellas.
As for getting rid of vampires, the director makes reference to both well-known and obscure methods, the use of the cross, fire and wooden stakes, decapitation of the corpse and burning of the heart.
Of course, one shouldn’t forget the weapons provided by nature, sun and seawater.
South Africa thieves 'steal railway 1 News from Elsewhere media reports from around the world, found by BBC Monitoring 09:02 UK time Wednesday 16 July 2014 ’ Metal thieves in South Africa have stolen nearly 10km of working railway track, causing about $2.3m of damage, it's emerged.
Five men have appeared in court after being ""caught in the act"" by the security guards who patrol the track, the paper says.
They're not making mistakes,"" says Thumbu Mahlangu, a member of the local transport committee.
The stolen rails are reportedly worth about $120,000 on the scrap metal market.
Two huge black birds were seen on 26 June in a mountainous area between the towns of Tunkhannock and Nicholson, in Wyoming County, northeast Pennsylvania.
The primary witness saw the birds approaching from the north when he stepped out on his back porch at about 9:05pm.
His first impression was that they were herons, but soon realised that they were too big about 6ft from head to tail and the colour was wrong.
They landed at see the birds as they passed overhead, heading for some woods.
Consulting a bird book, the witness said that the closest species that he could find in shape was a black cormorant, although they were much too big.
Judging from the dimensions of the branches where the birds had rested, the witness estimated that the wingspan would have been 12ft or more.
Another family member was able to Police officers searching a property in Guerrero, Mexico, found the endangered big cat locked in a cage.
By Mark Molloy 1:59PM BST24Jul 2014 I Mexican authorities searching an abandoned house were left stunned when they discovered a Bengal tiger locked in a cage.
Police officers, who found the endangered animal after a tip-off from a member of the public, say it is a “complete mystery” how the tiger got there.
They were searching a property in the municipality of Chilapa de Alvarez, in the state of Guerrero, when they heard a strange noise.
The female tiger was found inside a locked room and police suspect it was illegally owned.
The animal was taken to a zoo where it is being cared for while police carry out their investigation.
The owner of the property told investigators he did not know who had brought the tiger to his house.
TIGER TALES The last recorded sighting of a tiger in South Korea took place in Gyeonggi Province's Daedok Mountains, in 1921.
But this has not prevented Lim Sun-nam from devoting every spare moment of the past seven years to searching for evidence that this dramatic felid exists in his country.
Having seen claw marks in a tree that he is convinced were made by a tiger, as well as 30 or so tiger-like footprints during February 1998 in snow on the remote Hanbuk Mountains, he returns here each week in a truck containing a sound machine which emits the mating call of a male tiger as a lure, and checks a camera set up with a rabbit as bait.
So far, no tiger has responded to either the aural or the living lure, but Lim Sun-nam believes there are still at least 10 tigers in his country.
He also claims to have e-mails from United States soldiers stationed here describing tiger noises and smells, and that there is even a video of a tiger pawing a fence along the 38th Parallel.
Yet sightings continue to this day among villagers and poachers, who have been interviewed at length by Didik.
They have even given him tiger teeth, skin, and whiskers, some of which may be from tigers killed only months earlier.
And he has collected faeces and found footprints in caves and other localities that tigers allegedly still frequent.
Since beginning his search in 1997, Didik claims to have seen a tiger himself once, albeit briefly, during a 14-day survey in Meru Betiri National Park.
Moreover, the Indonesian Institute of Sciences has apparently formally identified hair samples as Javan tiger in origin.
NHPA/KEVIN SCHAFER FRIDAY, JULY 25, 2014 TODAY IN HISTORY Today is Friday, July 25, the 206th day of 2014.
French aviator Louis Bleriot became the first person to fly an airplane across the English Channel, traveling from Calais to Dover in 37 minutes.
Austrian Chancellor Engelbert Dollfuss was assassinated by pro-Nazi Austrians in a failed coup attempt.
Benito Mussolini was dismissed as premier of Italy by King Victor Emmanuel III, and placed under arrest.
The Italian liner Andrea Doria collided with the Swedish passenger ship Stockholm off the New England coast late at night and began sinking; at least 51 people were killed.
A Woolworth’s store in Greensboro, North Carolina, that had been the scene of a sit-in protest against its whites-only lunch counter dropped its segregation policy.
Louise Joy Brown, the first “test tube baby,” was born in Oldham, England; she’d been conceived through the technique of in-vitro fertilization.
Soviet cosmonaut Svetlana Savitskaya became the first woman to walk in space as she carried out more than three hours of experiments outside the orbiting space station Salyut 7.
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Jordan’s King Hussein signed a declaration at the White House ending their countries’ 46year-old formal state of war.
Israelis formed a human chain stretching 55 miles from Gaza to Jerusalem to protest Prime Minister Ariel Sharon’s Gaza Strip withdrawal plan.
Protesters across the world called on Iran to end its clampdown on opposition activists.
This sparks first Northern War when Sweden's King Charles X invades Poland.
Courier De L'Amerique becomes the first French newspaper to be published in the United States.
United States Congress establishes the Department of Foreign Affairs, forerunner of the Department of State.
Revolutionary leader Maximilien de Robespierre is arrested by his opponents in Paris and tries to commit suicide, but fails.
Spain signs peace treaty with France, ceding its part of Santo Domingo.
July Revolution starts in Paris in reaction to restrictive policies of Charles X, who is forced from the throne after three days of fighting.
Opium War between China and Britain begins after Chinese authorities seize and burn British . cargoes of opium.
Russians invade Danubian principalities at request of Turkey to put down revolts there.
The first successful trans-Atlantic telegraph cable between England and the United States is completed.
Orville Wright tests the United States Army's first airplane for one hour, twelve minutes.
An armistice is signed at Panmunjom, after three years of negotiations.
Britain and Egypt agree on terms to end 72 years of British control of Suez Canal.
United States planes carry out first attacks against antiaircraft missile sites in North Vietnam.
SATURDAY, JULY 26, 2014 TODAY IN HISTORY Today is Saturday, July 26, the 207th day of 2014.
United States Attorney General Charles J Bonaparte ordered creation of a force of special agents that was a forerunner of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The Edison Studios production ""What Happened to Mary,"" one of the first, if not very first, movie serials, was released with Mary Fuller in the title role.
King Farouk I of Egypt abdicated in the wake of a coup led by Gamal Abdel Nasser.
Fidel Castro began his revolt against Fulgencio Batista with an unsuccessful attack on an army barracks in eastern Cuba.
The Italian liner Andrea Doria sank off New England, some 11 hours after colliding with the Swedish liner Stockholm; at least 51 people died.
Teamsters president Jimmy Hoffa was convicted in federal court in Chicago of fraud and conspiracy in the handling of a union pension fund; six co-defendants were found guilty of conspiracy.
Apollo 15 was launched from Cape Kennedy on America's fourth manned mission to the moon.
Mark Wellman, a 29-year-old paraplegic, reached the summit of El Capitan in Yosemite National Park after hauling himself up the granite cliff six inches at a time over nine days.
Mohammed Mamdouh Helmi Qutb, an Egyptian diplomat held hostage by militants in Iraq for three days, was released after successful negotiations.
Sarah Palin stepped down as governor of Alaska to write a book and build a right-of-center coalition, but left her long-term political plans unclear.
Alberto Contador won the Tour de France for the second time in three years; Lance Armstrong placed third.
Rickey Henderson and Jim Rice were inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame along with the late Joe Gordon.
SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 2014 TODAY IN HISTORY Today is Saturday, August 9, the 221st day of 2013.
The United States and Canada resolved a border dispute by signing the WebsterAshburton Treaty.
Henry David Thoreau's ""Walden, which described Thoreau's experiences while living near Walden Pond in Massachusetts, was first published.
President Franklin D Roosevelt signed an executive order nationalizing silver.
Three days after the atomic bombing of Hiroshima, Japan, the United States exploded a nuclear device over Nagasaki, killing an estimated 74,000 people.
Vice President Gerald R Ford became the nation's 38th chief executive, as President Richard Nixon's resignation took effect.
A federal judge in Washington ordered John W Hinckley Jr., who'd been acquitted o shooting President Ronald Reagan and three others by reason of insanity, committed to a mental hospital.
President Ronald Reagan nominated Lauro Cavazos to be secretary of education; Cavazos became the first Hispanic to serve in the Cabinet.
Jerry Garcia, lead singer of the Grateful Dead, died in Forest Knolls, California, of a heart attack at age 53.
A corroded cooling pipe burst at a Japanese nuclear power plant, killing ive workers.
Oscar-nominated movie and TV composer David Raksin died in Van Nuys, California, at age 92.
President Barack Obama flew to Guadalajara, Mexico, for a two-day speed summit with Mexican President Felipe Calderon and Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper.
Iraqi authorities arrested British contractor Danny Fitzsimons in the shooting deaths of two co-workers in Baghdad's protected Green Zone.
Jennifer Song became the second woman to win two United States Golf Association championships in the same year, beating Jennifer Johnson 3 and 1 in the United States Women s Amateur final.
President Barack Obama promised to „ work with Congress on ""appropriate reforms for the domestic surveillance programs that stirred criticism at home and abroad.
President Obama signed into law a measure resto inq lower interest rates for student loans.
Infamous drug lord Rafael Caro Quintero walked free after 28 years in prison when a Mexican court overturned his 40-year sentence for the 1985 kidnap and killing of United States Drug Enforcement Agency agent Enrique Camarena.
French troops, aided by the Swedish army, invade Bavaria to bring Thirty Years’ War to a close.
British forces under Duke of Marlborough and Savoy’s Prince Eugene defeat French at Toumai in Belgium.
Elections are held in the Philippines for the country’s first assembly.
German saboteurs blow up munitions plant on Black Tom Island, near Jersey City, N.J., before United States’ entry in World War I 1930: Host Uruguay wins first soccer World Cup, at Montevideo’s Centenario Stadium, beating Argentina 4-2.
The USS Indianapolis, which had just delivered key components of the Hiroshima atomic bomb to the Pacific island of Tinian, is torpedoed by a Japanese submarine.
Amnesty is proclaimed in Philippines for Huk rebels, but they refuse to comply.
The United States bomber offensive against North Vietnam is extended to the demilitarized zone separating North and South Vietnam, bringing new Communist protests and adding to the diplomatic tensions.
United States Apollo 15 astronauts David R Scott and James B Irwin land on the moon.
Greece, Tbrkey and Britain sign declaration for cease-fire agreement on Cyprus.
Syrian soldiers of Arab League’s peacekeeping force in Lebanon set up gun positions around two main Palestinian refugee camps to help control guerrillas.
Panamanian President Aristides Royo Sanchez resigns two years before the end of his six-year term under pressure from the country’s military leaders.
Bomb explodes at busy shopping plaza outside Johannesburg, South Africa, injuring dozens of people.
Poland’s government announces controversial program to end food price controls and meat rationing.
Robinson of Trinidad offers to resign, call elections and grant his captors amnesty.
United Nations weapons experts report finding 46,000 chemical weapons in Iraq, about four times what Baghdad had declared 1993: Guards at a Lima, Peru, museum walk out with golden relics of the Incas — most of which they later melt down.
Rebel Serbs in Croatia retreat and promise not to attack government troops in an effort to prevent attacks on their stronghold.
Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic says a fierce offensive that took much of Kosovo back from ethnic Albanian separatists is over.
The worst blackout in Taiwanese history cuts off electricity to 7 million households — one-third of the island — causing panic and fear that it might be under attack by China.
A collapsed utility tower is the culprit and it is unrelated to recent tensions with the mainland.
North and South Korea announce they will reopen border liaison offices and reconnect a rail line linking the two countries.
President Joseph Kabila of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwandan President Paul Kagame sign a peace agreement intended to bring an end to the devastating civil war that started in 1998.
Iranian Vice President Mohammad Ali Abtahi acknowledges that Zahra Kazemi, a freelance photographer who held both Canadian and Iranian citizenship, was murdered while detained by the Iranian government.
Kazemi had been arrested June 23 for taking photographs of protesters in Tehran.
Israeli missiles crush several buildings where Lebanese villagers are sleeping, killing at least 56 people, more than half of them children, in an attack against the militant group Hezbollah.
Maharashtra state government bans domesticated elephants from India’s largest city, Mumbai, saying that forcing the animals to walk the city’s chaotic, crowded and polluted streets is an act of cruelty.
A team of European scientists unveils a new method for extracting images hidden under old masters’ paintings, re-creating a color portrait of a woman’s face unseen since Vincent van Gogh painted over it in 1887.
Austrian and Russian troops under Francis Duke of Coburg and Count Alexander Suvorov defeat TUrks at Focshani in Romania.
Venezuelan Republic falls to Spanish forces, and Francisco de Miranda is arrested.
United States troops break through the German lines around the Normandy beachhead, opening the way to liberating the rest of France.
Thai Lap Thanh, of Frenchbacked South Vietnam, are killed 97 kilometers south of Saigon by a Communist suicide bomber.
Britain and West Germany sign 10-year agreement on nuclear cooperation.
Britain agrees to establish a wider Malaysian federation on the Malay Pehinsula.
United States Ranger 7 spacecraft transmits to Earth first closeup pictures of the moon.
Two United States Apollo 15 astronauts begin three days of moon exploration in an electric car.
Cease-fire takes effect between Ihrkey and Greece in fighting on Cyprus.
Gunman shoots his way into Iraqi embassy in Paris and holds hostages for several hours before surrendering to French police.
Eleven people are executed in Tehran, Iran, after being convicted of participating in an attempted anti-government coup earlier in the month.
Britain’s cabinet unanimously supports Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher’s resistance to stiff sanctions against South Africa.
Pier jammed with thousands of festival travelers collapses at ferry terminal in northwest Malaysia, killing at least 30 people and injuring about 370.
Thousands of residents flee Beirut, Lebanon, as fierce shelling continues.
United States government panel approves use of gene therapy for first time in treatment of human disease.
United States President George Bush and Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev sign a longrange nuclear weapons reduction pact at Moscow summit.
United Nations Security Council approves possible U.S.-led invasion of Haiti.
Hundreds of Israeli police and soldiers drag Jewish settlers away from an encampment on a West Bank hilltop where they protested the emerging Israel-Palestine Liberation Organization accord.
African leaders agree to impose sanctions on Burundi for the July 25 military coup that ousted the country’s fragile coalition government.
As Israelis bury the 13 dead from the worst terrorist bombing in more than a year, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu threatens to send troops into the autonomous Palestinian areas.
South Africa ends the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s public exploration of apartheid’s horrors after two years of hearings that laid bare decades of massacres, beatings and torture.
United States Senate Foreign Relations Committee holds hearings on United States plans to attack Iraq and oust Iraqi President Saddam Hussein.
The Vatican issues a 12-page document strongly urging Roman Catholic lawmakers worldwide to reject legislation sanctioning same-sex civil unions and adoption rights.
World Trade Organization members approve a plan to end export subsidies on farm products and cut import duties across the world, a key step toward a comprehensive global accord that has been discussed since 2001, trade officials say.
Lebanese Prime Minister Fuad Saniora visits Syria in an attempt to repair relations damaged after Damascus was forced to end its 29-year military presence in Lebanon.
The United Nations Security Council passes a resolution giving Iran one month to suspend uranium enrichment or face the threat of economic and diplomatic sanctions.
Deployment of British troops to support Northern Ireland police, codenamed Operation Banner, officially ends after 38 years.
Haitian lawmakers ratify Michele Pierre-Louis to be the country’s prime minister, ending more than three months of political bickering and deadlock in Parliament.
A string of bombings targets Shiite worshippers in the Baghdad area, killing at least 29 people in an apparently coordinated attack against followers of an antiUnited States cleric who were blamed for some of Iraq’s worst sectarian violence.
The threat of disease looms as some evacuees arrive in camps with fever, diarrhea and skin problems.
Syrian security forces backed by. tanks and snipers launch a ferocious assault on defiant cities and towns, killing at least 70 people and possibly many more as the regime raced to crush dissent ahead of Ramadan.
A.D. 64: the Great Fire of Rome began, consuming most of the city for about a week.
The English Parliament passed an act declaring the authority of the pope void in England.
President Harry S Truman signed a Presidential Succession Act which placed the speaker of the House and the Senate president pro tempore next in the line of succession after the vice president.
Edward M Kennedy, D-Mass., left a party on Chappaquiddick Island near Martha’s Vineyard with Mary Jo Kopechne, some time later, Kennedy’s car went off a bridge into the water.
At the Montreal Olympics, Romanian gymnast Nadia Comaneci received the first-ever perfect score of 10 with her routine on uneven parallel bars.
Gunman James Huberty opened fire at a McDonald’s fast food restaurant in San Ysidro, California, killing 21 people before being shot dead by police.
Walter F Mondale won the Democratic presidential nomination in San Francisco.
Actress Rebecca Schaeffer, 21, was shot to death at her Los Angeles home by obsessed fan Robert Bardo, who was later sentenced to life in prison.
Arnold Schwarzenegger would not apologize for mocking certain lawmakers as “girlie men,” despite criticisms from Democrats that the remark was sexist and homophobic.
Todd Hamilton gained a playoff victory over Ernie Els to win the British Open.
Former Environmental Protection Agency chief Anne Gorsuch Burford died in Aurora, Colorado, at age 62.
The Taliban posted a video of an American soldier who’d gone missing June 30, 2009 from his base in eastern Afghanistan and was later confirmed to have been captured; in the recording, the soldier (later identified as Pfc.
Authorities in Tennessee arrested Japob Shaffer in the deaths of six people, five of whom were found slain near Fayetteville; the sixth body was discovered in Huntsville, Alabama.
Tennessee became the first state to be readmitted to the Union after the Civil War.
The Treaty of Lausanne, which settled the boundaries of modern Turkey, was concluded in Switzerland.
During a visit to Moscow, Vice President Richard Nixon engaged in his famous “Kitchen Debate” with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev.
The Apollo 11 astronauts — two of whom had been the first men to set foot on the moon — splashed down safely in the Pacific.
Hulda Crooks, a 91-year-old mountaineer from California, became the oldest woman to conquer Mount Fuji, Japan’s highest peak.
A gunman burst into the United States Capitol, killing two police officers before being shot and captured.
Nine coal miners became trapped in a flooded tunnel of the Quecreek Mine in western Pennsylvania; the story ended happily 77 hours later with the rescue of all nine.
Without promising what specific steps he would take, President George W Bush said in his weekly radio address that his administration was committed to relying on the recommendations of the September 11 commission in waging the war on terrorism.
Former Nixon administration official Fred LaRue, who served a prison term for Watergate, died in Biloxi, Mississippi, at age 75.
Trying to tamp down a national uproar over race, President Barack Obama acknowledged using unfortunate words in declaring that Cambridge, Massachusetts, police had “acted stupidly” in arresting black scholar Henry Louis Gates Jr., adding he’d invited the Harvard professor and Sgt.
A highspeed train crash outside Santiago de Compostela in northwest Spain killed 79 people.
It was announced by Kensington Palace that the newborn son of Prince William and Kate, the Duchess of Cambridge, would be named George Alexander Louis.
RAQ PICKS NEW PRESIDENT; NRINE IN MOSUL DESTROYED Iraqi lawmakers elected a vet:ran Kurdish politician Thursday o replace long-serving Jalal Tala)ani as the country’s new presilent in the latest step toward brming a new government.
Meanwhile, a series of attacks dlled dozens of people, and Islamic militants destroyed a Muslim shrine traditionally said to be the burial place of the prophet Jonah, underscoring the overwhelming challenges facing the divided nation.
Fouad Massoum, 76, one of the founders of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan party led by the previous president, Talabani, accepted the position after winning twothirds of the votes in the parliament, noting the “huge security, political and economic tasks” facing the next government.
As Massoum was named president, the alQaeda breakaway Islamic State group blew up the Mosque of the Prophet Younis, or Jonah, several residents told the Associated Press.
The militants first ordered everyone out of the mosque, then blew it up, the residents said.
The Bakersfield Californian A13 Tomb robbers a dying breed in Italy following crackdowns BY ARIEL DAVID The Associated Press ANGUILLARA SABAZIA, Italy — It used to be so easy for the “tombaroli,” Italy’s tomb raiders.
Pietro Casasanta had no Indiana Jones-type escapes from angry natives or booby-trapped temples.
He worked undisturbed in daylight with a bulldozer, posing as a construction worker to become one of Italy’s most successful plunderers of archaeological treasures.
When he wasn’t in prison, the convicted looter operated for decades in this countryside area outside Rome, benefiting from what he says was lax surveillance that allowed him to dig into ancient Roman villas and unearth statues, pottery and other artifacts which he then sold for millions of dollars on the illegal antiquities market.
Casasanta, 69, was the prince of the tombaroli, as the looters are known in Italy — and some of his finds are priceless.
Police and prosecutors believe they are beginning to see results in efforts to combat the traffic of stolen or illegally excavated antiquities which they say made their way to the world’s top museums and collectors.
Giovanni Nistri, who heads the art squad with the Carabinieri, Italy’s paramilitary police, said that in 2006 his unit discovered fewer than 40 illegal digs.
Increased monitoring of archaeological sites has landed diggers like Casasanta in jail.
GREGORIO BORGIA /AP Pietro Casasanta stands near the ruins of a Roman palace in Anguillara Sabazia, near Rome, last month.
And Italy has been pressuring some United States museums to return artifacts.
It has put the former curator of Los Angeles’ J Paul Getty Museum, Marion True, aad art dealer Robert Hecht, on trial in Rome over allegations of knowingly receiving dozens of archaeological treasures that were smuggled out despite laws making all antiquities found in Italy state property.
Negotiations between Italy and the Getty have so far failed to yield a deal.
Italy’s efforts have scared museums and the international art market into following stricter guidelines for acquisitions and cutting ties with merchants suspected of buying from the tombaroli, Nistri said.
Over the last years the crackdown has been felt on the legal art market, with buyers concentrating more on objects coming from private collections or other legitimate sources, said Mieke Zilverberg, chairwoman of the International Association of Dealers of Ancient Art based in Amsterdam.
Zilverberg said dealers and museums are learning their lesson, but noted that the blame for the looting rests also with authorities who didn’t monitor what was happening in their own archaeological backyards.
When Casasanta started out in the 1950s he would sell his finds at tiny stalls that openly dealt in antiquities on the streets of Rome.
Too poor to get an education, he used part of his earnings to buy secondhand books about archaeology, fueling his growing passion.
The son of a mason, Casasanta first got interested in ancient relics at 14, as he accompanied a surveyor on outings in the countryside around Anguillara, an area rich in Etruscan and Roman remains.
As he surveyed the fields, pieces of pottery and sculpture brought up by the plow caught his attention.
His targets were usually Roman villas, on which he worked with a bulldozer and a couple of helpers.
At such sites he uncovered statues of emperors and gods, as well as what he considers his greatest find — a 4th-century-B.C. ivory mask representing the Greek divinity Apollo.
He unearthed the statue in 1994 and sold it to a Germany-based dealer, although Casasanta maintains he was cheated and received less than a tenth of the $10 million agreed upon.
In revenge, he reported the dealer to authorities and Italian police ultimately recovered the mask in London in 2003.
Craig J Lennox Tomb Sweeping Day is a time for families to celebrate life, and to pay respects to their ancestors.
Start the day right, by commemorating your ancestors and other loved ones who’ve passed on.
April 5th is a day to visit their graves, pull weeds, and sweep the grounds.
Offerings of food, rice wine, and paper money will all help ensure the spirits are smiling.
If you’re unable to visit their graves, one popular way to pay respect is to bum paper money on a street comer at night, which is a regular sight around China.
Other ways to celebrate this holiday are by enjoying the nascent spring air.
A picnic in the park, or a little kite flying, would be appropriate, and you’ll see the parks around China foil of people doing just this.
Questions raised about tombstone removal from small historic cemetery in Holmdel By MICHELLE GLADDEN • STAFF WRITER • September 6, 2010 HOLMDEL — When Terence Wall's 9-year-old daughter told him tombstones from a historic cemetery in their Beau Ridge neighborhood on Laurel Avenue had been removed, he didn't believe her.
But when the lifelong township resident and former township committeeman went down Saturday afternoon to the place he and his daughter often visited, he learned it was not the exaggeration of a child's imagination.
Wall said he was outraged because the 60 or so plots provided a historical accounting of township forefathers.
But Beau Ridge Association president Edward Esler said everything was done by the letter of the association's laws.
However, one member of the Holmdel Historical Society questioned whether the development association notified and received approval from Holmdel municipal officials to move the headstones.
Holmdel Historical Society Vice President Peggy Laskey said the society had not been notified of the gravestone marker removal.
Laskey also questioned whether the association went before any municipal body or official such as the Holmdel Planning Board or Zoning Board to get official approval on record.
The tombstones are to be replaced with white flat placards that will lie flush on the ground where the sandstones once stood, association officials said.
Wall said that from a distance you no longer can see that it is a grave site.
August 07, 2014 01:42pm ET Nosebleeds are common among children and young adults. but one young man's frequent nosebleeds turned out to have a rather unusual cause.
He had a tootn in ms nose, according to a new report of his case. extra tooth that had somehow ended up growing in his nose, according to tne repo The patient had a well -aligned and complete set ofteethjn his mouth j _accojjingjto_ r the report.
The doctors pulled out the extra tooth after putting the man under general anesthesia, and the patient completely healed, and had no more nosebleeds three months later, according to the report, published in July in the American Journal of Case Reports.
Extra teeth are not that uncommon, and may even grow upside dpwn, but they rarely qrow all the way into the nasal cavity, said Dr.
John Hell stein, a dentist and professor of oral pathology at the university of Iowa, who wasn t involved in the case. ""it’s an unusual case of an extra tooth certainly, the most impressive intranasal photo i think I've ever seen of one.
I've never seen the tooth actually in there, Hell stein told Live science.
It is surprising that the nasal tooth had gone unnoticed for such a long time, Hell stein said.
Somewhere between 0.15 percent and 3. percent of people have more teeth than normal, studies have found, ""we see several cases each year, t Hellstein^said.
But for it to have erupted up and through the nasal floor — that s unusual.
The patient in this case likely had a mesiodens, a common type of extra tooth, which is found around incisor teeth, Hell stein said.
One condition that is associated with extra teeth is cleft lip and palate, which is a facial development birth defect and is often repaired by surgery.
Officials have closed one of the city's most popular swimming holes indefinitely because of a rare toxic algae bloom that poses health risks to people and dogs.
November 12, 2002 11:00am EST by: Carey N Vicenti / Columnist / Indian Country Today The modern era in Indian law has come to an end.
The gathering rumblings of the past year have called us to abandon litigation as a means to preserve our independence and to provide protection to our Native interests.
Take cover, for the United States Supreme Court shall make use of its darkest secrets.
In its efforts to conceal a shift in power from the federal government to the states, it has no concern for our place in the federal union.
The Supreme Court has always been a secretive organ that has cautiously guarded the knowledge about itself, its members and its workings.
It recedes into the background of American politics so effectively that its most prominent public image comes from the words it pronounces in the opinions it issues.
It spins narratives that often stray far from the truth, but it is in these narratives that law is born.
These narratives, euphemistically called ""opinions of the Court,"" are frequently cover for the range of odd political theories espoused by its various members.
They employ ""secrets"" of decision-making that make the politics hide well under the camouflage of detached adjudication.
For instance, in one of its oldest decisions, Marbury Madison, it played down the fact that the United States Constitution did not give it the power to review the actions of Congress and the President.
In the early days, under the leadership of Chief Justice John Marshall, the associate justices were not allowed to render dissenting opinions.
And when this prohibition against dissent was lifted, strange results fell into place.
In the Cherokee Nation Georgia case, two justices backed Marshall’s description of Indian tribes as ""domestic dependent nations,"" two others felt that tribes consisted of conquered peoples, but the remaining two felt that the Cherokee people had proven well that they were entitled to be considered as part of that international club of ""independent"" and ""foreign"" nations.
We always forget the dissenters, and those who didn’t entirely join Marshall.
In 1831 when Cherokee Nation was decided, a few small ""domestic dependent nations"" were appearing in political discussions; Monaco, San Marino, Andorra, Luxembourg were all on the verge of attaining that special status as recognized independent nations within the European political theater.
For American Indians, though, we would become relegated to a wardship status, never to reach political maturity, perpetually the unwanted wards of an increasingly callous trustee.
The Supreme Court created the fictive characteristics of the Federal-lndian relationship, yet, in the past two centuries, has withdrawn at every attempt on our part to enforce the sketchy contours of the Court’s weak philosophy.
In more recent years, with cases like A-1 Contractors, Hicks, and Atkinson Trading Post, it has engaged its secret powers to ignore those seminal cases often referred to as the ""Marshall Trilogy,"" from which we get the now familiar concepts of trust and guardianship.
In the Marshall years the Supreme Court did say in Worcester Georgia that the reach of State law did not enter into tribal lands, yet each one of these new decisions stands for a retreat from the principled stance of Worcester.
Rather than commenting on the underlying logic of Worcester, the Court ignores the case altogether.
It has ceased referring to Worcester, as it articulates its recent logic.
Take care that Worcester may never be overruled but ignored into abandonment altogether.
A more troubling secret power of the Supreme Court has been in its ability to transform a case.
Using this technique, the Court makes a relatively small case into something larger.
The case of United States Montana is the classic embodiment of this secret power of transformation.
An ""exception"" to the real rule had miraculously become ""the rule"" itself.
As an appeals court, this is considered within the Court to be the most drastic of actions.
No law professor in the country can describe the necessary predicates to the overruling of a case.
But this secret remains guarded because it is one of the primary forces behind American litigation.
If the secrets to its mechanics were disclosed, cases would be settled or abandoned, and the dialectic engine of the adversarial process would grind to a halt.
Last year, as Justices O’Connor and Breyer met with Indian jurists and leaders, Justice O’Connor was asked point blank whether the Court was willing to re-examine some of the older, more troubling cases in Indian law, and, perhaps, overrule them.
She said that ""maybe"" it was time for tribes to approach Congress to seek a legislative solution.
Oddly, she was somewhat laying the blame for bad law on Congress when the real culprit was an uninspired and timid Supreme Court.
The trust relationship, that grew out of the incidental Marshall description of the relationship between tribes and the federal government as ""like"" a guardian and ward, is a concept coming out of English law.
A trusteeship in the English courts was always monitored by a supervising court.
She was signaling that the Court, consistent with its late-1 9th century stance, would not perform that function, even with an added century to reflect upon its lack of prudence.
She was also saying that the Court would be unwilling to overrule statements it made a century ago about the unlimited powers of Congress no matter how lacking in legal support they may have been.
But worse, she was unwilling to admit that the powers of Indian tribes would ever again rise to Constitutional proportions.
In other words, the politics of federal-lndian relations could conceivably be settled by Congressional decree without the protection of any court.
Congress could forever eradicate tribal governments in fact and leave only the hollow mention of ""Indian tribes"" within the Constitution as evidence of our political existence.
It is that the United States Supreme Court does not consider itself to bear any social responsibility for the fate of American Indian peoples.
The United States Constitution was built upon an essential theory that the weak were always protected through some Constitutional mechanism, whether it was through a bicameral Congress, residual State powers or a system of civil rights.
The status of Indian tribes cannot be relegated to a state of pupilage by judicial decree with any intellectual honesty without a backstop being installed to conform to this essential democratic theory.
It is the function of the Supreme Court, in the exercise of its ""judicial powers"" to detect iniquities in the administration of the American political system and to apply the language and theory of the Constitution to correct those shortcomings.
In regards to the Native peoples of this country, we have been committed to the netherworld of a wardship status.
The recent decisions of the Supreme Court have deprived us of our potential for political vitality.
The Supreme Court does not make use of commentary no matter who is the source.
American law is a system of incremental legal reform, and, as the Supreme Court can plainly see, every commentator urges monumental change.
In this post-modern era, we appear to have no choice but reluctantly to abide by Justice O’Connor’s suggestion.
The post-modern era portends more than legislative changes it may require changes in posture and attitude.
More importantly, it demands our vision and solidarity, and other things we presently do not have.
Judge Carey N Vicenti, a member of the Jicarilla Apache Nation of northwest New Mexico, currently serves as an Assistant Professor of Sociology at Fort Lewis College in Durango, Colo.
He sits as a judicial official for several American Indian nations and is a columnist for Indian Country Today.
As Urey Tories, realizing they hint no speech AppleTree Grower Inspires Folklore By Rick Bromer In September of 1797, twentythree-year-old John Chapman decided to leave his family’s farm in Massachusetts and go west to seek his fortune on the frontier.
Graham’s History of Richland County, Ohio, published in 1880. pouring into western Pennsylvania in search of cheap land, and Chapman thought that he could make money by starting an apple tree nursery there and selling seedling trees to other settlers as they arrived.
John Chapman as pictured in Harper’s New Monthly Magazine in November of 1871.
The artist portrayed him wearing a belted robe that does not match any eyewitness descriptions of Chapman ’s usual dress.
Chapman knew that almost every farmer who settled in the west would plant a large orchard in order to produce alcoholic apple cider.
Americans did not eat many apples in Chapman’s day, but they liked to drink cider with every meal.
Even small children drank hard cider with breakfast, dinner, and supper, because it was thought to be the healthiest beverage available.
Unlike creek water and unpasteurized milk, which often harbored deadly germs, cider drunk in moderation seldom made anyone sick.
Alcohol-free “sweet” cider was more wholesome than hard cider, but without refrigeration it fermented after a few days in the barrel.
Chapman calculated that he could sell thousands of young apple trees on the frontier, where every settler would want to plant at least fifty fruit trees to provide his family with a year’s supply of cider.
Most settlers would plant even more trees— perhaps two hundred— to produce extra cider for sale.
Chapman knew that settlers could start their orchards from seed, but he reasoned that most would prefer the faster and easier method of planting young trees.
He hoped that he could sell thousands of two-year-old seedlings for six cents each in western Pennsylvania.
To get started, Chapman visited a Massachusetts cider mill during the fall apple harvest.
He collected all of the apple seeds that he wanted, free of charge, by picking through the waste pulp dumped by the mill.
With a big sack of apple seeds among the provisions in his backpack, Chapman began hiking west in late October of 1797.
The weather was mild during the first weeks of his hike, but in mid-November, after he had passed the last settlements of the Susquehanna River valley, Chapman encountered a blizzard.
He was hiking along a mountain ridge in central Pennsylvania, days away from the nearest cabins, when the storm hit.
Chapman built a fire and a leanto shelter, and then he relaxed on a bed of boughs while the wind howled around him for days.
When the weather cleared, Chapman discovered that it was impossible for him to resume his journey because of massive snowdrifts that buried the trail more than a yard deep in most places. page eleven Another traveler might have been alarmed by this life-threatening difficulty, but Chapman was an exceptionally calm and reflective young man.
He returned to his fire, stretched out on his bed of boughs, and gazed thoughtfully at the snowcovered beech trees that towered around his campsite.
He got up and used his knife to cut the beech branches into flexible wands.
He sliced the hem of his jacket into strips, bent the branches into the shape of snowshoes, and fastened them with strips of cloth from his jacket.
After a full day of tinkering, he had made a serviceable pair of snowshoes.
With these laced to his feet, he walked over the drifts for a week until he reached his destination— the future site of Warren, Pennsylvania, where a land company had opened an office in a cabin.
The handful of settlers at Warren were so impressed by Chapman’s improvised snowshoes that the story of how he had survived the blizzard became a permanent part of local folklore.
That winter Chapman chose a site for his tree nursery at the place where the Big Brokenstraw Creek joins the Allegheny River, about six miles from Warren.
With an axe as his only tool, he killed the big trees on three acres of land by “girdling” each tree, slicing off the bark in a circle clear around each trunk.
He then built a rough fence of logs and brush to keep deer out of his clearing.
In the spring he planted apple seeds on the fenced land. three acres of ground for a nursery.
Chapman probably did most of his work of site selection, tree girdling, and fence-building in the fall and winter months.
By spring he would have multiple clearings ready for planting, and he could travel swiftly by canoe from one clearing to another, to get all of his seeds into the ground at the right time of year.
Chapman’s younger brother, Lawrence, became interested in his enterprise and for a while accompanied Chapman on his nursery-planting expeditions into the wilderness.
Eventually Lawrence grew tired of camping in the forest, and he abandoned the project.
But John Chapman remained so enthusiastically committed to tree planting that people on the frontier began to call him “Johnny Appleseed,” a nickname that he liked.
He was an amiable man who did a lot of talking whenever he got the chance, but he did not mind solitude.
When he was not doing the strenuous work of clearing land for nurseries, he enjoyed loafing beside his fire, observing nature or reading.
By 1802 Chapman had planted nurseries at many scattered locations along the Allegheny and Ohio Rivers and their tributaries, and he was earning steady income from the sale of seedling trees to new settlers.
He had become good at guessing where it* „,„ a i;uu, were treacherously false friends.
All that is known for certain about Chapman’s interaction with the Indians is that he spoke Algonquian dialects fluently and that he was able to travel freely from one Indian town to another in Ohio during the War of 1812, when any other white American would have been killed and scalped.
Chapman’s habit of traveling with few possessions may have been a sensible and practical solution to the challenges of frontier life, but it also had a philosophical basis.
He was profoundly influenced by the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg, a Swedish scientist who became a Christian mystic.
Chapman agreed with Swedenborg, and also with the ancient Greek philosopher Plato, that the material world is an imperfect reflection of an ideal spiritual world, and that attachment to material things leads to unhappiness.
When he visited a frontier cabin and was invited to sleep in a bed, he would politely decline and instead lie down to sleep on the floor by the fire.
He refused to harm any animal, and he lived on a vegetarian diet that included wild nuts, roots, and herbs.
He told one settler that, when he had been trapped by ice on an island in the Ohio River for several months, Swedenborg’s intellectual and theological notions, such as his doctrine that the Bible should not be taken literally, but should instead be read as a metaphoric guide to Platonic philosophy.
When Chapman discoursed on such topics, people on the Ohio frontier listened politely, but they seldom made much effort to figure out what he was talking about.
According to folklore, Chapman was extremely religious, but his ideas about heaven and hell were unconventional, and he got into many baffling, complicated debates with / fundamentalist preachers.
Despite his peculiarities, Chapman was a well-respected man on the frontier.
Everybody knew that he was a successful businessman with a good education.
Although he habitually went barefoot and dressed in threadbare clothing and oddlooking homemade hats, he always looked clean and tidy, with his long hair neatly parted in the middle.
His agents had standing orders to sell seedlings on credit to anyone who could not pay cash, and Chapman never made the slightest effort to collect a debt, so payment was effectively voluntary.
Chapman also made gifts of cash to needy people; he once handed fifty dollars to one astonished widow.
To spare lame horses from slaughter, he bought them and arranged for them to be put out to pasture.
Chapman became a hero to many frontier settlers during the War of 1812, when he gave white settlers diverse varieties of bitter, inedible crabapples, but that was fine with him.
He was not interested in raising trees that yielded sweet, edible apples, because such trees cannot normally be grown from seeds; they have to be propagated artificially by grafting.
Chapman disliked grafting because he considered it unnatural, and he knew that his customers would be perfectly satisfied with bitter crabapples because they made good cider.
That summer Chapman’s seedling trees flourished, but few new settlers moved into the area around Warren.
Chapman decided that he had chosen the wrong place to plant his nursery, since there were not enough customers.
To be sure of locating in an area that would attract plenty of customers for his seedlings, Chapman decided that he would need to plant nurseries at many places in western Pennsylvania and eastern Ohio.
Chapman spent the ensuing years planting tree nurseries at various locations in western Pennsylvania and eastern Ohio.
Every fall he would collect bushels of apple seeds from eastern cider mills.
He would carry these seeds to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where he would load them into a dugout canoe.
He would then paddle up the Allegheny River or down the Ohio River until he located a promising site for a future town, where he would go ashore and spend a few weeks preparing two or i'tgpA Rwrl 4o hereby apply far the pur* — Section numbered N of Range MB* *** # in Towttabtp numbered iA f„ , ~ fered %• cnMaiaiog acre*, according to the return* of the jlttmyer General, for whit Rtgttter hi give at the rate of one dollar and twenty* five cent* per.
ROBERT BRACK ENRID^E, Regiato r of tforland Oftce, do heraby certify,** the lot above described, contain* / _ acres, aa mentioned, and that the price agreed upon la one dollar and tweety-ftve cent* per acre. nurseries usually stood right beside a growing town.
Sometimes he would obtain legal title to the land on which he planted a nursery, but usually he would not bother to do that.
He did not remain long at any of his nurseries but hired local settlers to serve as his agents, tending the profitable seedlings and selling them on commission.
Despite Chapman’s increasing prosperity, he continued to lead an itinerant life, spending months every year traveling . up wilderness tributaries of the Ohio River in dugout canoes.
His growing attachment to his primitive way of life left him with little use for the hoard of cash that he was accumulating.
Since outlaw gangs occasionally preyed on river traffic, Chapman usually carried no money, keeping his cash hidden at various locations in the woods.
He carried nothing that anybody might be tempted to steal— no gun, no traps, no coat, no shoes— nothing that he valued except for his books and his apple seeds, which nobody else wanted.
Chapman’s lack of tangible possessions not only kept him safe from outlaws but also smoothed his relations with the Indians whose villages he visited on his travels.
Most Indians believed that a true friend would gladly share all of his possessions, and this belief caused endless trouble between Indians and white settlers.
To white people, the natives were “Indian givers” and thieves; to natives, the white people tobacco but was lond ol cider and applejack, the hard liquor made by allowing cider to partially freeze and then skimming off the ice.
During the War of 1812, when the frontier settlers were Map of the northern watershed of the Ohio River, the region in which Chapman planted most of his apple-tree nurseries.
Application to purchase 18. acres of land, signed in 1836 by John Chapman.
On many occasions the impunity with which he ranged the country enabled him to give the settlers warning of approaching danger in time to allow them to take refuge in their blockhouses before the savages could attack them.
When the war ended in defeat for the Ohio Indians and the withdrawal of their British allies to Canada, American settlers poured into Ohio faster than before, and Chapman became more prosperous than ever.
He became a real estate developer, buying tracts of land for sale to settlers.
Chapman’s nurseries and real estate developments were all located in a broad arc of land from western Pennsylvania, across Ohio, to eastern Indiana.
His lands were all accessible by canoe from the Ohio River and its ' tributaries.
The profits from Chapman’s real estate developments allowed him to send impressive sums of money to the New Church of Philadelphia, which sought to spread the doctrines of Emanuel Swedenborg in America.
Chapman’s profits also supported the family of his sister, Persis; Chapman employed his sister’s ne’er-do-well husband, William Broom.
His sister’s descendants inherited Chapman’s estate when he died of pneumonia in 1845, at age seventy, in Fort Wayne, Indiana.
His heirs were not able to track down all of his scattered real estate holdings, and they recovered none of his cash savings, which presumably remained hidden in rocky clefts and hollow trees.
They nevertheless collected nearly six hundred dollars’ worth of property, a considerable sum at that time.
Fanciful engravings that illustrated the article showed Chapman dressed in an old coffee-sack and carrying a staff, an outfit that made him look like a saintly hermit in a Victorian Bible illustration.
The article also incorrectly portrayed Chapman as a poor man who owned only one small tract of land.
Haley avoided mentioning that Chapman’s apples were useful mainly for manufacturing an alcoholic beverage.
Although one line in the article stated that Chapman raised trees as a business, the overall tone of the article gave readers the false impression that Chapman had planted apple trees mainly for charitable reasons.
Later writers exaggerated the distortions in Haley’s article to create a purely fictional image of Chapman as a pious vagrant who randomly scattered seeds to provide free apples for future generations of Americans.
Man and Myth, is still considered the authoritative biography of John Chapman.
Harper’s New Monthly Magazine illustration shows Chapman \s thirty-mile “ barefoot run” in September of 1812, when he trotted through the forest from Mansfield to Mount Vernon, Ohio, to warn settlers to flee because Indians planned to attack them.
One settler, who had been a young girl when Chapman appeared at her door, recalled that he had used language reminiscent of the King James Bible to give his warning.
Vandorn was too nervous to sleep for a long time 1 j)uUie_£^^ ^.omeims, u) raise a caom on some rana innr c niipman nuu nougin mnun nix miles from Lexington, Ohio.
In the dusk of the evening we saw smoke curling up amongst the tree tops, and directly we saw Johnny standing close to a fire kindled by the side of a large log, an old tree which had been torn up by the roots.
I shall never forget how pleased he appeared to be when we came up to him in the wilderness, four miles from a living soul but Indians, among bears, wolves, catamounts, serpents, owls, and porcupines, yet apparently contented and happy.
Nearby lay logs and clapboards that he had cut for the cabin that he was building.
When the boys arrived, they found Chapman cooking potatoes in the embers of his fire.
After a dinner of Chapman’s potatoes and some buttered bread provided by the boys, Chapman began telling entertaining stories about the Indian wars.
According to Vandorn, “Johnny blamed the whites for all the mischief done by the Indians.
Vandorn recalled, “I got into a doze, but was soon startled by the howling of wolves like so many devils, not far from the camp.
Both boys got up and fired their rifles in the direction of the howling.
Reloading his rifle, Vandorn retorted, “Well, sleep if you can, for I can’t.” l ""’W"" «g""l"" ""* WI""U I null Hill mill i iim , running on ten thousand wolves and their howlings, when hoo-hoo-o-hoo-hoo0 goes a great bull owl right above my head, enough to frighten a ghost.
The next day the boys helped Chapman to erect the log cabin, which he put up for sale as soon as it was completed, since he had no desire to live in a house.
The Mohican River was a wilderness waterway that John Chapman traveled often as he commuted by canoe across Ohio, visiting his many tree nurseries scattered around that state.
One of Chapman's nurseries was planted next to the Indian village of Greentown on the Mohican.
After the Indians were driven away by American militiamen during the War of 1812, Chapman’s sister, Persis, settled beside the river at Perryville, where Chapman visited her frequently.
He was very fond of her children, and her husband earned his living as Chapman’s employee.
Her grandparents who were fascinated with the occult sexually and physically abused her.
On 21 October, 1989, Wigginton, her lover Lisa Ptaschinski, and friends Kim Jervis and Tracey Waugh went for a drive in Brisbane, Australia.
Wigginton told her friends that she wanted to kill a person and drink their blood.
Tracey Wigginton had a reputation for Vampirism, and later claimed at her trial that she drank animal blood to survive.
Her attack was so vicious, his spinal cord was severed and the body was left almost totally decapitated.
Shockingly, Wigginton said she 'felt nothing', and sat down to smoke a cigarette while her victim died.
Wigginton then allegedly dug her teeth into his neck and drank his blood.
Wigginton's friend Tracey Waugh told police that she could 'smell blood' on Wigginton's breath when she got back into the car.
She was found to have Disassociative Identity Disorder, with several distinct split personalities; Bobby, The Observer, Avril, Little Tracey and Big Tracey.
Despite her obvious mental illness, Tracey's was prosecuted and sent to prison.
TSA worker gone after airport prank PHILADELPHIA — The Transportation Security Administration says a worker who pretended to plant a plastic bag of white powder in a college student’s carryon luggage at Philadelphia International Airport earlier this month is no longer employed by the agency.
TSA spokeswoman Ann Davis declined to identify the worker and his job title, citing privacy laws.
Debbie and Thomas Evans of Ringland, Newport, Gwent, believe their daughter's nocturnal agony was a premonition of the accident.
She was inconsolable for about half an hour and we couldn't do a thing with her.
She would often wake up saying Kieron was crying, but he would be asleep.
But then as soon as she would drift off to sleep he would wake up and cry.
Two-headed dolphin found on Turkey beach Heather Saul J Tuesday 12 August 2014 independent.co.uk In this photo of con-joined dolphin taken by gym teacher Tugrul Metin, while he was vacationing during the first few days of August 2014 , in the Aegean Sea coastal town of Dikili, Izmir province of Turkey.
A two-headed dolphin has washed up on a beach in Western Turkey, local media has reported.
The private Dogan news agency said the remains of conjoined dolphin calf were discovered on a beach in Dikili npar thp Aegean city of Izmir last week by a Tugrul Metin, gym teacher who was holidaying in the area.
This chance encounter with an animal that would later be referred to as the U-28 Creature took place in the early portion of World War I after a military engagement between the U Boat 28 and the British steamer Iberian.
The steamer sank so swiftly that its bow stuck up almost vertically into the air.
Simultaneously we all drew one another's attention to this wonder of the seas, which was writhing and struggling among the debris.
We were unable to identify the creature, but all of us agreed that it resembled an aquatic crocodile, which was about 60-feet long, with four limbs resembling large webbed feet, a long, pointed tail and a head which also tapered to a point.
One important thing to note about this encounter is the manner in which the captain recorded the encounter.
In general submarine captains are not known to be prone to exaggeration, leading some to believe that he would not detail such an encounter in any other way but as it happened.
Also there would be absolutely no reason to concoct such a fantastic story knowing, as we all do, that the majority of people who report strange encounters are generally looked upon as crazy and meet with only ridicule.
Some investigators have theorized that this encounter could indicate a surviving specimen of pliosaurs or mosasaurs, both of which are though to have resembled gigantic crocodiles.
The fossil record of these creatures also seems to indicate that their spines were very flexible, which could account for the more serpentine like movement of the U-28 Creature and other so called Sea Serpents sometimes spotted in this area of the world.
This small number of investigators have stated that any creature swimming in the ocean would more than likely keep its distance for a naval battle and the subsequent sinking of a ship due to gun fire, and for the U28 creature to have been blown out of the water upon the Iberian’s explosion the creature would have had to be swimming almost directly over the sinking ship, just seconds after it was sunk by torpedo fire.
Though it is unclear why a British steamer would be transporting a 60 foot aquatic creature across the Atlantic.
On September 2, 1915 the U-28 was damage beyond repair in the North Cape after being hit by debris from the munitions ship, the Olive Branch, which exploded after an engagement with the U-28.
It is safe to say that at this point in time the mystery of the U-28 Creature may never be solved, with all eye witnesses of the encounter having passed away and the Iberian resting at the bottom of the North Atlantic.
Perhaps one day the discovery of a creature similar to that described by the crew of the U-28 may shed new light on this encounter, however we will still never know if that new discovery is what the captain reported that day or if something else, still unknown, lurks in the depths of the last great unexplored region of Planet Earth, the ocean.
The Evidence There is currently no evidence to support the existence of a creature like the U-28 Creature in today’s oceans.
The Sightings On July 30, 1915, the U-28 torpedoed the British steamer Iberian, following the Iberian’s sinking below the waves a giant explosion rocketed debris and one unidentified 60 foot crocodile like creature out of the water.
Sea Monster • Size: 60 feet in length • Weight: Unknown • Diet: Unknown • Location: North Atlantic • Movement: Swimming • Environment: Ocean UNICORN FIND Customs officers may claim that they've seen it all as far as the smuggling of exotic items is concerned, but Auckland Harbour officers recently claimed a first when, in November 2002, they confiscated from an Auckland furniture importer an undeclared crate he had shipped from Indonesia.
He had bought them, apparently in good faith regarding their identity, as a special Christmas present.
When the bones were examined at Auckland Museum, however, they were identified as originating from a cow or water buffalo, and had been coated with a thin layer of cement to make them appear fossilised.
Scientists say they now know why some popcorn kernels resist popping into puffy white globes.
It's long been known that popcorn kernels must have a precise moisture level in their starchy center -about 1 5 percent -to explode.
Unpopped kernels, it turns out, have leaky hulls that prevent the moisture pressure buildup needed for them to pop and lack the optimal hull structure that allows most kernels to explode.
The findings may help popcorn breeders select the best varieties or create new ones -with superior hulls that yield few, if any, unpopped kernels.
In the varieties popped, the percentage of unpopped kernels ranged from 4 percent in premium brands to 47 percent in the cheaper ones.
The findings could be good news for people who savor the snack and those who grow the 1 7 billion quarts of popcorn sold each year in the United States.
Wendy Boersema Rappel, a spokeswoman for the Chicago-based Popcorn Board, said popcorn processors are always looking for ways to improve their product, including reducing the number of old maids.
Hamaker said two popcorn manufacturers have already expressed interest in Purdue’s findings.
The research, funded by Purdue's Whistler Center for Carbohydrate Research, which Hamaker directs, has been published online and will appear in the July 1 1 edition of the journal BioMacromolecules.
In a maze of chambers, archaeologist Roberto Pimentel Nita crouches to examine a find.
The qlimate at El Castillo is so arid that even delicate threads can survive in the ground for centuries.
UNIVERSITY OF WARSAW Inside a Wari Tomb After conquering the local lords, the Wari raised a massive imperial tomb at El Castillo.
With its crimson-painted walls, this sacred building could be seen for miles around, a constant reminder of the might of the new regime.
In the lowest level the Wari interred 58 noblewomen, including 4 queens or princesses.
In a chamber above, archaeologists found a throne for displaying the mummy of an important person-possibly the Wari emperor.
The tomb remained open for several months while it was being filled with mummified bodies.
Platform Tomb PHASE 2 ► Workers expanded the platform, sealed the burial chamber with tons of gravel and a layer of brick, then built rooms above for mummies and offerings.
Phase 2 platform A nobleman leads a ceremonial procession to carry a mummy bundle to a burial site.
Offering jars A small burial chamber reserved for lesser nobles IPPW5 '• •'SmS&St* Two guardians, a man and a woman, were buried at the tomb entrance.
Each lacked a left foot, perhaps to prevent them from deserting their posts. npr (See page 66 Burial Fit for a Queen Dying around age 60 , this prominent Wari noblewoman went to her grave with wealth and in splendor.
Attendants arranged her body in the seated position favored by the Wari, dressed her in a finely woven tunic and shawl, and adorned her with precious jewels.
To prepare her for burial, attendants painted, her face with sacred red pigment.
Geometric tattoos — Copper-alloy tupu pin The queen’s body was wrapped in cloth, a striped blanket, and a wide net of knotted cords.
Skull of El Castillo’s great queen population of as many as 40,000 people— a city larger than Paris at the time, which had no more than 20,000 inhabitants.
From this stronghold the Wari lords extended their domain hundreds of miles along the Andes and into the coastal deserts, forging what many archaeologists call the first empire in Andean South America.
Researchers have long puzzled over exactly how the Wari built and governed this vast, unruly realm, whether through conquest or persuasion or some combination of both.
Unlike most imperial powers, the Wari had no system of writing and left no recorded narrative history.
The foreign invaders probably first appeared on this stretch of coast around the end of the eighth century.
The region lay along what was then the southern frontier of the wealthy Moche lords, and it seems to have lacked strong local leaders.
Just how the invaders launched their offensive is unclear, but an important ceremonial drinking cup discovered in El Castillos imperial tomb depicts poleaxwielding Wari warriors battling coastal defenders brandishing spear throwers.
The new lord constructed a palace at the foot of El Castillo, and over time he and his successors began transforming the steep hill above into a towering temple devoted to ancestor worship.
Cloaked in nearly a thousand years of rubble and wind-borne sediment, El Castillo today looks like a huge stepped pyramid, a monument built from the bottom up.
But from the beginning Giersz suspected that there was more to El Castillo than met the eye.
To tease out the building plan, he invited a team of architecture experts to examine the newly exposed staircases and walls.
Their studies revealed something that Giersz had suspected— that Wari engineers began construction along the very top of El Castillo, a natural rock formation, and eventually worked their way downward.
As they moved downward, they cut into the slopes to make a tier of platforms.
Along the summit of El Castillo the builders first carved out a subterranean chamber that became the imperial tomb.
When it was ready for sealing, laborers poured in more than 30 tons of gravel and capped the entire chamber with a layer of heavy adobe bricks.
Then they raised a mausoleum tower above, with crimson walls that could be seen for miles around.
The Wari elite left rich offerings in small chambers inside, from the finely woven textiles that ancient Andean peoples valued more highly than gold; to knotted cords known as khipus, used for keeping track of imperial goods; to the body parts of the Andean condor, a bird closely associated with the Wari aristocracy.
In later times looters reported to a German archaeologist that they found mummies arrayed in wall niches there.
It may even have been used for venerating the emperor’s mummy, yet to be discovered by the team.
To rub shoulders in death with members of Society Grant Archaeologist Milosz Giersz’s work was funded in part by your Society membership.
PERU TOMB 67 the royal dynasty, nobles staked out places on the summit for mausoleums of their own.
When they exhausted all the available space there, they engineered more, building stepped terraces all the way down the slopes of El Castillo and filling them with funerary towers and graves.
Dried mortar in many of the newly exposed walls bears human handprints, some left by children as young as 11 or 12 years old.
When the construction ended, likely sometime betweend. and 1000, an immense crimson necropolis loomed over the valley.
That’s part of Andean logic.” in a small walled chamber along the western slopes of the necropolis, Wieslaw Wi^ckowski hunches over a mummified human arm, brushing sand away from its gaunt fingers.
As he edges his the sealed chamber was poor, Wieckowski says, trowel into the corner of the room, he exposes but his studies are starting to fill in key details part of a human femur lodged in a jagged hole in of the lives and deaths of the highborn women the wall.
Looters, he explains, probably tried to haul the Almost all of those buried inside the chamber mummy out from an adjacent room and literwere women and girls who had likely died over ally pulled it to pieces.
The Wari treated them in death with 68 NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC • JUNE 2014 great respect.
Attendants dressed them in richly woven tunics and shawls, painted their faces with a sacred red pigment, and adorned them with precious jewelry, from gold ear flares to delicate crystal-beaded necklaces.
Then mourners arranged their bodies in the flexed position favored by the Wari and wrapped each in a large cloth to form a funerary bundle.
Their social rank, says Wi^ckowski, mattered as much in death as it did in life.
Attendants placed the highest ranked women— perhaps queens or princesses — in three private side chambers in the tomb.
The most important, a female of about 60, lay surrounded by rare luxuries, from multiple pairs of ear ornaments to a bronze ceremonial ax and a silver goblet.
Beyond, in a large common area, attendants arranged the lesser noblewomen along the walls.
Beside each, with few exceptions, they laid a container roughly the PERU TOMB 69 The painted figure on a ceramic flask depicts a Wari lord sitting atop a balsa raft— a clue, perhaps, that the Wari invaded the territory by sea.
Remarkably preserved, thje hand of an Andean noble still clutches a bit of burial cloth v V The Wari elite dressed well, even down to fine footwear of brightly painted leather.
Made of cut canes, it stored all the weaving tools needed to create high-quality cloth.
Wari women were consummate weavers, producing tapestry-like cloth with yarn counts higher than those of the famous Flemish and Dutch weavers of the 16th century.
The noblewomen buried at El Castillo were clearly dedicated to this art, creating textiles of the finest quality for the Wari elite.
There were six individuals in all, three children — including what might be a nine-year-old girl — and three young adults.
Its possible, says Wi^ckowski, the victims were the offspring of the conquered nobility.
When the killings were done, attendants threw the corpses into the tomb.
Then they closed the chamber, placing the wrapped corpses of a young adult male in his prime and of an older woman at the entrance as guards.
Each body had lost a left foot, perhaps ensuring 76 NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC • JUNE 2014 Lima, El Castillos archaeologists beam as they examine some of the newly cleaned finds.
For weeks now conservators have been stripping away the thick, black patina that coated many of the metal artifacts, revealing glimmering designs.
Cushioned in tissue paper are three gold ear ornaments, each roughly the size of a doorknob and bearing the image of a winged deity or mythical being.
Richly painted and decorated, the flask depicts a sumptuously dressed Wari lord voyaging by balsa raft across coastal waters teeming with whales and other sea creatures.
Found among the cherished grave goods of a dead queen at El Castillo, the 1,200-year-old flask seems to portray an event — partly mythical, partly real — in the history of the north coast, the arrival of an important Wari lord, possibly even the Wari emperor himself.
The tomb of a great Wari lord may lie somewhere in the maze of chambers. that they couldn’t desert their posts.
Wi^ckowski is awaiting the results of DNA analyses and isotopic tests to learn more about the females in the tomb and where they might have come from.
But for Giersz the evidence is all beginning to add up to a detailed picture of the Wari invasion of the north coast.
But Giersz, the maverick who saw the buried outlines of walls where others saw only looters’ rubble, still thinks that the tomb of a great Wari lord may lie somewhere in the maze of walls and subterranean chambers.
And if the looters haven’t beaten him to the punch, he intends to find it.
Hi * i By Heather Pringle Photographs by Robert Clark I n the late afternoon light along the Peruvian coast, local workmen gather as archaeologists Milosz Giersz and Roberto Pimentel Nita open a row of small sealed chambers near the entrance of an ancient tomb.
Concealed for more than a thousand years under a layer of heavy adobe brick, the mini-chambers hold large ceramic jars, some bearing painted lizards, others displaying grinning human faces.
As Giersz pries loose the brick from the final compartment, he grimaces.
Its full of decayed puparia, traces of flies once drawn to the pots contents.
The archaeologist backs away and stands up, slapping a cloud of 1,200-year-old dust from his pants.
In three years of digging at this site, called El Castillo de Huarmey, Giersz has encountered an unexpected ecosystem of death — from A winged creature adorns a silver and gold ear ornament worn by an elite Wari woman. traces of insects that once fed on human flesh, to snakes that coiled and died in the bottoms of ceramic pots, to Africanized killer bees that swarmed out of subterranean chambers and attacked workers.
Plenty of people had warned Giersz that excavating in the rubble of El Castillo would be difficult, and almost certainly a waste of time and money.
For at least a century looters had tunneled into the slopes of the massive hill, searching for tombs containing ancient skeletons decked out in gold and wrapped in some of the finest woven tapestries ever made.
The serpent-shaped hill, located a four-hour drive north of Lima, looked like a cross between the surface of the moon and a landfill site— pitted with holes, littered with ancient human bones, and strewn with modern garbage and rags.
The looters liked to toss away their clothing before they returned home for fear of bringing sickness from the dead to their families.
Something important had happened at El Castillo 1,200 years ago, Giersz was sure of that.
Bits of textiles and broken pottery from Peru’s little-known Wari civilization, whose heartland lay far to the south, dotted the slopes.
So Giersz and a small research team began imaging what lay underground with a magnetometer and taking aerial photos with a camera on a kite.
Giersz and a Polish-Peruvian team applied for permission to begin digging.
The faint outline turned out to be a massive maze of towers and high walls spread over the entire southern end of El Castillo.
Once painted crimson red, the sprawling complex seemed to be a Wari temple dedicated to ancestor worship.
As the team dug down beneath a layer of Heather Pringle is the author of The Mummy Congress.
Inside were interred four Wari queens or princesses, at least 54 other highborn individuals, and more than a thousand elite Wari goods, from huge gold ear ornaments to silver bowls and copperalloy axes, all of the finest workmanship.
While Giersz and his team continue 60 NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC • JUNE 2014 to excavate and explore the site, analysis of the finds is shedding new light on the Wari and their wealthy ruling class.
Emerging from obscurity in Peru’s Ayacucho Valley by the seventh centuryd., the Wari rose to glory long before the Inca, in a time of repeated drought and environmental crisis.
They became master engineers, constructing aqueducts and complex canal systems to irrigate their terraced fields.
Near the modern city of Ayacucho they founded a sprawling capital, known today as Huari.
Colonial America's Oldest Unsolved Murder by LINTON WEEKS June 24, 201311:11 AM Preservation Virginia When archaeologists in Virginia uncovered the skeletal remains in 1996 of one of Jamestown's first settlers — a young European male designated as JR102C in the catalog — they said he was the victim in what was perhaps Colonial America's oldest unsolved murder.
At the time, archaeologist William Kelso, now director of archaeological research and interpretation at Jamestown Rediscovery, reported that ""the lead bullet and shot fragments lodged in his lower right leg contained enough force to fracture his tibia and fibula bones, rupturing a major artery below the knee.
Now, 17 years later, the forensic archaeologists at Jamestown may have identified the victim and, therefore, the perpetrator of the crime.
Stephens went on to become a court commissioner and an outspoken detractor of Virginia Gov.
In 1635, Stephens and Harvey engaged in fisticuffs, and Stephens lost teeth in the bargain.
Tongues swelled, lips split open and salt caked their eyes and faces as the briny ocean water dried in the sun.
In desperation, some men drank the salty water, and those who resisted the impulse soon saw what happened to the brains of those who relented.
It took only about an hour, Harrell said, before the hallucinations began for those men.
By Day 3, only 1 7 of the original 80 who were with Harrell were still alive.
A few sailors had found a few ammunition cans and potato or orange crates and figured out away to lash them together.
On the raft, they placed sodden lifejackets, which they squeezed as dry as possible, like sponges, then allowed them to further air dry atop the crude raft.
That way, they could trade out the jackets and buy themselves more time.
Inside were potatoes — mostly rotten, but with some nutrition and moisture in them.
It was on the fourth day that finally, and by accident, a United States military plane discovered ’’the boys 1 ’ in the water, still with sharks all around.
The pilot, Harrell recalled, didn't even know if the bobbing heads he saw were American or Japanese.
Harrell was in hospitals for months, a stay extended when his appendix burst and his body was riddled with infection.
In those early days of penicillin, Harrell received 1 1 . million units of the new antibiotic over 29 days — he remembers it, to the unit, to the day.
And then, the young man basically went home, stopping in Chicago in early 1946 to be discharged from the Marines and in 1947 marrying the pretty brunette who had promised to wait for him.
Friday, together in Indianapolis, Edgar and Ola Harrell celebrated their 67th wedding anniversary.
The USS Indianapolis' mission was top secret — few of the crew knew that it was delivering to the island of Tinian key parts and enriched uranium for the atomic bomb used at Hiroshima.
After completing that mission, the ship stopped off in Guam and was then sent to Leyte Gulf to prepare for a likely invasion of Japan.
As the years unfolded, Harrell and other survivors became angry — that their ship was sent out without a protective destroyer escort, that a cable intercepted before the USS Indianapolis took off from Guam said an attack submarine was in its path but that information wasn't relayed to the ship, that the celebratory transmission about the sinking from the Japanese submarine to Tokyo was intercepted but didn't trigger a rescue effort, and that the skipper of the USS Indianapolis, Capt.
Charles Butler McVay III, was held accountable and court-martialed even though critical information had been withheld from him.
On Oct., 2000, they got their wish, when McVay was posthumously exonerated by Congress and President Bill Clinton.
It was a victory for the USS Indianapolis survivors, but too late for McVay.
He committed suicide in 1 968* Harrell and many of his fellow survivors went on with their lives, drawing strength from their faith, family and friends* Forgiveness came — last year, Harrell held on his lap the great-granddaughter of Mochitsura Hashimoto, the commander of the Japanese submarine 1-58 that sank the USS Indianapolis* The baby smiled at him; Harrell had tears in his eyes.
And this weekend, Edgar and Ola Harrell were here with their son, grandson and great-grandson, in the embrace of a few remaining survivors and their children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
That first morning, we had sharks 7 Diana Penner, diana.penner@indystar.com 10:06m.
EDT July 26, 2014 Corporal Edgar Harrell was a Marine, a 20-year-old kid, who finished his watch on the USS Indianapolis at midnight July 29, 1 945.
Harrell had just dozed off And then, a few minutes into July 30, the world exploded.
The USS Indianapolis, with 1 ,1 96 sailors and Marines aboard, was hit by two of six torpedoes fired by a Japanese submarine.
Metal groaned and twisted, water churned and rose, and men scrambled and screamed.
For years afterward, Harrell and his fellow survivors talked little — if at all — about what happened that night.
But eventually, they not only talked, they hollered — to correct the historical record and to redeem the captain they revered but who got the official blame for the single worst loss of life at sea in the This weekend, Harrell, who now lives in Tennessee, was among about a dozen of the remaining 36 survivors of the ship at a reunion in the city that gave the famed vessel its name.
Harrell told his story, vivid with details and passion, insistent that it not be forgotten.
An Unforgettable WWII Story of Survival, Courage, and the Sinking of the USS Indianapolis, 1 ’ which Harrell republished in May after initially self-publishing it in 2005.
Harrells story, like that of his shipmates, is one of harrowing survival and gruesome death, tremendous courage and painful betrayal, and, eventually, redemption, albeit posthumously for many.
That night, in the chaos, the young Harrell, originally from Kentucky, realized he didn't have his drab brown kapok life jacket.
He spied some of the jackets on deck, but waited permission to take one.
He also searched for his commanding officer, looking for orders on what to do next.
Harrell held the man, keeping his head above water, but there was little else he could do.
He has told the story many times by now; he knows how to get through it.
But inevitably, a man would get separated from the group and float off.
The life vests, crude by today's high-tech standards, would become water-logged and less effective as flotation devices, he recalled.
The men figured out they could fashion vests in away that allowed them to sit on them, sort of like inner tubes, allowing them to keep their heads above water if they maintained the effort, strength and discipline to stay balanced in a seated position.
The site’s rare prehistoric whales helped earn it UNESCO World Heritage status.
It wasn’t until 1989, however, that the team found the link they were seeking to the whales’ terrestrial ancestors, almost by accident.
Near the end of the expedition Gingerich was working on a Basilosaurus skeleton when he uncovered the first known whale knee, on a leg positioned much farther down the animal’s spinal column than he had expected.
On the last day of the expedition Smith found a complete set of slender, inch-long toes.
Though unable to support a Basilosaurus s weight on land, these legs weren’t completely vestigial.
They had attachments for powerful muscles, as well as functional ankle joints and complex locking mechanisms in the knee.
Gingerich speculates that they served as stimulators or guides during copulation.
Whatever Basilosaurus actually did with its little legs, finding them confirmed that the ancestors of whales had once walked, trotted, and galloped on land.
Certain skeletal features of archaic whales, particularly their large, triangular cheek teeth, strongly resembled those of mesonychids, a group of hoofed Eocene carnivores.
In the 1950s immunologists had discovered characteristics in whale blood that suggested a descent from artiodactyls, the mammalian order that includes pigs, deer, camels, and other even-toed ungulates.
Ornate struts of bone on Basilosaurus vertebrae secured huge muscles used to lift and lower the whale’s tail and back as it swam. molecular biologists studying the cetacean genetic code concluded that the whales closest living relative was one specific ungulate, the hippopotamus.
Gingerich and many other paleontologists trusted the hard evidence of the bones more than the molecular comparisons of living animals.
But to test this theory, Gingerich needed to find one bone in particular.
The astragalus, or anklebone, is the most distinctive element of the artiodactyl skeleton, because it has an unusual double-pulley shape, with clearly defined grooves at the top and bottom of the bone like the grooves on a pulley wheel that holds a rope.
The shape gives artiodactyls greater spring and flexibility than the singlepulley form found in other quadrupeds.
His graduate student Iyad Zalmout found a grooved piece of bone among the remains of a new 47-million-yearold whale, later named Artiocetus.
Minutes later Pakistani geologist Munir ul-Haq found a similar bone at the same site.
At first Gingerich thought the two bones were the single-pulley astragali from the animals left and right legs — proof that he’d been right about the origin of whales.
But when he held them side by side, he was troubled to see that they were slightly asymmetrical.
As he pondered this, manipulating the two bones as a puzzler maneuvers two troublesome puzzle pieces, they suddenly snapped together to form a perfect doublepulley astragalus.
Walking back to camp that evening, Gingerich and his team passed a group of village children playing dice with the astragali of a goat.
Gingerich believes the first cetaceans probably resembled anthracotheres, svelte hippo-like browsers that inhabited swampy lowlands in Eocene times.
Whatever their shape and size, the earliest whales appeared about 55 million years ago, like all other modern mammalian orders, during the spike in global temperatures at the beginning of the Eocene.
Chasing new kinds of food sources deeper into the water, these early waders gradually developed longer snouts and sharper teeth better suited for snapping up fish.
By adapting to water, early whales gained access to an environment closed to most other mammals, rich in food and shelter, and short on competitors and predators — perfect conditions for an evolutionary explosion.
What followed was a starburst of idiosyncratic experiments in being a whale, most of which ended in extinction long before modern times.
Nummulites and other tiny desert relics provide vital clues to how early whales lived and died. huge snapping jaws, like a hairy saltwater croc; Dalanistes, with a long neck and head like a heron; and Makaracetus, with a short, curved, muscular proboscis that it may have used for eating mollusks.
Around 45 million years ago, as the advantages of a water environment drew whales farther out to sea, their necks compressed and stiffened to push more efficiently through the water, behind faces lengthening and sharpening like a ships prow.
Hind legs thickened into pistons; toes stretched and grew webbing, so they resembled enormous ducks’ feet tipped with tiny hooves inherited from their ungulate ancestors.
Some whales developed thick, powerful tails, bulleting ahead with vigorous up-and-down undulations of their lower bodies.
Selection pressure for this efficient style of locomotion favored longer and more flexible spinal columns.
Nostrils slid back up the snout toward the crown of the head, becoming blowholes.
Over time, as the animals dived deeper, their eyes began to migrate from the top toward the sides of the head, the better to see laterally in the water.
And whale ears grew ever more sensitive to underwater sound, aided by pads of fat that ran in channels the length of their jaws, gathering vibrations like underwater antennae and funneling them to the middle ear.
Though finely tuned to water, these 45million-year-old whales still had to hitch themselves ashore on webbed fingers and toes, in search of fresh water to drink, a mate, or a safe place to bear their young.
Basilosaurus, Dorudon, and their relatives never set foot on land, swimming confidently on the high seas and even crossing the Atlantic to reach the shores of what is now Peru and the southern United States.
Their bodies adjusted to their exclusively aquatic lifestyle, forelimbs shortening and stiffening to serve as flippers for planing, tails broadening at the tip in horizontal flukes to create a hydrofoil.
The pelvis decoupled from the spine, allowing the tail a broader range of vertical motion.
The final transition from basilosaurids to modern whales began 34 million years ago, during the sudden phase of cooling climate that ended the Eocene epoch.
A drop in water temperatures near the Poles, shifts in ocean currents, and an upwelling of nutrientrich seawater along the western shores of Africa and Europe drew whales into entirely new environmental niches and drove the remaining adaptations— big brains, echolocation, insulating blubber, and in some species, baleen in place of teeth for straining krill— present in cetaceans today.
Thanks in large part to Philip Gingerich, the fossil record of whales now offers one of the most stunning demonstrations of Darwinian evolution rather than a refutation of it.
Ironically, Gingerich himself grew up in a strictly principled Christian environment, in a family of Amish Mennonites in eastern Iowa.
Gingerich is still baffled by the conflict that many people feel between religion and science.
On my last night in Wadi Hitan, we walked a little distance from camp under a dome of brilliant stars.
He spread his arms, taking in the dark horizon and the desert with its sandstone wind sculptures and its countless silent whales.
With robust legs and webbed feet, it propelled itself on land like a sea lion.
The limbs also provided thrust for swimming; its tail served mainly as a rudder.
Later whales swam more efficiently with tail power; their hind legs dwindled, and their front legs morphed into flippers.
BY TOM MUELLER PHOTOGRAPHS BY RICHARD BARNES Thirty-seven million years ago, IN THE WATERS OF THE PREHISTORIC TETHYS OCEAN, A SINUOUS, 50-FOOT-LONG BEAST WITH GAPING JAWS AND JAGGED TEETH DIED AND SANK TO THE SEAFLOOR, Over thousands of millennia a mantle of sediment built up over its bones.
The sea receded, and as the former seabed became a desert, the wind began to plane away the sandstone and shale above the bones.
Shifts in the Earths crust pushed India into Asia, heaving up the Himalaya.
In Africa, the first human ancestors stood up on their hind legs to walk.
The sand around him was strewn with fossil shark teeth, sea urchin spines, and the bones of giant catfish.
Gingerich was searching for a key bit of the creatures anatomy, and he was in a hurry.
The light was failing, and he needed to return to camp before his colleagues started to worry.
Along with the bones of prehistoric sea monsters, Gingerich has found the remains of unlucky humans.
He moved down the spine toward the tail, probing around each vertebra with the handle of his brush.
Clearing the sand delicately with his fingers, he laid bare a slender baton of bone, barely eight inches long.
Basilosaurus was indeed a whale, but one with two delicate hind legs, each the size of a three-year-old girl’s leg, protruding from its flanks.
Gingerich has devoted much of his career to explaining this metamorphosis, arguably the most profound in the animal kingdom.
In the process he has shown that whales, once celebrated by creationists as the best evidence against evolution, may be evolution’s most elegant proof.
Wadi Hitan — literally “valley of whales” — has proved phenomenally rich in such Rosetta stones.
Over the past 27 years Gingerich and his colleagues have located the remains of more than a thousand whales here, and countless more are left to be discovered.
When we pulled into camp, we met several of Gingerich’s team members just back from their own fieldwork.
We were soon discussing their results over a dinner of roast goat meat, foul mudamas (fava bean puree), and flatbread.
Mohammed Sameh, chief ranger of the Wadi Hitan protected area, had been prospecting for whales farther to the east and reported several new bone piles — fresh clues to one of natural history’s great puzzles.
Jordanian postdoc Iyad Zalmout and grad student Ryan Bebej had been excavating a whale rostrum poking out of a cliff face.
Its descendants gradually improved the function of their primitive lungs, morphed their lobe fins into legs, and jury-rigged their jaw joints to hear in the air instead of water.
Mammals turned out to be among the most successful of these land lovers; by 60 million years ago they dominated the Earth.
FROM LAND TO SEA Early whales plied the shallows but still hauled themselves onto shore, probably to rest and to give birth.
The fossil record tracks anatomical changes as whales adapted to conditions that favored a fully marine mammal.
DORUDON PAKICETUS BASILOSAURUS Nose, eyes, and ears Nostrils move farther up the skull for easier breathing at the ocean surface.
Eyes migrate toward the sides of the head; ears adapt to underwater hearing.
Feet to flippers For foot-powered swimming, toes lengthen and grow webbing.
As tail-powered swimming evolves, foot bones become encased in flippers. evolutionary U-turn, retrofitting their terrestrial body plan to sense, eat, move, and mate underwater.
How whales accomplished such an enormous transformation has baffled even the greatest scientific intellects.
Recognizing the conundrum as one of the great challenges to his theory of evolution by natural selection, Charles Darwin took a stab at accounting for whales in the first edition of Origin of Species.
He noted that black bears had been seen swimming with their mouths open for hours at a time on the surface of a lake, feeding on floating insects.
His critics poked such loud and gleeful fun at this image, Tom Mueller wrote about mammoths in the May 2009 issue o/National Geographic.
More of Richard Barnes’s photos can be seen in his book Animal Logic. however, that he eventually omitted it from later editions of his book.
Nearly a century later George Gaylord Simpson, the preeminent paleontologist of the 20th century, was still at a loss to explain where whales fit in his otherwise orderly evolutionary tree of mammals.
If science could not account for the transformation of whales, antievolutionists argued, perhaps it never happened.
They contended that land animals that began to adapt to aquatic life would soon be neither fowl nor fish, incapable of surviving in either medium.
Backbones adapt to support the more powerful muscles that tail propulsion requires.
Pelvis and spine No longer needed to hold hind limbs that support a body, the pelvis becomes detached from the spine, enhancing the whale's range of motion.
JOHN BURGOYNE SOURCE: PHILIP D GINGERICH, UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN seas before a whale as we know it appeared,” wrote the authors of Of Pandas and People, a popular creationist textbook first published in 1989.
Philip Gingerich had unintentionally taken up this challenge in the mid-1970s.
After earning his Ph.D. at Yale, he began excavating in Wyoming’s Clarks Fork Basin, documenting the meteoric rise of mammals at the beginning of the Eocene, after the extinction of the dinosaurs ten million years earlier.
In 1975, hoping to trace migrations of mammals from Asia to North America, he started fieldwork in middle Eocene formations in the Punjab and NorthWest Frontier (now called Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province) Provinces of Pakistan.
Fie was disappointed to discover that the 50-millionyear-old sediments he had targeted were not dry land but marine beds on the eastern edge of the Tethys Ocean.
When his team uncovered some pelvic bones in 1977, they jokingly attributed them to “walking whales”— a preposterous notion.
At that time the best known fossil whales were thought to be similar to modern whales, with sophisticated mechanisms for underwater hearing, powerful tails with broad flukes, and no external hind limbs.
Then in 1979, a member of Gingerich’s team in Pakistan found a skull about the size of a wolf’s but with prominent — and very unwolflike — sails of bone at the top and sides of the skull to secure robust jaw and neck muscles.
Later the same month Gingerich came across some archaic whale specimens in museums in Lucknow and Kolkata , India.
Yet the skull lacked several other adaptations that living whales use to hear directionally beneath the waves.
He concluded that the animal had probably been semiaquatic, spending significant time in shallow water but returning to land to rest and reproduce.
Discovering this most primitive known whale, which Gingerich named Pakicetus, made him see whales in a new light.
Since then, I’ve been consumed by the search for the many transitional forms in this huge leap from land back into the sea.
I want to find them all.” in the 1980s gingerich turned his attention to Wadi Hitan.
Along with his wife, paleontologist B Holly Smith, and their Michigan colleague William Sanders, he began looking for whales in formations some ten million years younger than the beds where he’d found Pakicetus.
The trio excavated partial skeletons of fully aquatic whales like Basilosaurus and the smaller, 16 foot Dorudon.
These had large, dense auditory bullae and other adaptations for underwater hearing; long, streamlined bodies with elongated spinal columns; and muscular tails to drive them through the water with powerful vertical strokes.
CRADLE OF WHALES Fifty million years ago the Tethys Ocean stretched from modern Gibraltar to what is now India.
Land-living whale ancestors entered shallow water on the western edge of modern Pakistan and flourished throughout the Tethys until a sharp cooling of the climate 34 million years ago.
Police on Sibale Island, otherwise known as Concepcion in the Philippines, have ordered locals to ""shoot on sight"" if they see any mysterious creatures.
Villagers state the attacks always occur on the eve of a full moon, between midnight and 2am.
Last Saturday, the remains of a pregnant goat and her kid were discovered on a coconut grove on farm at Barangay Poblacion.
According to the owner, Charry Fajilago, the intestines of both animals had been removed.
Another farmer, Vincent Fajutagana, claimed to have come ""face-to-face"" with a mysterious creature at his Barangay Dalajica property, as reported by Au News.
Extra police armed with knives and sharpened bamboo sticks have been dispatched to the island to ward off the animals.
The supermoons set to appear on 10 August and 3 September have already spread panic among the locals.
The animal^ scampers away at the sight of humans, but residents are worried they might be next victims when all the goats are killed.
Romblon Gov Eduardo Fiormalo has issued a “shoot-on-sight” against the suspected werewolves.
Residents armed with bamboo spears and bolos patrol their neighborhood at night, but the animals have been elusive.
Deo Atillano, executive secretary to the mayor, said the werewolves have given Sibale Island, which is six hours by boat from the provincial capital of Romblon and one of the most peaceful place in the country, a bad reputation.
He said a murder was committed in the 1970s but no one major has been reported in the island since then until the vampires started killing the goats.
The islanders have limited access to the Internet and very few households have television sets,” Atillano said.
The Department of Agriculture has announced it would replace the goats killed, but residents have become reluctant to herd goats because it attract the vampires and they could be the next victims.
The whole issue came to limelight after the teenager, who was brutally attacked on the chest and the arms by a 20 year old lady.
The attack reports further accounted that the attack was so brutal that the boy has to suffer deep wounds and was hospitalized.
With all these procedures, the lady was also ordered to pay an amount of $400 in compensation.
Vampire killer Rod Ferrell focus of Investigation Discovery show By Jerry Fall strom, Orlando Sentinel 6:27m.
The program, ""Blood Lust,"" premieres at 9m. today, delving once again into the Eustis slayings of Richard and Naomi Wendorf.
Ferrell pleaded guilty to beating the Wendorfs to death with a crowbar and is serving life in prison.
In Murray, KY, Rod starts his own coven of teenage followers who meet regularly to drink, take drugs, have sex — and suck each others' blood.
Rod and three friends drive to Heather's home, where he and another of his disciples kill Heather's parents.
A Newspaperman's Life,"" is due to come out next month, said he focused on the Heather's involvement with the Investigation Discovery show.
Story of Vampire skeletons 1 among Science Week attractions Tue, Nov 08, 2011 The story behind Ireland’s “vampire skeletons” is just one of the mysteries that will be unravelled as Science Week begins next weekend, writes Dick Ahlstrom , Science Editor.
Dolores O’Riordan, for example, will give a talk on the hidden chemistry going on in the foods we eat and Dr John O’Shaughnessy will talk about how chemistry is central to the work of Ireland’s CSI forensic science team.
Chemistry is important to Science Week 2011 given its theme, “The Chemistry of Life”, said Dr Peter Brabazon, who heads Discover Science and Engineering, the science promotional body that organises the event.
Now in its 15th year it rank s as the single largest science promotion event in the country, attracting well over 100,000 participants across the State.
Stllff.CO.IU NATIONAL Judge praises 'vampire' for starting new life Last updated 05:00 29/06/2011 A man who bit a teenager during a bizarre vampire-style attack was praised by a judge for having turned his life aroun after taking work courses and the birth of his daughter.
James Eric Orr, 20, pleaded guilty on the morning of his trial to injuring with intent to irgure an 18-year-old victim, after and two others restrained him.
The victim and three others had been walking over the town belt to Hataitai when the attack happened on February 2C 2010, in a clearing on Mt Victoria.
He was bitten several times, ending up with infected bites to his chest, arms and ba He was in hospital for a week fighting the infection.
He was taking work courses through Community Corrections and completed a silviculture course about forestry and tree management.
His partner and their three-week-old daughter were at court yesterday to see him sentenced.
In Wellington District Court, Judge Bruce Davidson said Orr's conduct had been exemplary.
The judge said the victim had been significantly affected, not just having to go to hospital for the physical injuries but al having to spend time detained under the mental health legislation when his mental condition deteriorated.
Judge Davidson sentenced James Brooks to a similar sentence last year on a charge of wounding with reckless disregard.
He will sentence the last of the trio involved, Xenia Borichevsky, next month.
She is to get a discharge without convictic if she has done community work.
Orr's lawyer, Chris Tennet, said the changes in his client's life were positive. The Dominion Post 1 of 1 6/29/2011 4:38 PM Emma Foster Analysing the cultural shape shifting of the vampire, past to present.
By Emma Foster CG Arts and Animation, Year 1 Monday 23 rd April 2012 2,200 Words The Time MachineChris Hunt Emma Foster Contents Introduction 3 Main Body 4 Conclusion 8 Bibliography 8 2 Emma Foster Introduction This assignment will analyse critically the importance and popularity that shadows the mythological being of the vampire in that it is a cultural shape shifter from past to present.
Bram Stoker’s Dracula' will be treated as the basis of the vampire profile and used to discuss the change of the vampire through history.
Sucking Through the Century , 1897-1997 which will aid the exploration of Dracula in relation to the culture it was written during, Michael Ferber’s Romanticism ; a very short introduction to define the art movement of Romanticism and Kathrin Faller’s “And ft's All There""Intertextual Structures , Themes and Characters in Stephenie Meyer's “ Twilight "" Series to examine how far society change has impacted on the view of vampires.
The assignment will begin by defining the point in history where vampire popularity kicked off, it will then go on to examine how vampirism came to be so popular considering the impact of past cultural movements.
A more contemporary change in vampirism will then be regarded, finally leading on to how vampires have become postmodern in our culture.
To conclude, the assignment will strive to show just how much impact culture has on the receiving of the vampire and why this has made them cultural shape shifters.
Stoker’s vampire has characteristically become the archetypal perception of vampirism.
A reason for this is probably the fact that Vracufa' had such an impact on the Victorian society of its publishing.
But why did it have such an impact and why does vampirism continue to have this effect.
Sucking through the Century , 1897-1997 expresses the link between Vracufa' and Victorian society.
What Davidson appears to be saying is that Vracula' evidenced values of Victorian times and therefore, it sat in this society seamlessly.
This would allow a Victorian audience to identify with Stoker’s novel as they would be able to recognise and be familiar with key features associated with the Victorian era.
Davison goes on to explore that a text may not be able to stay popular literature as times change.
Yet she implies that with what could suitably be called a revamp, a text or idea can return to be popular, it just has to fit in with the times.
The popularity of Stoker’s Vracufa' is significant in this idea of fitting vampirism to the notions of time.
Stoker sets his novel during typical Victorian times and so it feels real to his similarly Victorian audience.
The factual and documentary like substance of his descriptions of people and places really create the sense in the audience that they are living during this tale.
Then, Stoker does something that really impacts on Dracula’s place in Victorian history.
He plays on an idea that puts together other Victorian ideas and really sets the tone and response that his audience give, and that is the idea of romanticism.
This is evident throughout ‘Dracula’ which was written in a time of sexual repression and idealised viewings of females in that it throws these ideals out and brings in the taboos.
Just look at how character Dracula succeeds in turning innocent and virtuous Lucy into a binary opposition of what was permissible.
Yes in ways this could alienate the Victorian audience because it is so shocking and scandalous compared to what was known.
However, it enlivens the Victorian male because what was unavailable in common culture could be voyeuristically enjoyed though Dracula.
Yet the males in the story are afraid of this change and perhaps this is why it becomes so enjoyable, the ability to get what you want but still feel you are in the society that forbids it as if you are being rebellious.
As such, the vampirism of 'Dracula’ becomes a metaphor for the repression Victorians faced and feeds quite literally on internal desires and emotions which is what really mattered to these people.
However, before Stoker’s take on the vampire there was another view which rather than feeding on internal desires conformed to societal and cultural beliefs.
The medieval periods were beset with myths and lore that impacted on how society behaved due to the morals tales emitted.
But these messages had to come from deeper ideas, even before medieval times.
Cain killed his brother Abel and so was banished; he wandered until he met Lilith... she is often depicted as killing human children and showed Cain the life power of blood.
What Beresford appears to be conveying is that with Cain’s punishment he gained blood lust through conferring with the embodiment of what the classicism period frowned upon, Lilith the female figure who went against perfection and sinned.
This makes him the depiction of 'the wicked man’ because he goes against all that classicism is about when he murders and makes his own path.
This can be linked to the archetypal vampire because he is punished with immortality through being undead and forever endures blood lust.
Classicism believes in perfection and adherence to principles, and is against romanticism by restricting internal feelings, being more down to business.
So it is right that the behaviour of Cain would be used as a moral to not sin because it follows his internal feelings to kill his brother rather than adhering to what is respected in society.
So with the ideals of classicism in mind and the similarities between 5 Emma Foster Cain’s behaviour and the depiction of the archetypal vampire it makes sense that the vampirism of classical times was the act of sinning.
However, for another society the shape shifting of vampirism could be a political statement for changing societal beliefs.
Since the arrival of Dracula and the many interpretations of it, society has changed and each interpretation has had to accommodate this.
Yet the vampire hasn’t stayed with Dracula, instead new takes on vampirism have arrived to also accommodate change including those which suggest statements about how we live.
One example of this is author Charlene Harris’ The Southern Vampire Mysteries* which seeks to take vampirism into territories it has yet to set foot on.
But in the Southern Vampire Mysteries , this is a new development .. .vampires in Harris*s novels have come K out of the coffin/* have declared themselves in the world and have become a legally recognized minority.
By understanding vampires in the way contemporary culture understands racial or physical difference , Harris has reenvisioned the place and nature of vampires in her fictional world , placing them in social terms rather than in theological terms.
What Harris does is play on the traditional romanticism of the Dracula vampire where internal emotions are more important than societal stature and uses this vampire to symbolise the minorities of the early 2000s.
By combining these two figures she creates a highly emotive character that enables her audience to see the issues of societal racial discrimination, immigration and equality much more distinctly because a different racial group of humanity is still human whereas, the vampire is already subjected to being labelled as something to show it isn’t.
So already we see the vampire as an outcast and can empathise much easier.
But Harris keeps the classical ideals of society within her world which makes her vampire all the more effective because the romanticism and classicism eventually come together through the medium of character Sookie supporting her point that everything should be equal.
What Harris allows her audience is the ability to think for themselves about these cultural issues though an average character that supports elements of both worlds, an understanding that the early 2000s media did not publicise unlike society now.
A crisis that currently floods the media is the behaviour of teenagers which many brush off as them trying to find themselves but it is the crisis ridden teenager that has turned to the vampire genre globally and which suggests yet another revamp in the perception of the vampire.
Structures , Themes and Characters in Stephenie Meyer's “Twilight” Series delves into Stephenie Meyer’s teenage vampirism approach.
What Faller appears to be saying is that Meyer takes away the alienation vampires normally face by putting them alongside a human who feels the same way.
She enables the teenager someone who can relate with her and so does the same with the teenage reader who keeps hold of Meyer’s novel as if it is a life line because they finally feel understood.
Twilight is a pure postmodern take on the vampire through Meyer’s borrowing of aspects to strengthen her vampires’ voice such as the identifiable undead and blood thirsting qualities.
But she doesn’t use them in the same way, instead she pushes them aside with Edward abstaining from his usual diet and managing to bear a child even through not alive.
And so the vampire is no longer a vampire but a metaphor for the struggles teenagers face such as fitting in, finding love and experiencing sex for the first time.
Edward is like the subconscious of Bella and together the characters represent the teenage reader’s self struggle.
A typical vampire has to adapt to new times due to their curse of immortality but this is exactly what we do to fit in.
So it makes sense that vampirism is metaphorical for our own journeys through life.
In Victorian times we needed escapism from sexual repression, in medieval times, a lesson to stay on society’s ideal path but now we just need to be able to be ourselves, so it makes sense that the vampire is more human than ever because we are in times where the want for pure humanity is at its strongest.
A July 20 episode of the HBO drama series about vampires co-existing with humans included a scene in which attendees at a Ted Cruz fundraiser are killed.
A female character also exclaimed a word that combined “Republican” with a vulgar epithet for a woman's genitalia.
Palin told Breitbart News she turned down an offer to i v ■ 1 ■ i make a cameo on the show.
VAMPIRES Primarily a Slavic legend of a blood-sucking creature, supposedly the restless soul of a heretic, criminal, or suicide.
Folklore claims that the vampire leaves its burial place or coffin (sometimes in the form of a bat to fly by night) seeking to drink blood from the living and then returns to its dark grave before first light.
In Rumanian folklore as opposed to Slavic, the draining power of vampires is directed toward their victim’s psychic energy rather than their blood.
Their whole appearance is uncorrupted by death, although the hair on their head and face is longer than at death.
Throughout European history, vampires have been described as having a ruddy lifelike complexion, longish hair that has grown after death, and plump bodies bloated with the blood of their victims.
When a stake has been driven into a vampire’s chest, the corpse utters a deep moan and blood is seen to come from its mouth.
Forensic pathologists tell us that there is a rational scientific explanation for all of these reported conditions.
In many cases of sudden death, the lungs become congealed with a heavily blood-stained frothy fluid.
In the agonized struggle to breathe, this may reach the mouth and nose and can appear on the lips and face when the body is being transported.
If death occurred when the body was king face down, then the face may well be ruddy because the blood will pool in the face and chest regions.
Contrary to common belief, hair on the head and beard cannot grow after death, but it may appear longer because the skin dries out and retracts slightly, leaving a pronounced stubble on the male chin.
During decomposition methane gas often builds up in the thorax and abdominal cavities, giving the corpse a bloated evenfatter-than-in-life appearance.
When a vampire hunter drives a stake into the corpse’s chest, heavily bloodstained fluid may be forced out of the mouth, and gas may be expelled in a rush past the vocal cords, causing noises that could be interpreted as a groan.
Vampires are often depicted with long talonlike nails, but nails fall off as the body decomposes.
The wire triangle was eon negative pole of a dry cell batter)' before bei between the two prisms.
It was believed th ties would generate electricity in the prism tricity was generated, it would drive the from the negative prism toward the positiv it would contact the wire connected wit pole of the battery.
At that point a bel Researchers would then note the spirits could engage in communication.
Following Vandermeulens death, his insi to a Belgian scientist named Rutot. who w> invention and claimed that ne ha cl been at contact with the spirit of the inventor.
United States psychical researcher Her ton attempted to reproduce Rutot's results to confirm his findings.
According to Herodotus , Cambyses, the son of Cyrus the Great, sent 50,000 soldiers from Thebes to attack the Oasis of Siwa and destroy the oracle at the Temple of Amun after the priests there refused to legitimize his claim to Egypt.
After walking for seven days in the desert, the army got to an ""oasis,"" which historians believe was ElKharga.
As no trace of the hapless warriors was ever found, scholars began to dismiss the story as a fanciful tale.
Striking evidence Now, two top Italian archaeologists claim to have found striking evidence that the Persian army was indeed swallowed in a sandstorm.
Twin brothers Angelo and Alfredo Castiglioni are already famous for their discovery 20 years ago of the ancient Egyptian ""city of gold"" known as Berenike Panchrysos.
Presented recently at the archaeological film festival of Rovereto, the discovery is the result of 13 years of research and five expeditions to the desert ""It all started in 1996, during an expedition aimed at investigating the presence of iron meteorites near Bahrin, one small oasis not far from Siwa,"" Alfredo Castiglioni, director of the Eastern Desert Research Center in Varese, told Discovery News.
Then the brothers spotted something really intriguing — what could have been a natural shelter.
It was a rock about 114. feet long, 5. feet in height and 9. feet deep.
Such natural formations occur in the desert, but this large rock was the only one in a large area.
About a quarter-mile from the natural shelter, the Castiglioni team found a silver bracelet, an earring and few spheres which were likely part of a necklace.
Indeed a very similar earring, dating to the fifth century B.C., has been found in a dig in Turkey,"" Andrea Cagnetti, a leading expert of ancient jewelry, told Discovery News.
In the following years, the Castiglioni brothers studied ancient maps and came to the conclusion that Cambyses' army did not take the widely believed caravan route via the Dakhla Oasis and Farafra Oasis.
Indeed we found that such a route already existed in the 18th Dynasty,"" Castiglioni said.
On the contrary, since the oasis on the other route were controlled by the Egyptians, the army would have had to fight at each oasis,"" Castiglioni said.
To test their hypothesis, the Castiglioni brothers did geological surveys along that alternative route.
They found desiccated water sources and artificial wells made of hundreds of water pots buried in the sand.
Thermoluminescence has dated the pottery to 2,500 years ago, which is in line with Cambyses' time,"" Castiglioni said.
In their last expedition in 2002, the Castiglioni brothers returned to the location of their initial discovery.
Right there, some 62 miles south of Siwa, ancient maps had erroneously located the temple of Amun.
The soldiers believed they had reached their destination, but instead they found the khamsin the hot, strong, unpredictable southeasterly wind that blows from the Sahara desert over Egypt.
Some might have reached the lake of Sitra, thus surviving,"" Castiglioni said.
Mass grave discovered At the end of their expedition, the team decided to investigate Bedouin stories about thousands of white bones that would have emerged decades ago during particular wind conditions in a nearby area.
Indeed, they found a mass grave with hundreds of bleached bones and skul ls.
Among the bones, a number of Persian arrow heads and a horse bit, identical to one appearing in a depiction of an ancient Persian horse, emerged.
The team communicated their finding to the Geological Survey of Egypt and gave the recovered objects to the Egyptian authorities.
Piero Pruneti, editor of Archeologia Viva, Italy’s most important archaeology magazine, is impressed by the team's work.
More in msnbc.com Technology and Science © 2009 Discovery Channel First fesnd ®.cc@mts fr©m the Message b®ard @f f@rteantiM.es ocew.
Vanishing cowboy Around Christmas 1981 1 travelled from Kentucky to California to spend the holidays with my family.
When I arrived, the house was filled with the smell of food being prepared.
He brought me a glass of wine without asking me (I drink very little and never during the day), so I let the glass sit untouched.
It was broken in a odd place; usually a wineglass will break at the narrowest part of the stem, or where the stem meets the base or the bowl.
While I studied my broken glass, Pat’s glass, sitting on the table untouched, also broke, in the same odd place.
She mentioned to Pat that he should have known it would happen, after all “he” liked to break the good crystal.
I remained confused no one was willing to explain to me that they knew the ranch to be haunted.
During my stay that holiday, several more crystal glasses broke in the same way, always while the glass was untouched and in the same place on the stem.
My family was having a party for their friends, most of whom were a lot older than me.
I was about 27 or 28 and most of the people attending the party were at least 40. 1 was the only single person, and I was bored.
I had almost talked myself into getting a plate of food and going upstairs to start a new book, but stalled a bit.
I thought there was still a chance I might meet an unattached young man, or at least, someone more in my age group.
I glanced at the fireplace about 12ft from me and noticed a young cowboy.
He was wearing chaps, a cowboy hat off his head and hanging from leather ties around his throat, and spurs.
But then I remembered I was on a working ranch that still housed and tended horses, and maybe this guy had just finished work.
My plan was to stand where I was until he looked my way but he never looked at me.
Another guest came from the other end of the hallway and started to swing the bathroom door shut so he could get past.
He shut the door, took a couple of steps and decided to enter the bathroom himself.
Yes, the bathroom did have a window, but it was only about 18in wide and would have been impossible for a grown man wearing full chaps to have climbed through.
It was less than a minute from the time the cowboy entered the bathroom to the time the guest tapped on the door.
I asked my sister-in-law who was standing in the kitchen at the time, if she had seen him.
She could in fact describe him, but then said she hadn’t seen him that night.
I later learned that different family members had seen him on other occasions.
I was the only one who saw the cowboy that night and I had had only one drink.
After that New Year’s Eve my family told me that they suspected the ranch to be haunted.
One other apparition they witnessed, a sea captain from the 19th century, also seemed solid and real but could come and go in an instant.
This would often be witnessed by two or three family members at the same time.
Mysterious burning smells had also drifted through the house and they called the fire department.
Firefighters came, and could also smell the mysterious odour, but couldn’t identify it either.
The fire chief admitted that this wasn’t the first time they had been called to the ranch for the same occurrence.
Poltergeist activity was frequent and ranged from flying skillets to the shoving of family members.
The Nature ConsexVancy says it has received a gift of South Kona forest land that has never been cleared or grazed.
The non-profit organization said retired Honolulu physician Charman Akina donated the 37 acres. — "" A Miraculous Blessed Virgin Statue in Transylvania byBoczor Iosif O n the 9th of June, 2000, 1 went by bus to Sumuleu Cliuc, a Transylvanian place of pilgrimage.
The bus went as slowly as a tortoise because the road was full with pilgrims going on foot to Sumuleu Ciuc.
Sumuleu Ciuc (Hungarian name, Csiksomlyo) is a suburb of Miercurea Ciuc, a town at the foot of Carpathians, not far away from Dracula’s castle.
Every year on Whitsunday, 200,000 to 300,000 pilgrims from Romania, Hungary, Slovakia, Austria, Germany, the United States, and Canada take part in a procession and in a Mass in the open, on a hill surrounded by fir trees.
The Blessed Virgin Statue Many pilgrims pray before the Blessed Virgins statue in the baroque Roman Catholic church.
This church was built between 1802 and 1826 on the place of a medieval Gothic church.
The 2.27-meter-high Saint Mary’s statue was carved from the wood of a lime tree between 1515 and 1523.
Some art historians suppose that the sculpture is the work of Veit Stoss , a famous German sculptor.
Several times, the Tartars sacked Sumuleu Ciuc and set it on fire, but God and the Blessed Virgin always saved the statue.
Foaming with rage, he began to stab the Blessed Mary’s face with a lance.
The khan could not overturn the statue, because his hand was paralyzed when he touched this devotional object.
The restorers have tried in vain to paint over the traces of the stabbing, but no paint of any sort will stick to the statue.
After the light disappeared, Bashaw Ali with its soldiers invaded the village near the church.
According to some documents of the epoch, the smile disappeared from the Blessed Mary’s face when the enemy came nearer Sumuleu Ciuc.
In August 1 60 1 , a young monk named Domonkos stole the Blessed Virgin’s crown, which is ornamented with pearls.
When the thief was praying before the altar, tiny balls of light flashed around the statue, then glittered upon it.
The monk trembled at the thought of his sin and wanted to run from the church, but he fell down and could stand only when the lights disappeared.
Another monk, R Bonaventura Palfalvi Ferenc, saw the light when it flew out from the church and then gradually grow dim on the church tower.
Losteinen Leonard mentions in his book on the history of the Transylvanian monasteries that on December 26, 1746, a dried flower transformed into a single candle.
Healing Power Many plaques confirm that this miraculous statue has healing power, too.
In 1746, Deak Janos, a choir master from Ozsdola, and Joseph Udeak, a landowner, swore that they had recovered because they had prayed before the statue.
In 1764, Karol Stanislaw Radziwill, a Polish aristocrat, had to leave Moscow because he affirmed that the Polish people had the right to elect their king.
The doctors gave up their patient for dead, but after having prayed before the statue, the Polish aristocrat recovered quickly.
In 1870, a paralyzed woman prayed earnestly before the statue and was then able to leave her crutches in the church.
In 1931 a child from Braila in southen Romania was cured of her mysterious disease when her dress touched the statue.
He is a regular contributor to several Hungarian paranormal magazines and a correspondent for the Fortean Times.
Virgin vision in glass WOMAN IN THE WINDOW On the weekend of 14/15 June, some 25,000 people flocked to Milton Hospital near Boston, Massachusetts, to gaze at a second floor window said to show an image of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
Few, if any, of the visitors doubted that Our Lady had appeared to deliver a message.
Five years ago a seal broke in the window and a chemical deposit started to turn the glass a blotchy white, which gradually turned into an apparent simulacrum and inspired an impromptu religious shrine similar to that seen in front of die glass-fronted Seminole Finance building in Clearwater, Florida, in 1996 , Dozens of bouquets, rosaries, lalloons, and a large plastic sontainer for money were placed beneath the window.
Most visitors igreed the image showed the Virgin Mary cradling her son; lut she was standing either imong clouds, on a nountaintop, or astride a globe, lepending on one’s perspective.
In a statement released to the lews media on 16 June, the lospital asked people to limit their dsiting hours to between 5:30 and 1:30 in the evening.
Parking for staff and visitors, already tight, has ieen diminished as an entire lot vas roped off for visitors to stand Officials sought advice from the trchdiocese of Boston “on what ippropriate steps to take"" about he phenomenon.
On 19 June, the hospital began covering the BVM image with a tarpaulin for most of the day to try and reduce the crowds and disruption.
Some said that the Virgin had come to warn Milton Hospital not to join with Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, which was thought to allow abortions.
SQUASH SEEDS OF FATE Cutting into a 151b banana squash on 13 March, Kasim Barakzia, owner of Salt Lake City’s Baba Afghan Restaurant, noticed strange white etchings on the normally smooth seeds, which resemble those from a pumpkin, inside the thick-skinned winter squash.
He said his restaurant has cut into two or three banana squash every day for the past nine years and he had never seen anything like this.
Some of the etchings resembled the letters F, A,T and E and the numbers 4 and 14; others had markings that looked like a tree and bird; and a few appeared to bear the Arabic for Allah.
One had the Arabic letter baa, a kind of “u” with a dot underneath, and some of the etchings looked like Japanese, Chinese or Hindi.
Barakzia laid out the seeds on black trays near the cash register of his adjacent Oriental rug and pottery business.
Lori McConnel, one of his customers, suggested that the markings had been made by worms.
The Friends of the Fishkill Supply Depot has received $24,600 from the National Park Service.
The group, which works to preserve the USA’s largest burial ground for Revolutionary War soldiers, will use the funds to create maps that depict archaeological features of Gen.
As documented in Heuvelmans's book On the Track of Unknown Animals and more recently reassessed within my own In Search of Prehistoric Survivors, one of the most intriguing of Africa's many mammalian cryptids must surely be that amphibious anomaly generally dubbed the water elephant.
Possessing a noticeably long, ovoid skull and a relatively short trunk according to eyewitness accounts, it seems to bear more than a passing resemblance to some of the earliest, long-extinct members of the proboscidean lineage, but has not been seriously investigated in the field for several decades.
However, in mid-2003, Bill Gibbons, a veteran seeker of cryptozoological curiosities, plans to visit the Democratic Republic of Congo with a Belgian helicopter company operating there, in order to pursue claims by the company's president and CEO that a military helicopter flying over Lake Tumba spied a herd of very strangelooking elephants that the helicopter's pilots thought may be the legendary water elephants.
According to Bill, the producer of a French TV documentary company is keen to film the expedition, so we wish everyone associated with this project the best of luck, and await further developments with interest.
Waterford A seven-headed sea creature that causes droughts when it is insulted.
A tale from the Fulani of Mali in Africa tells of a story about a girl called Jinde.
Each day Jinde would carry a jug of water on her head and take some water from the river to bring home.
One day the Waterlord rose from the waters and captured Jinde who then forced her to marry him.
Despite being in love with another she had no choice but to become its spouse.
Waterlord decided to let Jinde go back home to say goodbye one last time to her mother.
But when she came back home, her parents refused to open the door saying that her home was with the monster now.
She then went to the house of her old boyfriend who then took his father's sword and protected her as they went to the lake.
The Waterlord raised its head above the water to kill the young man but Jinde 's boyfriend was victories in the fight and severed off the monster's seven heads.
Janyl Jumadinova and Oliver BonhamCarter chose an unusual venue for their wedding, Forest Lawn Cemetery, last weekend.
The bride, who is from Kyrgyzstan, said her culture holds a firm belief in spirits.
Some of the groom's ancestors are buried in the cemetery, the Omaha WorldHerald reported.
But today we thought we would have a look at a few of the more fantastic creatures that are featured in medieval bestiaries, many of which are scarcely known today.
The amphivena The name of this beast is variously given as anphivena, amphisbaena, amfivena, and many other variations* But the true spelling of its name is not the least of its mysteries; the exact nature of the amphi vena’s form was also a source of considerable uncertainty.
Detail of a miniature of an amphivena, from a theological miscellany including a bestiary, England, 1236 1250, Harley MS 3244 . f 62r Detail of a bas-de-page scene of two amphivenas, from the Queen Mary Psalter, England , 1310 1320, Royal MS2B VIL f 138v The bestiary text tells us that this animal is so called because it has two heads, one in the 'normal position' and one at the end of its tail, and that its body forms a round shape.
In general, it looks like a bull, but has horns that curl backwards so that if someone were to fall on them, they would be uninjured.
This creature’s true claim to fame is its unique defense mechanism; when threatened, we are told, a bonnacon will spray its attacker with poisonous dung.
This excrement 'produces such a stench over an area of two acres that its heat singes everything it touches’, and needless to say, it is extremely effective at ending a pursuit.
Its most distinctive characteristic is its charming wide-mouthed grin, which stretches across its head.
Its teeth are single, continuous pieces of bone, and it is capable of imitating the sound of a human voice.
The basilisk The basilisk is included among the reptiles in the bestiary.
A basilisk is an exceedingly dangerous animal, as its scent can annihilate almost anything, and its gaze is terrible enough to cause the death of any man foolish enough to look at it.
Detail of a basilisk wearing a crown , Harley MS 4751 t f 59r Detail of a basilisk killing a man with its gaze and being attacked by a weasel \ Royal MS 12 C XIX. f 63 r Aftlrfcus grttt lannc-itrtptafrq^ to It is, however, vulnerable to the weasel, which can pursue the basilisk into its hiding hole and kill it.
In the bestiary text, much is made of the example of the basilisk; the writer takes the opportunity to expound on the nature of evil embodied in this horrible creature.
We’ll have a look at some more of our bestiary favourites in the months to come , and please send along some of your finds to us on Twitter @BLMedieval. Sarah J Biggs TERRY COLON ""NEXT CASE, 0 A Bristol man, caught with £17,000 worth of cannabis, convinced a jury it was for personal use.
The man and his partner chain-smoked joints to relieve paranoia, agoraphobia, post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety and light sensitivity.
He drugged women with the date-rape drug GHB and filmed himself raping his unconscious victims at his beach house.
He faced a life sentence, but had not been seen since he jumped bail three weeks earlier.
AND SOME CLASSICS © A young Italian girl, Giovanna d’Arco was sitting beside a fire in Caserta, near Naples, in 1978 when a spark leapt from the hearth and ignited her clothes, burning her to death.
Welsh Dragons everything you need to know Posted on Jul 25, 2014 RICHARD FREEMAN, one of the world’s leading cryptozoologists, gives an indepth history and insight into Welsh Dragons • Of all monsters the dragon can truly be called the king.
Roman rule, under which conquered people became Roman citizens, may have added to the whole mix.
Roman cohorts, 1 0 of which formed a legion, marched into battle flying a dragon standard.
This consisted of a metal serpent’s head attached to a long, fabric body like a wind sock that would have writhes when air blew through it.
Roman dragon lore was influenced by Greece, Iran and by the Dacians, a people who live in what is now Eastern Europe and also had a dragon standard.
The word v boa’, in modern times used to describe constricting snakes of the genus boaidae found in South and Central America* The word itself however was originally used to describe huge snakes that were said to feed on both cattle and humans.
These monster snakes were reported from what is now Italy and other areas* Pliny the Elder writes of one killed on the Vatican Hill during the reign of Emperor Claudius that contained the body of a whole infant in its belly* No known snakes of that size inhabit Europe but there are persistent reports from the Crimea of huge snakes* Interestingly similar reports come from the Caucasus Mountains, once the ancient kingdom of Colchisl were the Greek hero Jason was said to have encountered a serpentine dragon.
The men fell back in horror and after some consultation decided to cross further up river.
But as the soldiers began to ford the waters the monster reappeared and seized a man.
As each of the warriors tried to cross they were grabbed by the monster’s jaws, encircled by its coils and dragged under* After many men were lost this way-it seemed like the serpent would defeat the entire armyRegales ordered that it should be bombarded by ballista-giant, rock hurling catapults.
It was on public display on Capitol Hill until I 33 BC, when it was lost during the Numantine War with the Iberian Celts.
Armed with razor teeth and claws, and a mighty tail, its most formidable weapon was the white-hot jets of flame it grouted at its victims.
These monsters were considered to be the most magical of beasts with powers such as shape-shifting, self-regeneration, and mind reading attributed to them.
They were covered in impenetrable scales and had only one vulnerable spot.
The Gwiber The gwiber was a winged serpent of huge size and a venomous bite.
Gwibers were said to grow from ordinary vipers that had drunk the milk from a woman’s breast or lapped up human milk that had fallen on the ground.
British dragon lore is full of stories of dragons and worms sucking up milk from cows or being pacified by offerings of milk.
Were as a true dragon has four legs and two wings the wyvern has only two legs and two wings.
Wyverns had stings in their tails and were blamed for spreading diseases like plague.
It could re-join severed portions of its body and was hence very hard to kill.
The Cockatrice The cockatrice is a small relation of the dragon that can strike any living thing dead with its baleful glance.
This monster was supposedly generated when a rooster’s egg was hatched by a snake or toad.
Welsh Dragons in Glamorgan Penllin Brilliantly-coloured flying serpents were said to inhabit the woods of Penllin as recently as the mid 19th century.
People who were old men and women at the beginning of the 20th century recalled them well from their youth.
They were prone to raid chicken coops and as a result were hunted into extinction.
Folklorist Ruth Tongue interviewed many of these people and recorded their stories.
One old woman said her grandfather had killed one after a fierce fight.
She recalled seeing the skin preserved at his house when she was a girl.
Cardiff A worm was supposed to live at the bottom of a whirlpool in the River Taff.
Welsh Dragons in Pembrokeshire Preseli Hills A huge black serpent guarded treasure in these hills.
None dared approach it until one day a man walking his dog found the monster asleep.
He filled his pockets with gems until he heard the beast awakening behind him.
When he reached the base of the hill he turned and saw the worm vanishing into a cave.
Welsh Dragons in Dyfed Trellech a’r Betvvs A gwiber is supposed to guard a prehistoric tumulus in the area.
Newcastle Emlyn A flame-spewing wyvern lived in a ruined castle, and was covered in impenetrable scales.
The wyvern reacted to the cloth like a bull and swooped down to attack it, allowing the soldier to shoot it in its one vulnerable spot.
Castle Gwys In one of the strangest British dragon legends, the beast here was a cockatrice whose body was covered in eyes.
For some unexplained reason the estates of Winston were up for grabs to whoever could look on the freakish thing without it seeing them.
One resourceful chap hid inside a barrel and rolled into the cockatrice’s lair.
Welsh Dragons in Powys Llanbadarn Fawr A sleeping dragon is said to be kept dormant by a ring of churches surrounding Radnor Forest.
As late as the 1 930’s the Rev Daniel Parry -Jones wrote that a belief in the dragon was still strong and one old man claimed to have heard it breathing.
If any of these churches are demolished it is said that the dragon would awaken once more.
Llandelio Graban A dragon roosted in the tower of Llandelio Graban church until a local ploughboy worked out a way of destroying it.
He carved a dummy dragon out of oak, and had the blacksmith cover it with steel hooks and spikes* It was then painted red and erected on the tower whilst the dragon was away hunting.
Upon returning, the dragon saw what it thought was a rival and savagely attacked it.
The real dragon coiled about its facsimile and tried to squeeze the life from it.
The genuine dragon was fatally wounded, and both the monster and the fake dragon came crashing down from the tower to their ruin.
Welsh Dragons in Gwynedd Betws-y-Coed A monster known as the Wybrant gw i be r terrorized the neighbourhood* An outlaw from Hiraethog set out to kill it Beforehand he consulted three soothsayers.
One said the gwiber would poison him, the second said it would rib out his throat and the third said it would drown him.
Welsh Dragons in Clwyd Penmynydd In this detailed story a rich nobleman invites a soothsayer to the celebration feast after his son’s birth* The sage foretells that the boy will die of a gwiber’s bite* The boy is sent away to England for safekeeping, and his father offers a reward to whoever can slay the last gwiber in the area.
The gwiber falls into the pit and sees its own reflection* Thinking it a rival, it attacks the mirror until exhausted; then they boy leaps into the pit and hacks off the gwiber’s head* Years later the nobleman’s son, now a spoilt teenager, returns and is shown the gwiber’s skull.
He contemptuously kicks it and one of its long, dead fangs slices through his boot.
Cynwch Lake A wyvern dwelt in this lake beneath the slopes ofMoel Offrum.
It emerged to poison the countryside and devour whatever it could catch.
The Wizard of Ganllwyd employed a group of archers to kill it, but the wyvern always eluded them.
One day a shepherd boy named Meredydd found the wyvern sleeping on the hill* He ran two miles to Cymmer Abbey and borrowed a magick axe.
He hacked the wyvern’s head off while it was asleep* Llarhaeadr-ym-Mochant A gwiber brought a reign of terror to the area until the surviving locals studded a huge megalith with spikes and hooks and swathed it in red cloth.
The red colour enraged the gwiber who attacked, becoming fatally entwined on the hooks.
Nant Gwynant After the Roman Legions left, Vortigern became the first British king.
He decided to build a stronghold on the Iron Age hill fort of Dinas Emrys.
Every time work began upon Dinas Emry, it would be destroyed by earthquake-like disturbances.
Vortigem’s wizards said that in order to stop these events, the ground should be sprinkled with the blood of the son of a virgin.
A boy was found whose mother had apparently been magically impregnated by a spirit.
He was about to be sacrificed when he went into a trance and announced that beneath the hill was a lake.
In the lake dwelt a red dragon and a white dragon who perpetually fought.
The two great reptiles fought until, at last, the white dragon gave way and fled.
Seeing this as an omen that his forces would defeat the invading Saxons, Vortigern adopted the red dragon as his emblem.
His friends, who were waiting for him on the bank, were horrified to see a serpentine creature coiling after him as he swam* As he approached the shore the thing reared up and wound about him like a python.
Welsh Dragons in Denbighshire Denbigh A true dragon desolated this area and killed ever knight that tried to stand against it.
One day a knight called Sion Bodiau who had two thumbs on each hand, challenged the dragon* The monster was so preoccupied with gawping at its foes odd hands that the knight was able to strike its vulnerable spot and slay it.
There have been many theories proffered to explain the dragon phenomena.
One is that dragons are based on some kind of flesh and blood creature, gigantic reptile of some kind.
It has been widely suggested that fossil remains of dinosaurs and other large animals were the basis for dragon legends.
Whilst they may have been an influence in some cases, most fossil bones are too fragmentary to give rise to such awe-inspiring legends.
We must also remember that many ancient texts specifically speak of dragons as living entities interacting with humans.
There are some living reptiles that make impressive dragons* Crocodiles can be huge and deadly predators.
The largest, the Indo-Paciflc crocodile {Crocodylus porosus) can reach 1 0 meters in length and tip the scales at 3 tons.
The ancient Chinese called the creature the “flood dragon’ 1 The African Nile crocodile can exceed 7 meters and can kill a lion with one bite.
It was worshipped by the Egyptians as Sebek, the god of the life giving Nile.
These armour-plated giants can bite down with a force of 10,000 Newton’s.
Big constricting snakes make good analogues of the limbless “worm” type of dragon.
The reticulated python ( Python reticuatlus) of S E Asia can grow to ten meters and swallow animals as large as deer whole.
The green anaconda may exceed eight meters and is far more bulky than any python.
Tales of monstrously large specimens filter out of the South American jungles from time to time.
The infamous komodo dragon is found only on three small Indonesian islands* It remained undiscovered until 1912.
Chinese pottery found on Komodo Island suggests this animal was known to seafarers from the orient* Impressive though it is the Komodo dragon looked like a pipsqueak compared to its pre -historic relative Megalania prisca.
It evolved to feed on the giant ice age marsupials such as Diprotodon a rhino sized wombat, and Procoptodon a ten-foot tall kangaroo.
Author Peter Dickinson postulated that dragons may have evolved from huge carnivorous dinosaurs such as Tyrannosaurus rex* Dickinson believes that the dragons flew and breathed fire via the manipulation of hydrogen gas* The wings evolved from a modified ribcage and the chambered stomach was a huge gas bag* The dragon created hydrogen gas from hydrochloric acid in the gut mixed with calcium from the bones of its victims and ingestion of limestone.
The dragon, according to Dickinson was essentially a living hot air balloon* It flew by inflating the expandable gut and using the wings to steer.
But looking at dragons as mortal flesh and blood creatures may be wrong* Perhaps they were something much stranger.
Maybe the dragon exists as an entity in a reality different to our own.
This would explain how they could appear, terrorize a community, and then vanish.
Another idea is that they are a massive, collective, sub-conscious, thought form.
The thought form ortulpa is said to be a 3D semi solid image created by the power of the mind.
Buddhist llamas in Tibet are said to be able to summon up tulpas during intense meditation* French explorer Dame Alexandra David Kneel was said to have created a tulpa of a monk whilst studying in Tibet.
Polish medium Franek Kluskl was said to have summoned up huge cats, birds, and even ape-men during seances.
Perhaps, considering the types of beast he called up, he was creating tulpas.
Several million years ago, our Australopithecine ancestors on the plains of East Africa had a struggle to survive.
Our ancestors were being preyed upon by and were in competition with various formidable creatures.
But when these things manifest in places that could not support a “real” creature maybe we should look to thought forms for answers* No one explanation is likely to hold the key to the riddle of the dragon.
Cryptozoologist RICHARD FREEMAN, Zoological Director, Centre for Fortean Zoology, has searched the globe for unknown animals and strange beasts.
He is the author of several books, on subjects such as dragons yet another of his expert fields and oriental ghosts and demons.
T he European side of the legend of Madog examined in this magazine last month placed the Welsh prince in a gentle pastoral of manuscripts, inscriptions and philology.
American evidence a credibility-stretching corpus if ever there was one is, on the other hand, full of interrogatives which finish off the prince in the estimation of ‘establishment’ scholars.
For someone who wants to steer a ‘sensible’ middle course, the most terrifying aspect of ‘Madog in America’ is the sheer bulk of the evidence.
It has been estimated that between 1550 and 1850 about 15 Indian peoples were declared by the Madogwys as the descendants of Madog.
These include the Mandans, the Kutenai, the Padoucas, the Comanches, the Aztecs, the Doeg, the Cherokee, and various Caribbean tribes.
In that same period, scores of descriptions of encounters between travellers and ‘Welsh Indians’ got into print.
In the modem period from about 1850 to the present day these encounters were replaced by findings of ‘Welsh’ artefacts, words and folk customs among Amerindian peoples.
No source book has yet been written but, when it comes, it will be a couple of thousand pages long, at least.
Archaeological parallels between America and Wales could be mistakes or coincidences.
It is a description by Morgan Jones of events in 1666, first written down in 1686 (this date can be trusted), though not actually published until 1740.
The ‘desire factor’ is the extent to which a given individual would find it exciting to experience something, independent of whether that ‘something’ is true or not.
The higher the ‘desire factor’ the more care with which we must treat reports like this.
To put this in concrete terms, two individuals find themselves in a forest in Canada.
Both are ‘unknown’ creatures and both are duly reported to the park ranger.
The sasquatch is something that most of us have heard about from childhood and that carries with it a frisson of the unknown and the wilderness.
Whether through dishonesty, error, or a mixture of the two, an individual might ‘desire’ to have such a story to his name.
The purple beetle, however, just isn’t going to make people come up to you in a crowded room.
This may have the whiff of psycho-babble about it, but it is offered here as an honest attempt to help us get from the 21st century to Morgan Jones in the 17th.
Today we are perhaps inclined to see Welsh Indians as purple beetles something bizarre certainly, but not something that you would go out hoping to find, or God forbid, boast about afterwards.
However, when Jones come across them they were the sasquatch of their day well-known legends guaranteed to get you a free drink in any bar in town.
But it is an extremely important consideration to take into account when considering his story.
T o show just how the desire factor influenced early sightings in North America we can take two texts, from either end of the golden age of WelshTndian spotting; the first from the late 16th century, the second from the mid' 19th century.
At the end of the 16 th century, when Raleigh wrote, he was not alone in claiming to have found the Welsh in the New World.
As early as 1568, David Ingram had reported Welsh Indians in Canada along with the first sighting of the American elephant.
The peak period, however, came in the 18th century when sightings occurred much more frequently, the next account, from 1865, being one of the last.
In Raleigh, it was hustled along by an attempt to gain the new Continent for England.
By the time of Tappan it was an inherited idea from numerous wilderness stories like that of Morgan Jones.
WELSH INDIANS WERE REPORTED IN CANADA, ALONG WITH THE AMERICAN ELEPHANT That an undoubtedly intelligent man could believe that an Indian language was Welsh or decide that Mexican blankets resembled those from around Cardiff is testimony to its strength.
The reports of Tappan and Raleigh belongs to the enormous comic fund of mistakes and misidentifications that are the special privilege of the Madog researcher.
They stand along with James Girty, the wilderness man who was enlisted to help to compile a WelshTndian vocabulary.
He was the Southwalian who com' plained that the Comanches were difficult to understand because they spoke Northwalian.
Besides their comic potential, two further points need to be noted about these encounters with Welsh Indians.
First, the incredible geographical range covered by the Welsh Indians who were invariably always at the very edge of the area currently being explored by the Western powers at any given time.
In the 19th century it was the southwest; and one 20th'Century report points to British Columbia.
T he second point and this is characteristic of phenomena where ‘the desire factor’ is high is that the accounts of sightings often fall into a pattern.
The first common feature is that the hero (or his friend) being captured by Indians and on the point of death speaks Welsh, to the shock of a Welsh'Speaking Indian who happens to be present.
When in the Indian village, the hero is shown a manuscript or even a printed work usually the Bible and usually written in Welsh.
You can be a firm believer in the Welsh Indians and still accept that most of the reports have to be fabrications or misunderstandings.
The fact that so many different individuals went through remarkably similar experiences in different comers of the American Continent is simply not credible.
We are dealing with the equivalent of fishermen’s tales, ‘periodically rehearsed fables’, wilderness myths and colossal misunderstandings.
The answer to this question will depend ultimately on the evidence of language, of legends, of archaeology, of physiognomy and of customs among one very interesting Amerindian people, the Mandans, who were first encoun' tered on the Missouri.
They were decimated by smallpox in 1836; however, not before their civilisation was carefully observed by several pioneers.
ILLUSTRATION BY GEORGE CATLIN/MARY EVANS PICTURE LIBRARY of Madog the fire behind the smoke of the Welsh Indian myth.
Secondly, their customs were marked as being ‘civilised’; they lived, for example, in well-constructed villages; they refused to torture captured enemies and they kept agreements.
However, before the Welsh passports are handed out, it is worth pointing out that there are other possibilities.
Another reason the Mandans may have looked different from their neighbours is that could have been the last remnants of an older Indian group in the area or an intrusive people.
It is also important not to get carried away with European ideas of civilisation; by 18th-century standards, the Mandans were actually more ‘civilised’ than the 12th-century Welsh.
The best that the descriptions of special physiognomy and customs can do, then, is to open the door through which better proof may come.
They are not decisive in themselves, and certainly not decidedly Welsh.
In 1833 the American (nonWelshspeaking) artist George Catlin stayed with the Mandans for several months.
It is mainly thanks to Catlin who was seduced by the Welsh Indian theory that such claims continue to be made for Mandan.
Among the coincidences between Mandan and Welsh, for example, is that fish in Mandan is pysg . . . and in Welsh it is pisg.
While Mandan was clearly Indian it is, in fact, a Sioux language the question arose whether it was a mongrel CelticAmerindian tongue that had, only recently, been overwhelmed by native elements.
Evans, a Welsh-speaker, had originally come to America in search of Welsh Indians, but detected no sign of Welsh in Mandan.
In fact, he went to the trouble of explicitly denying its presence in a letter.
Various half-hearted and, on one occasion, dishonest explanations have been cooked up to explain this, 5 but Evans’ evidence stands as a powerful brake on the Welsh/Mandan theory.
It may be true that some words in Mandan like ‘fish’ resemble Welsh, but Catlin also alleged that, in his day, the pronouns of Mandan (he, she, it ... ) were Welsh in origin.
A language can, of course, lend words to another; the Japanese words samurai , karate and karaoke are used in English.
For a language to borrow words as basic as ‘he’, ‘she’ and ‘it’, it would have to be fully-blown Creole; in that case Welsh would have left far more behind it than the few words recorded in the 19th century, or those that Evans so singularly failed to spot in the 18th.
The few ‘identical’ words are, in fact, much more easily explained by chance.
A Mandan initiation ceremony by Catlin. dences of meaning in words that sound similar.
Only someone with a background in the Sioux languages (to which Mandan belongs) and the space to develop technical linguistic arguments could really give that.
But we should not kid ourselves that these links have any scientific basis.
The Mandans may have had Welsh blood in their veins, but there is no linguistic proof to that effect.
A cynic might even note that the Modogwys made a fatal mistake in choosing the Mandans; they found a people for whom too much additional evidence survives.
Brave his Soul: the Story of Prince Madog of Wales and his discovery of America in 1170 p31.
Deacon's book is littered with apparently important but undocumented contributions to the Madog question.
At the moment he is to be found in Florence, Italy, surrounded by lots of books.
Were-hyena Deadly Origins-Many parts of Africa In the Kanuri lauguage of the former Bomo Empire in the Lake Chad regiieon, werehyens are called “bultungftn ” roughly tranlated to “1 change into a hyena ” It was once belive that one or two village in the region were home to many were hyena such as Kabultiloa Belief in the bouda is also present in Sudan, Tanzania and Morocco.
In Western Sudanic folklore a human hyena hybrid creature is depicted as a cannibalistic monster who nightly transforms and terrorizes people, especially lovers.
The creature is often portrayed to be a magically powerful healer, blacksmith, or woodcutter in its human form, recognizable through different signs such as a hairy body, red and gleaming eyes and a nasal voice.
Members of the Kore cult of the Bambara in Mali “become” hyenas by imitating the animals behaviour through masks and roleplays.
These are evocative of the hyenas’ reviled habits, and may also be used to invoke fear among the participants into avoiding such habits and traits in their own lives.
Residents are at a loss over what vicious animal would leave only carcasses of its prey after feasting on them.
An article published recently by the Manila Standard Today said farmers are becoming increasingly fearful of the creature, which strikes when the moon is full, sucks the blood of its prey and tears off the limbs of livestock such as goats.
Locals believe that the culprit was similar to the mythical werewolf, a creature that strikes during the evening and transforms into a four-legged creature.
The island that the supposed werewolf inhabits is as remote and detached from civilisation as any other minor island in the Philippines.
To reach it by boat from Romblon, people would have to travel five hours in a motorised outrigger boat, it is closer to the main Oriental Mindoro island, where most residents get their supplies.
It not known whether the creature hunts alone or moves against its prey in packs, like wolves and wild dogs do.
In an attack last Wednesday, nine goats owned by the local village chief, Ulpiano Ebora of San Vicente, were killed.
Before this, several of the livestock were killed in the same locale and the adjacent village of Poblacion.
So far, no one has seen the creature and there has been hardly any evidence — except for the carcasses.
Philippine folklore is rife with frightful creatures of the underworld.
During the Spanish period, the colonial government in the island of Panay pervaded the myth of the “aswang”, a local version of the shape-shifting, flesh-eating banshee-like creature in European folklore.
The story was allegedly spread to prevent Filipinos from rebelling against then colonial administration, since rebels usually held their clandestine meetings in the evening.
There are others who see similarities between the mystery animal that victimised the goats of Sibale and the so-called “chupacabra,” a four-legged creature similar to a dog with sharp canines, which can tear the flesh of its victims like a hungry wild animal and suck their blood.
Man claiming to be chased by werewolf in Conway By David Harten CONWAY — A bizarre incident in Conway led officers to a man on the Hendrix College campus who believed he was being chased by a werewolf.
Anderson told his story to Conway police officers, who arrived at the scene after public safety officers at Hendrix called dispatch.
According to a report released by the Conway Police Department, the incident began when Anderson was in the local Wal-Mart and noticed a ""strange red light"" that Anderson said caused his body to start smoking.
Anderson said he then ran from the Wal-Mart to where he had been sleeping, the alleyway by the Coin Laundry, 1065 Clayton Street, the report said.
When he arrived, Anderson claimed that a ""large beast began to talk to him"" and that he believed the beast was a werewolf.
He also claimed that the werewolf told him to ""get rid of the odor,"" only Anderson didn't know what he meant.
Anderson then ran to Carrington Apartments at 2010 Cleveland Ave. and kicked in the door Anderson stated that the werewolf would harm him if he didn't kick in the door — to an apartment in the complex.
He then took off all his clothes and dumped them into the dryer with the resident's clothes, pouring a gallon of bleach into the dryer.
Anderson then put on another set of clothes and ""decided to scare the werewolf off"" by attempting to light the bleached clothes on fire, but was unsuccessful, according to the report.
After being apprehended, Anderson became nervous when anyone tried to approach him, became aggressive and asked if the police were going to kill him.
Anderson only calmed down after the officers advised him that the handcuffs were made of silver and the werewolf couldn't hurt him as long as he had them on.
Anderson was arrested on charges of residential burglary, two counts of first-degree criminal mischief and drunk insane, according to the report.
Discovered by science as recently as 1958, the Japanese beaked whale Mesoplodon ginkgodens is also known as the ginkgo-toothed whale, on account of its distinctive single pair of teeth, which in shape are reminiscent of the lobe-edged leaves of the ginkgo or maidenhair tree Ginkgo biloba.
Until recently, only 19 specimens had been recorded, but on 9 April a twentieth came to light, when an adult female, weighing almost two tonnes and measuring 4.8m long, was washed up dead on an Onaero beach in New Zealand.
This is the first Japanese beaked whale ever recorded from New Zealand shores, and is only the third reported anywhere in the Southern Hemisphere.
Cryptozoologist Richard Freeman from the Centre for Fortean Zoology, alongside Chris Clarke and Jon Hare, will be taking part in a three-week expedition to Sumatra in June this year, seeking two of its most notable cryptids the reclusive orang pendek, and an equally elusive mystery cat called the cigau.
The expedition will scale Mount Kerinci to Lake Kerinci, 750m above sea level, where it will establish a series of base camps.
Although other teams have looked for the orang pendek, this is the first to make a purposeful search for the cigau.
Described as having yellow or tan-coloured unpatterned fur, a short tail, and a ruff encircling its neck, it is allegedly slightly smaller than the Sumatran tiger, but is extremely aggressive and thus greatly feared by the locals.
Jon Downes/CFZ, cz@yahoogroups.com 16 April 2003 . i SSI sm& forum poetry What rough beast 1 RICK DE YAMPERT wonders if some of the supernatural entities imagined by WB Yeats and other poets ever escaped from their vivid imaginations WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS, THE great Irish poet, was haunted by the mythologies of his native Ireland and the occult revival of late 19th-century Europe, by thoughts of the sidhe , by apparitions, by the ghostly ‘instructors’ (who talked to him through his wife’s automatic writings), and by other denizens of supernatural worlds.
Indeed, he may have been haunted by these otherworldly entities in a very literal sense.
After all, he did begin with the phrase “I began to imagine...” [emphasis mine] However, compare Yeats’ strange vision with those of two music artists of the rock era.
It is possible that Morrison had read Yeats and was subconsciously echoing the Irish poet.
Morrison’s love of poetry (especially his admiration of Rimbaud and Baudelaire) is well-documented; however, I could find no evidence of Morrison referencing Yeats.
Four Decades of Commentary edited by John M Rocco detail a vivid, ghastly encounter experienced by the four-year-old Morrison when travelling, with his family, through New Mexico.
They came upon a highway accident involving a truck carrying Native Americans.
Years later Morrison would tell his friends that, at the time of the accident, the soul of a dying shaman entered his body.
In the realm of the shaman, Morrison believed, a door to supernatural worlds could be opened.
Perhaps Morrison’s “hairy Satyr” and Yeats’ “brazen winged beast” entered our realm of existence through such a doorway.
While Morrison and Yeats believed this was a possibility, the folk-pop singer Judy Collins had no doubt about her otherworldly encounter.
When I interviewed Collins in 1996, 1 asked her about that striking passage, half-expecting some metaphorical fancy.
RICK DE YAMPERT is an entertainment and feature writer at the daily newspaper in Daytona Beach, Florida, USA, where he has written about the exploits of the state's skunk apes, chupacabras, UFOs and other forteana.
He simply came off as one because, you know, he tended to ride in captured vessels, sail with rugged crews and fly colors that no country on the planet could claim were theirs.
During the American Revolution, this pissed-off Scotsman put his lifelong hatred for King and Country to the single best use on the planet by joining the United States Navy long before it was popular.
He was given a sweet new ship, the USS Ranger and a boatload of United States Marines which he used to successfully invade England in one of the most daring acts in U„ S . history.
Despite boasting the single largest pair of cannonballs on either side of the Atlantic, Jones' midnight raid of Whitehaven nearly turned into a disaster for two reasons.
The first was a traitor named David Freeman, who started the raid by going all Paul Revere through the city, warning everybody that ""pirates"" were there to burn it down.
Wallingford of the United States Marine Corps, whom Jones had tasked with burning the ships.
Out of the hundreds of boats Jones had hoped to sink that evening, his pirate/Marine raiding party managed to sink only one.
The raid successfully scared the fuck out of the entire British Empire, and Jones got to join the ranks of William the Conqueror and Julius Caesar as one of the few .leaders in human history to successfully invade the British Isles.
Had Jones 1 United States Marines done their job instead of getting drunk with your great grandmother, it would have been an absolute nightmare for the British.
Multiply that by 200, and you might have an idea how the Royal Navy would have been forced to respond.
Which we are pretty sure is every single Scotsman's dream. whirlwinds In Native North American lore, whirlwinds are associated with spirits of the dead and with evil.
The Shoshoni of Wyoming, Montana, Idaho and Colorado believe that whirlwinds are apparitions of dead people and that they can be dangerous.
According to legend, a company of Shoshoni women went out walking one day, and a whirlwind arose.
The Gros Ventre also believe whirlwinds are spirits of the dead, and observe that whirlwinds often are seen in cemeteries when there is no wind anywhere else.
In the myths and folktakes of the Mandan-Hidatsa, whirlwinds are the vehicles by which the spirits of the dead travel about.
The latter refers to animated objects, such as crystals and stones, which are believed to be both the source of a shaman's power and the cause of illness.
Various beliefs hold that whirlwinds can poison, will cause miscarriages or w 7 ill earn . 7 off children.
My girlfriend and l just got back from a brief sojourn at the Sabi Sands Private Game Reserve where we spotted a beautiful and rare white lion.
Champagne in colour with greenish-blue eyes, l was positively enthralled by the sighting.
Long after the guided tour while we were relaxing in our bedroom, 1 couldn’t help but wonder about the white lion we saw.
I found this interesting article about the origin of white lions and was surprised to discover the local lore that surrounds these beautiful creatures.
As the story goes, the Timbavati region was once hit but a strange shooting star that emitted a bright light.
The Queen and her people decided to investigate the fallen star and discovered it to be a shiny metal ball more brilliant than the Sun.
The Queen, who was frail and elderly at the time, was abruptly swallowed by the light and emerged soon after fit as a fiddle youthful, healthy and beautiful.
The strange 'fallen star’ remained in the area for several days before returning to the sky as mysteriously as it appeared.
Apparently, its unnatural presence caused the animals in the area to be born with weird deformities like buck with two heads, and lions with white fur coats.
September 6, 2013 The origin of the White Lion The white lion is a breathtakingly beautiful beast.
The sight of its snowy fur coat and creamy mane will have you transfixed.
Reports of this snowy cat have been circulating around Africa for centuries and particularly in Southern Africa, accounts of the rare creature features in folklore and oral traditions.
Legend has it that white lions were the divine brood of the Sun God, and were sent to Earth as gifts.
White lions vary in colour from white to champagne and can have bluish-green eyes on occasion.
As the story goes, the people who populated the region, now known as Timbavati, spotted a brilliant shooting star that landed in the area.
Queen Numbi and her people investigated the falling star and discovered it to be a shining ball of metal that was brighter than the sun.
Accordingly, Queen Numbi was at that time a rather frail and elderly w r oman and was abruptly swallowed by the light of metal ball.
The strange fallen ‘star’ remained in the area for a number of days before quietly returning to the sky, and it was believed that it’s unnatural appearance caused a range of animals to be born with strange deformities, like white impala, leopards and lions.
Oddly enough, white animals are frequently born in Timbavati to this day, and white lions were widely regarded as indigenous to the area for many years, yet the earliest recorded sighting only dates back to 1938.
These predatory cats, however, are not albino but owe their shade to a rare colour mutation called a recessive gene.
This genetic mutation has been known to occur naturally in the wild, but these beautiful cats are also specifically bred in specific zones around the world.
Their lack of pigment puts them in a vulnerable position when in the wild, they do not camouflage easily and this makes them visible to both poachers and prey.
Head to theKruger National Park or to the Sabi Sands Private Game Reservelocated on the periphery of the Timbavati region to spot white lions in a protected, safe environment.
WILD THINGS WORLDWIDE To compliment his article on feral children , Paul Sieveking rounds up some of the latest cases.
TRAIAN CALDARAR A feral child was caught in the Brasov region of Transylvania, Romania, in early February 2002.
When shepherd Manolescu loan’s car broke down, he was forced to walk home across country from his pastures in the shadow of the Fagaras Mountains.
It was believed he had lived alone in the forest for years, but doctors thought that he must have had some protection; perhaps he had been looked after by some of the many wild dogs in the region.
He was the size of a normal four-year-old, but his missing front milk teeth pointed to an age of seven.
He had rickets, anasmia, the distended belly of the half-starved, and frostbite on his feet and legs.
He has dark hair and dark eyes and once his hair was washed and cut and he was given a bath he looked really presentable, but he tends to walk like a chimp rather than upright and tries to sleep under his bed rather than on it.
About a week after his capture, he was idena HE WAS EATING A DEAD DOG tified as Traian Caldarar, lost three years ago at the age of four.
After being re-educated at an orphanage in Brasov, he was reunited in April with his mother Lina Caldarar, 23, in the remote village of Vistea de Jos, less than seven miles from where he was found in February.
Traian Ciurar, 24, the boy’s father, is married to Ms Caldarar under gypsy law.
When she fled back to her family to escape her husband’s cruelty, he prevented her from taking her son.
Ananova, 13 Feb; Scotsman, 14+22 Feb; Sun, 21 Feb; Metro, 22 Feb; Sunday Telegraph, 14 April 2002.
He was taken to the Tudun Maliki Torrey children’s home in Kano, where the staff named him Bello.
He is thought to be the son of nomadic Fulani people who travel through the region.
Mentally and physically disabled, with a misshapen forehead, sloping right shoulder and protruding chest, he was probably abandoned by his parents because of his disabilities.
Such abandonments of disabled children are common among the Fulani, a pastoralist people who travel great distances across the West African Sahel region.
In most instances the children die, but this child appears to have been adopted by the chimps.
Bello is now aged about eight, but has the size and weight of a four-year-old.
When he was first brought in, he walked in a chimpanzee-like fashion, moving on his hind legs but dragging his arms on the ground.
At first he was very restless, smashing and throwing things and leaping about at Light from bed d bed in the dormitory, but today be is much aimer.
He still leaps, chimpanzee-like, and laps bis hands over his head repeatedly, upping his hands, and does not speak but makes chimpanzee-like noises.
AFP] 15 April 2002 . vlALCOLM RAADT liree-year-old Malcolm Raadt or Raad) and his cousin Thabiso Paint, aged wo, wandered off on 10 December 2001 while (laying at the Luckhoff farm in South Africa’s ural Free State, where their parents worked, diabiso was found naked and scratched near he fast-flowing Orange River three days later.
Vpart from another track of tiny footprints, here was no sign of Malcolm.
Police used dogs nd helicopters in a fruitless weeklong search, fter which everyone thought he had drowned.
Three weeks later, at 4pm on New Year’s sve, Johan Lombaard was out on his motor)ike checking irrigation equipment on his farm vhen he found Malcolm 19 miles from lome.
He was covered in mud, wearing only a T-shirt and lying on his side near a lake.
The province had been experiencing weltering summer days with temperatures up o 100F and there had been torrential hundershowers at night.
Although it is mostly armland, the Luckhoff terrain is vast and solated, thorny and rocky, with snakes and )redators including leopards.
At the Pelonomi dospital in Bloemfontein, Malcolm was found o be covered in scabs, dehydrated and uffering from mild pneumonia.
When his mother, Tina Raadt, isked him how he survived, he said he had iaten “flowers” and hidden under bushes at right.
The police were mystified how he had urvived such tough conditions alone for so ong.
BELLO STILL LEAPS LIKE A CHIMPANZEE SUDAM PRADHANA Sudam Pradhana from the village of Bargania in Orissa, India, never went to the local school and enjoyed tending cows and working in the fields.
In April 1990, when he was 13, he travelled to the dense Labingi forests in the Angul district, 19 miles from his village, with his elder cousin Abhay, who was looking for a large log to make into a plough.
Abhay told Sudam to rest near a makeshift loghouse while he went in search of water.
For several days, Sudam’s parents and their neighbours searched for him.
His father Gautam Pradhan never reported his disappearance as he kept hoping he would turn up sooner or later and he did.
On 4 May 2001, Gayachand Muduli and Deb Muduli from the neighbouring village of Gadtaras, collecting firewood in the forest, encountered a wild creature with long hair and unkempt winding fingernails sheepishly gawking at them while sucking mangoes under a tree.
They took him back to Garatarasa where he was identified as Sudam because of scars on his skull and feet.
He greeted questions with blank stares and stmggled to utter a word or two in Oriya.
He has big, white marks on his skin as if he has been in combat with wildlife.
Ganesh Pradhan, the police chief at Bantala, suggested Sudam might have spent the last 1 1 years in the company of the honey-collecting nomadic Mallar tribe which lives deep in the jungle.
Times of India, 18 May; The Pioneer, 27 May 2001. [zr I FT161 OTHER DOG BOYS Kunu Masela, six, was seen for three years scavenging for food round the Kenyan town of Machakos with a dog.
One evening she followed them out into the bush and saw the dog dragging together some banana leaves to make a bed for them.
Mrs Rukia Ali Murefu, 29, a coffee plantation worker who had moved to Nairobi, said that her husband had left her when Kunu was born in 1977, and she had struggled for three years to care for him.
In 1983, he was in a government juvenile home and the dog was being cared for by a market trader.
In June 2001, 11-year-old Alex Rivas was captured in southern Chilean port of Talcahuano.
For many months, he had been living in a cave with a pack of about 15 stray dogs, scavenging out of dustbins and drinking milk from the teat of a bitch that had recently given birth.
After being abandoned by his 16-year-old mother when he was only five months old, he had a disrupted childhood before being put into a children's home in Chillancito, near Concepcion, in 1998.
Since there has been no word of his recapture, FT presumes he is still at large.
Wolves and bears, they say, casting their savageness aside, have done like Offices of pity.
Such children elicit both heart' rending pity for their abandonment and wonder for their survival against such terrible odds.
Ancient mythology has many stories of children rescued by animals, but the first ‘true’ account of a feral child was recorded by the usually dependable Roman historian Procopius.
A baby boy, lost by his mother during the chaos of the Gothic wars in about AD 250, was found and suckled by a she' goat.
When the survivors returned to their homes, they found the boy living with his adopted mother and named him Aegisthus.
Goats don’t figure much in subsequent feral accounts, although a child said to have been raised by goats for eight years was found in the Peruvian Andes in 1990.
Many academics regarded the whole phenomenon of feral chib dren with scepticism; they pointed out that most of the children never learned to speak, while those that did could recall very little of their wild existence.
Similarly, the cm cumstances of their discovery were by their nature anecdotal, taking place far from habitation and often depending on the testimony of a solitary witness.
Dismissing testb mony as superstition and folklore became commonplace in 19th century science, to the detriment of folk wisdom and forteana.
Robert Kerr, whose translation of Linnaeus appeared in 1792, dismissed Homo ferens as imposture and exaggeration, and this became the orthodox view.
Of course, inventing a species for feral children is today seen as eccentric.
Many others, however, were not; and neither were they intentional' ly abandoned, but had escaped from abusive parents or were lost by accident or in the chaos of war and surviving without human help required considerable native intelligence.
Note Levi Strauss’s qualifying phrases “most of’ and “almost all”; some of the case histories refuse to be explained away in this fashion, particularly those of Victor of Aveyron, Kaspar Hauser and the Midnapore wolfrgirls Kamala and Amala, described in detail by persons of standing respectively a doctor, a lawyer and a priest.
An 1807 image of Peter the Wild Boy, found near Hanover in 1724 and a 1950s French magazine item on Indian wolf-children. with all strange phenomena, it only requires one case to be demonstrated beyond reasonable doubt to allow the possibility that many of the others are also true.
Sir Kenelm Digby, later one of the Royal Society’s founders, is the first to mention Jean de Liege in 1644, having interviewed those who had seen him a few years earlier.
When the fighting moved elsewhere, the villagers returned home, but the timorous Jean remained in hiding for 16 years.
In the wild, his senses sharpened; he could scent “wholesome fruits or roots” at a great distance.
When he was finally captured at the age of about 21, he was naked, “all overgrown with hair”, and incapable of speech.
In human society, he learned to talk, but lost his acute sense of smell.
He climbed trees with ease, lived off plants and seemed incapable of speech.
He refused bread, preferring to strip the bark from green twigs and suck on the sap; but he eventually learned to eat fruit and vegetables.
He was named Peter, presented at court in Hanover to George I, and taken to England, where he was studied by leading men of letters.
When coaxed from a tree in Songi near Chalons in the French district of Champagne in 1731, she was aged about 10, barefoot, and dressed in rags and skins with a gourd leaf on her head.
In a pouch she carried a cudgel and a knife inscribed with indecipherable characters.
She shrieked and squeaked, and was so dirty that she was mistaken for a black child.
Her diet consisted of birds, frogs and fish, leaves, branches and roots.
She is said to have used her thumbs to dig out roots and swing from tree to tree like a monkey.
When the Queen of Poland, the mother of the French queen, passed through Champagne in 1737 to take possession of the Duchy of Lorraine, she heard about the girl and took her hunting, where she outran and killed rabbits.
The two most prominent feral cases of the 19th century are Victor of Aveyron, made famous by Francois Truffaut’s wonderful film L’ Enfant Sauvage , and Kaspar Hauser, the subject of Werner Herzog’s haunting film of the same name.
A great deal has been written about both of these, most recently by Michael Newton in Savage Girls and Wild Boys , so I will concentrate on lesser-known cases.
There are about 80 examples of feral children; a fairly accurate chronological table of 53 cases appears in Lucien Malson’s book.
Children locked up for years often develop autistic symptoms, leading the psychologist Bruno Bettelheim in 1959 to lump all three types under the heading of infantile autism.
The most famous wolf-children are the two girls captured in October 1920 from a huge abandoned Hk ant-hill squatted by wolves near Godamuri in the vicinity of Midnapore, west of Calcutta, by villagers under the direc9Np|9B tion of the Rev Joseph Singh, an Anglican missionary.
The mm girls were named Kamala and J -Jk W Amala, and were thought to be aged about eight and two.
According to Singh, the girls had misshapen jaws, elongated canines, and eyes that shone in the dark with the peculiar blue glare of cats and dogs.
Amala died the following year, but Kamala survived until 1929, by which time she had given up eating carrion, had learned to waik upright and spoke about 50 words.
He had deformed limbs, uttered animal cries and ate raw meat by snatching at it with his teeth ; but there appears to be no evidence that he actually lived with wolves.
In May 1972, a boy aged about four was discovered in the forest of Musafirkhana, near Sultanpur, in At&^ the region where five of the ^^k wolf-children mentioned by Sleeman came from.
He had very dark skin, long hooked fingernails, matted hair and calluses on his palms, elbows and knees.
Although weaned off raw meat, he never talked, but learned some sign language.
In 1978 he was admitted to Mother Theresa’s Home for the Destitute and Dying in Lucknow, where he was re-named Pascal and was visited by Bruce Chatwin.
He died in February 1985. in 1962, according to an unsubstantiated report, geologists found a boy aged A about seven running with a wolf pack in a bleak desert region of Turkmenistan, central Asia.
The men threw a net over the boy, but the wolves rushed JHH to protect him, tearing at the net.
It was four years before the boy, named Djuma, was taught to utter a few words.
He told anthropologists how he rode on the back of his wolf mother when the pack went hunting, and later learned to run on all fours.
I have no idea how many months I spent with them but I wanted it to last forever it was far better than returning to the world of my own kind.
Today, though most memories of my long journey are etched in tones of grey, the time spent with the wolves. . . is drenched in colour.
So wrote Misha Defonseca, a Jewish orphan who, from the ages of seven to 11, wandered through occupied Europe in World War II, living on wild berries, raw meat and food stolen from farmhouses, and occasionally teaming up with wolves.
Another child who had learned language before his life with wolves was Marcos Pantoja, “the wild child of the Sierra Morena”, who was about seven when he was abandoned in the desolate mountainous forests of southwest Spain in 1953.
A seven-year-old boy was supposedly captured from a wolf lair in the German state of Hesse in 1344, but the first published account didn’t appear until 1609, in a work by the medical writer Phillipus Camerius, published in Frankfurt.
They offered him the pick of the hunting spoils, carpeted a pit with leaves to protect him from the cold and made him run on all fours until he had attained their speed and could make the most prodigious leaps.
After his capture, he frequently stated that he would rather associate with wolves than human beings.
Fourteen wolf-children were found in India between 1841 and 1895, seven of which were described by General WH Sleeman, the nemesis of the Thugs.
The first was captured in Hasunpur (near Sultanpur in what is now Uttar Pradesh), and showed most of the typical wolf-child characteristics.
Kamala lapping food and curling up with Amaia . 37 cared for in the Republican Hospital in Ashkhabad and it was years before he got used to sleeping in a bed.
By the time of a news report in 1991, he was still crawling on all fours, eating only raw meat, and biting when he was angry.
Dr Rufat Kazirbaev, chief of psychiatric research in the hospital, doubt' ed if he would ever lose his wolf ways.
Twenty-three days later, a forest ranger found the little girl sitting under a tree.
Mekhriban Ibragimov, three, lost in a snow-filled ravine, was found after 16 hours, sheltering in a cave with a wolf and three cubs.
Shepherds found a naked boy aged about five in 1971, cowering in a cave in the Abruzzi Mountains of central Italy.
Doctors believed he had been abandoned as a baby and brought up by mountain goats or wolves.
Various families tried without success to ‘domesticate’ him, after which he was placed in a psychiatric hospital near Milan.
He walked on all fours and liked to be stroked but retreated snarling into comers when frightened.
Given the right conditions beard will take care of) human infants CARE BEARS According to the Athenian historian Apollodorus , the Greek heroine Atalanta was abandoned by her father Iasus at birth because he desired a son; but she was suckled by a she-bear (the symbol of Artemis), till hunters found her and brought her up among themselves.
News reports do suggest that, given the right conditions, bears will take care of human infants.
In 1971, five-year-old Goranka Cuculic got lost in the forest near her home village of Vranje in Yugoslavia.
Three days later she was found by a farmer and related how she had met a bear and two cubs.
The bear licked her face, and she played with the cubs and snuggled up to them at night in a cave 2 L In October 2001, a 16-month-old toddler went missing in Iran and was found in a bears’ den three days later, safe and well.
In 1669 hunters in a Lithuanian forest saw two little boys among a group of bears.
They captured one and took him to Warsaw where he was named Joseph and presented to the king of Poland, who later passed him to the Vice Chamberlain of Posnan.
Several times, Joseph escaped to the woods where he would suck the sap of trees and gather wild honey and crab apples.
Once a wild bear, notorious for having killed two men, was seen to approach him and lick his face.
It was suggested that they had become separated from their families following raids by marauding Tartars.
Her behaviour was “very crude” and when taken to an asylum she refused to eat anything but raw meat, roots and tree bark.
Coolies from the tea gardens found her in a forest in Jalpaigori in 1892, sitting beside a huge bear den.
Aged two or three, she walked on all fours and bit and scratched, but was gradually taught to walk upright and wear clothes, although she never learned to speak.
A 14'year-old wild girl was caught in the jungle near Naini Lai, Uttar Pradesh, in July 1914.
Named Goongi , she ran with great agility on her hands and feet and was covered all over with a thick growth of hair.
The hunter Jim Corbett speculated that she had been brought up by bears, pointing out that her climbing ability, eating habits and diet were similar to bears, and that the deep scratches on the upper part of her body could well have been caused by being carried by bears.
Finally overcome, this turned out to be a human child, though utterly bear-like in her voice, habits and physique.
She refused all cooked food and slept on a mattress in a dark comer of her room.
Investigations showed that a two-year-old child had disappeared from a nearby village 14 years earlier, and it was presumed that a bear had adopted her.
MONKEY BOYS TISSA, FROM SRI LANKA Pemawathie, 42, a female woodcutter, captured a naked, long-haired boy ambling about on all fours with a troupe of monkeys in the jungle near her home village of Tissamaharama, southern Sri Lanka, in early 1973.
As his habits were more animal than human, she handed him over to the police, who placed him in a private welfare centre 10 miles outside Colombo, run by Miss LP Morawake.
Apparently, two other “animal boys” had been tamed there, one of whom drank milk straight from a cow’s udder.
Three months after his admission, Tissa was still learning to walk upright and was not yet talking, although he could eat food from a plate with his hand.
American anthropologist Diane Skelly said he was covered in a fine layer of hair, which disap' peared once he took to wearing clothes.
After studying the boy intensively, Dr Harlan Lane (author of The Wild Boy of Aveyron) and Dr Richard Pillard, said he had suffered a “disastrous illness” at the age of two, resulting in organic retardation.
They could account for every year of his life and he was never in the wild.
ROBERT OF UGANDA In 1982, during the chaos of civil war, a boy aged three was left for dead in the Luwero triangle of Uganda.
All scattered apart from one female protecting a small bundle which turned out to be a human child.
By the age of eight, he had been toilet-trained and learned to walk and sleep in a bed.
JOHN OF UGANDA Another wild boy, found in Uganda in 1991, was identified as John Sesebunya, last seen in 1988 at the age of two or three when his father murdered his mother and he fled to -r*. ^ the jungle.
He vaguely remembered monkeys coming up to him, after a * few days, and offering him roots and nuts, sweet potatoes and cassava.
The five monkeys, two of them young, were wary at first, but befriended him within about two weeks and taught him, he says, to travel with them, to search for food and to climb trees.
John has been studied by a host of experts, who are convinced that he is a genuine feral child.
When left with a group of monkeys he avoided eye contact and approached them from the side with open palms, in classic simian fashion.
John Sesebunya , the Ugandan monkey boy who visited Britain as part of a choir and the mysterious gazelle boy reported in the Sunday Express in 1946.
The monkeys befriended him and taught him to frnd food and climb trees smiles.
He tends to greet people with a powerful hug, in the way that monkeys greet each other.
GAZELLE-BOYS SPANISH SAHARA Jean-Claude Auger, 34 an anthropologist from the Basque country, was travelling alone across the Spanish Sahara (Rio de Oro) in 1960 when he met some Nemadi nomads, who told him about a wild child a day’s journey away.
Auger found a small oasis of thorn bushes and date palms and waited for the herd.
Three days later, his patience was rewarded, but it took several more days of sitting and playing his galoubet to win the animals’ confidence.
The boy walked on all fours, but occasionally assumed an upright gait, suggesting to Auger that he was abandoned or lost at about seven or eight months, having already learned to stand.
He habitually twitched his muscles, scalp, nose and ears, much like the rest of the herd, in response to the slightest noise.
Even in deepest sleep he seemed constantly alert, raising his head at unusual noises, however faint, and sniffing around him like the gazelles.
Auger describes how he gradually learned to decipher the significance of every gazelle gesture and movement, which the boy shared with the herd.
There was a complex code of stamping to indicate distance of food sources; and social interaction through exchanges of licking and sniffing, with the boy emitting a kind of mute cry from the back of his throat with his mouth closed.
He would eat desert roots with his teeth, puckering his nostrils like the gazelles.
He appeared to be herbivorous apart from the occasional agama lizard or worm when plant life was lacking.
Two years after his stay with the herd, Auger returned with a Spanish army captain and his aid-de-camp, who kept their distance to avoid frightening the herd off.
His pursuers failed to keep up across the rough terrain, and eventually the herd disappeared as the jeep sustained a puncture.
In 1966 an unsuccessful attempt was made to catch the boy in a net suspended from a helicopter; unlike most of the feral children of whom we have records, the gazelle boy was never removed from his wild companions.
Auger took no photographs of the boy, being more concerned with protecting him from human interference than providing evidence to convince the sceptics of his existence.
MIDDLE EAST According to the fortean zoologist Ivan Sanderson, the story of an earlier gazelleboy “turned out to be a plant by a bored newsman in Cairo during World War II”; but he gives no further details.
We are told that Amir Lawrence al Sha’alan, chief of the Ruweili tribe, was out hunting in the desert straddling Transjordan, Syria and Iraq, when he saw what looked like a boy running amid a herd of gazelles.
The hunting party chased the herd in their cars for 50 miles , until the boy stumbled against a large stone and was caught.
The Amir took the boy to Dr Musa Jalbout at one of the British-run stations of the Iraq Petroleum Company, who later passed him into the care of four Baghdad doctors.
Dr Jalbout said he acted, ate and cried like any gazelle, and had no doubt that he had Any village jjowl that came within his reach was tom to pieces lived all his life among the gazelles, being suckled by them and cropping the sparse desert herbage along with the herd.
Apparently speechless, he was covered in fine hair and ate only grass although a week before Karim’s report he had had his first meal of bread and meat.
Since he was in administrative charge of the North Cachar Hills near Assam at the time when he investigated the case, he was in an excellent position to obtain a true account of the facts.
The boy was stolen from his parents by a leopardess in the North Cachar Hills in about 1912, and three years later recovered and identified.
His knees. . . had hard callosities on them and his toes were retained upright almost at right angles to his instep.
The palms of his hands and pads of his toes and thumbs were also covered with very tough homy skin.
According to an unsubstantiated report, a wild girl aged about two was found in a forest south of Jansi in north central India in May 1986.
We might recall that Atalanta, the bear-suckled heroine of Greek myth, was the most swift-footed of mortals.
When first captured, Memmie Le Blanc moved with “a sort of flying gallop” and could out-run game; and the Saharan gazelle-boy was clocked at 7mph faster than the best Olympic sprinter.
Peter, Memmie, Victor and the Ugandan John Sesebunya were all agile arborialists; the last three were cornered up trees before their capture.
The wolf-child of Overdyke in Holland, abandoned during the Napoleonic wars, climbed trees with wonderful agility to get eggs and birds, which he devoured raw.
Kaspar Hauser and many of the Indian wolf-children, including the Midnapore girls, could see well in the dark.
Jean de Liege could recognise his warden by smell from a distance; Kamala could smell meat from one end of the orphanage garden a compound of three and a half acres to the other; and many wild children sniffed at objects in the way that cats and dogs do.
Victor of Aveyron, the first Sultanpur child , Kamala and Amala had an unusually sharp sense of hearing.
A naked youth aged about 15, caught in woods near Uzitza, Yugoslavia, in 1934, could mimic animals and birds as well as run amazingly fast.
Another curious phenomenon is the wild children’s insensitivity to extremes of temperature, a characteristic shared with desert nomad and gypsy children.
This was seen in the Irish sheep-boy, Victor, the Kronstadt boy, the first Sultanpur child, the Midnapore girls, and the Saharan gazelleboy.
The latter seen to grab a handful of hot embers and hold them for some time without apparent pain, while Victor took potatoes out of a pot of boiling water.
At least eight ferals angrily tore off any clothing they were dressed in.
Hardly any of them learned to laugh or smile and their libidos seemed stunted.
Kaspar confused dreams with reality and spoke of himself in the third person.
Neither Victor nor Kaspar could recognise their reflections in a mirror; the Turkish beargirl would sit for hours in her room gazing at herself in a mirror.
Auger observed the gazelle-boy looking at his reflection in a pool of water as if it were a stranger. m PAUL SIEVEKING is an editor of Fortean Times and has been collecting material on feral children for many years; one of these days, his long-promised book on the subject may appear.
Two treatises: in one of which, the nature of bodies; in the other, the nature of man's soul, is looked into, Paris 1644.
Kamala, incidentally, is the name of a medicinal plant used by Hindus against tapeworm.
See FT44:4. for both wolf-boys D.Mirror, 17 April; National Enquirer, 23 April 1991.
The History of Poland by the Irish doctor Bernard Connor, who actually met one of the bear-children.
Report by George Maranz in American Weekly, 5 Sept 1937; Sunday Dispatch, 31 July 1938.
Auger describes his experience 'Un Enfant-Gazelle au Sahara Occidental' in Notes Africaines No 98 (April 1963, pp58-61) and in L'Enfant Sauvage du Grand Desert under the pseudonym Jean-Claude Armen.
FT1:14, 3:4, 4:14, 7:14, 24:23, 25:8, 26:5, 27:49, 32:10, 32:40, 33:18, 36:49, 42:9, 43:63, 44:4-5, 45:44-47, 47:19, 47:74, 49:12, 59:20, 85:53, 93:11, 117:22, 127:18-19, 130:18.
EST, Thu January 8, 2009 Woman suspected of witchcraft burned alive O MIKX SHORE EMAIL SAVE PRINT STORY HIGHLIGHTS • Woman suspected to be witch in Papua New Guinea burned alive • Death adds to growing list of people accused of sorcery tortured or killed • Victims are often scapegoats for someone else's unexplained death Next Article in World » By Saeed Ahmed tekt sis CNN A woman in rural Papua New Guinea was bound and gagged, tied to a log and set ablaze on a pile of tires this week, possibly because villagers suspected her of being a witch, police said Thursday.
Her death adds to a growing list of men and women who have been accused of sorcery and then tortured or killed in the South Pacific island nation, where traditional beliefs hold sway in many regions.
The victims are often scapegoats for someone else's unexplained death, and bands of tribesmen collude to mete out justice to them for their supposed magical powers, police said.
Early T uesday, a group of people dragged the woman, believed to be in her late teens to early 20s, to a dumping ground outside the city of Mount Hagen.
They stripped her naked, bound her hands and legs, stuffed a cloth in her mouth, tied her to a log and set her on fire, Kauba said.
The country's Post-Courier newspaper reported Thursday that more than 50 people were killed in two Highlands provinces last year for allegedly practicing sorcery.
In a well-publicized case last year, a pregnant woman gave birth to a baby girl while struggling to free herself from a tree.
Villagers had dragged the woman from her house and hung her from the tree, accusing her of sorcery after her neighbor suddenly died.
The killing of witches, or sangumas, is not a new phenomenon in rural areas of the country.
In recent years, as AIDS has taken a toll in the nation of 6. million people, villagers have blamed suspected witches and not the virus for the deaths.
According to the United Nations, Papua New Guinea accounts for 90 percent of the Pacific region's HIV cases and is one of four Asia-Pacific countries with an epidemic.
While there is plenty of speculation why T uesda/s victim was killed, police said they are focused more on who committed the crime.
With all my heart and most unfeignedly and with all my will most deliberately do I wholly renounce God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost; the most Holy Mother of God; all the Angels and especially my Guardian Angel, the Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ, His Precious Blood and the merits thereof, my lot in Paradise, also the good inspirations which God may give me in the future, all the prayers which are made or may be made for me.
The prosecution of witches solely for having pacts with the Devil increased slowly on the European continent, though convictions still required evidence of malefi da.
Witch-hunting handbooks such as the MALLEUS MALEFICARUM discussed pacts in great detail.
In Protestant England, Devil’s pacts were acknowledged to exist but apparently did not play a major role in most trials, according to surviving records.
The public cared little about pacts and more about what harm a witch did to her neighbors.
The first oral Devil’s pact was recorded in 1612, and Elizabethan witches in general were believed not to be in direct contact with Satan.
In 1645 MATTHEW HOPKINS began his infamous hunt of witches in England and obtained sworn evidence of written pacts.
Modern Witches, who do not worship the Devil, have nothing to do with Devil’s pacts.
Diana Classical goddess of the MOON and th hunt and one of the most important aspects of the GOD DESS in contemporary Witchcraft.
Diana (counterpart t< the Greek Artemis) personifies the positive attributes o the moon, which is the source of Witches’ magidal powei as well as independence, self-esteem and fierce aggressive ness.
A virgin goddess and maiden warrior, she is the eter nal feminist, owned by no man, beholden to none.
As moon goddess, Diana shares the lunar trinity with SELEN and HECATE and serves as patron goddess of witches.
Emperor Theodc sius closed the temple in 380, allegedly because h Apollo and Diana un L I Lieu Thames Valley Police receive calls about witchcraft and aliens By Linda Serck BBC News, South 25 Duly 2014 Last updated at 03:16 ET Reports of witchcraft and aliens were among the emergency calls Thames Valley Police has dealt with in recent years.
Forty-eight reports claim supernatural or extraterrestri al incidents between 2010 and 2013.
Mental health charity Sane said it was ""absolutely essential"" police communicate with mental health services in cases such as these.
The caller was ""unsure if it was linked to witchcraft"" A caller's ""sister-in-law is performing witchcraft and voodoo on her"" A caller has ""found an envelope with witchcraft symbols on it"" A caller believes ""witchcraft is going on"" with a Muslim worship group Katy Dennison, who organises an Oxfordshire meeting group for pagans, witches ""and other questers"" said the witchcraft claims were unlikely.
In October 2013 police made further inquiries into a man who knocked on an Oxfordshire woman's window and said he had seen the ""ghost of his nan"" there.
She added police would attend if there was a concern for a person's welfare.
According to WATE in Tennessee, the Sullivan County Sheriff's Office said the woman's name is Elizabeth Poles and she is from Motts, Alabama.
She's been spotted in several states including Virginia, Tennessee, Kentucky and Ohio.
One FOX1 9 viewer saw her at the 1 st Stop gas station in Fayetteville on Wednesday.
No one seems to know exactly why she has been walking through the area or where she is headed.
A t the end of October, Brian Thair, a biology professor at the College of New Caledonia in Prince George, northern British Columbia, spotted a silky, white spiders’ web stretching 60 acres (24 hectares) across a triangular clover field Russell Jervis had farmed since 1944.
A barbed-wire fence on wooden posts surrounded the field about four miles east of McBride in the Robson Valley.
It looked as if the whole field was covered with an opaque, white plastic.
The thin, elastic material was not soft and fluffy like webs built by individual spiders.
There were about two Holorates ksenius spiders per square centimetre laying the silk.
Near the perimeter fence, the web showed great tensile strength enough to put a handful of coins on it without them falling through.
The brownish spiders, each about three to four millimetres long, were dragging lines of silk, ignoring each other as their efforts created the web.
Dr Thair estimated there were hundreds of millions at work in the field.
Hundreds of millions of spiders had been at work Since they didn’t seem to care if an occasional insect stumbled into their construction, he didn’t think it was built for trapping purposes.
Thair guessed that because of too much rain or insufficient wind, the spiders were unable to balloon, so stayed in the field and multiplied.
But it was a mystery how so many spiders managed to survive so close together for so long.
Perhaps they had encountered an enormous quantity of high quality, nutritious prey.
People in La Marque, near San Luis Pass, and in Pearland reported seeing the webs constantly between about noon and 5pm.
An article on the Internet prompted speculation that the webs were fallout from a chemical plant leak, or radar chaff used by military aircraft to avoid detection and enemy fire.
They believed the government was mixing unknown chemicals in jet fuel and spraying them, via jet engine exhaust, on unsuspecting people below.
Samples were sent to the S&N Labs of Santa Ana, California, where Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy identified the presence of protein, suggesting the material was spiderweb.
Similar web rains and so called ‘angel hair’ have been reported over the years.
For more on chemtrails and falling webs, see Mark Pilkington’s FBI report in FT124:22-23.
Eight-legged invaders A spiny ‘Red Army’ of monster crabs that devour everything in their path is on the march from northern Russia and could work their way as far south as Gibraltar.
Descendants of a scheme initiated by Stalin in the 1930s to bring food to the barren Soviet Arctic, the Red King or Kamchatka crabs can live for 30 years and grow up to a metre (3ft 3in) across from claw tip to claw tip.
They were imported from the Pacific, but escaped into the wild and in the past 10 years have advanced 500km (310 miles) along the Norwegian coast.
They are thought to number around 12 million no one knows what caused the population to rocket in the 1990s.
Each female produces 300,000 eggs a year, coming up from the depths in winter for the spring mating season.
They sell the meat in fish markets, but the crabs tear their nets to shreds.
The WWF is calling for unlimited crab fishing to remove the threat to the environment posed by the invaders.
No one knows how far south the seabed stormtroopers will advance before the water gets too warm or they run into tougher predators.
Cod, catfish and even seals prey on the soft-skinned young crabs before they develop the armoured shells of the adult.
It’s possible they will halt at Lofoten, just inside the Arctic Circle.
In the Pacific, where seabed competition is tougher, the crabs have ventured as far south as Vancouver Island and northern Japan.
A military proj ectile possibly dating to the World War II era has been destroyed after it was found on a local beach.
The most extraordinary things about Stephen Harding's The Last Battle, a truly incredible tale of World war II, are that it hasn’t been told before in English, and that it hasn’t already been made into a blockbuster Hollywood movie.
John C ‘lack’ Lee Jr., liberated an Austrian castle called Schloss Itter in the Tyrol, a special prison that housed various French VIPs, including the ex-prime ministers Paul Reynaud and Eduard Daladier and former commanders-in-chief Generals Maxi me Weygand and Paul Gamelin, amongst several others.
Yet when the units of the veteran 17th waffen-SS Panzer Grenadier Division arrived to recapture the castle and execute the prisoners, Lee’s beleaguered and outnumbered men were joined by anti -Nazi German soldiers of the Wehrmacht, as well as some of the extremely feisty wives and girlfriends of the French VIPs, and together they fought off some of the best crack troops of the Third Reich.
The battle for the fairytale, 13th century castle Itter was the only time in wwil that American and German troops joined forces in combat, and it was also the only time in American history that United States troops defended a medieval castle against sustained attack by enemy forces.
To make it even more film worthy, two of the women imprisoned at Schloss itter-Augusta Bruchlen, who was the mistress of the labour leader Leon Jouhaux, and Madame weygand, the wife General Maxime Weygand-were there because they chose to stand by their men.
They, along with Paul Reynaud ’s mistress Christiane Mabire, were incredibly strong, capable, and determined women made for portrayal on the silver screen.
When United States and German soldiers Joined Forces in the waning Hours of world war II in Europe’ By Stephen Harding. pages.
The other was the much-decorated wehrmacht officer Major Josef ‘Sepp’ Gang!, who died helping the Americans protect the VIPs.
This is the first time that Gangl’s story has been told in English, though he is rightly honored in present-day Austria and Germany as a hero of the anti-Nazi resi stance.
Harding, is a respected military affairs expert who has written seven books and long specialized in World War II, and his writing style carries immediacy as well as authority.
This book proves that history can be new and nail-bitingly exciting all at once.
The French VIPs finally put aside their political differences and picked up weapons to join in the fight against the attacking SS troops.
Despite their personal enmities and long-held political grudges, when it came to a fight the French VIPs finally put aside their political differences and picked up weapons to join in the fight against the attacking ss troops, we get to know Reynaud, Daladier, and the rest as real people, not merely the political legends that they’ve morphed into over the intervening decades.
While the book concentrates on the fight for Castle Itter, it also sets that battle in the wider strategic contexts of the Allied push into Germany and Austria in the final months of the war, and the Third Reich’s increasingly desperate preparations to respond to that advance.
This book is thus a fascinating microcosm of a nation and society in collapse, with some Germans making their peace with the future, while others-such as the waffen-SS unit attacking the castle-fighting to the bitter end.
The book also takes pain to honor the lives of the “number prisoners” who worked at Castle itter-faceless inmates from Dachau and other concentration camps whose stories have never before been told in this much detail.
Whatever their political leanings or personal animosities toward each other, the French vips did what they could to help the so-called “number prisoners’’-! .e. the ones stripped of their names-in any way they could.
One of the honored prisoners was Michel Clemenceau, the son of the Great War statesman Georges clemenceau, who had become an outspoken critic of Marshal Petain and who was arrested by the Gestapo in May 1943.
During the attack, with ammunition running dangerously low-they got down to the last magazines of their MP-40s-thei r tanks destroyed, and the enemy advancing from the north, west and east, this septuagenarian kept blasting away.
The bones were found in El Salto, Durango State, northern Mexico, in a cave hamlet built into a cliff.
The site called Cueva del Maguey dates back to around 1425 and was formerly home to the Xiximes tribe.
Archaeologists excavate Cueva del Maguey, Mexico, where a cache of human bones was discovered which proves the Xiximes tribe were cannibals Bone room: Cueva del Maguey is a cave built into the side of cliff in El Salto, in the Mexican mountains of Durango The archaeological trove included more than three dozen human bones which showed evidence of having been defleshed, cooked and then ritualistically marked with stone blades.
The Xiximes apparently believed they could guarantee a good harvest if they consumed the souls of their enemies often fellow tribesmen from neighbouring villages ate their bodies and hung their bones from trees as offerings to the spirits.
There had previously been no scientific evidence to back up those early accounts, often derided as hysterical exaggerations, but the team behind the discovery and subsequent research says the bones, which have laid virtually undisturbed for centuries, offer concrete proof.
The rituals were tied to the agricultural cycle of planting and sowing com, according to the research reported in National Geographic.
After each harvest, the warriors of the Xiximes were sent to hunt for flesh, preying often on lone men working in isolated conditions in the pine forest region, some 8,530ft above sea level.
UNITED STATES PACIFIC OCEAN The bones were found in El Salto, Durango State, northern Mexico, in a hamlet of caves built into a cliff While there were battles with other tribes, and a ready menu of Spanish colonials too, only the bodies of the Xiximes people had value for the rituals.
The warriors brought their unwilling victims back to the village where they were ripped limb from limb.
The bones were cleaned and the flesh eaten in soup as part of an all-night celebration complete with tribal song and dance.
The bones were then stored in treasure houses until the start of the planting season when they would be hung from trees as an offering to the spirits the tribe believed would bless the crops.
Her name is a contraction of the Yoruba saying “iya omo eya” meaning “mother whose children are the fish.” and mer-people are Yemoja sacred offspring.
Yemoja wears seven panels skirts to represent the seven seas of which she rules over.
She carries a black haired horse tail fly-whisk, a sabre, or a machete with which she defends her children.
When she spins, the rippling edges of her dress are the tempestuous waves of the stormy sea.
Yemoja The queen of the Earth, owner of all waters, and the orish of motherhood.
B4 The Bakersfield Californian Herb Benham CALIFORNIAN COLUMNIST Eye Si Giving new meaning to the phrase ‘You old goat’ Friends have a goat.
I think my friend Wendy named her lizard and usually lizards are last in line to be named.
What you do is go home and when the cat jumps on your lap, you forget that you even saw a goat.
It’s one thing to have a goat with a name you can hardly remember, but if he’s crippled too, now we’re really in unfamiliar territory.
I hadn’t been in the country for a while, but usually when you’re in the country and you’re looking at country animals, you expect a little performance value for your country money.
I said, thinking that if Caramel had been one of the children’s pets, he might be the kind of goat you could let in at night and trade headbutts with on the carpet.
He barely had a name, he may or may not have been able to walk and he wasn’t the least bit sociable.
An old goat, not the least bit friendly, lives way beyond the time that any self-respecting goat would live.
Meanwhile, the sweet young goats end up in deep freezers, wrapped in clean white paper.
Especially one with a long beard and a personality given to irritation.
That beard made Caramel look like the college professor who has a Ph.D in coeds and a minor in attractive grad students.
This had never happened during any previous visits there. bore<^ human race, the had shot off in a direction aw ; •. earth, otherwise there could have been In Cairo the Zar Drives out the Jim ►. by Doris M Humphrey he ritual happens every Tuesday in Abu-el-Seoud, a dingy neighborhood in Cairo.
Drums beat slowly at first, then faster and faster as participants — nearly all of them women — dance, fling themselves about, slap themselves, scream, and fall to the floor, believing the jinni that possess them are being driven out, thus freeing them of suffering.
A kodia or sheika, a person thought to have supernatural powers, is in charge of the zar.
Incense is passed over the women s heads and under their arms to purify them before they begin.
The dancers may dress in red robes to get rid of red jinni, or in the white robes of pilgrims to Mecca.
In spite of the wafting incense, the acrid smell of gyrating bodies is overpowering.
Tambourines and flutes join the drums to produce arcane sounds that mingle with the humid air outside.
The kodia and the musicians are all women, wearing traditional scarves and robes.
They sit on the floor with tambourines before them, inhaling the incense.
Although such get-togethers are illegal in Egypt (because participants are expected to pay as much as they can afford, and sheikas are suspected of being charlatans) nothing is done to stop the rituals.
Women trying to rid themselves of jinni moan, pray loudly, and ask God for help as they prepare to dance.
They feel that the zar gives them peaceful release from their mental or physical demons.
Some say their personal jinn has been with them from childhood, causing depression and misery.
The women attending the zar distrust psychiatrists, or aren’t able to afford them — so they turn to the zar as a kind of catharsis.
The place of women in the Islamic world has always been inferior, and the zar allows them to deal with their resentment.
The dishwasher-sized ‘Jasker Power System' built by the anonymous Irish engineer.
A 58-YEAR-OLD IRISH ENGINEER, WHO wishes to remain anonymous ""for security and publicity-avoidance reasons”, is the latest claimant to have harnessed free energy with his ""Jasker Power System"", developed over 23 years in a remote stone outhouse on a windswept hill somewhere in Ireland.
He said that once the dishwasher-sized device is powered up, it will produce cost-free energy until its parts wear out.
He claimed a prototype has supplied all his domestic power for 17 months.
Physicists remain distinctly underwhelmed, because the Jasker breaks the first law of thermodynamics.
Zombies Continued from Page D1 All I ever ask for is to give me time to he“daySt helP me ’” Bnmdage 83111 ° f On this day, Brundage has zombie guests fraternizing among the bugs, raven and mice.
Six-year-old “L’il Noel Price is another sort of “undead” as a stegosaurus from the Late Jurassic Period revived in fuzzy green fabric. ch originally made the costume, stuffed tail plates and all, out of a Simplicity pattern for her son, “Big Noel” Price, who wore it 23 years ago.
He then scurried around the hving room on all fours, his long tail wagging.
He assured his grandmother that the costume also made him feel wild. i r JC1 10ls ^ <-<uiuy wnen ne wore the costume.
And when his dad wore it he was so cute that he wound up on the family Christmas card. in Z 3 UU Noel is going t0 be 3 hunter in camouflage gear.
Mika Price said the dinosaur costume was her favorite of all the costumes she made over the years.
No differentiation is or should be made between commercial and non-commercial speech.
It ruled that the Constitution protects the free speech rights of corporations and unions to express themselves on candidacies and issues through paid advertisements.
The ruling overturned two precedents — a provision from the 2002 McCain-Feingold campaign-finance act limiting corjorate-funded political ads immediately before federal elections and federal aws going back to 1947.
Presi. dent Barack Obama promised to work with Congress on new legislation to regag businesses and unions.
One idea put forth by lawmakers would give corporate shareholders or union members a binding say over spending on political advertisements.
Another would enact the Fair Elections Now Act that creates a public financing system for campaigns.
She suggested a constitutional amendment to strip a corporation’s “personhood” for First Amendment purposes.
That’s a chilling idea Our representative democracy has flourished for more than two centuries because of the marketplace of ideas.
During last year’s oral argument before the high court, Deputy Solicitor • General Malcolm Stewart said that under McCain-Feingold, the government actually could “prohibit the publication” of corporate-funded books that called for the election or defeat of a candidate.
Neither does a majority on the Supreme Court — nor should Americans who truly cherish free speech.
Opinions in this space reflect a consensus of the discussion by The Leaf-thronicle’s Editorial Board.
Zombies have free speech rights too, United States court rules Mar.rd.10 at 2:18 PM WASHINGTON They're said to utter little more than an occasional groan, but zombies — the blood-drenched monsters of Hollywood ""B"" movies -still have a right to free speech, a United States court ruled this week.
An appeals court in the northern United States city of Minneapolis, Minnesota on Wednesday allowed a group of zombies — or rather, several protesters costumed as such — to press ahead with their lawsuit against police who arrested them for disorderly conduct.
The appeals court overturned a lower court in finding that the group of seven ""zombies"" had been wrongfiilly detained during a 2006 shopping mall protest against consumerism.
The three-judge panel, by a two-to-one vote, ruled that Minneapolis police lacked probable cause to arrest the demonstrators for disorderly conduct.
The judicial panel upheld the lower court in dismissing the plaintiffs' claims of ""false imprisonment"" and ""First Amendment retaliation"" by Minneapolis police after being put in jail for two nights.
But the appeals court sided with the protesters in ruling that police had no reason to imprison them simply for ""dressing as zombies, and walking erratically in downtown Minneapolis,"" the court decisioi said.
The decision allows the protesters to revive their lawsuit against Minneapolis and its police, which according to the Star Tribune newspaper seeks damages of at least 50,000 dollars per person arrested.
Stray dinosaur roams Clarksville By Karen Parr-Moody The Leaf-Chronicle In a leafy neighborhood, in a “Leave it to Beaver”-style house, a group of the undead lurks, blood tricking from the corners of their mouths.
The front door creaks open, and poised inside is a diminutive woman wearing a hairnet.
Her lips are a ghastly grey. j She holds a pot full of brains and other organs.
Cathy Brundage — is so organized this Halloween that she ordered her zombie costume nametag early from the “It’s Time Clock Shop,” complete with strategically placed bite marks.
For those ignorant of zombie lore, for hundreds of years, and in various cultures, people have believed a corpse can be brought back to life via some form of witchcraft.
This concept was further exploited by 1960s Hollywood when “Night of the Living Dead” hit the silver screen.
THE LEAF-CHRONICLE/GREG WILLIAMSON Mika Price helps her grandson, Noel Price Jr. f 6, with his dinosaur costume, the same costume her son, Noel Price, wore when he was seven years old.
Zombies are evidently hungry for human f\ es h — or more specifically, brains.
For modern day Halloween celebrants, such as Brundage, one of the joys of dressing up like a zombie is it’s a twofer.
In addition to being a zombie, you also get to be whatever you were before you were “zombified.
One glance around the Brundage living room gives the impression that one is not in Hilldale anymore.
It has been creatively transformed in a style that looks straight out of the “Martha Stewart Living” Halloween issue.
Family photos on every visible wall are encrusted with cobwebs and tilted in a dizzying fashion.
Rubber mice scurry across the frames, or stop to peek at the hands of a clock.
A raven is perched on an end table; another is perched on a A photo of Lafayette “Fate” Jennings, a distant family ancestor, was on the wall anyway, peering out from the ghostly past.
But in this context — and with a plastic cockroach crawling behind his frame — his creepy factor is heightened exponentially.
Brundage isn’t certain of the exact roots of her Halloween obsession, other than she was born October 2.
The auspicious date provides perfect timing for getting a house spooked up for Halloween.
SEE ZOMBIES, PAGE D3 The Hummingbird 6/13/99 12:47 PM The Hummingbird Not far from Rainbow Cave on the Sacred Mountain in what is now New Mexico, Hummingbird Hoya lived with his beloved grandmother long ago.
Because he was so small and wanted to be sure that people could see him, Hoya dressed himself in his colourful hummingbird coat and flew far away.
Below him, he saw a lovely spring and decided to stop, taking off his beautifully feathered coat.
Before long, Kia, the daughter of Chief Kya-ki-massi, arrived to fill her jar with the cool spring water.
Many young men of the Zuni Indian tribe longed to marry Kia, but were afraid to ask her father, the Chief.
Kia began to fill her water jar without speaking to the attractive young man nearby.
Hoya followed Kia to her house, and they talked for some time at the bottom of her ladder, which led to the lodge roof.
The young men of the village did not see Hoya vanish, which aroused their curiosity.
When Hoya arrived back at his beloved grandmother's house, she met him with a bowl of honey combined with sunflower pollen.
The next day, he carried some of the delicacy to the spring as a gift for the princess.
Again, he walked Kia home and they conversed at the bottom of her ladder.
He then put on his magic coat and flew away instantly as Kia ascended the ladder to her roof.
At dawn next day, Hoya and his beloved grandmother, dressed in their hummingbird coats, zoomed away southward to the land of the sunflowers.
Hoya's beloved grandmother mixed the pollen and honey together, much the same way as kneading bread dough.
She then wrapped a large ball of the mixture in a deerskin, which Hoya took to Kia that very evening.
Village youths gathered and watched from a distance as Hoya climbed Kia's ladder to her lodge roof.
There Hoya secretly hid his magic coat under a rock before lowering himself into Kia’s lodge.
The young men of Zuni village gathered in a Kiva, a ceremonial lodge saying to the Bow Chief , ""Please announce that in four days we will go on a parrot hunt.
He quickly put on his hummingbird coat and flew away to Parrot Woman's Cave.
I also ask your help for myself,"" Hoya said, telling her of the plot to kill him.
Hoya was instructed by the group to go down the rope to the nest of the young parrots.
Parrot Woman was waiting for him, spreading her large fanlike tail outside her cave entrance.
Upon returning to the village, the young men reported that the rope broke, letting hoya fall to his death.
In Kia’s lodge, there was much sadness at the loss of Kia's new husband.
Parrot Woman took her two young birds and, with Hoya in his magic coat, flew up to the mesa.
Hoya took the two young parrots to his new home and, from the roof he heard Kia crying inside.
But Kia ran up the ladder and to her great joy, she discovered her husband with the two parrots.
At dawn, Hoya placed the two young parrots on the tips of the ladder poles.
Hoya heard the terrible news, so he went to the cave of the Bear Mother.
I have come to warn you and to ask you for your help in protecting me,"" replied Hoya.
Hoya again secretly wore his magic hummingbird coat beneath his buckskin shirt.
He was forced by the young men to lead the attack at the cave entrance.
She chased the young Zuni hunters, killing a few of the young tribesmen.
Later, Hoya flew home with two bear cubs and at dawn he placed them on the roof.
When the villagers discovered the bears on Kia's roof, they knew that Hoya was still alive.
Hoya decided to fly to his beloved grandmother's home near Rainbow Cave to seek her wisdom about a new plan of his.
She helped him paint a bird cage with many colours and they filled it with birds of matching colours.
Back to Zuni village he flew, carrying the cage, which he placed in the centre of the plaza.
From that moment on, all of the happy, dancing Zuni tribe accepted Hoya and his gifts.
His wife they called Mother, and they called him Father of their tribe for many contented years.
YP people and the city must rethink its involvement in holiday Black Pete is usually portrayed by white people in blackface makeup, with thick red lips and a frizzy Afro hairstyle Debate over Zwarte Piet has raged in the Netherlands in recent years.
Nicholas arriving by steamboat from Spain in November, accompanied by a flotilla of boats packed with Black Petes.
Amsterdam has begun discussing possible solutions, including using different colors of face paint for Pete, or merely smudging his cheeks with soot.
The issue is sometimes linked to ongoing tensions between native Dutch and immigrants.
Opponents often are told to embrace the tradition a remark that's especially galling for secondor third-generation Dutch people.
Two white female Dutch celebrities who oppose the Petes and have married black men , Victoria's Secret mode Doutzen Kroes and singer Anouk, have been the target of ugly sexual insults.
