Romney 49Obama 48 From Public Policy Polling, a firm that typically surveys for Democrats and liberals : PPP's newest Florida poll finds a 5 point gain for Mitt Romney over the last three weeks.
The shift in the race is largely attributable to independent voters shifting their preferences.
When it comes to the biggest issue in the election, the economy, Romney's edge over Obama expands to 51/46 on who voters trust more.Romney and Obama's images have headed in difference directions since the Presidential debate.
Voters have warmed up to Romney a good bit, going from giving him a negative favorability rating at 44/51 to a positive one at 50/47.
Where before he was on positive ground with 51% of voters approving of him to 47% who disapproved, now he's in slightly negative territory at 48/50.
Romney 49Obama 48 "" » Posted by Marc Caputo at 9:00 PM in Barack Obama, ELECTION 2012, Mitt Romney, Polls | Permalink | Comments With 284,000 Florida votes already in, absentee vote data more critical than polls As the public focuses on political polls, the campaigns in the nation’s biggest battleground state are concentrating on a more-important set of figures: Absentee-ballot votes.
At least 284,000 people have already cast absentee ballots in Florida over the past week.
About 2 million voters have requested the ballots, which are typically mailed.
But the numbers also show President Barack Obama’s campaign is closer than ever to matching Republicans in requesting and voting absentee ballots.
Republicans are winning the absentee-vote race in North Florida, the Naples area and in Miami-Dade County, where nearly 20,000 ballots have already been cast.
Democrats are pulling ahead in Central Florida, Tampa Bay’s two biggest counties and in Broward County.
The Republicans lead Democrats when it comes to absentee votes cast, about 126,000 to 114,000.
Meantime, a Miami Herald/El Nuevo Herald/Tampa Bay Times poll last week showed Romney with a 7 percentage-point lead over Obama.
Despite all the positive trends for them, Republicans are a little nervous.
They’ve always out-organized and outvoted Democrats by absentee ballots — usually by big margins.
Relative to this time in the 2008 election, Democrats trailed Republicans by 16 percentage points in voted absentee ballots.
In the rest of the country, however, it’s a different story for Obama when it comes to likely Hispanic voters.
Cuban-American voters, who are overwhelmingly Republican and who appear to be increasingly excited about Romney’s campaign.
Cubans just don’t,” said Eduardo Gamarra, an FIU professor of Latin American studies who conducted the poll with his political research firm, the Newlink Group.
In the national and Florida surveys, Cuban voters consistently gave Obama low marks on handling the economy, immigration and foreign policy.
Momentum from Cuban voters could help other Republican candidates on the Florida ballot, particularly in South Florida.
Take out Cuban voters, and Obama wins Florida Hispanics 64 percent to Romney’s 33 percent, according to the poll, which has a 3. percent error margin.
Overall, 54 percent of Florida Hispanics said they were not better off than four years ago, compared to 46 percent who said they were.
That’s not just a reflection of Cuban sentiment; it’s an indication of Florida’s unemployment rate, which is higher than the nation’s.
The number of Hispanic children living in poverty now exceeds the number of non-Hispanic white children, even though Hispanics are a minority.
David Rivera defends himself over federal investigation, plays tape recording of FBI witness In his first sit down English-language television interview in weeks, United States Rep.
David Rivera defended himself Sunday against a federal grand-jury investigation into his alleged involvement in a primary campaign against his Democratic opponent.
At one point, Rivera pulled out a black Sony tape recorder and held it up against his lapel microphone to play a recording of what he said was a telephone message from an FBI witness in the case.
The FBI is investigating whether Rivera illegally funneled secret money to Justin Lamar Sternad, who lost in the Aug. primary to Joe Garcia.
State records show that federal authorities as late as last year were investigating him in a separate matter stemming from a secret $500,000 dog track payment the congressman had arranged.
Rivera had denied at the time that he was even under state investigation or that he had a lawyer.
In the latest investigation, at least two campaign vendors have told The Miami Herald and El Nuevo Herald that they had been interviewed by federal authorities concerning Sternad’s campaign, which was fueled by tens of thousands of unreported money — much of it cash.
The FBI was scheduled to speak to Ana Sol Alliegro, Sternad’s campaign manager who apparently acted as Sternad’s conduit to Rivera.
A target of a federal investigation is typically not informed of the probe until it is wrapping up or investigators have compiled enough evidence to confront their subject.
When Putney pressed Rivera about his involvement in Sternad’s campaign leading up to the August primary, Rivera tried to discredit vendor Hugh Cochran, who has said Rivera hired his company, Campaign Data, to target voters to receive Sternad fliers.
Posted by Patricia Mazzei at 5:41 PM in Congress, David Rivera | Permalink | Comments In Miami-Dade commission race, an ongoing debate over new Marlins ballpark Bruno Barreiro chaired the Miami-Dade County Commission when it signed off on a new, mostly publicly funded Marlins ballpark in the heart of his Little Havana district.
Public money covered more than 80 percent of the stadium and parking garages, which cost about $634 million.
The county spent some $376 million, the city of Miami $133 million and Marlins owner Jeffrey Loria $125 million.
Garcia, a former Miami Beach city commissioner, has been hammering on the stadium since the Aug. primary.
In a Spanish-language radio ad, Garcia touts opposing the stadium project.
On Sunday, Barreiro fought back saying Garcia in 2007 voted for a bill in the Florida Legislature that would have provided the Marlins with $2 million in annual sales tax revenue.
Continue reading ""In Miami-Dade commission race, an ongoing debate over new Marlins ballpark"" » Posted by Patricia Mazzei at 5:09 PM in Miami-Dade Politics | Permalink | Comments Amendment 4 offers tax breaks for some, big revenue drain for local governments It is the longest of the 11 amendments on Florida’s longest-ever ballot, and its multi-billion dollar impact could mean major tax relief for first-time homebuyers, owners of second homes, small businesses and, especially, large corporations.
But it could also mean higher taxes for Florida residents and massive cuts to struggling local governments.
As voters decide whether to vote up or down on Amendment 4, hanging in the balance could be a few hundred dollars in tax cuts for the average new homebuyer, and as much as $600,000 in tax breaks for multimillion-dollar properties like the famed Fontainebleau hotel in Miami Beach.
Proponents of Amendment 4 argue it will create thousands of new jobs while reinvigorating the state’s troubled housing market and saving homeowners millions of dollars.
Full-time Floridians shouldering the tax burden of snowbirds and corporations, while governments are forced to make bone-deep cuts to social services.
McCabe said he is in favor of property tax reform and efforts to revive the housing market, but called Amendment 4 a “patch job” that will shift tax costs from businesses onto long-time homeowners.
Florida voters will ultimately decide, as the amendment — along with 10 others on this year’s lengthy ballot — requires a 60 percent margin to make it into the Constitution.
Absentee voters, who submit their ballots by mail, make up an ever-increasing share of the Florida electorate — the result of relaxed voting laws and aggressive campaign strategies.
In the coming election, as many as one in four Florida voters will cast their ballots from home instead of a voting booth.
In the primary election in August, almost 40 percent of the votes cast in Miami-Dade were absentee.
In some precincts in Hialeah and Sweetwater, as many as two-thirds of the votes were cast by mail, records show.
Miami-Dade police arrested two boleteros, or ballot-brokers, on charges of altering ballots of elderly or disabled voters.
