FOR 13 DAYS, THE TWO POWERS STRUGGLED TO FIND A A United States NAVY plane flies over a Soviet freighter headed to Cuba during the DIPLOMATIC SOLUTION. missile crisis.
The new president, John F Cuba, he declared, was a socialist forces toppled the regime of Cuban Kennedy, approved the plan with country, and “I am a Marxist-Lenindictator Fulgencio Batista, an ally of modifications.
Of the 1,400 guerillas who ing another invasion of the island, new premier of Cuba. landed at the Bay of Pigs in April he turned to Khrushchev for help, Castro promised democratic rule, 1961, almost every one was killed, not just for oil and to buy sugar, but but instead he consolidated power. wounded, or captured in three days. also for defense.
Thousands of Batista supporters While the United States tried to deny any role Khrushchev quickly agreed to were executed or sent into exile. in the operation, it was clear to supply weapons to Castro.
During Many Cubans, especially the everyone that the United States government 1961, the Soviet Union provided wealthy and well-educated, fled the had been closely involved.
It island and settled in nearby Florida. was important, Khrushchev told his Castro’s government seized large Cuba Makes Friends advisers, to protect Castro’s revolufarms and sugar plantations, many With the Soviets tion against another United States assault owned by Americans, and turned Even before the Bay of Pigs inand preserve a “communist outthem over to peasants or to governvasion, Castro had begun developpost” in the Western hemisphere. ment-run enterprises.
When In April 1962, Khrushchev develover privately owned businesses, inthe United States stopped buying Cuba’s oped another plan as well.
In addicluding oil refineries owned by sugar, the Soviet Union stepped in. tion to providing conventional American companies Texaco, Esso, Early in 1960, the two countries military weapons, Khrushchev deand Shell.
Khrushchev had three primary The United States retaliated by imposing It would pay for the sugar with reasons for putting missiles in Cuba. restrictions on trade.
It probably only had three oil deliveries. established formal diplomatic reladozen intercontinental missiles, This was at the height of the tions.
The Soviets did, however, The CIA began training and Soon after the Bay of Pigs invapossess many intermediate range misequipping Cuban exiles to become a sion in April 1961, Castro cemented siles.
These missiles could reach most guerilla force that could overthrow his relations with the Soviet Union. of the United States from Cuba.
After Wikimedia Commons hours of analysis, the CIA concluded that these were bases with intermediate-range missiles and launchers.
On Tuesday, October 16, the information was passed on to the White House.
The Soviets might have many missiles that could reach the United States.
And the United States would have far less warning time if an attack were launched from Cuba.
The missiles Khrushchev, who had lied to him. threat from Turkey. were to be protected from an air Only a month earlier, Khrushchev His final reason was to protect attack by anti-aircraft launchers had sent messages clearly implying Cuba from an attack by the United States armed with surface-to-air (non-nuthat only defensive weapons were Khrushchev believed that once the clear) missiles built around being sent to Cuba. missiles were in place, Kennedy the island. would do nothing about them.
The first ships set off in July, He viewed Kennedy as young and sailing out of seven different Soviet The missiles inexperienced and thought the ports, which were guarded by secret Bay of Pigs fiasco had deeply police.
Even the sailors and their in Cuba changed weakened him. captains did not know their true In May 1962, a secret delegation destination until they opened sealed the balance of Soviet officials arrived in Cuba orders at sea.
The delegation was servers or spies, many of the troops were issued fleece-lined parkas—and of power. also instructed to find out if the missome even skis—as if they were For the next week, Kennedy met siles could be deployed secretly, headed to a cold, icy destination. daily with without detection by the United States In Others were luckier and sailed disan “ExComm” committee that inJune, the delegation returned to guised as tourists on passenger ships. cluded his secretaries of state and deMoscow and told Khrushchev that During the summer, the underfense and his top military advisers.
Cuba had agreed to deploy the nucover plan worked despite rumors The committee members disagreed clear missiles and that they could be from informants in Cuba saying that on how to get the nuclear missiles hidden from view.
One month later, they had seen Russian-built fighter out of Cuba. the missile deliveries began. jets.
On August 9, United States spy planes On one side, the diplomats photographed surface-to-air missile counseled negotiation and making a The Crisis Begins sites.
In June Everything changed on Sunday, a way that gives everybody a 1962, the military equipped a fleet October 14, when an Air Force pilot chance to pull away from it before it of 85 ships to bring weapons, equipbrought back 4,000 feet of film from gets too hard.” ment, and troops for installing the a 12-minute reconnaissance flight On the other side, the joint bases.
The next day, chiefs of staff wanted to attack withlaunchers with 60 nuclear missiles. analysts reviewed pictures on the out any delay for negotiations.
They The missiles each had an explosive film of two sites with scratched wanted to bomb not just the missile 6 United States HISTORY bases but all planes, airfields, and rope.
The Soviets and the Western he received another letter on Saturstorage sites and then finish with a allies had bitterly disagreed over day, October 27.
Marines withdraw its missiles from Turkey. naval blockade around Cuba to stop were sent to Florida and Georgia.
Kennedy chose the compromise naissance planes flew over Cuba to The decision to put missiles in plan.
In the Turkey had been approved by spoke to the nation on television U.S., bombers in various locations NATO, the Western military alliance. and announced, for the first time, were equipped and made ready to President Kennedy thought that if that nuclear missiles had been distake off on 15 minutes notice. the United States decided unilaterally to recovered in Cuba.
He described his After the blockade went into efmove its missiles from Turkey, it decision to put a blockade in place. fect on Wednesday, October 24, would weaken the NATO alliance.
The United States Navy would stop, board, Khrushchev sent a defiant letter to The crisis got even worse.
He stated that he would rockets fired from a Soviet base in bound for Cuba carrying cargoes of order his ship captains to run the Cuba knocked a U-2 spy plane from offensive weapons.
He announced blockade and to defend their ships, the sky, killing the pilot.
The United States refused, but agreed to wanted a full-scale invasion. that any nuclear missile launched preliminary talks through the United Nations Finally, Kennedy decided that he from Cuba would be regarded as an provided that Soviet ships avoided would publicly accept Khrushchev’s attack by the Soviet Union “requirthe blockade line.
Kennedy was encouraged that On Saturday night, Robert an agreement could be reached until Kennedy, the president’s brother Stepping Back From the Brink For six days after October 22, the world anxiously waited.
No one knew how Cuba would react to having aerial reconnaissance planes flying over the island and to having a United States naval blockade.
No one knew what actions by the Cubans or Soviets might trigger “further action” by the United States and how the Soviets would Wikimedia Commons respond.
Many believed that if the United States and the Soviet Union did not come to an agreement, nuclear war could erupt.
Such a war would not just involve Cuba, but also the U.S., DURING THE CRISIS, President Kennedy decided on a course of action proposed by the Soviet Union, and possibly EuSecretary of Defense Robert McNamara, right.
United States HISTORY 7 and Washington for immediate and Wikimedia Commons direct teletype communication in times of crisis.
Kennedy and Khrushchev, the opposing leaders in the crisis, did IN 1961, LONG before the crisis, Kennedy and Khrushchev had met in Austria.
A judged Kennedy as young and inexperienced. year after the crisis, Kennedy was assassinated.
The following year, and attorney general, met with the late April 1963, the United States had disKhrushchev was forced out of office.
Soviet ambassador and conveyed mantled its missiles in Turkey that Only Castro remained in power.
He the president’s offer to remove the had threatened the Soviet Union. retired in 2008, after almost 50 years United States missiles from Turkey.
He also exas the leader of Cuba. plained that the offer would have to Aftermath be kept secret.
What reasons did Khrushchev warm letter to President Kennedy between the two powers.
Find and get permission to interview someone who was at least 10 years old at the time of the crisis.
If the person did not hear about the crisis, ask the person to explain why.
Write a report on and be prepared to discuss what the person experienced.
Include the answers to the questions and the person’s age during the crisis.
If the person did not hear about the crisis, explain why and discuss the news event that the person found most important.
