The week of October 7, 1962, saw bad weather in the Caribbean, preventing American U-2 surveillance planes from making more reconnaissance flights over Fidel Castro's Cuba, just ninety miles off the Florida coast.
But Sunday morning, October 14, was cloudless, and the U-2 flight got some good photos— pictures that, over the next few days, were analyzed and reanalyzed.
Faced with this dramatic documentation, President John F Kennedy immediately decided that the missiles would have to be removed and called his most trusted advisers together to serve as an Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or ExComm.
Its job was to develop possible responses to the buildup of missiles and the consequences the buildup represented.
Four tactical air squadrons were readied for air strikes over Cuba, with missile sites, airfields, ports, and gun emplacements as their potential targets.
More than 100,000 troops were sent to Florida for a possible invasion of Cuba.
Throughout 1962, the movement of Soviet personnel and equipment to Cuba had aroused suspicions in the American intelligence community.
In response, United States ships and planes began photographing every Cuba-bound Soviet vessel, and U-2 spy planes began regular reconnaissance flights over the island.
The first evidence of the arrival in Cuba of surface-to-air missiles, missile-equipped torpedo boats for coastal defense, and large numbers of Soviet military personnel came in photographs taken in late August.
But these pictures provided no evidence of offensive ballistic missiles.
In September, Kennedy delivered two explicit warnings to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev regarding the buildup of what were being called ""defensive"" Soviet arms in Cuba.
Despite Kennedy's warnings, the Soviets continued to construct the bases, and the United States continued to monitor their activities and take pictures.
The October 14 photographs, however, changed the nature of the game and set in motion a series of extraordinary events.
Meeting of the ExComm, Oct 29, 1962 An ""ExComm"" meeting on October 29, 1962.
As the ExComm discussions proceeded, the idea of a naval blockade emerged as the response of choice.
Kennedy read Gromyko his previous statement that warned against offensive missiles in Cuba.
Later that day, preparations for the naval blockade began, but the Joint Chiefs of Staff continued to push for an air strike and invasion.
The President, wanting to appear to be conducting normal business, flew to the Midwest for campaign appearances in connection with the upcoming congressional elections.
He returned Saturday, October 20, to read the draft of a speech announcing the blockade.
Although the blockade, which Kennedy preferred to call a ""quarantine,"" represented only ""limited action"" against Cuba and the Soviets, Kennedy felt that ""limited action"" was the best way to start; he could always opt for broader action, such as an invasion or air strikes, if the blockade did not work.
He wanted to speak on Sunday evening but was persuaded to delay the address until Monday, so the State Department could brief leaders of allied countries and congressional leaders could be informed.
Many months of sacrifice and self-discipline lie ahead— months in which both our will and our patience will be tested— months in which many threats and denunciations will keep us aware of our danger.
Kennedy's speech drew wide support in Latin America and among United States allies.
Several Soviet vessels turned back from the quarantine line, and the United States presented in the United Nations photographic proof of the missiles during a televised confrontation with the Soviet Union.
The Soviets would remove the missiles under United Nations supervision and inspection, and the United States would lift the blockade and pledge not to invade Cuba.
Kennedy got another letter from Khrushchev, demanding removal of United States missiles in Turkey, the Soviet Union's neighbor, in exchange for removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The implicit message was if the United States invaded Cuba, the Soviets would invade Turkey, and the conflict could escalate.
On Sunday, October 28, the Soviets agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba.
Negotiations for final settlement of the crisis continued for several days, but the immediate threat of nuclear war had been averted.
Subsequently, the United States dismantled several of its obsolete air and missile bases in Turkey.
The Cuban missile crisis was perhaps the greatest test of John F Kennedy's presidency, and while he and Khrushchev were able to achieve a peaceful resolution, the crisis had a number of far-reaching historical consequences.
Within a year, Kennedy and Khrushchev signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, the first disarmament agreement of the nuclear age.
Also in 1963, the first ""hotline"" between Washington and Moscow was installed.
