In fact, John F Kennedy with tireless help from media toadies more obsequious than any today, elevated political charade to a level Obama and his staffers can only envision in their sweetest dreams.
This was made possible of course, because no alternative media existed in 1960-63.
Indeed, the very JFK fable that swayed Rush last week might have never gotten its wings if Rush himself had been on the airwaves in 1962 and helped strangle it in the crib.
That very Berlin wall went up as a direct consequence of JFK's appeasement.
The Berlin Wall was raised and the Castro regime was entrenched because Kennedy snubbed Eisenhower's advice and shrank when challenged by the Butcher of Budapest.
So here's another muscular Kennedy oration scoffing at appeasement, Rush.
As we all know, JFK's inaugural oration proved a fairy tale and Ike's advice a tragic joke The Bay of Pigs became the proverbial “fiasco” rather than the liberation had Nixon won in 1960.
A chastened JFK quickly returned to Eisenhower's knee, rationalizing his lie to America and his back-stab to Cubans by saying he had feared Soviet reactions in Europe had he held the line in Cuba.
The Soviets brazenly built the Berlin Wall exactly 4 months after Kennedy's talk with Eisenhower.
Ten months after that, the Soviets started shipping nuclear missiles to Cuba.
When those missiles were removed from Cuba 4 months later, Camelot's media auxiliaries and subsidiaries cranked into high gear.
But Republicans and conservatives of the time penetrated the farce and angrily denounced it.
In his diaries Nikita Khrushchev confirmed the cause of the conservative ire while gloating about his trouncing of Kennedy.
Until today the United States has complied with her promise not to interfere with Castro and not to allow anyone else to interfere with Castro.
JFK's solution also pledged that he immediately pull the rug out from under Cuba's in-house freedom fighters.
The Coast Guard in Florida got 12 new boats and seven new planes to make sure Castro and his Soviet patrons remained utterly unmolested as they consolidated Stalinism 90 miles from United States shores.
This ferocious guerrilla war, waged 90 miles from America's shores, might have taken place on the planet Pluto for all you'll read about it in the MSM and all you'll learn about it from those illustrious Ivy-League Academics.
JFK Special Message to Congress on World Defense and Assistance,April 2, 1963 Raul A Garcia 8/26/2008 Ms.Paul, go buy a Che t-shirt.
Castro has destroyed my nation and pauperized its people and been brutal to them.
It is your pipe-dream and ignorance and obvious swallowing of all the propaganda that endears you to that Stalinist regime that still holds its people hostage.
Raul A Garcia 8/26/2008 History should not be learned from a few Hollywood filmsthat is dangerous and simplifies historythe way the Marxists have done with it.
The release of the papers during the Missile crisis reveal the insanity of Castro whom Nikita had to restrain.
Castro has aided and abetted almost every terrorist group in the past fifty years, precisely against United States interests.
In time he will fall, Cuba will be free and schoolchildren will no longer have to be indoctrinated and will be free to critize anyone they choose.
Raul A Garcia 8/26/2008 The whole Cuban ""revolution"" has been a process of myth-making and brainwashingin that regard it has succeeded but gladly, M Fontova and many others will revise this charade.
I repeat my statement that I will only return to topple the statues of the false prophets.
There are more prostitutes now that even beforethe Canadian man who was boasting before me a few years ago how he had procured the services of one for a ""really good price"" on his junket to Cuba I told to leave my midst or I would deck him to the floor.
All governments here, Democratic and Republican, have equally failed in dealing with that ruthless dictator whom you love so much.
I want to remind you that grain sales and other foodstuffs from the United States to Cuba have increased exponentially in recent years.
I want the best for the Cuban people and that can only be achieved without the Castros, their apparatchniks, and that failed system of misery now almost fifty years old.
Stop spouting the same liberal jive as if you know what is best for the Cuban people.Oliver Stone, Ted Turner, Gabriel Garcia Marquez have all groveled at the feet of the killer and so many here in the United States are totally ignorant of the real happenings for the past five decades.By the way, my parents were both teachers and we were lower middle class and we lost our freedom and our country, most precious of all.
He was a drug-runner, murderer, and, if my memoray of the film serves me right, had an unhealthy interest in his sister.
Reagan and Nixon would have handled the situation no differently to what Kennedy did.
Gentleman, it is time you dragged yourselves into the reality of the world as it is today, rather than a pipe-dream of what you or your family may have lost with the downfall of the corrupt Batista regime.
Hamilton 8/24/2008 Good article and necessary antidote for those poisoned by the notion of JFK as an anti-Communist hero.
The line about what would Reagan or even Nixon have done is a great one.
I am overweary of the drivel uttered by the left and the pseudo-left in this country for so many years about this.
I will return to the land of my birth only to help overturn the statues of the oppressors and false prophets.
Bill Heuisler 8/23/2008 Mr Fontova, As one of those freedom fighters arrested for Violating the Neutrality Act in 1965, I applaud your article and marvel at your historical accuracy.
