Clw-...ified by Multiple £'■... ce , EXEMPTED FROM G^IEIiAL Dh.CLASSH''IC;,T SCiiEDULE OP EXECUTIVE oi^p n ^u S EXra-TTION CATEGORY fV, / (Includes footnote ci (9 TOP SECRET MOVEMENT CONTROL IN THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS By the time the United States had evidence of the buildup 01 boviet missiles on the island of Cuba, in October 1962, contingency planning for such a situation had been in progress for some two years.
Although the basic concept for the operations remained essentially the same, force requirements had ■• increased from time to time on the basis of revaluation of the enemy's capabilities.
By the beginning of October 1962, CINCLANT was convinced that consideration should be given to relocating and pre-positioning of troops, aircraft, ships,' equipment , and supolies in order to develop the highest possible state of readiness to execute his Cuban plans.
Accordingly, between 1 and 6 October, he directed CINCAi-LANT and CINCNAVLAMT to take measures reauired to assure maximum readiness by 20 October.
The conference was to develop specific actions that could be taken to increase the readiness posture of the United States Armed Forces and to reduce the reaction lead time.
It was a result of this conference that Active Army units assigned to the supporting STRAC OPLANs were given an increased supply priority, although that did not actually occur until 19 October.
Organizational arrangements drawn up by CINCLANT envisioned a joint task force under 'CINCLANT, with Service components.
On 16 October the Department of the Army designated the Commanding General, United States Continental Army Command as the interim Army component commander.
Staff were informed that the Administration had decided to prepare plans for a sea blockade of Cuba while protecting United States territory and shipping and the Guantanamo Naval Base.
He stated that the United States would initiate a strict quarantine of all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba, continue close surveillance of the island, and reinforce the United States base at Guantanamo, while evacuating dependents of United States personnel there.
The President added that he had placed additional military units on standby alert, but he gave no indication of the extent of military preparations already underway.
United States Army Movements The task of preparing movement schedules and moving troops to implement CINCLANT 1 s OPLANs was challenging and complex.
VJith the size of the units to be moved, the distances involved, and the shortness of time allowed, the planning staffs of the agencies in Washington and in the field were hard pressed to secure enough equipment and shipping for pre-positioning of forces.
In Washington, the United States Army Chief of Transportation had the responsibility for movement of troops and materiel for the Army and, when assigned, for the Navy and the Air Force.
The commander originating the basic plan submitted for JCS approval the transportation requirements for the first 30 days, by mode and in 5-day increments, to support a specific operation.
Ibid., pc.-47. / transportation requirements that could not be met from the transportation resources assigned or attached.
The Services were responsible for consolidating the requirements of all their forces; and the consolidated requirements went to the appropriate single manager transportation agencies, who developed the movement schedules. dU > Planning for the pre-positioning of force continued, and on .,-22 October the Joint Chiefs of Staff authorized the loading of On the morning of 23 October many of the supporting units were ordered into the positions they would occupy upor imde~ ' mentation of the plan.
Third' Army was directed to activate, assemble, and prepare for movement to selected airfields an Army staging areas command headquarters for each staging base.
Third Army was also directed to complete activation of Headquarters, Army Staging Area Command, and to move it to its designated destination as soon as possible, and to expedite the movement of all the units on the troop list for the Army Staging Area Command.
SEjjfFEi v > USCONARC directed the Commanding General, 2d Logistical Command, who was to be the commander of the Peninsula Base Command, to prepare a detachment of 35 officers and 95 men for movement from Fort Lee to Opalocka Air Force Base to establish the base command.
Opalocka Air Force Base by 2'4 October, but USCONARC did not officially establish the base command until 30 October.
The primary mission of the Peninsula Base Command 'was to operate the Army staging area commands and terminal commands and to provide administrative and logistic support as required.
In addition, it was responsible for all emergency supplies and aerial resupply.
At the direction of USCONARC, Third Army on 30 October transferred to the operational control of Peninsula Base Command all logistical-type forces required for the support of operating forces in Florida.
The 507th Transportation Group was alerted for movement on 23 October and directed to move to Ooalocka Air Force Base on 26 October.
Its mission was to provide liaison teams at all staging bases in Florida and at all surface ports of embarkation being used.
It was attached to Peninsula Ease Command for operational control on 30 October.
The relationship of Peninsula Base Command to Third Army was not clearly defined.
The situation was further complicated when the Commanding General, USCONARC, acting as CINCARLANT, established an advance headquarters at Homestead AFB, from which he intended to exercise operational control of Army forces in the Atlantic Command.
A CONARC review committee later found that USARLANT command relationships had not been clearly or formally defined and concluded that better use of the existing command structure should have been made.
In particular, the committee felt, the primacy of the Commanding General, Third 2b.
But later that day, 23 October, the Defense Transportation Management Service informed the transportation officer at Fort Hood that it could furnish only 11 day coaches for the movement of the first increment of Task Force Charlie.
This number was only sufficient for the first train that was scheduled to depart Fort Hood that day.
The Defense Transportation Management Service was unable to forecast when troop cars for subsequent incremen ts wou ld be available.
However, flatcars to move thef equipment were available in ample supply.
Such cars were to be used only when movement requirements could not be satisfied through commercial or other DOD interchange fleet capabilities.
After CINCARLANT made a request to the DA, the Strategic Air Command instructed 37.
The Army Task Force was dependent on Int £L y f°f ajJPhibious shipping.
Some of the units scheduled for transport in these amphibious vessels were to outload from the port of Savannah, where there were no LST ramps, ^he orepositioning of Task Force Charlie at Fort Stewart required immediate construction of four LST ramps at the tort of Savannahthese were completed on 31 October.
In the latter case either the vehicles would have to be waterproofed or a causeway landing would have to be made.
During the amphibious training exercise conducted for the first increment of Task Force Charlie in November 1962, the four LSTs were loaded to a maximum weight capacity, and a causeway pier of four sections wis crement's equipment .43 Jj I "" w,1 *°/ ailu °Causeway p added to the increment's equipment.
At the beginning of Force Charlie introduce gember, USCONARC directed that Task ° h i e St °L staff a ""™ h orize""^^ and the MSTS arranged the charters in matter of three days.
During the partial implementation of the OPLAN, a number of movement control problems arose.
Ibid., 235. ^l' ^ S) Kugler, United States Army's Role in the Cuban Crisis VII-23.
Many requirements set forth in the OPLAN, particularly those concerning reports, lacked sufficient detail or proper clarity, and the plan did not clearly delineate responsibilities assigned to various agencies.
In addition, enemy situation changed rapidly and developed unforeseen requirements.
The preparations to execute the plan revealed that coordination between the plan and the counterpart plans developed by other headquarters or Services was inadequate.
Also, there were no headquarters-wide standard operating procedures for implementing contingency plans, and no pretested procedures existed for the establishment of an emergency operations center.
It was the consensus of the USCONARC logistical staff that this function was as vital to the Army's readiness posture as were training, supply maintenance, and communications.
As a result, a movements control nucleus was established in the Plans Division of the USCONARC Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Logistics.
But during the Cuban crisis, USCONARC had to improvise management tools, devices, •and procedures, rather than executing a planned system of move\ \; ment control. ^9 tggm Another factor hindering movement control was the lack of a •. ' unit designator system, compatible with the needs of both supply"" procedures and movement reporting, that could have identified units, active or reserve, regardless of size.
In early 1963, USCONARC forwarded to the DA a series of recommendations concerning the need for a revised, simplified, and standard procedure .or unit movement reporting.
Another problem area affecting movements and their control was the use of the Defense Readiness Condition system.
Ibid. lH . the warning time it provided created the environment in which improved force readiness could be achieved.
The DEFCON system, they were convinced, was the catalyst to complete certain required actions, including the tailoring of service support units, reallocation of personnel and critical' items of equipment, and arrangements for commercial and military transport of their movement.
The use of the DEFCON system started a chain of interrelated actions both at the USCONARC headquarters and within the subordinate commands and also initiated action by MSTS, MATS, and the Defense Traffic Management Service, as well as by commercial carriers who controlled the movement of resourfces on which the Army depended.
Consequently, the CONARC logistical planners concluded that USCONARC s readiness depended to a great extent on the margin of warning it received through the DEFCON system.
But during the Cuban crisis, they believed, the required DEFCON was not instituted promptly enough, nor was it raised high enough.
In the actual preparations, many actions were taken that should have occurred under DEFCON 1 status, yet only A DEFCON 3 was actually put into effect.
The necessity of providing support units for contingency •plans was another lesson learned from the Cuban crisis.
Sufficient support units for the expanded concent of the OP'LAN were not available within the actiye forces of the United States; hence those units could not have been made available within the required reaction times regardless of the movement control procedures employed.
In the week following President Kennedy's speech, SERVLANT organised and dispatched the necessary units to supply these naval operations.
SERVLANT had to react to the increased demand for supplies for the Cuban crisis with very little pre-positioning.
Service Squadron Four was already advantageously positioned in support of an amphibious exercise off Puerto Rico, and a training' mission 51.
Ibid. , 237. 1 01'' ^ enabled the USS HYADES to very quickly remove evacuees from Guantanamo.
But In general tankers, tenders, salvage and towing ships, and the other necessary vessels had to be deployed in late October.
Despite the emergency nature of the supply deliveries, movement control often functioned very well.
For example, from 21 October to 25 October MATS lifted a 3,600-man Marine battalion from Camp Pendleton to Guantanamo.
In the same period another battalion arrived from Cherry Point, North Carolina.
Planes were landing at Guantanamo every ten minutes and st'ill averaged only 1-1/2 hours turnaround time.
Normal COMPHIBLANT transportation had to be augmented by SERVLANT ships, and finally commercial shipping was needed to move necessary rolling stock into Guantanamo for construction of defenses.
The large quantities of equipment and material needed by the construction battalions gave them a perpetual transportation problem.
Throughout the Cuban operation none of the major items needed was in shcrt supply.
The USS INDEPENDENCE and the USS ENTERPRIZE were able to maintain their fuel stocks at near capacity, though minor problems in the movement of supplies did appear.
At the beginning of the operation backlogs of both air and surface freight increased rapidly.
Much of this backlog was the result of the heavy demands placed on shipping by the Guantanamo defense construction project.
MATS increased its airlift capacity and together with organic airlift moved the supply backlogs out to Guantanamo and Roosevelt Roads.
This rapid influx of air freight in turn caused backlogs at both bases.
The cause of the problem there was the inability of these activities tc handle the increased volume because of personnel limitations and the unavailability of aircraft and surface shipping tc deliver the materia] to units at sea.
The two SERVLANT AK ships were committed to' support the fleet ballistic 53.
Consequently no organic shipping was available to establish a regularand direct delivery of surface freight to task force units at sea.
Surface freight movement was accomplished much less satisfactorily by the use of auxiliarly naval craft and other organic units that were available.
Commercial bottoms had to be utilized to make scheduled deliveries to bases at Guantanamo, Roosevelt Roads, San Juan, Trinadad, and Kingston.
Commercial shipping was the least satisfactory method of -supply,since it required a double handling of cargo, further strained the overloaded Caribbean ports, and diverted underway replenishment ships or combatants for pickup and delivery at sea.
After an unsuccessful attempt to use Mayport as the base of operations for both AKS and AF ships, it was determined to revert to Norfolk for support of both types of ships.
At sea the AF ships operated effectively, but they were considerably handicapped by communication backlogs of as many as three or four days.
The chief problem in AF operations, however, proved to be the surplus of provisions on hand when the Cuban oper•ation was cancelled.
AKS shipping was also delayed by the communication backlog, and the wide dispersal and rotation of ships proved to be a serious problem.
All shipping assigned to PHIBLANT for the Cuban operations was assembled and formed into a task force by 2 November.
There a designated subordinate of the Naval Task Force Commander would assume operational control of the. ship by direct contact and order it to an unloading sit>5 or holding area.
This procedure was never implemented, since no operations were conducted against Cuba.
As early as June iyt^ AFLC was able to begin making its own plans for moving the required amounts of war readiness materiel needed.
The air preparation phase of this plan had been relatively simple because it had assumed that the Cubans possessed only a rudimentary air defense capability.
The evidence produced in August 1962 showed that the Cubans were rapidly acquiring a modern air defense system, and on 7 September 1962,' the TAC established a planning group to develop a new air plan.
Four days later, on 17 October, AFLC was directed to complete delivery of the initial WRM by 20 October.
By midnight 19 October all supplies were in place except some tnat were unavailable . 62 support equipment and over 11,000 personnel were on standby.
Deployment of tactical units to Florida was then able to begin, on 20 October, and by 22 October all TAC combat forces, 59.
The crisis did not involve actual combat; rather the deployed United States forces acted as a deterrent to hostilities.
Hence AFLC had to overcome only the problems involved in supporting the employment bases, not in supporting combat operations.
AFLC might have been sorely pressed to supply some critical items to all the deployed forces if it had been necessary to mount more than one such operations.
Finally, the Cuban crisis was clearly the gravest sort of threat •to our security since World War II, and the size of the threat supplied an impetus which might have been lacking under less crucial circumstances.
AFLC, and the 1*1,000 reservist s^alled to active dut y was ected__to__be combat support . ''^ — the OPLANs were not executed^iowever^rrectlv^nes^^""the movement control of these units under combat conditions remained untried.
Despite the favorable overall record of the Air Force, problems of considerable magnitude did arise during the deployment of iorces m October.
Perhaps it was only the relatively' small size of the reaction to the Cuban missiles that permitted such a successful movement of personnel and supplies.
At the request, of the AFLC, the USAF headquarters organized an ad hoc commiovee ro evaluate the logistical efforts in the Cuban Crisis.
First, many of the consumable items required in the crisis had not been procured by AFLC or were not available in the AFLC logistics system, chiefly because funding had not been provided.
As a result these items had to be withdrawn from United States and overseas bases.
In many instances AFLC expended a large proportion of the available military airlift capability to move these items to the deployment bases.
Consequently each office contacted its counterpart in other commands and piecemeal information existed at all levels.
At Headquarters, AFLC, attempts were made to provide information on assets and resource requirements, but no method existed to obtain the desired information on a timely basis.
Command Post personnel at AFLC noted other weaknesses in performance 'in the Cuban crisis.
There was a lack of supply discipline, and there was widespread abuse of high priority requests.
The Rome Air Materiel Area reported operating commands were reluctant to use Defense Supply Agency centers and went by habit to the AFLC for all material support.
One of the most confusing situations for AFLC was the numerous' late changes made in the forces involved.
On 19 October the Joint Chiefs of Staff had increased the number of Air Defense Command aircraft at the Florida bases.
Additional models of aircraft v;ere called, for late in the planning stages, and their different logistics needs caused even later changes in the logistics arrangements.
LAN required addir.s°additicr.ai deployment anc employment bases, requiring changes ""in shipoing orders.
AFLC needed better force structure information more quickly and a materiel policy that would enable the command to plan support for a contingency without unduly endangering support for other commitments worldwide.
The procedure to establish WRM requirements was another factor in delaying AFLC support action.
During the crisis a delay of at len*-t ten days occurred between the identification 60.
The rrt-A establishin S priorities and precedence also hampered ellective materiel support.
On 6 September AFLC asked for target dates for pre-positioning materiel, the precedence rating ol the operation, and authority for redistribution of its worldwide assets.
But the USAF did not authorize the diversion of overseas stocks for a month and did not give AFLC the firm inplace date of 20 October until 17 October.
These delays forced AFLC to divert premium transportation to-returnitems form overseas bases.
This created delays and resulted in excessive numbers of aircraft at pickup bases.
Parking space problems were aggravated and aircraft and crew utilization suffered.
In summary, the Air Force generated the necessary effective logistic support for the Cuban crisis, but it was not a neat job.
The AFLC had to meet support requirements without a supporting L-SAF-approved program.
The crisis necessitated crash actions to obtain or redistribute assets with the result that costs were high and normal logistic support was not possible.
It was clear that to avoid a similar situation in future emergences the Air Force would have to do more advance planning.
