Or that, at the same gathering, former CIA Deputy Director Ray Cline -who led countless plots to kill Castro in addition to the operation that discovered the Cuban missile sites -cordially thanked the Cuban leader for the visa to attend the conference.
Castro feigned a look of shock, and said, ""Why, Mr Cline, it is our pleasure.
In 1989 and 1992, I worked to convene meetings in Moscow and Havana with the key players in 1962's harrowing ""Thirteen Days in October,"" bringing together former enemies to talk about the events that led to the brink of the abyss.
I sat at the table with former Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, the legendary ""Mr Nyet""; former Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin; Sergei Khrushchev, editor of the secret memoirs of his father, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev; Robert McNamara; Fidel Castro; former National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy, and others.
As director of the Harvard-Soviet Joint Study on Crisis Prevention, I was fortunate to participate in these unprecedented candid conversations that revealed how close we had come that autumn to a radioactive nuclear winter.Most striking to me as a young man back then were the words of the chastened and humbled elders who had so narrowly avoided inflicting mass destruction on the world.
They spoke of the dangers of misjudgment, miscalculation, and the unintended consequences of military action.
Upon discovery of the missile sites in Cuba, several of Kennedy's top advisors called for an immediate airstrike and invasion.
Had we invaded, the weapons would have killed tens of thousands of United States marines -and may even have struck Miami.
Kennedy took all measures to avoid pushing his opponent into a situation where the choice was between humiliating defeat or a devastating war.The veterans of the missile crisis repeatedly pointed to our shared humanity and our shared fallibility.
Today we see the many unintended consequences of military action -even with the best intentions -in the Arab Spring, with the tragic cost to Syrian children, the sectarian vengeance between the Sunni majority and the ruling minority Alawites.
The toppling of Muammar Gaddafi became a lesson to rogue regimes around the world that they should develop and keep nuclear weapons to ensure their survival , or how in the chaos of the civil war in Libya, weapons disappeared from their depots and ended up in the hands of radical Islamists who now control northern Mali, Libya's neighbor.
You cut one head off the mythical Hydra, and the beast grows two more.A second lesson is that human beings can become extreme, irrational, and suicidal under crisis conditions.
Our meetings showed how much more reckless revolutionary authoritarian regimes can be when cornered, reminding us today of Iran, North Korea, Libya, or Syria.
At our meetings, we learned for the first time of the cable that Fidel Castro sent to Khrushchev calling on him to be the first to fire nuclear missiles, to launch a preemptive strike against downtown Manhattan and other major American cities with a warhead 60 times more powerful than the one dropped on Hiroshima.
Realizing that events were spinning out of control, Khrushchev broadcast over open radio his pledge to remove the missiles.
Fortunately, JFK resisted calls to invade and Khrushchev raced to accept a negotiated end to the crisis.
We got a clear view of Castro's mindset, driven by nationalism and fanaticism, a peculiar product of the Cuban experience, the mythology that the country had created in its struggle as a small nation against a neighboring goliath.
Castro was completely resigned to the fact that they were all going to die if the United States invaded.
In the South Pacific in WWII, Kennedy had seen Japanese soldiers and civilians commit suicide rather than surrender.
He learned that overwhelming force does not mean your opponent will capitulate.
We saw similar behavior most recently in Libya, where the Gaddafi regime chose to let the country be devastated and ""fight to the last bullet"" rather than capitulate to rebels and the demands of the established big powers -of France, the U.K. and the United States.
The death toll in Syria has already reached 30,000 and Assad is still presiding over the destruction of his country.Another lesson has to do with the ""red lines"" and the nuclear crisis with Iran.
His actions provide no basis for the ""lesson"" that George W Bush proffered to justify preemptive action in Iraq, nor is there a direct parallel with Iran.
Kennedy did announce that the missiles were unacceptable and demanded that Khrushchev remove them.
