The documents show that United States intelligence listed the Soviet weapons as ""unidentified artillery"" pieces, when they were actually cruise missiles armed with Hiroshima-sized nuclear devices.
They were deployed to within 15 miles of the Guantanamo base on the same day -October 27, 1962 -that the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended an all-out United States invasion of Cuba to destroy the Soviet missile bases.
President Kennedy rejected the advice of his military advisers in favor of a diplomatic solution to the crisis that included a secret understanding between his brother and the Soviet ambassador.
Dobbs conducted extensive interviews with Soviet combat veterans and discovered previously undisclosed United States intelligence documents that explode the myth of successful crisis management and offer new insights into how a United States president makes decisions at a time of grave international crisis.
Nikita Khrushchev alluded to the nuclear threat hanging over the United States Naval base at Guantanamo during a meeting in the Kremlin on October 24, 1962, with the president of Westinghouse, William Knox.
He told Knox that the Guantanamo naval base would “disappear the first day” after a United States invasion of Cuba.
What Kennedy did not know was that the Soviets had deployed nuclear cruise missiles to Cuba, armed with 14-kiloton warheads, roughly the power of the bomb that destroyed Hiroshima.
FKR cruise missile regiments were stationed near the port of Mariel in western Cuba and at Mayari Arriba in eastern Cuba.
At about the time that Khrushchev was speaking with Knox, a convoy of FKR cruise missiles was moving from Mayari Arriba to a pre-launch position at the village of Vilorio.
Two Soviet soldiers were killed during this deployment when their truck fell down a ravine.
Click on the icons for further details on the FKR deployments Soviet soldier Viktor Mikheev was killed when his truck fell down a ravine near Guantanamo naval base.
The Marines defending Guantanamo followed the movement of a convoy of several thousand “RUSS/SINO/CUBAN TRPS” transporting “unidentified artillery equipment” from Vilorio to Filipinas.
A Navy intelligence message on October 28 gave the precise coordinates for the deployment, but did not identify the FKR cruise missiles.
The FKR missiles were still in position in Filipinas on November 12, long after the Soviets had begun to dismantle the strategic missile sites.
Both the Filipinas and Vilorio sites were targeted for air strikes by A4D Skyhawks, operating out of Roosevelt Roads Air Naval Station in Puerto Rico.
A GITMO Naval intelligence summary dated November 14 reported that ‘missile launching platforms” had still not been dismantled at the pre-launch site at Vilorio.
The same intelligence summary reported the arrival of “three artillery pieces) of unknown type in Filipinas from Santiago de Cuba.
The United States evacuated 2,810 women and children from the Guantanamo naval base on October 22, shortly before JFK addressed the nation about the presence of Soviet missiles on Cuba.
Five thousand United States Marines were sent to Guantanamo to reinforce the base, which could have been wiped out by the Soviets in a matter of minutes.
If you have Google Earth installed on your computer, you can download the precise coordinates of the Soviet deployment of FKR cruise missiles around Guantanamo by downloading this Google Earth layer and opening it in the free Google Earth application.
More information on the targeting of the Guantanamo naval base, including the role played by Raul Castro and a shootout between Cuban and Soviet troops, is available in One Minute to Midnight, available through Amazon.com.
