Seeking to complement previous works, which are focused largely on military events, this study shows how Canadian diplomats responded to the crisis and sought to support their vital ally in the events of October and November 1962.
Their lengthy discussion touched on a range of topics, from the status of Berlin, to disarmament negotiations, and to the Soviet leader’s domestic popularity.
Now that tensions had abated, Khrushchev urged Ottawa to revert to its former position on Cuba.
It contradicts the commonly held view that Canada–US relations ‘reached their nadir’ in October 1962 when the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba precipitated a standoﬀ between the United States and Soviet Union during which Canada appeared to oﬀer only hesitant support to its American ally.
Hours after the President of the United States, John F Kennedy, took to the airwaves on 22 October to disclose the presence of the weapons and to announce his response, Canada’s Prime Minister, John Diefenbaker, rose in the House of Commons.
In a poorly worded speech, Diefenbaker seemed to question Kennedy’s actions as well as the President’s claim that missiles were being deployed in Cuba.
I would like to acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the Kennedy Library Foundation and the Social Science and Humanities Research Council.
My thanks, as well, to Galen Perras; his thoughtful comments and criticisms on a draft of this paper were of great help.
Unbeknownst to Diefenbaker, who was unwilling to permit Canadian forces to go on alert until 24 October two days after the United States military had requested that this be done the Canadian Defence Minister, Douglas Harkness, had readied Canada’s air force as well as its navy on 23 October.
As Canadian ships patrolled for Soviet submarines in the North Atlantic, Royal Canadian Air Force pilots readied themselves to defend North American airspace.
Although Canada was thus the only United States ally to take on an active military role during the October crisis, the Prime Minister’s prevarications and the resulting confrontation between Canada and the United States are the main focus of the studies of Canadian reactions to the standoﬀ between the superpowers.
The most prevalent view is that Canadian or rather Diefenbaker’s inaction was inexcusable and greatly angered the United States.
NORAD, or the North American Air Defence Command, the joint command providing for the defence of North American airspace by both Canada and the United States, required mutual consultation in the event of a crisis.
By October 1962, thanks to policy and personality diﬀerences, Kennedy and Diefenbaker loathed one another, and so during the crisis consultation did not take place between them.
As a recent study has also contended, the lack of consultation was the natural result of the disparate power relationship between Canada and the United States.
That the Canadian government did not receive special consideration has been a reason for some to decry United States treatment of Canada throughout the crisis and to support Diefenbaker’s hesitant actions.
Consultation and the issues arising from it have been the primary focus for historians, and they do show a rocky state of aﬀairs between Ottawa and Washington.
The answer, quite simply, is that throughout the crisis Canada stood by the United States.
While their Prime Minister bumbled about, Canadian oﬃcials from the Department of External Aﬀairs played a helpful role by providing intelligence to the Americans, by using Canada’s leverage with the Cuban government to seek a resolution to the crisis, and by acting as an intermediary between Cuba and the United States.
Further, in analysing the events of October and November, these oﬃcials took the view that Washington’s actions were a justiﬁed response to dangerous provocations from Moscow and Havana.
This study seeks to complement those works focused on Canada’s military role, through an exploration of how Canadian diplomats viewed and responded to the crisis.
Whereas these previous studies have cast the October crisis as having been a crisis in Canada–US relations, an examination of the gamut of Canada’s role in the events of October and November 1962 leads to far diﬀerent conclusions.
Since the success of the Cuban Revolution in 1959, Canada has maintained diplomatic ties with Cuba’s government and has pursued a policy of trading with Cuba in all goods barring those possessing military or strategic value.
This was diﬀerent from the course that Washington embarked upon, particularly once a United States embargo was put in place in October 1960, and United States diplomats were withdrawn in January 1961.
Occasionally, these diﬀerences resulted in open arguments as in May 1961, when the Canadian Minister of External Aﬀairs, Howard Green, and the United States Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, had a very tense exchange regarding Cuba.
Spurred by the recent failure of the US-sponsored invasion of Cuba by Cuban exiles at the Bay of Pigs, Green emphasized to Rusk that United States policy was severely mistaken.
Throughout 1962, a number of United States oﬃcials had made their displeasure over the nature of the Ottawa–Havana relationship quite clear to their Canadian counterparts.
The United States Ambassador at Ottawa, Livingston Merchant, informed several Canadian cabinet ministers that Canada’s inﬂuence in Washington had declined thanks in part to ‘ostentatious divergence’ from the United States position on Cuba.
Citing the threat that Cuba posed to the region and pointing out that United States public opinion was becoming anti-Canadian, Rusk argued that Canada’s position was a dangerous one.
Indeed, Canada’s Cuban policy was ‘‘‘the most serious problem’’’ in terms of Canada–US relations because of the harm that it might do to the relationship.
Green resolved that in public he would attempt to downplay diﬀerences over Cuba.
Penned by the undersecretary of External Aﬀairs, Norman Robertson, the report did not advocate a change in Ottawa’s fundamental outlook on Cuba.
It did argue, however, for a more appreciative view of Washington’s stance.
Meanwhile, Canadian concern was growing over the state of another relationship, that between Havana and Moscow.
From the Cuban capital, the Canadian Ambassador, George Kidd, passed on a wealth of information on this subject to Ottawa.
Many of these reports, sent also to the Americans and the British, dealt with Cuba’s arms build-up over the summer of 1962.
In mid-August, for example, Kidd sounded the tocsins over the increasing numbers of Soviet technicians, military personnel, and materiel arriving on the island.
The Soviets matched these provocative actions with dangerous rhetoric, a worrying mix.
On 11 September, the TASS news agency released a statement from the Kremlin castigating United States policy, and repeating Moscow’s deep commitment to Cuba.
Wary because it seemed logical to expect that Moscow would henceforth demand a greater say over Cuban policy, Kidd also worried that Cuba was now on par with Berlin as a key centre of the cold war.
Still, he felt that deepened Soviet involvement could also have the eﬀect of moderating Cuban adventurism throughout Latin America.
In this regard he reported that the Soviets, in fact, seemed to be trying to reduce tensions.
Thus, their guarantee that long-range missiles would not be installed in Cuba was heartening.
But Soviet arms shipments continued, and on the same day that Kidd sent this dispatch, the United States President held a news conference to warn the Soviets against introducing oﬀensive weapons into Cuba.
Kennedy had made similar pronouncements the previous week and the growing tension in Washington was picked up by the Canadian Embassy in its reports back to Ottawa.
Kennedy’s warnings, combined with Kidd’s worrying cables, worried members of External Aﬀairs.
Green, for one, was concerned by the frequent overﬂights of Canada by Soviet airplanes which often stopped to refuel at Canadian airports.
There was a belief in External Aﬀairs that these ﬂights were being used to transfer military technicians and personnel to Cuba, and Green’s speciﬁc worry was that Canadian acquiescence to these ﬂights was making Canada complicit in the armament of the Cuban military.
At his request, the Soviet chargé was called into the Department to be told of Canadian concerns.
In regards to Cuba itself, Norman Robertson had a wide-ranging discussion in late September with the Cuban Ambassador, Américo Cruz.
Lamenting both Cuba’s alignment with the Soviet bloc as well as the ‘steadily worsening relations’ between the United States and Cuba, Robertson emphasized that this situation had created ‘growing uneasiness and anxiety’ amongst Canadians.
The following week, Robertson set down his thoughts on Cuba in a memorandum to Green.
Hoping to oﬀer his minister an assessment of the ‘situation behind the Sugarcane Curtain’, he viewed the increasing Soviet military presence with anxiety.
Nevertheless, Robertson felt that ‘there seems to be no substantial reason for terminating our present normal diplomatic relations with Cuba’.20 A week later, 16 October, Kennedy received startling news that Soviet missiles were being deployed in Cuba; he and his key advisors then set about crafting a response.
Over several days they debated a number of options, including bombarding the missile sites and invading the island.
The course they set upon was to blockade Cuba the term ‘quarantine’ was used and then demand that the missiles be removed.
These measures would be announced by the President during a televised address, set for 7pm on 22 October.
During the ﬁrst day of deliberations, in what appears to have been the only point at which Kennedy and his advisors considered Canada, Rusk had mulled over using the Canadian Ambassador at Havana as a go-between with Cuban leader Fidel Castro, but the idea was abandoned.
Ottawa was, however, amongst those governments that received a brieﬁng from United States oﬃcials prior to the President’s address.
Called to the State Department, Charles Ritchie, Canada’s new Ambassador at Washington, received information on the crisis from the United States Under-secretary of State, George Ball, while George Ignatieﬀ, the Canadian representative to the North Atlantic Council, attended former United States Secretary of State Dean Acheson’s brieﬁng of the NATO allies.
Both Canadian diplomats noted that during the brieﬁngs, the need for solidarity had been underlined.
To brief the Canadian Prime Minister, Livingston Merchant, recently retired from the foreign service, returned to Ottawa.
Because this situation was so dangerous, they expected that the United Nations would become involved.
Possible Canadian action could then be to urge that the UN ‘conduct an on-site investigation in Cuba’ to conﬁrm the United States government’s assertion that missiles were being installed.
Merchant’s insistence that the President would not play politics with such an important issue seemed to soothe the Prime Minister as did photographic evidence of the missile sites.
Merchant also observed, though, that ‘it was interesting . . . that at no point, despite pointed questions, did make a commitment in this regards’.24 Importantly too, Merchant had made no mention of a NORAD alert, nor had the Prime Minister mentioned the idea of UN inspections as he had been advised to do by External Aﬀairs prior to the President’s address.
Perhaps Diefenbaker did not suggest UN inspections because Kennedy, in a letter to the Prime Minister which Merchant presented, had made some positive comments about the United Nations.
This eﬀort, an ‘independent inspection’ made through the UN, would both ‘provide an objective answer to what is going on in Cuba’ and constitute ‘the only sure way that the world can secure the facts’.26 Hardly a ringing endorsement of Kennedy’s stance, Diefenbaker’s statement did not go unnoticed.
In Ottawa, the Cuban Ambassador remarked to Alfred Pick, the head of External’s Latin American Division, that ‘he had read and liked the Prime Minister’s statement in the House’ because the suggestion of an inspection ‘implied that Mr Diefenbaker himself doubted President Kennedy’s assertions’.27 Pick was compelled to dissuade Cruz of this notion, but the damage was done.
Speaking with David Ormsby-Gore, Britain’s Ambassador at Washington, Robert Kennedy, the US Attorney General, reported that ‘the only half-hearted response’ to their actions that the White House had received was from the Canadian Prime Minister.
Rather than being an assertion of doubt, the speech, or at least its phrasing, appears merely to have been a rather unfortunate gaﬀe, something that even Diefenbaker recognized immediately.
In a cabinet meeting the following morning he told his colleagues that the press was pestering him over whether there were any doubts about the missile sites.
Noting that there ‘were, of course, political overtones in the American attitude’, Diefenbaker nevertheless averred that he, Green, and Harkness ‘had been convinced that there had been no exaggeration of the situation’ by Kennedy.
Importantly, he explained that Kennedy’s plan involved using a UN Security Council resolution as a means to seek the missiles’ removal, but he felt this eﬀort would most likely fail due to the Soviet Union’s veto.
His purpose was not to compete with a United States resolution; rather, it was to put forward a proposal which could be used in the event that the Soviet veto was used.
Thus, his proposal was meant to compliment United States initiatives, and given his claims that Kennedy had not exaggerated the evidence, one can conclude that Diefenbaker had initially blundered by emphasizing the role of the United Nations in the way that he had.
Prior to making this clariﬁcation, Diefenbaker had signed oﬀ on instructions to the embassy in Washington and to Canada’s mission at the United Nations, telling these Canadian diplomats to seek out their United States counterparts in order to discuss the inspection proposal.
While doing so, they were to stress that the manoeuvre was not meant to cast doubt on the United States claims; Ottawa’s goal was simply to put in motion an initiative which could be used if and when the Soviet veto was employed.
The British opposed the proposal because the evidence provided by the Americans seemed convincing.
Norway’s representative was mildly in favour of the move, but only if it became necessary to counter Soviet denials about the presence of the missile sites.
Seeking to downplay concerns about Diefenbaker’s statement of 22 October, concerns the Canada desk at the State Department had already made clear, they emphasized to Tyler ‘that facts of situation as outlined by President were not questioned by Canadian Government’.33 Ritchie also discussed the Prime Minister’s initiative with Harlan Cleveland, the Assistant Secretary for International Organizations.
As the Americans preferred the latter, and since Diefenbaker’s mission seemed aimed at doing the former, Washington would not support the Canadian scheme.
Speaking with Ivan White on 24 October, Howard Green ‘played down’ the proposal and oﬀered his assurance that Canada would go no further in this regard without the United States.
As these talks were taking place, Robert Bryce, the Clerk of the Privy Council and Canada’s top civil servant, was carrying out prime ministerial instructions to determine the legality of the United States’ quarantine.
The latter’s study of past naval blockades concluded that as the legality of the President’s action was ill-deﬁned and without precedent, Canada could accept the quarantine measure without acquiescing to anything illegal.
The DEA study, grounded in a discussion of international law, likewise noted the ‘sui-generis’ nature of the US quarantine.
As a result, there would be nothing wrong if Canada at least oﬀered its tacit support.
To avoid a potential blunder, though, Norman Robertson advised Canadian oﬃcials to avoid discussing the legal merits of the quarantine in public.
This advice was convincing enough that the Prime Minister made no complaint when the quarantine came into eﬀect, a move in line with those of other friendly nations.
Canadian diplomats also moved quickly to respond to a request made by the US embassy on 22 October that Canada temporarily suspend overﬂight clearances for airplanes travelling to Cuba from the Soviet Union.
In a brief press conference following the Prime Minister’s address to the House that evening, Howard Green announced that ﬂights to Cuba from the Soviet bloc would no longer be permitted to land or refuel in Canada nor could they enter Canadian airspace.
However, as ICAO rules stated that civilian airlines could not be used to transport military equipment, Canadian oﬃcials could lawfully conduct searches of planes from these airlines to enforce this rule.
By 23 October consultations between the Royal Canadian Mounted Police as well as the Departments of External Aﬀairs, Transport, National Revenue, and National Defence led to procedures establishing these searches.
They were immediately put into eﬀect when a Cubana plane touched down at Goose Bay, Newfoundland, on 24 October.
A thorough and purposefully lengthy search by customs oﬃcials found no strategic material, but several missile technicians were on board.
Unable to remove these men, the Canadian cabinet cleared the ﬂight to leave.
A United States analysis of these search procedures, concluding that they were ‘suﬃciently detailed to ensure a measure of deterrence’, recommended that similar measures be used by countries in the Caribbean.
As the United States military went to Defense Condition 3 alert on 22 October, United States oﬃcials requested, via the Canadian element of NORAD, that Canada match this level of readiness.
As this request had come through military channels rather than a political one, Canada’s military passed it on to the Defence Minister; Harkness, in turn took it to the Prime Minister.
Diefenbaker then referred the matter to the cabinet, where, during two meetings on 23 and 24 October, Canadian ministers ﬁercely debated whether or not to comply with the United States request.
Harkness again pleaded his case the following day, and again, the ministers were deeply divided.
Following this meeting Harkness presented Diefenbaker with a report showing that the United States military had moved to DEFCON 2, meaning the Americans were making immediate preparations for war.
Galvanized by this news, the Prime Minister ordered that Canada’s air forces be readied.
Harkness had already authorized an alert days before, and Canada’s military commanders had immediately complied with this secret order.
So although the Prime Minister had forced a delay, the Canadian military and the Minister of Defence, in fact, had ensured that Canadian forces were ready in case hostilities broke out.
While Diefenbaker was fumbling about on defence issues, Green stumbled about on television.
Given the cabinet’s indecision over NORAD, Green’s misstep is not surprising, however.
What is surprising is that so much has been made of Green’s omissions and that little attention has been given to his statements in support of United States policy.
Also downplaying Diefenbaker’s suggestion for a UN veriﬁcation mission, Green argued that in the rush of activity this subject had come up in a hurried manner as a method of resolving the crisis; as such, it did not reﬂect Canadian doubts about the veracity of United States intelligence.
As Green remarked, ‘I don’t think the Americans have any doubt whatever that we’re standing beside them.
Agreeing that ‘this situation should be corrected’, the ministers advised the Prime Minister to make a further public statement ‘outlining what steps Canada had taken already and clarifying Canada’s stand in support of the United States action’.52 In the House of Commons that afternoon Diefenbaker recounted the steps that Canada had taken to search Cuban-bound aircraft and revealed that Canadian NORAD units were on alert.
He also attacked the Soviet Union, which ‘by its actions has reached out across the Atlantic to challenge the right of free men to live in peace in this hemisphere’.53 This strong rhetoric was matched by supportive actions by Canadian diplomats in Washington, Havana, and Ottawa.
In the United States capital, on 26 October, Charles Ritchie and Basil Robinson called ﬁrst on Robert Kennedy and then on the Secretary of State.
Robert Kennedy was pleased to see Ritchie because he had just heard about Diefenbaker’s statement to the House of Commons.
Ritchie also handed the Secretary of State a memorandum of conversation between Howard Green and Cuba’s Ambassador, Américo Cruz.
Thanking Ritchie for the information, Rusk suggested that Green might probe Cruz further.
Ritchie was less than convinced that Rusk truly expected anything from this eﬀort but he advised Ottawa of it nonetheless.
The Secretary of State likely put more stock in this channel than Ritchie thought as Rusk was already using Brazilian diplomats as a way to communicate with the Cuban government.
Thus, he may sincerely have wished to use Canadian oﬃcials in this regard as well.
Meanwhile, in both Havana and Ottawa, Canadians looked on with astonishment and worry at Cuban actions.
Commenting on a ﬁery address that Fidel Castro had made as he had put Cuban soldiers and militia on alert, Kidd worried that the Cuban leader had failed to refute the United States charges about the presence of the missiles and had neglected an opportunity to calm the situation.
Instead, Castro had ‘reiterated his readiness to die with his people but seems rather less concerned about whether they or anyone else remains alive’.56 On 25 October, the Cuban Ambassador called on Howard Green; a bitter discussion ensued, during which the Canadian Foreign Minister rebuked Cuban policy.
He ﬁrst ‘expressed disappointment’ that Castro had recently rejected any notion of UN inspections and then underlined that the Cuban position implied that Havana had something to hide.
Next, Green emphasized that the missiles posed a ‘grave threat to the security of the Americas, including Canada’, and that ‘one way or another, they had to go’.57 Cuba’s actions clearly alarmed the Canadian government and Green’s statements here conﬁrm whose side he was on during the crisis.
This was remarkable, he felt, because of the strong domestic pressure on the Kennedy administration to take a hard line, particularly with a mid-term election looming.
Noting that there was some criticism of the United States quarantine amongst Canadians, Robertson defended this measure as ‘a necessary response to clear provocation’.58 A detailed study of Soviet motivations, prepared in the European Division and funnelled up to the Prime Minister, also played up the provocative nature of Khrushchev’s actions.
Moscow’s actions therefore constituted a ‘serious threat’ towards which Washington had shown considerable moderation.
Highlighting the ongoing danger of the situation, the study noted, too, that following the imposition of the quarantine, the Soviets had also taken a moderate position and negotiations might therefore prove fruitful.
Yet on 26 October there was only some vague possibility of a resolution, and so Charles Ritchie ominously counselled Ottawa that it appeared that a ‘second and more critical phase of the crisis’ was about to begin.
The next day, Radio Moscow broadcasted a message from Khrushchev who oﬀered to swap the missiles in Cuba for United States missiles in Turkey.
Ritchie rushed to the State Department to receive any information that William Tyler was willing to oﬀer.
Tyler, who warned that meeting Khrushchev’s demand could seriously damage the NATO alliance, nevertheless felt that a potential schism was outweighed by the danger posed by the missiles.
Despite this grim assessment, Ritchie was buoyed by a discussion with Ormsby-Gore, who conﬁded that he had received word of secret and more constructive communications between the Soviet Premier and the United States President.
After conﬁrming this development with Tyler, Ritchie advised Ottawa that this news could herald a break in the crisis.
This was indeed the case and on 28 October Khrushchev announced that the missiles in Cuba would be dismantled.
After deliberating with Canada’s delegation to the UN, Green spoke with the UN Secretary General, U Thant.
That day, Thant had announced his intent to go to Havana to gain Castro’s consent to the establishment of a UN mission to verify the dismantling of the missile sites.
Green stressed to Thant that Canada was willing to assist in any way possible.
After conferring with Adlai Stevenson, Green informed the Secretary General that Canada would be willing to oﬀer aircrew for a UN reconnaissance mission.
Flying United States airplanes painted white and bearing UN markings, these pilots would conﬁrm that the missiles were being removed.
To speed up this process, Green also authorized the embassy in Washington to begin discussions with the Americans on the details of securing these planes and moving Canadian pilots into position.
Although United States oﬃcials hoped that Canadian pilots would be used for this mission, they fully expected that the proposal would be rejected.
Returning to Ottawa on 30 October, Green met with the Cuban Ambassador in order to smooth the way for UN inspections.
Green urged Cruz to tell his government that ‘it was no less in Cuba’s interests to cooperate’ with the UN than it was to oppose a mission.
Canada, he continued, would be willing to contribute in any way towards the success of the mission; the Cuban government could thus rest assured of Canadian impartiality.
As Cruz attacked Kennedy, Adlai Stevenson, and Dean Rusk, Green defended them as ‘voices of moderation in United States policies’.65 Green’s overture to Cruz ultimately had little eﬀect as Thant, during his meetings with Castro on 30 and 31 October, found the Cuban leader quite unwilling to permit inspections.
The Americans therefore sought Canada’s help to pressure the Cuban government.
On the evening of 31 October, Ivan White approached Ross Campbell to ask whether Canada would be willing to ‘intervene strongly’ with the Cubans by threatening to break oﬀ relations should Cuba refuse inspections.
Campbell made no commitments but did reveal that Green had already underlined Canada’s displeasure to Cruz.
White’s suggestion of using the severance of Canada–Cuba relations as a bargaining tactic met with a decidedly negative reaction within External Aﬀairs.
The presence of the Canadian embassy in the Cuban capital had ‘frequently proved valuable’ and to change Canada’s policy at this point would imply that the maintenance of the relationship in the past had been a mistake.
Despite this view, Robertson thought it was advisable that Kidd reiterate to Cuban oﬃcials that the UN should be brought in to oversee the dismantling of the missile sites.
In a cable to Kidd, Green therefore asked him to meet with the Cuban Foreign Minister, Raul Roa Garcia, to stress that ‘it was in Cuba’s interest to cooperate’ with the United Nations to resolve the crisis.
During a meeting on 30 October, he had listened to the Cuban Foreign Minister denounce the idea of UN inspections, but following through on his orders from Ottawa, Kidd spoke with Roa on 31 October to again urge Cuba’s government to do its part to gain a resolution.
They also met again the next day, this time to address Havana’s mistaken belief that Canada was attempting to mediate the dispute between the United States and Cuba.
Roa had mentioned this to Kidd during their discussion on 30 October; the Canadian Ambassador, unaware that his government had made such an oﬀer, cabled Ottawa to ask for clariﬁcation.
Oﬃcials in External greeted this news with disbelief for at no time had they oﬀered to mediate anything.
The conclusion they came to was that Cruz, lacking a ﬁrm grasp of English, had misconstrued Green’s comments on the importance which Canada attached to inspections.
Instructions to correct the misunderstanding were sent to Kidd, and Ross Campbell phoned the embassy in Washington.
Kidd was busy not just in speaking with Cuban oﬃcials; he was also reporting on events on the island.
Throughout the crisis, Kidd had commented on the positioning of the Soviet missiles and then, once the crisis ended, the subsequent withdrawal of weaponry and personnel.
In addition, at the State Department’s request, Ottawa had directed the Canadian embassy in Havana to send reports of the Cuban reaction to events and to report on whether Voice of America broadcasts were having any inﬂuence.
In response, Kidd reported that despite Cuban attempts to jam the signals VOA broadcasts were being received, and many Cubans were tuning in.
He noted that assessing the inﬂuence of the broadcasts was diﬃcult, but that by making more information available, they were undoubtedly having some impact.
Still, the ‘pervasiveness of Cuban propaganda and its reliant patriotic themes’ was not easy to counter.
This report came as the crisis was abating, and Kidd noted that a sense of relief was spreading throughout the Cuban populace, as was a worry that the ‘destiny of their country had escaped Cuban hands’.75 This latter feeling was prominent throughout government circles in Havana, and Kidd perceived deep anger towards Moscow.
Cuban oﬃcials also appeared upset that other Latin American countries had sided with the United States against Cuba.
Kidd believed that Castro, his ego heavily bruised, would henceforth want to demonstrate ‘to Cuba, the world and himself that he is nobody’s puppet’.76 These reports evidently were of some value to the Americans.
Hugh Crimmins, the director of the Oﬃce of Caribbean and Mexican Aﬀairs at the State Department, spoke to several Canadian diplomats ‘in the warmest and most complimentary terms’ of the reports received from Havana.
Indeed, during a brief and decidedly antagonistic lunch with Diefenbaker at Nassau in December 1962, Kennedy praised the helpful role played by the Canadian embassy staﬀ in Havana.
In assessing the fallout of the crisis from Cuba’s capital, Kidd was highly perceptive.
Early on, he had noted that Cubans were coming to realise that they were ‘caught up in a situation beyond control’.79 The resulting anger amongst Cubans, particularly once Washington and Moscow agreed upon a settlement which had excluded and ignored Havana, was best expressed by Castro.
In a ﬁery speech on 1 November, the Cuban leader, as Kidd put it, tried to skilfully salvage ‘as much domestic prestige as possible’ out of what was undoubtedly a ‘humiliating’ situation for Cuba.
Kidd also reported that while the speech had contained favourable references to the USSR, at one point Castro could no longer ‘disguise a frustrated rage at Soviet retreat’.80 Cuban anger was such that Anastas Mikoyan, a trouble-shooter for Khrushchev, arrived on the island to soothe Cuba’s leadership and gain Castro’s acquiescence to the removal of the missiles.
It seemed likely to him, though, that the Soviets and Cubans would try to keep their disagreements quiet and would use all means available to avoid a breakdown in relations.
Soviet policy had also been unwise and for the failure of this gambit, Smith put the blame entirely on Khrushchev’s shoulders, predicting, presciently, that the Soviet leader would have to answer for his mistakes.
Reaction to the crisis in Ottawa was overwhelmingly concerned with the impact of the events on Canada–US relations.
While expressing his government’s unequivocal support for the United States, he still ‘made clear that consultation is a prerequisite to joint and contemporaneous action being taken’.84 This speech was geared towards the Prime Minister’s domestic critics who were clamouring for the government to explain why it has not stood more forthrightly beside the United States.
As historians have noted, much of the criticism that the Canada’s government received for its actions or inactions during the missile crisis was from Canadians.
Basil Robinson addressed these concerns with State Department oﬃcials, telling them of his government’s concern over public outrage.
The resulting political crisis over the nuclear weapons issue would bring down Diefenbaker’s government in February 1963, and it has been argued at the time and since, that the Kennedy administration played a role in the Prime Minister’s downfall.
While the Americans certainly bear some blame for the collapse of Diefenbaker’s government a January 1963 State Department press release caused a stir by calling the Prime Minister a liar it seems doubtful that the Americans ‘delight in scheming to obtain vengeance for Diefenbaker’s diplomatic cold shoulder’ during the missile crisis.
There seems in fact to have been a general lack of criticism of the Canadians by US oﬃcials.
Speaking with Basil Robinson in December 1962, Livingston Merchant did voice his disappointment over both the Prime Minister’s statement in the House of Commons on 22 October and Green’s television interview a few days later.
Such assistance had pleased United States oﬃcials and while the Prime Minister’s statement of 22 October was noted, criticism did not come from the United States likely because little was expected of the Canadians.
As far as Washington was concerned, Canada, like most other countries, was largely irrelevant in the crisis.
The transcripts of Kennedy’s deliberations with his advisors attest that United States oﬃcials gave little thought to a role for Canada’s government, an omission also not surprising given the mutual hostility between the President and the Prime Minister.
Still, Kennedy both sent Merchant to brief the Canadians and wrote a personal message to Diefenbaker, so there is something to be said for the relationship between Ottawa and Washington.
As the crisis then unfolded, and despite their Prime Minister’s reluctance, Canadian oﬃcials, including Green, responded to the crisis by siding with Washington and by playing a helpful role in providing the Americans with intelligence, by monitoring ﬂights heading towards Cuba, and by pressuring the Cuban government.
In analysing events, Canada’s diplomats were sympathetic to their United States ally and wary of Soviet and Cuban actions.
Further, even though Diefenbaker did not order a military alert until 24 October, Canada’s military, through the initiative of the Canadian Defence Minister, played its part in keeping North America secure.
In early November 1962, Rufus Smith, the political counsellor at the United States embassy in Ottawa and one the oﬃcials who would draft the infamous State Department press release in January 1963, met with Canadian journalist Robert Reford to discuss Ottawa’s response to the crisis.
Referring to an incident in 1960 when the Canadian Trade Minister had called Cubans ‘ﬁne businessmen’, Smith said that ‘unfortunately’ these types of statements tend ‘to be remembered by people, particularly editors, who may forget that in fact Canada has been more cooperative with trade embargo’ than had other United States allies.
Implicit, then, was that both the Prime Minister’s 22 October statement and Green’s television interview would be remembered more than Canadian eﬀorts to support the United States throughout the October Crisis.
After hearing Merchant read the President’s speech, the Prime Minister advised that a reference in the speech to the Soviet Foreign Minister as being a ‘dishonest and dishonourable’ man be removed.
Pick to Robertson, memo, ‘Views of the Cuban Ambassador on the Crisis’, 23 Oct.
Knox to Burdett, memo, ‘Canadian Search Procedures of Soviet Bloc Aircraft’, 27 Oct.
It is doubtful how much support Green may have given Diefenbaker, however.
United Nations Division to Robertson, memo, ‘Cuba and the United Nations’, 30 Oct.
