The revelation marked the beginning of a thirteen-day crisis that saw the United States deliver a public ultimatum to the Soviet Union, saw Soviet and United States warships come close to tangling on the high seas and, indeed, saw the world verge on a nuclear holocaust.
Taylor characterised the Cuban missile crisis as the two most important weeks in human history.
Taylor may have overstated, but he reminded us that this was the closest we have come to extinguishing human civilisation.
This crisis, which saw the Soviet Union accede to United States demands, has been called President John F Kennedy's and America's finest hour.
It has also been described as a sobering experience for the president and the superpowers, leading to d6tente.
But, in current historical revision, the missile crisis has also been called a reckless display of power that had some unfortunate repercussions.
Almost everyone over the age of forty or so remembers the events of the thirteen days in October.
This paper reviews the causes of the crisis, the conduct of the crisis and the significant results.
NEW EVIDENCE It is particularly appropriate to review the Cuban missile crisis becaus abundance of new evidence that has become available in the past three y part of the process of glasnost and the thawing of the Cold War, there series of Soviet-American conferences attended by the surviving partic the crisis.
Presidential advisers like McGeorge Bundy, C Douglas Dillo MacNamara and Theodore Sorensen have joined these conclaves.
On the side, most of the key actors are dead, but those who were younge officials have offered their views.
We have heard from, among other Khrushchev, the Soviet leader's son, Fyodor Burlatsky, one of Nikita chev's speechwriters, and Sergo Mikoyan, son of Deputy Prime Minister Mikoyan.
Sergei Khrushchev, for example, has related what his father told him many years ago about the missile crisis.
But scholars know that they must examine these dialogues and interviews carefully.
Neither the Soviet Union nor Cuba has yet declassified documents on the missile crisis.
We do have, however, significant new evidence on the United States side, because scholars, the John F Kennedy Library and organisations like the National Security Archive of Washington, DC, have used the mandatory declassification review process and the Freedom of Information Act to open files.
This new documentary evidence has encouraged Kennedy-era officials to speak extensively about the crisis.
My own contribution to the historical debate comes through my book Eisenhower and Latin America.
Using newly declassified evidence, I traced the growing hostility between the United States and Fidel Castro's Cuba.
ORIGINS OF THE CRISIS The bulk of the new documentary evidence relates to the origins o I shall devote much of my paper to this subject.
In retrospect, scholars agree that the Soviet Union gambled reck ing missiles in Cuba.
Premier Khrushchev must have anticipated Kennedy and United States intelligence agencies would quickly discover the siles.
Khrushchev should have known that Kennedy would have t Kennedy believed that he would be 'impeached' if he did not r challenge.
In his memoirs, Khrushchev remembers, the Soviet premier stated that he wanted to protect Castro and counterbalance United States missiles in Turkey.
During the 1960 presidential campaign, candidate John Kennedy alleged that during the 1950s the Eisenhower/Nixon team had allowed a 'missile gap' to develop.
Khrushchev knew that Kennedy and the United States Defense establishment understood that there was a 'missile gap' but that it favoured the United States.
In fact, Department of Defense official Roswell Gilpatric pointed to the United States strategic superiority in a speech in October 1961.
Nonetheless, President Kennedy accelerated United States military spending.
In terms of inter-continental ballistic missiles , the United States had a better than four to one advantage and was rapidly expanding its advantage.
By comparison, the Soviets had approximately twenty ICBMs on their soil in October 1962.6 Secretary of Defense MacNamara has now conceded that the Soviets could possibly have surmised that the United States was contemplating developing a first-strike capability.
The fifteen Jupiter missiles positioned in Turkey also bear re-examination.
The Kennedy administration's stance after the crisis was that these medium-range missiles were old, obsolete, unthreatening, and that, in any case, Kennedy had previously ordered their removal.
But the minutes of the meetings of the special committee, the socalled EXCOMM group, convened by President Kennedy to consider the crisis suggest different perceptions.
At the beginning of the crisis, on 16 October, the president speculated on Soviet motivations.
Although the Jupiters had been authorised in 1959, President Dwight Eisenhower delayed their deployment, probably judging that they were unnecessarily provocative.
The missiles were deployed in mid-1961 after the stormy meeting in Vienna between Kennedy and Khrushchev, became operational in April 1962, and were turned over to Turkish forces on 22 October 1962, the very day Kennedy publicly demanded that the Soviets dismantle their missiles in Cuba.
To be sure, Kennedy had previously ordered a study to consider the missiles in Turkey, but he had not actually ordered their removal.
As a client state of the Soviet Union, Cuba is frequently depicted as a pawn in the Cold War.
But the release of the photographs taken by the U-2 reconnaissance plane led to calls in the United States for an invasion or bombing of Cuba.
It is on these questions that the most new documentary evidence exists.
The most likely sequence of events that led to a Soviet-Cuban agreement on offensive weapons is that in the spring of 1962 Khrushchev and his advisers began contemplating sending missiles to Cuba.
This plan was initialled by Ratil Castro, the Cuban leader's brother, during his visit to Moscow in July, and an accord was reached in late August/early September when Ernesto 'Ch6' Guevara, Fidel Castro's trusted adviser, travelled to Moscow.
Now the traditional explanation of United States policy during the Soviet-Cuban plotting is that the United States was shocked by the 14 October discovery.
After the Bay of Pigs invasion fiasco of April 1961, the United States claimed that it confined its actions to warning the Soviets about putting offensive weapon systems in Cuba, conducting reconnaissance flights over the island and gathering intelligence.
In short, between April 1961 and October 1962, the United States launched no hostile missions against Castro's Cuba.
After 1975, that history had to be modified with the revelations of the Church Committee.
From 1960 through 1963, the United States persistently attempted to assassinate Fidel Castro.
The Church Committee recorded eight specific attempts on the Cuban's life.
Approved by President Kennedy in November 1961, Operation Mongoose authorised the Central Intelligence Agency to train Cubans to infiltrate the island and carry out sabotage activities.
CIA-trained saboteurs burned cane fields and blew up factories and oil storage tanks.
When faced with this new evidence in the mid-1970s, Kennedy administration officials tended to dismiss Operation Mongoose as a harassment and spoiling campaign, not a second Bay of Pigs.
The documents suggest that a United States invasion of Cuba was central to hopes for Operation Mongoose's success and that the covert programme was intended to have the capacity to produce a pretext for direct United States intervention.
Hopefully an uprising could be sparked that would provide a justification for a massive rescue mission carried out by United States armed forces.
This interpretation emerges from the guidelines established for Operation Mongoose and from the declassified minutes of Colonel Lansdale's group meetings.
Moreover, during the first ten months of 1962, the Pentagon, on orders from the president and secretary of defense, worked intensively on contingency plans for an invasion of Cuba.
On 5 October 1961, President Kennedy ordered the joint chiefs of staff to begin contingency planning for Fidel Castro's removal.
As part of the planning process, in April, May and August of 1962, United States military forces carried out large-scale manoeuvres in the Caribbean.
On 23 August 1962, Kennedy authorised the development of 'Operation Mongoose Plan B Plus', which called for provoking a full-scale revolt in Cuba requiring a United States military response.
On 2 October, Secretary of Defense MacNamara ordered the JCS to intensify preparations for either an air strike or invasion of Cuba by 20 October.
On 4 October, Attorney General Robert Kennedy told Lansdale and the CIA that he wanted 'massive sabotage activity' directed immediately against Cuba.
Over the next ten days, before the discovery of the missiles, the Pentagon ordered aircraft, ships and troops into position in Florida, reinforced the United States military base at Guantinamo Bay, and pre-positioned supplies such as petroleum, oil and lubricants.
These plans and movements indicate something more than routine contingency planning.
Before drawing conclusions from this new evidence, however, we should be cautious.
Intensive preparations for an attack on Cuba are related to growing alarm in the United States about Soviet shipments of conventional weapons, including surface to air missiles , to Cuba.
The Soviets, in deciding in the summer of 1962 to station medium-range 12.
Finally, when confronted with the new evidence, Kennedy administration officials have vociferously and repeatedly denied that President Kennedy would have ever ordered, without provocation, an invasion of Cuba.
Notwithstanding these caveats and denials, a question about the origins of the Cuban missile crisis arises.
President Kennedy's performance during the Cuban missile c ditionally been praised as a superb example of crisis management. a naval blockade of Cuba, labelled a military quarantine, the pres his demand of having the Soviets dismantle the missile sites.
Am that 'we went eyeball to eyeball with the Russians and they blink phers, such as Arthur Schlesinger Jr and Theodore Sorensen, als president high marks for resisting pressure from some EXCOMM military strike on Cuba and for achieving a peaceful resolution o particular, they point to his master-stroke of seizing on a concil sent by Khrushchev and using that as a basis for settlement.
To be sure, prior to the declassification of documents, schol asking hard questions, particularly about the tactic of issuing a pu to the Soviets.
In return for the removal of missiles, the publicly pledged not to invade Cuba and privately assured the So Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be dismantled.
Ambassador Nations Adlai Stevenson actually suggested this compromise a meeting.
But fellow members rudely dismissed Stevenson's diplo ruled out private negotiations and recommended the public ultimat Scholars have also wondered whether the 42 medium-range mis radically undermined the balance of power, thereby justifying a p 15.
The Cuban missiles would be under the cover of the United States early-warning system for ballistic missile attacks.
The Cuban missile crisis foreshadowed Henry Kissinger's argument of the 1970s that strategic superiority conferred negligible diplomatic or military advantage.
Even without the Cuban missiles, the Soviet Union had the nuclear capacity in 1962 to inflict unacceptable damage on the United States.
The new evidence on the conduct of the crisis raises further questions about public ultimatums and the ability of leaders to control events once they have initiated them.
At the height of the crisis, on 27 October, a U-2 plane was shot down over Cuba.
The Soviet military officer who ordered the firing of the SAM did so probably without authorisation from Moscow.
On the same day, another U-2, experiencing an equipment malfunction, wandered over Soviet airspace.
Soviet fighters scrambled to intercept it; United States fighters left Alaska to rescue it.
US leaders realised that if the United States attacked Cuba there could be Soviet casualties, but they could not calculate how high that risk was, for they believed the Soviets had a few thousand personnel in Cuba.
Another error was that, until 27 October, United States officials forgot to inform the Soviets exactly where they had drawn the quarantine line.
And, during the crisis, the United States launched a test ICBM that was stationed near armed ICBMs.
The Cuban missile crisis also demonstrated that in a public confrontation leaders can forfeit decision-making power to operational personnel.
The commander of the Strategic Air Command, in readying his forces for nuclear war, issued DEFCON 2 alert instructions in the clear, rather than in code, because he wanted to impress the Soviets with United States power.
During the crisis, United States warships forced Soviet submarines that patrolled near the quarantine line to surface.
In one case, a naval commander chose the high-risk option of dropping light depth charges to force the Soviet submarine to surface.
The Kennedy administration detained a 60-man Cuban attack team scheduled to sail from Florida, but it constantly worried that teams already in Cuba would inflame the situation with a spectacular raid or an attack on Castro.
Finally, let us note the effect that the missile crisis had on President Kennedy's men, the EXCOMM committee.
For thirteen days they worked continuously, under extreme pressure and with little sleep.
Ambassador Adlai Stevenson had memory lapses brought on by emotional and nervous tension.
During the crisis, advisers who favoured diplomacy were unable to argue their cases effectively.
RESULTS OF THE CRISIS We have little new evidence to assist us in assessing the results of missile crisis and determining its effect on the history of the Cold time, we can only ask a few tentative questions.
Both John and Robert Kennedy seemed personally sobered by crisis and the realisation that they could have lost control of events.
Robert Divine has opined, the first two years in office served as the of John F Kennedy.
During his last year in office, the president l peaceful initiatives aimed at taming the Soviet-American confrontat sides agreed to establish a direct telephone link or 'hot-line' between and Moscow to prevent nuclear miscalculation.
The president succes lenged the Soviets to stop testing nuclear weapons in the atmosphere about the Limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963.
In November 1963, for example, Ken French journalist to act as an intermediary between himself and Fi Nevertheless, the covert war against Castro continued.
In 1963, the tration sporadically mounted sabotage campaigns against Cuba.
And, day that the president was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, the CIA ha vous in Paris with an anti-Castro Cuban and passed to him a pen ri poisonous hypodermic needle.
In view of the agreements he struck with the United States, Nikita also seemed to have a new attitude about the Cold War.
Whether we can answer those questions precisely will depend upon gaining access to Soviet and perhaps also Cuban archives.
When it does, we shall be able to ask new, hard questions about Soviet and Cuban behaviour and policies.
We can probably expect, however, that in the 1990s all minutes of EXCOMM meetings will be declassified.
When the full documentary record is open for scholarly research, we should have a full understanding of these most important two weeks in human history.
