David G ColemanUpdated Jul., 2017 1:24AM ET / Published Oct., 2012 7:30PM ET Bill Allen / AP PhotoAs we move into the foreign policy debates, the commander-in-chief test will move to front and center of the discussion.
That question lies at the very heart of talk of red lines and vital interests, troop levels and air strikes.As any high-school history student can tell you, it was a question John F Kennedy faced in dramatic fashion in the 13 days of the Cuban missile crisis.
But his decision then was less about whether Soviet long-range nuclear missiles in Cuba were worth fighting for—nearly everyone instinctively understood that they were, and Kennedy himself had publicly drawn a red line the previous month—than finding a way to get rid of them before it came to that.
Rather, it was in those first weeks in the aftermath of the crisis that Kennedy faced a series of decisions that were in many ways even more difficult.
And those weeks were even more fraught with danger than we knew, as talk of air strikes and blockades and invasions continued out of the public eye.
Getting through the 13 days of the Cuban missile crisis without war required cool heads and careful decision-making.
And so did getting through the weeks after.Thanks to Kennedy’s own secret White House recording system—something that was never meant to be made public—we have a remarkably intimate view of how a president makes the decisions about what is and is not worth fighting for.On the 13th day of the crisis, Khrushchev caved, the world sighed with relief, and school children could take a break from their duck and cover drills.But the crisis didn’t simply evaporate with one radio broadcast.
The missiles were still in Cuba, as were dozens of short-range tactical nuclear weapons, nuclear bombers, and tens of thousands of Soviet troops.The first order of business was making sure that Khrushchev’s promise to remove the missiles wasn’t part of some trick, that it wasn’t just a way of buying time as Soviet troops rushed to ready the missiles for firing.
It just might be “a gigantic hoax of which history has had no parallel,” worried Secretary of State Dean Rusk in a moment secretly captured by Kennedy’s hidden tape recorders.There had to be verification before there could be trust.
On the 12th day of the crisis, a Soviet missile had shot down a U-2, killing the pilot.
And planes flying the low-level missions were returning to base with holes from Cuban bullets.In one episode revealed for the first time on these tapes, Kennedy was forced to confront that issue directly.
Preliminary reports had come in that another American surveillance plane had been shot down over Cuba.
In the anxious minutes waiting for the Pentagon to confirm the report, Kennedy mulled his options.
And he knew he would face scorching political pressure once word leaked out that another plane was down—it was the day before the 1962 midterm elections.
But retaliation could easily spiral into war.As it happened, Kennedy was handed a reprieve that day.
It was a false alarm—Cuban fighters had scrambled but not actually shot down a plane—but in the secret recording of those nervous minutes we get to hear in real-time and in intimate detail a president confronting the decision directly based on the kind of incomplete and sometimes flawed information he’s given.
The decision about what was and was not worth fighting for was one Kennedy faced many other times in the weeks after the 13 days as the focus shifted from the missiles of October to the rest of the formidable arsenal the Soviets had sent.That included long-range nuclear bombers capable of striking deep into the United States.
The Soviets were refusing to remove them—they were not part of the deal, they said.
The Americans knew about some of them, although they didn’t know that Moscow’s plan was to hand them over to Fidel Castro, which would have made Cuba the world’s fifth nuclear power overnight.
With a range of about 25 miles, they could “deal bloody hell with Guantanamo,” as Marine Corps Commandant General David Shoup told Kennedy, but they couldn’t reach the United States.Tens of thousands of Soviet troops were still in Cuba.
Kennedy navigated those weeks by choosing carefully where to apply pressure.
He got some of what he wanted, but he was also forced to compromise and accept a level of risk.
The Americans decided not to push explicitly for removal of the short-range missiles.
In the vice presidential debate, Paul Ryan claimed the mantle of John F Kennedy’s tax plan.
But Kennedy’s more enduring legacy is how he faced the commander-in-chief test.
But his decision then was less about whether Soviet long-range nuclear missiles in Cuba were worth fighting for—nearly everyone instinctively understood that they were, and Kennedy himself had publicly drawn a red line the previous month—than finding a way to get rid of them before it came to that.""]]],,0,""Rather, it was in those first weeks in the aftermath of the crisis that Kennedy faced a series of decisions that were in many ways even more difficult.
Should he order air strikes on the airfields to take them out?""]]],,0,""There were also dozens of short-range nuclear missiles in Cuba.
And Khrushchev would be taken at his word that he was going to remove the troops .""]]],,0,""In the vice presidential debate, Paul Ryan claimed the mantle of John F Kennedy’s tax plan.
