Republicans nominated Vice President Richard M Nixon One of most active vice presidents in United States history Traveled throughout the world as a ""troubleshooter"" in various capacities.
Kennedy called upon American people for sacrifices to achieve their potential greatness -The New Frontier B Campaign 1.
Kennedy’s Catholicism became an issue until he told a group of Protestant ministers that he accepted separation of church and state and that Catholic leaders would not unduly influence him.
Debates First time presidential debates shown on national television; determined the fate of the election The first debate was the most important  Those listening on the radio gave the edge to Nixon.
Kennedy earned the support of African Americans when he arranged to have Martin Luther King released from a Georgia jail C Result 1.
JFK unable to get much through Congress due to resistance from Republicans and conservative Southern Democrats.
Congress blocked plans for an income tax cut, federal aid to education, urban renewal, medical care the aged, and creation of a Department of Urban Affairs 3.
Lyndon Johnson would later get these measures passed after JFK was assassinated.
B Minimum wage raised from $1 to $1.25 an hour and extended to 3 million more workers.
Provided nearly $5 billion over four years for preservation of open urban spaces, development of mass transit, and the construction of middle class housing.
Kennedy promoted a $24 billion project to land an American on the Moon.
The Civil Rights Movement A JFK did nothing during his first two years regarding civil rights 1.
RFK’s attempts at enfranchisement in the South was largely unsuccessful Only a small percentage of blacks were registered due to literacy tests, poll taxes, white primaries, and grandfather clauses.
While Kennedy was initially able to satisfy both sides of the issue, the rise of civil rights militants forced his hand.
Freedom Riders were organized by CORE (Congress of Racial Equality) May 1961, they rode interstate buses to verify that segregation wasn’t happening.
Showdown in Birmingham, Alabama 1963, Birmingham closed parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, and golf courses to avoid desegregation.
Martin Luther King, Jr. chose Birmingham as a target for desegregation because it was the toughest challenge and a victory would break segregation throughout the South.
MLK and his supporters were arrested on Good Friday for “marching without a permit” and spent 2 weeks in jail.
Shortly after, King’s motel bombed  After rioting erupted, JFK decided to side with King.
That night, Medgar Evers, NAACP director in Mississippi, was assassinated in retaliation for U of Alabama issue 2.
In response, JFK announced he would send Congress a civil rights bill to Congress The bill would crush segregation, outlaw discrimination in elections, and give the justice department authority to enforce school integration.
By the time JFK was assassinated, his civil rights bill was moving toward passage in the House.
Organized in part by A Philip Randolph (who had started the March on Washington Movement during WWII) 3.
Protesters demanded passage of Kennedy’s civil rights bill and for more and better jobs.
Kennedy sought conventional military strategies to deal with thorny local challenges around the world.
Ironically, during the presidential election of 1960, Kennedy had criticized Eisenhower for allowing a ""missile gap"" that favored the Soviets.
When JFK became president, he learned that the gap was actually in favor of the U.S.; yet he continued the largest peacetime military buildup in history.
Kennedy ordered a buildup of conventional armed forces to fight localized wars in the Third World.
Set up the Green Berets Built up nuclear arsenal for a second-strike capability.
Early 1960, Eisenhower authorized the CIA to organize, train, and arm in Central America a brigade of 1,400 Cuban exiles for an invasion of Cuba to overthrow Fidel Castro.
Invaders would presumably trigger a popular uprising in Cuba JFK continued the plan when the CIA pledged it would work.
Kennedy publicly took full responsibility on national TV for the ill-conceived mission.
Established in 1961, sent young volunteers (doctors, lawyers and engineers) to Third World countries for locally sponsored projects to improve economic stagnation, poor health and education.
Primary goal was to help Latin American countries to close the gap between rich and poor thus quieting communist sympathies.
Khrushchev delivered a new ultimatum on Berlin; saw U.S. weakness in the Bay of Pigs fiasco USSR would give Berlin to East Germany, stripping western access to Berlin.
East Germans built a wall separating West Berlin from the rest of Berlin and East Germany almost overnight.
Stem the flow people escaping from East Berlin Kennedy called up 1,500 United States reserves to reinforce West German garrisons.
Tensions eased as the refugee problem was solved  Air and land routes to West Berlin were kept open.
Khrushchev began placing nuclear weapons in Cuba, just 90 miles off the and Florida coast in October 1962.
Soviets intended to use the weapons to force the United States into backing down on Berlin, Cuba, and other troubled areas.
October 14, United States aerial photographs revealed Russians were secretly and speedily installing nuclear missiles.
Warning of missile attack would shrink from 30 to 2 minutes USSR also had nuclear cruise missiles to destroy the United States Navy 3.
October 22, JFK ordered a naval ""quarantine"" of Cuba and demanded immediate removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Kennedy also stated any attack by Cuba on the United States or any other Latin American country would result in a full retaliatory response on the Soviet Union.
Kennedy rejected ""surgical"" bombing strikes against missile sites since no guarantee existed that all missiles would be hit.
Also rejected a United States invasion of Cuba (many in the cabinet and the military favored this)  Unbeknownst to Kennedy, the Soviets had tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba that would have destroyed an invading American army. o Soviet field commanders had the authority to use the tactical nuclear weapons if necessary.
For a week, the world watched as the Soviet ship carrying missiles steamed toward Cuba.
Any United States attack would trigger war between the United States and USSR Oct 24, 16 Soviet ships stopped before reaching the blockade 5.
October 26, Khrushchev agreed to remove missiles if U.S. removed its missiles from Turkey and vowed not to attack Cuba.
This agreement publicly favored Kennedy as the United States quietly pulled its Turkish missiles out 6 months later.
Kennedy and Khrushchev realized they had come dangerously close to nuclear war and now worked to prevent a future war.
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Banned the atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons -Khrushchev refused on-site inspections.
Assassination of President Kennedy A November 22, 1963, Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas while on a southern tour to drum up support for his policies  Lyndon Johnson became president B Lee Harvey Oswald, the alleged assassin, was arrested shortly thereafter  Oswald was killed a few days later by Jack Ruby, an alleged mafia member, while he was being taken to court.
C The Warren Commission was created at Johnson’s request to further investigate the assassination.
Many people continued to believe decades after the assassination that a sinister conspiracy was behind the assassination.
Pledged to continue Kennedy’s policies A Rammed Kennedy’s stalled Civil Rights and tax cut bills through Congress.
Election of 1964 A Democrats nominated LBJ on the platform of ""The Great Society"" 1.
Sweeping set of New Deal-type economic and welfare measures aimed to transform America.
Public sentiment was inspired by Michael Harrington’s The Other America which showed that 20% of the U.S. population and over 40% of blacks lived in poverty.
He attacked the federal income tax, Social Security System, the TVA, civil rights legislation, nuclear test ban treaty, and the Great Society.
Considered by many today as the ""father of modern conservatism""  Ronald Reagan’s platform in 1980 was very similar to Goldwater’s in 1964.
Johnson characterized Goldwater as a warmonger who might start a nuclear war.
Goldwater disenchanted many of his fellow Republicans with his extremism.
Johnson and Congress now had a mandate for the passage of massive wave of legislation.
Office of Economic Opportunity Headed by R Sargent Shriver, it was created to oversee most of the “War on Poverty” programs.
Appalachian Regional Development Act of 1966  Congress allocated $1. billion to redevelop isolated mountain areas along the Appalachian range where white poverty was rampant.
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965  Over $1 billion was given to elementary and secondary education, largely in areas where poverty existed 4.
Head Start established pre-schools for educationally disadvantaged children to prepare them for elementary school.
Provided medical care for the elderly who were not covered by their own medical insurance 2.
The program was popular for millions of Americans being pushed to poverty by skyrocketing medical costs.
The program was administered jointly between the federal government and the states.
Built 240,000 housing units and allocated $2. billion for urban renewal.
Admission was also based on things such as skills and political asylum.
The act more than doubled the number of immigrants coming in each year, mostly from Latin America and Asia.
Johnson believed that the federal government had a role to play in bringing high culture and educational programming to the masses.
National Endowment for the Arts aimed to bring opera, Broadway musicals, symphony performances, and other “high” culture to Americans via television programming.
National Endowment for the Humanities provided funds for the creation of educational programming and documentaries 4.
Corporation for Public Broadcasting was created to make high quality, educational programming available to everyone 5.
Conservatives argued that the federal government was exceeding its authority by funding such programs.
Abolished poll taxes in federal elections B Civil Rights Bill of 1964 1.
Provisions Forbade segregation in hotels, motels, restaurants, theaters, and sporting arenas that did business in interstate commerce.
Relieved individuals of responsibility for bringing discrimination complaints to court themselves; the federal government was now responsible.
Discrimination based on race, religion gender and national origin in the workplace was illegal.
Most businesses in the South’s cities and larger towns desegregated immediately.
Existing legislation still did not enforce the 15th Amendment guaranteeing the right to vote.
After 2 marches that resulted in beatings, arrests, and one murder, civil rights leaders in Selma announced a climactic protest march from Selma to Montgomery with federal protection in late March.
In response, on March 15, Johnson promised on TV to send a bill to Congress that would extend voting rights to African Americans in the Deep South.
Literacy tests unlawful if less than 50% of all voting-age citizens were registered.
If so, African Americans could be enrolled whether or not they could read.
If local registrars would not enroll African Americans, the president could send federal examiners who would.
Johnson signed an executive order in 1965 requiring employers on federal contracts to take ""affirmative action"" to ensure underprivileged minorities and women were hired.
President Nixon later furthered affirmative action with the Philadelphia Plan.
Black, Asian, and Hispanic enrollment in universities increased dramatically.
Bakke case, 1978 Supreme Court ruled that Allan Bakke, a white student, was unfairly turned down to medical school at UC Davis because of an admissions program that favored minorities.
Court declared that preference in admissions could not be given to members of any group based on ethnic or racial identity alone.
Jesse Jackson emerged as the African American community’s leading advocate in the 1970s and 1980s for affirmative action policies and the furthering of civil rights.
The Court ordered school districts to bus children from allminority neighborhoods in the inner-cities to achieve integration of schools.
Years between 1954 and 1968 can be seen as the ""Second Reconstruction""  The quest for equality before the law was largely achieved.
Other minorities,g. women, Native Americans, Hispanics and gays looked to civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s as a model for their own efforts.
Rise of Black Power and racial violence A Not all African Americans agreed with Martin Luther King’s nonviolent methods.
After the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965 King’s ideas seemed obsolete to many young blacks.
Many questioned whether it was a good idea for blacks to try to integrate with whites.
Blacks still continued to experience poverty and discrimination in the nation’s inner-cities and cried out against police brutality.
Called for the separation of the races in America by occupying an exclusive area of land in the United States supplied by the federal gov’t.
Inspired by ideas of Marcus Garvey (leader during ""Harlem Renaissance"") who had advocated a back-to-Africa movement The Nation of Islam was the most notable and well-organized of the black separatist groups 2.
Malcolm X’s ideas became the foundation for the Black Power movement later in the decade.
Influenced by the ideas of Malcolm X and chairman of SNCC in the mid-1960s 2.
The first popular use of the term was by Carmichael in 1966 who decried James Meredith’s shooting in the March Against Fear Essentially it was an appeal for racial pride, black nationalism, and struggle against perceived white tyranny.
It was a revolutionary socialist movement to organize African American men in northern and western cities to fight for liberation.
Poverty, unemployment, and racial discrimination were common in major inner-cities, despite civil rights victories.
Kerner Commission was appointed by LBJ to investigate the causes of the riots.
King was shot by sniper James Earl Ray while standing on a motel balcony with friends in Memphis.
Rise of the ""New Left"" and the Counterculture A Impact of baby boom generation 1.
Raised largely in economic security; 75% of college students came from families with income above the national average.
Yet the student protest movement only represented a minority of student population 4.
The “New Left” had decidedly socialist views and many supported Marxist ideas.
Universities were viewed by leftist student leaders as bureaucracies indifferent to student needs.
Students for a Democratic Society Led by Tom Haydn who called for ""participatory democracy"" in universities where students could exercise increased influence over policies that affected them.
SDS became more militant during the Vietnam War and organized numerous protests.
Berkeley started sit-ins in 1964 to protest the prohibition of political canvassing on campus.
Like the “New Left,” millions of young people felt alienated by gov’t bureaucracy, materialism, and the Vietnam War.
Many youths turned away from politics in favor of an alternative society.
The Greening of America  The best-selling book argued that the counterculture was leading the way to a new era in human society focusing on personal freedom, egalitarianism, and drug use for recreational purposes.
Music of the counterculture The folk music protest tradition began by Woody Guthrie during the Dust Bowl era was taken up by a new generation in the early 1960s led by Bob Dylan, Pete Seeger, and Joan Baez.
The “British invasion” played a large role in the mid-1960s with the Beatles, Rolling Stones, and The Who leading the way The Woodstock festival in August 1969, represented the apex of the counterculture.
By the early 1970s, counterculture was shrinking as a result of either its excesses or its members re-entering the mainstream.
Ironic commentary on mass culture by using items common in advertising 2.
The Warren Court A Chief Justice Earl Warren was appointed to the Supreme Court by President Eisenhower in 1953.
His Court is considered one of the two creative periods in U.S. history  John Marshall is considered to be the first of the great creative periods.
Warren’s court stressed personal rights (especially the 1st Amendment), placing them in a preferred constitutional position.
B Brown Board of Education is the most important of his Court’s decisions C Reapportionment decisions -""one-person, one-vote"" 1.
Result has been an electoral reform shifting voting power from rural districts to urban and suburban areas.
Congress according to population so that each district had roughly the same number of people.
Established that people accused of a crime have the right to a lawyer, even if they cannot afford one.
Ruled that one has the right to a lawyer from the time of arrest or when one becomes the subject of a criminal investigation.
Required that accused people be informed of their right to a lawyer and their right not to testify against themselves.
Birth control pill and antibiotics encouraged freer sexual practices beginning in early 1960s  Promiscuity increased among younger Americans especially as the counterculture took effect.
Endorsed improvements in education, equal employment, child care, and governmental opportunities for women.
Feminine Mystique is considered a classic of women’s protest literature.
With other feminists she founded the National Organization for Women in 1966.
Argued for changes in divorce laws to make settlements more fair to women Sought legalization of abortion 1967, began advocating an Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution extending the same guarantees contained in the 14th Amendment for racial and religious minorities.
Several corporations forced to provide back wages to female employees who had not received equal pay for equal work.
Roe Wade Legalized abortion in all states Perhaps the most important Supreme Court decision of the last 40 years as it hardened the divisions between liberals and conservatives.
Title IX guaranteed equal access for girls to programs boys benefited from 6.
Magazine became the women’s liberation movement’s most influential publication, beginning in 1972  Gloria Steinem was the magazines founding publisher 7.
Caesar Chavez led the United Farm Workers Organizing Committee and succeeded in gaining improved work conditions for mostly Chicano agricultural workers.
Since the 1970s a number of Mexican-Americans were elected to prominent political positions.
Occupy Alcatraz movement Between November, 1969 and June, 1971 a group of Native Indians and their supporters occupied Alcatraz hoping to gain the island for an Indian studies center.
American Indian Movement founded in 1968 AIM seized the Indian Bureau in Washington in 1972, protesting desperate conditions in reservations (e.g. unemployment and illiteracy). 1973, militant Indians led by leaders of AIM and the Oglala Sioux occupied Wounded Knee, South Dakota.
Emerged in the late 60s and used civil rights laws to win discrimination cases.
President Lyndon Johnson’s legacy A Few presidents had shown more compassion for the poor, the ill educated, and minorities.
Achievements of first three years compared with the successes of the New Deal.
Anti-poverty programs, such as Head Start, significantly improved the educational performance of underprivileged youth.
Infant mortality rates fell in minority communities as general health conditions improved.
B No president since Lincoln had worked harder or done more for civil rights and equality 1.
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965 served to reverse the failure of Reconstruction to enforce the 14th and 15th Amendments 2.
Most programs were extremely costly and eventually required increased taxes to fund them.
They accused the Great Society as ""social engineering"" that could not be solved simply by allocating billions of dollars.
Many accused the Great Society as having taken the country in a socialist direction.
D The Vietnam War siphoned off much of the energy of the Great Society 1.
Johnson’s handling of the war caused the turbulence that characterized the 1960s and led to America’s skepticism over its government.
Background A France lost control of Vietnam after the battle of Dien Bien Phu in 1954 1.
Agreement temporarily divided Vietnam into north and south along the 17th parallel until a 1956 unifying election would determine the nation’s fate.
Ho Chi Minh accepted the agreement based on assurance that the Vietnam-wide elections would occur within two years.
B Domino Theory – determined Eisenhower’s policies in Southeast Asia in the 1950s and continued into the 1960s 1.
If one country in Indochina fell to communism, other surrounding countries would also fall, one right after the other, like dominoes 2.
Southeast Asia Treaty Organization created by U.S. in order to prop up Ngo’s regime.
Ngo was a nationalist and was fiercely anti-communist Yet, Ngo was an aloof and aristocratic Catholic autocrat who ruled over a nation of poor Buddhist peasants.
His reforms were slow to take shape; most resources went to the military 2.
The Vietcong were communist insurgents in the South supported by Ho Chi Minh and the Vietminh in the North.
Officially known as the NLF Supported by China and the Soviet Union Promised economic reform, reunification with the north, and genuine independence.
Kennedy and Vietnam A Kennedy had to choose between abandoning Ngo or deepening United States involvement.
A Buddhist monk set himself on fire to protest Ngo’s regime ; photos changed world opinion overnight.
Tacitly supported by the United States due to Ngo’s corruption Three weeks later JFK was assassinated.
C The question of whether or not Kennedy would have pulled out of Vietnam still remains unanswered today.
Dean Rusk, Secretary of State: major proponent of the domino theory Robert McNamara, Secretary of Defense: In effect, he was the architect of the United States escalation policy in Vietnam © 2012 HistorySage.com All Rights Reserved HistorySage.com APUSH Lecture Notes Page 22 Unit 15.1: 1960s B Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, 1964 1.
Early August 1964, Johnson announced North Vietnamese torpedo boats had attacked two United States destroyers in international waters off the coast of North Vietnam in the Gulf of Tonkin  Johnson told Congress that the ""attacks were unprovoked"" 3.
Gave Johnson more authority to widen the war effort without waiting for Congress to declare war.
Years later, it became known that United States ships were helping South Vietnamese commandos raid North Vietnamese islands and that the attacks on United States ships were thus not ""unprovoked"" 4.
Johnson ordered a ""limited"" retaliatory air raid against North Vietnamese air bases, stating he sought no ""wider war""  LBJ used this episode effectively during the 1964 presidential campaign.
Johnson’s major error was using the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution to justify his widening of the war without seeking congressional and popular approval.
He sought to protect his Great Society programs by keeping the war’s decision-making secretive.
As the situation unraveled, the initial United States objective of South Vietnam’s stabilization was no longer viable.
In response, LBJ made the fateful decision to escalate the war on March 2, 1965.
Operation Rolling Thunder United States response to Pleiku LBJ ordered the first bombing of North Vietnam which went on nonstop for 3 years.
The Vietcong dug 30,000 miles of tunnels to ship supplies and escape bombing.
To flush out the enemy Napalm was used to burn out heavy jungle areas where the Vietcong and Vietminh operated.
Agent Orange was used as a defoliant to kill jungle vegetation  Many United States soldiers were exposed and later developed cancer.
Search & destroy missions against guerrilla tactics was common Westmoreland constantly demanded more troops Just finding the enemy was difficult “The guerrilla wins if he does not lose, the conventional army loses if it does not win”; by this definition, the United States was losing.
United States soldiers dealt with dense, humid, hot hostile jungle terrain 2.
The average age of a United States soldier in Vietnam was 19 (26 in WWII) C Tet Offensive, 1968 1.
Tet Offensive was not militarily successful for North Vietnam but psychologically destroyed American hopes of winning the war.
Represented the beginning of the end of United States involvement in Vietnam.
As the Students for a Democratic Society became more militant, it used violence and turned to Marxism for its ideology.
The “New Left” lost political influence after it abandoned its original commitment to democracy and non-violence.
Students for a Democratic Society , religious groups, anti-nuclear weapons groups, women, and civil rights groups 3.
The draft was perhaps the biggest cause for protest Small campus ""teach-ins"" in 1965 escalated to enormous public protests.
Draft numbers increased from 5,000 per month in 1965 to 50,000 per month in 1967.
The poor were twice as likely to be drafted than the middle class who used college deferments to avoid the draft  A lottery system was instituted in 1970 that was fairer.
Thousands of draft dodgers fled to Canada; others burned their draft cards 4.
Technology allowed Vietnam to be brought into American’s living rooms with very little censoring of the press.
Body counts of total enemy kills had been used to show the U.S. was killing far more Vietcong and Vietminh.
D Senator J William Fulbright headed the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations.
He held widely-viewed televised hearings in 1966-67 during which prominent commentators aired their largely antiwar views.
The public came to feel it had been lied to about the causes and ""winnability"" of the war.
An increase in numbers of antiwar ""doves"" resulted E Hawks and Doves argued over the United States role in Vietnam 1.
Hawks defended the president’s policy and drew on Truman’s containment policy.
Doves claimed the conflict was a civil war in which the U.S. should not get involved.
Argued South Vietnam’s gov’t was not democratic Opposed large-scale bombings, chemical weapons, and killing of civilians.
Rejected the domino theory pointing out the increased losses of American lives and the economic cost of the war.
Most Americans were neither hawks nor doves but were disturbed by unsuccessful war and the protests.
The Tet Offensive changed public opinion dramatically  Hawks decreased from 62% to 22% of public opinion from January 1968 to March 1968; Doves increased from 22% to 42% F Democratic party challengers for 1968 nomination 1.
Eugene McCarthy, a liberal from Minnesota, ran an antiwar campaign in New Hampshire and nearly got 1/2 the vote -Inspired Robert Kennedy to run for president as well.
Johnson announced he would not seek another term Tet, McCarthy, and Kennedy contributed to LBJ’s decision.
Robert Kennedy was assassinated in June after winning the California Democratic primary.
Meanwhile, a riot occurred outside the Democratic National Convention in Chicago between police and anti-war activists  The nation and world watched as the riot was televised 2.
Republicans nominated Richard M Nixon Nixon’s “Southern Strategy”  Nixon courted conservative southern Democrats who were disgusted with civil rights and the anti-war protests.
Appealed to the fears generated by war protesters and big government policies of the Great Society.
As the former segregationist governor from Alabama, he appealed to southerners with racist ideologies.
As a law and order advocate, he gained support in some northern states He advocated bombing North Vietnam ""back to the Stone Age"" B Result 1.
Congress remained Democratic as the Democrats got 95% of the African American vote 3.
Nixon thus became a minority president with no clear mandate  He owed his victory to the divisions caused by the war and the protests against the unfair draft, crime, and rioting.
This sub-unit is an extremely high probability area for the essay portion of the AP exam.
In the past 10 years, SEVEN questions have come wholly or in part from the material in this chapter.
Below are some questions that will help you study the topics that have appeared on previous exams.
Evaluate the degree to which John F Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson achieved their Cold War objectives.
Analyze the extent to which the women’s rights movement was successful in the 1960s and early 1970s.
Analyze the impact of America’s youth on politics, society and culture in the 1960s.
Analyze the ways in which the Vietnam War impacted American society in the 1960s.
