The nation was founded as a constitutional republic, one whose governmental powers were extremely limited.
In fact, the whole idea of using the Constitution to bring the federal government into existence was to make clear that the government’s powers were limited to those enumerated in the Constitution itself.
Due process of law, right to counsel, grand-jury indictments, trial by jury, search and seizure, cruel and unusual punishments, bail, speedy trial — they are all expressly addressed, reflecting how important they were to our American ancestors and to their concept of a free society.In the age of national security, all of those protections have been rendered moot.
They have all been trumped by the concept of national security.Ironically, the term isn’t even found in the Constitution.
One searches in vain for some grant of power anywhere in that document relating to “national security.” It isn’t there.
Nonetheless, the government now wields omnipotent powers — powers that the greatest totalitarian dictatorships in history have wielded — under the rubric of “national security.”With the exception of libertarians, hardly anyone questions or challenges it, including those who profess an ardent allegiance to the Constitution.
Consider, for example, the Constitution’s Interstate Commerce Clause.
We have the government coming up with a concept known as “national security,” which it has then used to adopt powers that would otherwise violate the Constitution.
It’s as if national security has been made the foundation of the nation.
National security is one of the most meaningless, nebulous, nonsensical terms in the English language, but, at the same time, the most important term in the lives of the American people.All the government has to do is say “national security,” and all discussion and debate shuts down.
If the government says that national security is at stake, that’s the end of the story.
Federal judges will immediately dismiss lawsuits as soon as the government claims, “The case is a threat to national security, your honor.” Congress will immediately suspend investigations when the government claims that national security is at stake.
The Justice Department will defer to the national-security establishment when it raises the issue of national security.National security, a term not even in the Constitution, trumps everything.
Those two entities have done more to transform American life than anything else, even more than the welfare state.
When Americans read that the Soviet government rounded up its own people and sent them into the Gulag, they recoil against the exercise of such totalitarian powers.
They have the same reaction when they hear that the North Korean government has tortured people within its prison system.
It’s the same when Americans hear that the Chinese government has arrested and incarcerated people for years without charges or trial.But when the United States government does such things or even just claims the authority to do them — in the name of national security — the mindset of the average American automatically shifts.
It can’t be evil for the United States government to wield such powers because the agents who are wielding them are Americans, not communists.
In fact, another fascinating aspect to all this is the mindset of those within the national-security establishment itself.
Even though they are wielding the same kinds of powers that are wielded by totalitarian regimes, the last thing in their minds is that they’re doing anything evil or immoral.
In their mind, they’re fighting evil in order to preserve security and freedom.
Sure, they have to do some unsavory things, but those things are necessary to preserve the nation.
Americans are safe and free because of things they’re doing, and we’re supposed to be grateful that they’re doing them.After all, as advocates of the national-security state often remind us, the Constitution is not a suicide pact.
If measures have to be taken to preserve the nation — or the security of the nation — that are inconsistent with the Constitution, then so be it.
Thus, when officials in totalitarian regimes round people up without charges, incarcerate them indefinitely, torture them, and execute them, what they are doing is evil.
But when officials within the United States national security state do those same things — and more — they look upon themselves as good and the citizenry look upon them in the same way, simply because they are doing it to advance freedom and to preserve the national security of the United States.And even then, things are not so clear, at least not when it comes to national security.
For example, some foreign totalitarian regimes are considered evil while others are considered good.
In the mindset of the United States national-security establishment, they are considered to be evil totalitarian regimes.But then consider, say, Egypt, which has been ruled by a brutal military dictatorship for nearly 30 years, a totalitarian regime that wields the same kind of totalitarian powers that the United States government now wields.
For decades, Egyptian military and intelligence forces have rounded people up, taken them to prison camps for indefinite detention, tortured them, and executed them, without formal charges and trial.Nonetheless, the United States national-security establishment has long looked on the Egyptian military dictatorship as good, because of its close relationship with the United States national-security state.
In fact, during the past several decades the United States government has sent hundreds of millions of dollars in money and armaments to Egypt to help fund its totalitarian military dictatorship, and there has been close cooperation between the national-security apparatuses of both nations.
In fact, Egypt’s national-security state even agreed to serve as one of the United States empire’s rendition-torture partners, a relationship that enables United States officials to send a kidnapped victim to Egypt for the purpose of torture.Good regime, bad regimeSometimes, the nether world of national security becomes even more clouded, with some nations shifting back and forth from good to evil.
In 1953, Iran was considered a threat to United States national security.
Thus, the CIA, one of the principal components of the United States national-security establishment, engaged in its first regime-change operation, one that succeeded in ousting Iran’s democratically elected prime minister, Mohammad Mossadegh, from power and installing the shah of Iran into power.For the next 25 years, Iran was considered good, notwithstanding the fact that the shah’s regime was totalitarian in nature.
In fact, the CIA even helped him and his national-security establishment to oppress the Iranian people.
When Iranians finally revolted against the domestic tyranny that the United States national-security state had foisted upon them, Iran immediately became an evil regime in the eyes of the United States national-security establishment, notwithstanding the fact that the new regime wasn’t doing anything different than the shah’s regime had done.
During the 1980s, Iraq had a brutal totalitarian regime headed by Saddam Hussein.
Nonetheless, it was considered a good regime because it was friendly to the United States national-security state.
Later, when Iraq invaded Kuwait, the United States national-security establishment reclassified Iraq as an evil regime.
Today, Iraq is headed by a democratically elected regime that exercises the same totalitarian powers that Saddam exercised, but it’s considered to be a good regime because it’s perceived to be on the side of the United States national-security state.
Let’s start by focusing on Cuba.One of the most demonstrable examples of the turn that America took toward empire, militarism, and the national-security state has involved Cuba.
That small nation 90 miles from American shores encapsulates the effect that such a turn had on the values and principles of the American people.Consider the economic embargo that the United States government has maintained against Cuba for more than half a century.
The aim was to cause massive economic suffering to the Cuban citizenry — privation, poverty, and even starvation.
Then, as a result of that suffering, the idea was that Castro would be removed from power either by a citizens’ revolt, a military coup, or abdication by Castro himself.Obviously, the plan has never succeeded, although undoubtedly United States officials, 50 years after the embargo was instituted, are still hoping that it will succeed.The embargo is also a classic example of how the turn toward empire, militarism, and the national-security state has warped the values and principles of the American people.
While there have been those who have objected to the embargo, even from its beginning, by and large the American people have deferred to the authority of their government.
If United States officials believed that an embargo against Cuba was necessary to protect the “national security” of the United States, that was all that Americans needed to salve their conscience over the harm that their government was inflicting on the Cuban people.Ironically, a few years after the Cuban embargo was instituted, the United States government, under the regime of Lyndon Johnson, declared its “war on poverty,” a domestic war whose purported rationale was a deep concern for the poor in society.
If national security required the government to inflict great suffering on the Cuban people, then that’s just what would have to be done.
Nothing could be permitted to stand in the way of protecting national security, whatever that term meant.
What mattered was that the national-security establishment —e., the military and the CIA — knew what national security meant and had the ultimate responsibility for protecting it.For their part, Americans were expected to remain silent.
No matter how much suffering the Cuban embargo inflicted on the Cuban people, it wasn’t something over which most Americans troubled themselves.
Given that United States officials had determined that national security necessitated the imposition of the embargo, that was all that mattered.Conscience wasn’t all that Americans ditched with the Cuban embargo.
They also abandoned traditional American values of private property, free enterprise, and limited government.After all, while the embargo was ostensibly an attack on the economic well-being of the Cuban people, it was, at the same time, an infringement on the economic liberty of the American people.
Under the principles of economic liberty, people have a fundamental, God-given right to travel wherever they want and to dispose of their money any way they choose.But the embargo made it a federal criminal offense to spend money in Cuba without a license from the United States government, which, for all practical purposes, operated as a prohibition against traveling to Cuba.
If an American was caught violating the embargo — say, by traveling to Cuba as a tourist — the United States government would prosecute him criminally or sue him civilly or both.The irony was that that was precisely the sort of economic control that Castro was wielding in Cuba as part of his embrace of socialism.
In the attempt to oust Castro from power, United States officials were imposing the same kinds of socialist controls on the American people that Castro was imposing on the Cuban people.Most Americans remained silent.
If United States officials determined that it was necessary to adopt socialist methods in order to protect national security, that was sufficient justification to surrender an important part of economic liberty.
The end justified the means.In fact, the American mindset throughout the Cold War was even worse than that.
It wasn’t as though Americans viewed their government as adopting evil or immoral means to protect national security.
Instead, the viewpoint was that whatever was being done by United States officials to protect national security wasn’t evil or immoral at all.
Instead, the mindset, both in and out of the United States government, was that even if the United States government was employing the same methods being employed by the communists, such methods were good when employed by United States officials and bad when employed by the communists.AssassinationA good example of that mindset involved assassination.
Assassination is murder, an act that is considered a grave sin under Judeo-Christian principles.
Assassination is something that our American ancestors recoiled from as something objectively bad.
When the Constitution called the federal government into existence, the power to assassinate was not among the enumerated powers delegated to it.
Moreover, to eliminate any doubt on the matter, the American people, as a condition for accepting the federal government, demanded the enactment of the Fifth Amendment, which expressly prohibited the government from depriving people of life without due process of law.All those principles went out the window when it came to Cuba and the Cold War.
The national-security establishment engaged in numerous assassination attempts against Cuba’s president, Fidel Castro.
The CIA repeatedly tried to murder him, in a variety of ways.It shouldn’t surprise anyone that United States officials justified their assassination attempts under the rationale of national security.
The end — the preservation of national security — justified the means — assassination.Meanwhile, Americans were expected to not question or challenge what the CIA or the military was doing in the name of national security.
If they did, they themselves would come under close scrutiny by the national-security establishment.Americans, for their part, understood that the national-security state was doing things that had to be kept secret from them — unsavory things but unfortunately necessary to protect national security.It was as if a pact had been implicitly entered into between the American people and the officials of the United States national-security state.
Under the pact, United States officials would have the omnipotent power to do whatever they felt was necessary to protect national security, such as assassinate foreign officials.
Such things would be kept secret from the American people so that their conscience wouldn’t be troubled over the unsavory things that United States officials were doing to protect national security.Americans, for their part, wouldn’t ask questions and would defer to the authority of their government.
What mattered, first and foremost, was the preservation of national security, a concept whose ever-shifting meaning would be subjectively determined by officials of the national-security state.Equally important, people both within the government and within the private sector convinced themselves that even if United States officials were doing unsavory things, such as assassinating people, such things were not evil because they were being done by United States officials to protect national security.
That is, when the communists assassinated people, that was something bad.
If CIA officials determined that it was necessary, on grounds of national security, to partner with the Mafia to assassinate Fidel Castro, then it was considered okay from a moral standpoint.
Moreover, while the other things the Mafia was doing were considered bad, once the Mafia united with the CIA to assassinate Castro that action was considered to be good.
The hope was that the assassination of Castro would bring into power a ruler who would be subservient to the United States government.Other attemptsThe assassination attempts on Castro’s life weren’t the only way that the CIA was trying to effect regime change in Cuba.
The efforts at replacing Castro with a proUnited States ruler began with the CIA’s invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs, an action that took place a few months after John Kennedy assumed office as president.The Bay of Pigs invasion was a CIA project that had originated under the Eisenhower administration.
From the very beginning, the operation was based on a lie, one that the national-security state intended to sell to the American people.
Even though the CIA was orchestrating the invasion, the plan called for United States officials, including Kennedy, the military, and the CIA, to lie to the American people about the role the CIA played in the operation.
United States officials intended to falsely tell everyone that the invasion was carried out solely by Cuban exiles who just wanted to free their country from the communist tyranny of Fidel Castro.Even though the deception was revealed in the aftermath of the invasion, official lying became an established principle under the national-security state.
If United States officials had to lie to protect national security, so be it.
Since it was the United States government that was doing it for the sake of national security, deception by United States officials was considered something necessary and good.
It was only deception on the part of others, such as the communists, that was considered bad.There were also the numerous U.S.-sponsored terrorist attacks in Cuba, in which CIA-supported operatives would bomb or sabotage Cuban businesses, farms, and industries.
National security was all that mattered.One of the most tragic events during the Cold War period involved the terrorist downing of a Cuban airliner over Venezuelan skies.
Dozens of people were killed, including the members of Cuba’s national fencing team.
While there isn’t any direct evidence that the CIA was behind the attack, there is no doubt that the people who did commit the attack had the same mindset as the CIA — that the end justified the means.Moreover, it is somewhat interesting that the United States government, to the present date, has steadfastly continued to harbor a man who has been accused of orchestrating the attack, a CIA operative named Luis Posada Carriles.
For years, the Venezuelan government, with whom the United States has an extradition treaty, has sought the extradition of Posada to Venezuela to stand trial for the murder of the people on that plane.
The United States government has continually refused to honor the extradition request.
It should also be noted that Posada was convicted in Panama of trying to assassinate Fidel Castro, an act that Panama considered to be a criminal offense.
He was later pardoned by Panama’s outgoing president, enabling him to immigrate to the United States, where the United States government has provided him with safe harbor, preventing his extradition to Venezuela.Of course, the CIA wasn’t the only branch of the national-security state that was committed to effecting regime change in Cuba.
The United States military establishment was also committed to achieving that goal.
In fact, one of the most fascinating — and revealing — aspects of the military mindset during the Cold War involved a Pentagon plan known as Operation Northwoods.The purpose of Operation Northwoods was to provide a justification for United States forces to effect regime change in Cuba through a military invasion of the country.
It also called for fake Cuban agents to commit terrorist attacks within the United States, possibly involving the loss of innocent American lives to make it look good.
The plan also called for the hijacking of an American airliner that would fall off the radar screens and be replaced by a pilotless drone that would be crashed into the sea, making it look as though the airliner itself had crashed.
The plane would then be secretly flown back to a base in the United States.
Ominously, the plan didn’t explain how the passengers would be released back to their families if they were thought dead.The point of all this deception was to provide an excuse for ordering a military invasion of Cuba.
The idea was that the United States would simply be responding to a Cuban attack rather than aggressing against Cuba with an unprovoked invasion of the island.Under the plan, the Pentagon was obviously calling on the president to deceive the American people and the people of the world, just as the CIA had called on Kennedy to lie to Americans about its role in the Bay of Pigs invasion.
The Pentagon expected Kennedy to go on national television, look straight into the cameras, and falsely tell the American people that America had been attacked by Cuban terrorists, thereby necessitating a United States invasion of the country.To Kennedy’s everlasting credit, he rejected Operation Northwoods.
Their crime entailed the transmission of United States “national defense” secrets to Cuba.
As part of a plea bargain, he received a life sentence and she received a prison sentence of 81 months.At their sentencing, the presiding judge, United States District Judge Reggie B Walton, berated the Myerses for what they had done.
They told the judge that long ago, they embraced the philosophy of communism and socialism and the principles of the Cuban revolution.
They said, We did not act out of anger toward the United States or from any thought of anti-Americanism.
Our only objective was to help the Cuban people defend their revolution.
United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton ordered a comprehensive damage assessment to determine how United States national security may have been harmed by the Myerses’ action.There are several fascinating aspects to this case, all of which shed light on United States foreign policy under the national-security state for the past 70 years.
For one thing, the judge never seemed to question or challenge the United States government’s conduct towards Cuba since the 1959 Cuban revolution.
He seemed to have just automatically concluded that since the Myerses had delivered classified “national defense” secrets to Cuba, that was the end of the matter.
Unfortunately, under principles of “national security,” the United States government won’t disclose that information to the American people, which seems odd, given that Cuban officials already have the information.
But whatever the information was, it couldn’t have had anything to do with “national defense” simply because Cuba has never taken any aggressive actions against the United States.
Instead, the truth is that it was the United States national-security state, and specifically its determination to invade Cuba, that precipitated the crisis.
Here’s what really happened.After the Bay of Pigs disaster, the Pentagon and the CIA became more determined than ever to get rid of Fidel Castro and replace him with a proUnited States stooge.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff unanimously presented a plan to invade Cuba to John Kennedy.
It is one of the most shocking proposals in the history of the United States national-security state.Operation NorthwoodsOperation Northwoods called for United States officials to initiate terrorist attacks on United States soil, on refugee boats leaving Cuba, and on the United States military facility at Guantánamo Bay.
In actuality, however, they would be United States personnel falsely portraying themselves as Cuban agents.Under Operation Northwoods, real people were to be killed, including Americans.
The president, who, of course, would be in on the scheme, would go on national television, look into the camera, and inform the American people that Cuba had attacked the United States.
He would then announce that as a matter of national security, he was ordering a military invasion of Cuba.One of the most fascinating aspects of Operation Northwoods was the belief among the Joint Chiefs of Staff that such a wide-ranging conspiracy, which obviously would involve many personnel in both the military and CIA, could and would be kept secret from the American people and the people of the world — and for a very long time.
As it was, no one who was privy to the plan, including the entire Joint Chiefs of Staff, ever talked.
The idea, which has always been a guiding principle for the national-security state, especially within both the military and the CIA, was that the end justified the means.To his credit, Kennedy rejected Operation Northwoods.
But that didn’t dissuade the Pentagon and the CIA from continuing to support an invasion of Cuba.
As it turned out, the chatter about invading Cuba reached both Cuba and the Soviet Union.While Castro’s forces could defeat a small force of Cuban exiles, as it did at the Bay of Pigs, resisting a full-fledged military invasion of Cuba was another thing altogether.
In their minds, the missile crisis was proof positive that the president should have accepted their proposals for invading Cuba in the months preceding the crisis.
Moreover, the military and the CIA viewed the missile crisis as an opportunity — the perfect excuse to effect regime change in Cuba through force.
The CIA even sent sabotage teams into Cuba in preparation for the invasion without the knowledge or approval of the president.
The military, for its part, raised the nuclear-alert level to the second-highest possible level and let the Soviets know about it, again without the consent of the president.Fortunately, Kennedy and the Soviet premier, Nikita Khrushchev, were able to extricate themselves from the crisis.
As Soviet records later documented, nuclear missiles had already been installed and made operational, with authority given to commanders in Cuba to fire them in the event of a United States invasion of the island.
If Kennedy had done what the Pentagon and the CIA wanted him to do — bomb and invade Cuba — there is no doubt that full nuclear war would have been the result.That’s how close the United States national-security state brought America and the Soviet Union to a nuclear holocaust.In any event, the classified information that the Myerses were delivering to Cuba during the past 30 years couldn’t have had anything to do with “defense,” as Secretary of State Clinton intimated.
It has never engaged in terrorist attacks or acts of sabotage either in the United States or against United States installations overseas, not even at the United States military installation at Guantánamo Bay.
It has never attempted to assassinate United States officials or anyone else on American soil, either in partnership with the Mafia or anyone else.
It has never implemented an economic embargo against the United States.
It has never tried to effect regime change in the United States.Instead, it has been the United States government that has done all those things to Cuba.
It has repeatedly tried to assassinate Fidel Castro and other Cuban officials, even going so far as to enter into an assassination partnership with the Mafia to do so.
It has maintained a brutal economic embargo against Cuba for more than half a century.
The information that the Myerses transmitted to Cuba had to have pertained, instead, to the United States government’s acts of aggression toward Cuba, that is, to plans relating to assassination, invasion, terrorism, sabotage, or embargo.How Americans should thinkThat’s why the Myerses said that they hadn’t acted out of anger towards the United States or from any thought of anti-Americanism.
In their minds, they were simply giving information to Cuba to enable it to defend itself from United States aggression.
In their minds, the United States government should simply have left Cuba alone.But, you see, for Judge Walton and for officials in the United States national-security state, American citizens are never supposed to think like that.
Under the principles of the national-security state, Americans are not supposed to make judgments on right and wrong when it comes to the actions of their government.
They’re supposed to defer to the authority of their national-security state officials and to support them unconditionally, without question or challenge.After all, the job of the national-security state is to keep Americans safe.
They are the ultimate judges both of what “national security” means and of what must be done to protect it.
If they say that it’s necessary to invade a sovereign and independent country, to assassinate its officials, toenter into an assassination partnership with organized crime, to engage in terrorism and sabotage within the country, and to squeeze the lifeblood out of foreign citizens with an embargo, then that’s just the way it is.All Americans are expected to get on board.
And whoever questions or challenges what the government is doing to protect their “national security” is considered suspect or, even worse, a bad person, or, worst of all, an enemy of the state or a “terrorist sympathizer” — a person who obviously hates his government and his country, especially given that under the principles of the national-security state, government and country are conflated into one entity.The mistake the Myerses made was in delivering the information to Cuba, which placed them in violation of United States laws against spying and treason.
Moreover, Judge Walton would undoubtedly have still berated them if they had been convicted.
But at least the information would have reached the American people, which might have caused more Americans to exercise some independence of thought and personal conscience, which in turn might have brought a change in United States foreign policy towards Cuba.More examplesAnother example of this phenomenon is the case of the Cuban Five.
That case involves five agents of the Cuban government who were arrested by federal officials in the United States, prosecuted for spying, convicted, and sentenced to long prison terms by a federal court in Florida.
Imagine the audacity of those five men in trying to protect their country from terrorism.
Consider Cubana Flight 455, which took off from Venezuela on October 6, 1976, and was returning to Cuba.
We do know that he and the CIA claimed that he was no longer working for the CIA during that time.
But the problem is that they would say that anyway, so there really is no way to know for sure.
What we do know is that the United States government has steadfastly harbored Posada by refusing to honor an extradition request from Venezuela, notwithstanding an extradition treaty between the two countries.
If they had delivered such information to Cuba, there is no doubt that they would have been treated in the same way they were treated for transmitting the “national defense” information that they actually transmitted to Cuba.
Fidel Castro’s refusal to submit to the control of the United States government and the fact that Castro was a communist who turned Cuba into a communist state.Those two concepts — United States imperialism and the United States national-security state’s excessive and unreasonable fear of communism — have been driving principles of United States foreign policy towards Cuba and the rest of the world through much of the 20th and 21st centuries.
They have also wreaked untold damage on our nation, our values, our economic well-being, and our freedom.The day after Japanese forces attacked Pearl Harbor in December 1941, they invaded the Philippines, where they killed or captured tens of thousands of American soldiers.
The answer lies in the turn towards empire that the United States took during the Spanish-American War in 1898.
When Cuba and the Philippines revolted against the rule of the Spanish Empire, the United States intervened in the conflict, promising to help the revolutionaries to achieve independence.America’s intervention succeeded and the Spanish Empire lost the war.
Nonetheless, Cuba and the Philippines failed to secure their independence.
When the Cuban people revolted against Batista and replaced him with Castro, United States officials initially hoped that Castro would continue the tradition and place Cuba and himself under United States control.
That hope, however, was soon dashed, as Castro made it clear to the United States empire and to the Cuban people that Cuba was, for the first time in history, to be a sovereign and independent country.It is not a surprise that Castro’s position did not sit well with United States officials.
The empire placed him squarely in its sights for a regime-change operation that would ultimately consist of an economic embargo, an invasion, assassination attempts, terrorism, sabotage, and almost nuclear war.But there was another critically important factor that guaranteed that Castro would become the target of the United States empire.
After seizing power, he revealed himself to be a communist, one who quickly began converting Cuba’s economic system to communism.Those two factors — United States imperialism and United States anti-communism — became the twin driving forces of the United States government in the second half of the 20th century.
But when “we” is defined to mean the United States, Great Britain, France, and other non-Soviet Allied powers, then “we” did not win the war.
It was the Soviet Union that won the war.Recall, after all, the ostensible reason that Great Britain declared war on Nazi Germany.
Well, the Polish people were indeed freed from Nazi tyranny, only to have to suffer for the next 50 years under Soviet communist tyranny.
For those who were born after that era, the best way to describe it is that the fear of communism was about 1,000 times greater than the fear of terrorism is today.
What was different, however, was that while terrorism involves a physical act of force, communism involved more than that.
Communism also involved an idea, one that absolutely scared United States officials and much of the American populace to death.
There were several aspects to the anti-communist fervor.One aspect was the notion that the Soviet Union intended to initiate a war against the United States in which America would be conquered by the communists.
Under that scenario, the American people would end up living their lives much like the people of Eastern Europe — under the iron boot of the Soviet Union.A second aspect was the notion that communism would spread beyond Cuba, into other Latin American nations, which would enable them to mobilize military forces that would invade Florida and Texas and sweep up the Eastern seaboard, ultimately defeating United States forces and taking over Washington.
Under this scenario, communists would begin winning elections all across the land and gradually begin to seep into the federal bureaucracies, enabling them to bring communism to America in a purely democratic fashion.All five of those aspects of the anti-communism mindset combined to produce a climate of constant preparation for war and a long, dark era of deeply seated fear that pervaded the United States and the American psyche.
Communism is an economic doctrine in which the state owns the means of production.
In its purest sense, it means that the state owns everything in society.
The state guarantees that everyone will be taken care of with housing, food, employment, health care, education, and other important things.
No more worries about losing one’s home, starving to death, being fired, or being unable to pay for medical expenses or for an education.
Everyone’s needs are taken care of, from the day they are born to the day they die.
This ordered a withdrawal of 1,000 troops out of roughly 16,000 Americans stationed in Vietnam by the end of 1963, with the complete withdrawal by the end of 1965.
The memorandum also authorized open-ended covert operations against North Vietnam.
This, in turn, led to the Gulf of Tonkin incident, which President Johnson used to obtain congressional authorization for a drastic escalation of the war.
Invading Cuba — Declassified in 1997, this lengthy document has been called the most corrupt plan ever created by the United States government.
On March 13, 1962, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Lyman Lemnitzer, submitted this secret plan to Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara.Its purpose was to justify an invasion of Cuba by means of terrorist actions against the U.S.—to be carried out by United States military and intelligence.
The committee recommended to the Justice Department that the case be reopened.
The CIA's role in the assassination — On Aug., 1978, Liberty Lobby Inc. published an article by former CIA officer Victor Marchetti in its magazine, The Spotlight.
In that article, Marchetti stated that E Howard Hunt, also a former CIA officer, was involved in the JFK assassination.
However, in the appeals trial, former CIA asset Marita Lorenz testified that on Nov., 1963, the day before the assassination, E Howard Hunt was in Dallas, where he delivered ""sums of money for the so-called operation"" to a small group of men that included former CIA agent Frank Sturgis of Watergate fame and Oswald killer Jack Ruby.
Naming names — In August 2003, former CIA agent E Howard Hunt lay dying in his Miami home with his son, Saint John Hunt, at his side.
E Howard Hunt began describing the details of ""the big event,"" including names.
Hunt sent an audio taped confession to his son in January 2006, and directed him to release the materials upon his death, which occurred in January 2007.
Garrison's investigation centered on an association between Shaw, former FBI agent Guy Bannister, pilot David Ferrie and Lee Harvey Oswald.
Shaw testified under oath that he had never worked for the CIA.Photo of Lee Harvey Oswald and David Ferrie in the Civil Air Patrol — In 1993, PBS' Frontline secured a 1951 photograph of the Louisiana Civil Air Patrol in New Orleans that shows both David Ferrie and Lee Harvey Oswald in the same unit.
Bush wasn't officially affiliated with the CIA until he was named director in 1976.
Nothing to see here — On the day of JFK's funeral, Nov., 1963, this document was sent from Assistant Attorney General Katzenbach to Bill Moyers, press secretary to the newly sworn-in President Johnson.
The single-bullet theory — In July 1997, pages from the original draft of the Warren Report were released.
Among them was a page describing the path of the famous single—or magic—bullet.
On November 22, 2013, a select group of high school juniors will have the opportunity to see behind the scenes at the Sacramento FBI headquarters.The group of students selected to attend the Fall 2013 class will spend the day meeting FBI personnel, learning what is required to become an agent, what the FBI investigates, how to avoid behaviors that can negatively affect their future, and some pitfalls of online communication, according to an official with the FBI, Sacramento Field Office.Students can submit their application at Sacramento FBI headquarters either in person or by mail.
That is a question that should be asked following a political assassination, or even when foul play is suspected.
Common Americans are to be fed from a bottomless garbage can of ""lone assassin"", or ""accident"" rubbish.
John F Kennedy, Jr., most would have to admit, was charming and articulate, and had none of the ghosts and scandals in his closet that others of his relatives seem to have had or have.
If he ran for important public office, he most likely would sweep the field if not just giving every other candidate a hard time.
There are two reasons for his death, one being the main one and then, for some, an alternative.
His family knew he planned, on August 1, 1999, to announce, that like his father, he was going to run for President.
His relatives, however, warned him that the United States Secret Service would not and could not protect him and they did not protect his father.
The head of what is now called the United States Secret Service, Lafayette C Baker, was part of the plot to murder President Abraham Lincoln.
The presidential guards likewise permitted an assassin to murder President James Garfield and President William McKinley.
Both were anti-British, pro-American at a time when Great Britain persisted in their schemes to take back this Continent as their puppet colony Further, the Secret Service allowed a plot to go forward to disable or murder in 1981 newly-elected President Ronald Reagan.
A so-called ""lone assassin"", Hinckley, part of a family close to oil-soaked family of George Herbert Walker Bush, then Vice President, was blamed.
Two TV network reporters stated live that there were shots from another gunman, a matter never repeated on the air but never rescinded.
He trusted the presidential campaign officials of Albert Gore, Jr. to know that JFK Jr. planned to announce on August 1, 1999, that he was going to run for President.
That would have interfered with the plans of Gore as well as George W Bush, the Texas Governor.
The Gore campaign reportedly promised total secrecy, a pledge they never kept.
The Elder Bush, George Herbert Walker Bush, was reportedly part of the scheme to assassinate President Kennedy.
According to the book not allowed for many years to be openly sold in the U.S., ""Farewell America"", the oil industry wanted President Kennedy dead, dead, dead.
JFK wanted the oil cartel's tax dodge, the oil depletion allowance, to be cancelled.
The latest front for the oil fraud, George W Bush, likewise would most naturally have an interest in the demise of JFK, Jr.
George W just before the fatal plane take-off, somehow was near the New Jersey airport where JFK Jr. kept his plane without proper security.
After all, JFK Jr. was a captivating speaker and would have most likely swept the field of Presidential candidates.
Conservatives and liberals, both could join together to support America's Golden Boy.
According to our best, long-time reliable sources, Jr.'s sister, Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg likewise warned her brother that running for President would be a death warrant.
After his death, reportedly feuding with the Kennedy family, she did not go to the family get together.
Her family reportedly threatens to silence her with a ""Marilyn Monroe"" needle, or by a psychiatrist to change her views.
Thus interfering with the plans of what we call The Dragon Lady, Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Upwards of a hundred eyewitnesses have been ""suicided"", ""accidented"", or plain murdered, who knew too much about the criminality of the CIA couple known as Bill and Hillary.
The Rodham family reportedly are tied to Gambino crime family in Pennsylvania.
We obtained the details of the secret FBI report which was not to have been disclosed for 30 years.
A crooked, blackmailable federal judge in Chicago dismissed our case without legal formality against Hillary and others.
Over the years, the federal crash investigators have covered up several sabotaged plane crashes.
John F Kennedy, Jr. was murdered before he could get to his planned announcement of August 1, 1999.
If he lived and ran for President, he would have been 40 years old just after the 2000 Presidential election.
We intend to post more updates on What Happened to America's Golden Boy.
The crash of John F Kennedy Jr's aircraft and the indications of a cover-up.Having established that the government and the media have a prior record of deliberate lies to the public, let us look at how the official story of the crash of John F Kennedy Jr's plane evolved, and why it is suspect.As first reported by United Press International, John F Kennedy Jr. on approach to Martha's Vineyard in 8 mile visibility, was in radio contact with the ground, calmly informing them of his intentions to drop off a passenger before proceeding to Hyannis airport.
Then, according to ABC News, JFK Jr's plane went into a steep dive, and crashed.However, even before the wreckage was found, the story being put out in the media began to change.
Gone was the previously reported radio conversation a calm JFK Jr. had with ground personnel just before the plane fell out of the sky, replaced by a declaration from the NTSB that JFK Jr. had not used his radio at all as he approached Martha's Vineyard.
JFK Jr. stalled the plane.FACT: The radar track shows that he was well above stall speed.PROPAGANDA: JFK Jr. went into a steep turn and lost his horizon.FACT: There is no reason for JFK Jr. to have been in any turn at all at that point on the flight path leading into the airport.
Again a story attributed to ""unnamed sources"", and again debunked by the interviews shown on Inside Edition.
The FAA issued VFR weather conditions that night, and the weather report called for 8 mile visibility.
One witness on shore reported that there was very little haze and that standing on the shore, he could see airplanes out over the ocean on approach to the island, proof that airplanes on the approach could see the shore.
This claim is backed up not only by the weather report of 8 mile visibility, but by a weather radar image taken at about the time of the crash.
Martha's Vineyard is very dark and won't show through the haze.FACT: That may have been true only a few months ago.
However, as evidenced by a Letter to the Editor of the Martha's Vineyard Times just days after the JFK Jr. crash, new lights installed on the island, lights that point up in the sky, are so bright they are drawing complaints from island residents.That the Kennedy family has been the target of political assassination is a part of the American political landscape.
According to their research, there was a meeting in Bill Clinton's Oval Office.
Bush, and the head of the FBI, along with an unnamed agent of the Mossad.
The meeting was held to discuss and decide the best way to eliminate John F Kennedy Jr.
To compound this threat, he also let slip that once elected President, he would re-open the investigation into his father's assassination.
You can imagine how well all this went over with these occupants of the Oval Office.Hillary planned to run for the Senate as a stepping-stone to the Presidency.
Though its members fought for the United States, the organization was spied on by the FBI in the 1960s.
In 1960, Korean War veteran Albert Orozco set out to prove himself with other Mexican-American vets on a new battlefield — politics.
He doesn’t let the surveillance eclipse the significance of the activism.
By one account, 91 percent of Texas Mexican-Americans voted for JFK — giving the senator a key state in a razor-thin election.“The clubs saw how important it was to get involved in the voting process,” Orozco said.
He and his late wife, Henrietta, co-hosted the first Viva Kennedy meeting in the Old East Dallas home of his mother.“For the first time, after the efforts of the GI Forum, they saw the results,” he said. “They saw that it does pay to vote.”Military service filled families with pride and confidence.
In Dallas, Orozco and others took on swimming pool segregation, a Catholic Church that kept Mexican-American altar boys from field trips and a downtown bar with a “No Dogs, Negroes or Mexicans” sign.In Corpus Christi, similar scenes unreeled before Dr.
The catalysts for the movement were discrimination against Latino vets, poor treatment at the Veterans Administration, school segregation and an infamous incident over a Texas funeral wake for a soldier.“They were veterans and not too happy to be treated like second-class citizens,” said his oldest child, Daisy Wanda Garcia, a 67-year-old Austin resident.GI Forum chapters morphed into Viva Kennedy clubs in the Southwest, California and Illinois.
Membership also came from the League of United Latin American Citizens.“Kennedy was a dark horse,” she said. “It if hadn’t been for the Viva Kennedy clubs delivering all these votes for him, he might not have been elected.
It was one of the first concerted attempts by minorities to put in office someone favorable to their cause.
Poll taxes were $1.25 per voter, the equivalent of about $10 today.Inspired to actOn Nov., 1963, Henrietta Orozco left her downtown office at noon to see the Kennedy and his wife, Jacqueline, in their motorcade.
Her husband stayed at work, content that his wife would experience the excitement surrounding a couple “she was in love with.”When she returned to her office, she heard the news.
Years later, she’d retell the story of that day to her daughter Diana Orozco-Garrett, who was a toddler in 1963.
For several years, on Nov. they’d repeat the ritual.JFK’s assassination inspired deep political dedication.“For my mom, it gave her more reason to be involved and for me, too,” Orozco-Garrett said.As a child, she watched her mother register voters.
As an adult, Orozco-Garrett was a delegate to two Democratic conventions.
In 1994, she won election as a justice of the peace, serving six years.She now lives in Santa Fe with her husband, a former Voting Rights Act litigator.‘Good Americans’Earlier this year, Orozco-Garrett began researching those Kennedy years.
She found documents from the FBI and the Warren Commission on surveillance of the GI Forum of Dallas.Years earlier, the Mary Ferrell Foundation had amassed material on the JFK murder using the federal Freedom of Information Act.
The foundation and its online resources are named for the Dallas legal secretary who became prominent among assassination experts.That’s how Orozco-Garrett found her father’s name.A mole inside the Dallas chapter of the GI Forum had reported to the FBI on the Mexican-American vets.
He was William Lowery, a shoe salesman who died in the 1990s.“They were good Americans and this is who the government was spying on,” Orozco-Garrett said. “They were thought to be subversive groups.”As Orozco-Garrett pieced together those years, she enlisted help from an old friend and a fellow attorney, Sol Villasana.
He’d been an early officer of the Dallas GI Forum chapter.Edmund Villasana, a World War II vet, fumed when denied service at Dallas restaurants.
Wiretapping in Mexico City, Double Agents, and the Framing of Lee Oswald delves deeply into the strange story of the Oswald Mexico City trip two months before the assassination.
Over the coming several weeks, the full book will become available online.Read the Preface to State SecretEditor's note:Bill Simpich and the MFF are providing this book online free of charge.
If you would like to support this effort and the other activities of the Mary Ferrell Foundation, please consider a membership or donation.
Good afternoon.I, too, appreciate the opportunity to address the Board today and appreciate the time you are spending going to the public for information.
One of the theories of the assassination revolves around the possibility that there may have been some involvement by persons with experience in the United States intelligence community.In my study and research of the assassination I have discovered and investigated supporting information of the presence of an intelligence unit of the United States Army having been present and on assignment in Dealey Plaza just before, during and immediately after the assassination.
To the best of my knowledge, information on this unit has not been released publicly.In 1992, as the fury of the public resulted in the proposed legislation which created your Board, I came across an individual who claimed to have been very near Dealey Plaza during the assassination.
Now, as a researcher, you can understand that this immediately caught my attention, and I began to question this gentleman about the experience.Now before I tell you the entire story, I want you to know that I had a difficult time believing his story the more and more I thought about it.
Even though I had personal experience with some of the devices and the techniques that this group used, I was still very skeptical, as you may be also.
But with further investigation I convinced myself that it technically could have been accomplished, and I think you will be similarly so impressed about the possibility when we are finished.The gentleman I spoke with proceeded to tell me he was in the Army Station in Fort Hood, in Clean, Texas.
On the day of the assassination his group, a communications group, was assigned the task of observing and videotaping the presidential motorcade as it moved through the Plaza.
This unit had no similar assignment in any other Texas city during the President's visit, and they were only to tape that portion of the motorcade as it proceeded through Dealey Plaza.Now if this event actually occurred, if it actually happened, it makes their activity highly suspicious and adds new questions to the assassination, particularly with reference to the possible foreknowledge of the assassination of intelligence personnel.In my conversations with this gentleman, I asked questions of a technical nature trying to discovery how their assignment was accomplished.
After discovering that the camera signals were transported by wireless means back to the control studio, which was actually a semi-tractor-trailer, I found myself doubting that this type of equipment was available in 1963.
I knew that ham radio operators have been sending television signals easily for a number of years, and I had also participated in that hobby.
I started to research available equipment to see if this story had any possibility of being true.I have another handout that I would like to give you.
Now that we know that equipment existed in 1963, and I can tell you a little bit about the equipment, if you would like, in the question and answer, I can relate his entire story, the following information was obtained over approximately three separate conversations with this individual.
I had extracted a verbal consent to get his story on videotape, like any good researcher would, but when the time came for doing so, his attitude on the matter had completely reversed and I am only left today with the recollection, you know, the notes that I had taken from the conversation and the subsequent information by my independent investigation.This military communications group had several cameras stationed around the Plaza.
The signals from the cameras were sent back to a semi-tractor-trailer acting as a mobile studio parked a short distance from the Plaza.
Each camera had a preview monitor and videotape machine associated with it inside the trailer recording the view of each camera.
There was no sound recorded in this assignment.Each videotape position had a single person responsible for its proper operation.
Each position these men occupied was shielded from the others so that they could only see the preview for their individual camera.
Each man saw the assassination occur from a different perspective of their monitors.About 15 minutes after the assassination, a group of men appeared who identified themselves as FBI agents.
Each man was put on a bus which had been summoned to the scene and they were all driven back to their base.
Upon their arrival, they were simply told to forget it.Finding that there was equipment available in 1963 that would do this made it easier for me to accept the story I have just related to you.
At one point, he mentioned to me that he was allowed by a letter from the military to discuss some things in relation to his duties on the day of the assassination, but I believe he probably went further than he was allowed.All these things collectively make me believe that this unit in Dealey Plaza was an intelligence unit.
Still, one important step in my investigation was to find some additional evidence that the event occurred.
You should know that there is some possible photographic evidence of this communication group being in Dealey Plaza that day, and I would be happy to provide you with further information on that if time allows at the end of my presentation.Some requested things I would like to see the Board do, obviously what was recorded on this videotapes would be of invaluable aid to a serious study of the assassination, as well as cast more suspicion on the intelligence community.
An attempt should be made by the Board to locate the tapes and request that another government agency attempt to get the exact electrical format determined and a video machine constructed to bring their images to view.
Duplication to modern day formats would then make the tapes available publicly.So far as locating the videotapes are concerned, the Dallas Field Office of the FBI and the Bureau Headquarters may have information or be in possession of the tapes.
If there remains an estate of the late J Edgar Hoover, they may have some information or be in possession of the tapes themselves.If the men who seized the tapes were not real FBI agents, then CIA, military intelligence and other splinter groups of the intelligence community should be checked.
Also, I would inquire of Mr E Howard Hunt, if he is still alive, as to his knowledge of the tapes and their subsequent disposition.
There exists a possibility that he may even have them in his possession.Regarding locations where you might find documents supporting this activity, I would suggest beginning with the records at Fort Hood.
I would not be familiar with other depositories of documents, and you will probably have to use some of your existing source to hopefully lead you in the correct directions.There seems to be a problem of gag orders that I would like to address also, and the fact that this individual I had interviewed had received notification that he did not have to continue to keep certain things confidential is further indication that there continue to be individuals who continue are under an obligation of confidentiality.I believe this brings up an interesting problem for the Board.
There appear to have been several instances of this happening to individuals required by military order or other Executive Branch order not to discuss any details of what they know of the assassination or its subsequent investigations, perhaps even the Board members itself have been required to sign promises of confidentiality.Since these individuals do not have the permission of disclosure, many have not written of their experiences or granted interviews to members of the media or the research community to record their recollection.
If our government is really serious about full disclosure of all facts surrounding the assassination, he will rescind these orders, prevent them from being renewed and allow a complete compilation of personal records and recollections.
This will allow the Review Board to further fulfill and properly perform its congressionally mandated task.Additionally, as distasteful and wild as the thought is that the American intelligence community could be involved in such an event, I hope the Board will keep an open mind as you sift through the records.
Your work may be the last official attempt to bring to the light of day this dark deed, so it is vital for you to question everything you find.Remember, if any intelligence personnel were involved, it is their profession and they are very adept at covering up any evidence of their involvement in any activity.
In any operation that United States intelligence personnel are involved in, we the citizens would expect them to be able to complete their missions with expert precision.
We would expect that they would be able to cover up their involvement as an agency and our involvement as a nation if the nature of the task so dictated.
Please keep this in mind as you ponder the information brought to your attention in whatever form it is presented.Finally, I would like to make a comment in relation to the Board's mandate.
One of the problems that certain individuals in our government have had with the idea of releasing all the assassination records is that to do so may compromise methods employed by the various intelligence agencies in their covert activities.
At first glance, we may take this to mean that it may make it difficult for them to use these techniques in the future if they are made known to the general public, but I would encourage the Board to consider that it may be that many of these covert methods were used to carry out the assassination of President Kennedy, whether by Americans or some other government.I have found considerable circumstantial evidence of more than a few intelligence techniques used in the assassination that may not be generally known.
But if this assassination was accomplished by Americans from the intelligence community, they have not only betrayed the citizenry of this country by taking from them their President, but they have betrayed their agencies and the United States public by making it necessary to uncover and publicly expose their methods in order to bring satisfaction to the American people in this matter.
Mr Osborn, in your testimony you indicated that information you had gathered from a subsequent independent investigation helped you in forming your conclusion that there was an intelligence unit in Dealey Plaza.
I have not made any attempts at that because I believe the story so thoroughly.
I felt that if I were to make any attempts to confirm any of this or search for the tapes that those things might be destroyed, because these tapes -if you would like to discuss the photographic evidence, there is one that would probably show a shooter behind the stockade fence, so I did not want these materials because of something that I did to end up disappearing.
Mr Chairman, with that in mind, I would like to pose to you a set of questions, if I may, and you can cut me off if I get too long-winded here, as I am sure you will.
I have not had any type of military experience, so I probably approach this a little bit differently as a citizen that would like to know what my government has been up to or persons within my government have been up to, why I can't know, why it has been hushed up so much.I have been researching for approximately the last 15 years, not quite, and have mostly focused my investigation on identifying the man who fired the fatal head shot.
Because I feel that he may have violated military orders, I believe that he thought that he had originally been saying things he could, and then the way that he froze up -in fact, I have had several individuals that have done that, I feel that he may be guilty of some sort of violation.
If the President were to rescind all those orders, I would be happy to provide his name.
The only thing that I really did was, from the conversations that we had, I prepared a list of questions, because I do have a technical background, I have been in electronics since I was 14, ham radio, and television, and most recently personal communications, and so I was very interested in the technical aspects of this because I doubted in my senses that this could be done in 1963.
If you would look at the cameras, this is a fully transistorized camera.
It comes with a backpack transmitter so that you don't have to have a cable going back to a videotape recorder, and this device was available in 1962 by a company that regularly supplied the military with all kinds of camera equipment and, as I also indicated, there is some photographic evidence that exists that may possibly show one of these individuals.
If you will document it, that would be helpful.You also indicate on page 5 that he had mentioned to you that he was allowed by a letter from the military to discuss some things in relation to his duties on the day of the assassination.
I will -what I will do, sir, is, I will probably seek some counsel on that to ensure that I, myself, do not get into a situation here that may make me liable for something, and I will be glad to consider that for you.I was going to, let me go on record saying, I was going to ask that individual for that document in the videotaped session, but because he cut everything off, I was not able to actually view that document.
That certainly is a gray area, and the problem with dealing -if we are dealing with the intelligence community here in this time, they certainly have at their disposal, shall we say, executive privilege, and the rules are a little bit different when dealing with these type of people because they can claim national security.I think national security a lot of times can mean more than one thing.
It can mean security of our nation from its people being held in arms over something that the government or people within the government have done, so I think they really use the term national security quite widely, and I would fully expect that if there were individuals from the intelligence community involved that they would do everything in their power, like I had mentioned before, they are very adept at covering up.
So that is a gray area because we don't know if these persons were really involved, and they may be saying that these are operatives that we can't afford to let their names go.
I would like to ask this question with respect to the letter that this young man received saying what he could say about his activities.
Yes, this was a number of years later that these things were no longer -that certain things, and I never got into the exact details.
I just assumed that the things that he was telling me were things that I could know.
Thank you, Mr Osborn.The public hearing will stand in recess until promptly the hour of 2:00m., and we will return and reconvene at that time.Thank you very much.
Cyril Wecht made one of his wonderful passionate speeches, confirming the progress that we have made in the past, with the enactment of the JFK Act, which released millions of documents providing some transparency to the assassination.
In addition to attempting the release of remaining documents, Wecht stated that there are not enough young people investigating this case, which was also echoed by Oliver Stone.
Most Americans have no idea that the case was never closed, in the City of Dallas.
Sabato reached this conclusion after considering 50 years of evidence, even while also debunking a conspiracy theory put forth by a House committee in 1979.
Alternative theories cannot be put to rest because of discrepancies and inadequacies in the initial response to the assassination.To start, there are the questions about why the autopsy was performed at the Bethesda Naval Medical Center in Maryland, not in Texas as required by the law, and why the Bethesda team did not confer with doctors from the Texas trauma room and did not have the president's clothes."" opens it up to conspiracy theories immediately that the body was altered, the wounds were altered, and all the rest of it,"" Sabato told us.
The problem is the Warren Commission did not do a thorough job when the trail was hot,"" Sabato told Business Insider.
It is virtually impossible 50 years later to put all of the pieces back together.
Because of these errors, certain conspiracy theories may never be put to rest.The conspiracy theoriesWhile all evidence suggests that Oswald killed Kennedy, some clues suggests that he may not have been the only assassin or that he may not have acted alone.First, there remains ""the live possibility of a second gunman in the grassy knoll area,"" given the testimony of several witnesses, the presence of phony Secret Service agents, and the armed men seen in the vicinity of the Dealey plaza before, during, and after the assassination.Adding to this theory is Dr.
Robert McClelland, a physician in the trauma room of the hospital where JFK was taken, who contends that the wound he saw was consistent with a shot from the grassy knoll.
For a complete nobody, Oswald certainly did seem to hang out with well-connected people,"" Sabato told BI.Some of those shady connections include:Upon returning from his short defection to the Soviet Union, Oswald became friends with an international man of mystery named George de Mohrenschildt, who ""had ties with American intelligence and the State Department ... and killed himself before he could testify to the House Committee on Assassinations,"" Sabato said.
In this way, pre-assassination documents can throw light on Lee Harvey Oswald.Oswald in New Orleans, April-September '63Oswald left Dallas not long after the Walker shooting, and went back to his hometown, New Orleans.
Once there, he wrote to Vincent Lee, the national director of the left-wing Fair Play for Cuba Committee , about setting up a New Orleans branch of the organization.
Oswald introduced himself to the New Orleans DRE delegate Carlos Bringuier , saying that as an ex-Marine he wanted to train anti-Castro Cubans in guerrilla warfare.
Bringuier declined this offer, and was then surprised, a few days later, to discover Oswald handing out pro-Castro FPCC literature on Canal Street.
An FBI agent, John Quigley, who was familiar with Oswald's defection to the USSR, was sent along.
Oswald told Quigley about how he'd heard of the New Orleans chapter of the FPCC, and then decided to join it.
Oswald appeared compromised as a closet Communist and suspect tool of Moscow.
Marina and June went back to Irving, and Lee obtained a tourist permit for Mexico.The Odio Incident, September '63Newman has a take on the mysterious 'Odio Incident' which is sympathetic to Silvia Odio and paints it as more likely that Oswald, not an Oswald impostor, paid the woman a visit in Dallas in late September.
This incident did not sit well with the Warren Commission's timeline, and certainly the meeting could not have taken place too close to 10am, 27 September, the hour Oswald's bus arrived in Mexico City.
It could have taken place on 25 September, however.sylvia-odio.jpgSilvia OdioSilvia Odio was living with her sister Annie in Dallas, and they were the daughters of Amador Odio, who was jailed in Cuba as the leader of Junta Revolucionaria Cubana a left-wing anti-Castro group.
Certainly in the context of Oswald trying to inflitrate Bringuier's DRE in New Orleans in August, and having being seen at a Dallas DRE meeting on 13 October , infiltrating JURE in Dallas as well is not outside the bounds of possibility.
But the 'second version' of the Odio connection does not match with Connell's account, and this was Silvia's own version, given to the FBI and the Warren Commission.
The American man with them was introduced as 'Leon Oswald' and he 'stood quietly by, saying almost nothing at all.
Leopoldo was looking for her help to raise funds for violent anti-Castro operations.
He could do anything like getting underground in Cuba, like killing Castro. says we Cubans don't have any guts.
Amador Odio corresponded with his daughters, and was very suspicious when he received a letter from Silvia about these men, whom he suspected were not JURE members.
Oswald having two associates is a bit inconvenient, and when the Warren Commission wrote to J Edgar Hoover stating that 'It is a matter of some importance to the Commission that Mrs.
Odio's allegations either be proved or disproved', the FBI managed to produce one Loran Eugene Hall.
Hall , Larry Howard, and William Seymour .larry-hancock dot com seymour oswald.jpgPhoto: larry-hancock.comHoward and Seymour, however, denied they ever met Odio, and then Hall recanted his story, but the FBI and the Warren Commission kept this information from the public and ran with the convenient Hall version.Oswald in Mexico, September-October '63This blog has covered the issue of Oswald in Mexico as one big, confusing mystery, and Oswald and the CIA, more than any other book, has attempted to make sense of it all.
Newman decides that the best guide to real events is to combine the transcripts of CIA surveillance at the Soviet Consulate in Mexico City ; the statements about the sequence of events from Silvia Durán, secretary at the Cuban Consulate; and the written account of Oleg Nechiporenko, vice consul at the Soviet Embassy, whose book includes the accounts of vice consul Valery Kostikov and consul Pavel Yatskov.oleg-nechiporenko-2010-7-11-10-33-2.jpgOleg Nechiporenko, years later.The sequence of real events:1.
On the morning of Friday, 27 September, Lee Harvey Oswald visited the Cuban Consulate to request 'an in-transit visa for travel through Cuba to the Soviet Union', but he had no 'passport-style pictures of himself necessary for the visa' .2.
Silvia Durán 'filled out duplicate visa application forms for him and then explained he would have to get his Soviet visa before she could issues his Cuban visa' .3.
Oswald went to the Soviet Embassy and met Kostikov, then Nechiporenko, whom he told that the Soviet Embassy in Washington had turned him down for a visa.
According to the rules, a visa application should be handled in the United States but Nechiporenko said he'd make an exception.
However, the papers would still have to be sent to Moscow and the reply from there would have to be sent to Oswald's permanent United States address, and this process would take at least 4 months.
He claimed to Durán that the Soviets had said there'd be no problem with a visa.
On Saturday morning at the Soviet Embassy, Oswald tried to convince Yatskov to give him a visa, saying 'I am afraid... they'll kill me.
Nechiporenko, Kostikov and Yatskov managed to calm him down, but he would not take the visa application forms they offered him, as if 4 months would be too late.
Then he left.Newman's account works as long as we set aside the issue of Azcue not identifying Oswald, and Durán saying he was short and blonde.
But that's Newman's account of real events, and it goes up to 10.30am Saturday, 28 September.
The CIA telephone surveillance transcript of a call to the Soviet Embassy at 11.51am has 'Durán' putting an American on the line to them.
He speaks in bad Russian and says he had visited the Soviet Embassy, now has 'his address' from the Cuban Consulate, and agrees to come to the Soviet Embassy now to 'leave' his 'address' with them.
Newman reasons that this is a Durán impostor, and an Oswald impostor who does not know what transpired between Yatskov and Oswald, and is 'trying to keep the conversation going' by talking about addresses, but does not realize that the real Oswald was not interested in visa application forms , but immediate help from the Soviets.
Meanwhile the CIA sent a cable to their own Mexico City station with an accurate description of the true Oswald.
Lee_Harvey_Oswald_being_shot_by_Jack_Ruby_as_Oswald_is_being_moved_by_police400.jpgNewman points out that while Oswald was murdered, the other person who had been impersonated, Durán, was still alive.
The day after the JFK assassination, the CIA station in Mexico City informed the Mexican authorities that she should be arrested, and as she was a Mexican citizen not a Cuban diplomat, they did just that.
She told her interrogators Oswald never returned to the Consulate after the 27 September, but the Warren Commission, influenced by the CIA and the Mexican government, reported that 'confidential information' told them that he did, and Durán's 23 November statement was not accurately reported by the Warren Commission.
Oswald may even have threatened to kill JFK if the 'Solo' story is to be believed.
The CIA could protect operations and sources, etc., but it led to the death of a President.hill and jackie SMALL.jpgThat's if Oswald was the assassin.
On the surface, Oswald's trip to Mexico City made no sense at all,' Newman writes.
He could have been prosecuted for going to Cuba, while the State Department in the summer of '63 had already given him permission to travel to the USSR, which he could easily have done via Europe not Cuba.Manipulators, in Newman's view, may have been trying to link Oswald to both Cuba and KGB assassination expert Kostikov.
Oswald could not get a Cuban visa without getting a Soviet visa first, so it brought him into almost inevitable contact with Kostikov.
In the second transcript, the 1 October one, both men were specifically named.
Newman thinks the 1 October transcript , with its 'Lee Oswald' waiting for an 'answer from Washington' implies that the impostor knew the contents of the genuine Durán-Kostikov phone call of the afternoon of Friday 27 September , which means the impostor was being informed by 'either a member of the CIA station or... someone... at the telephone tap center' .kostikov.jpgValery KostikovThe Oswald impostor made the Warren Commission possible.
That was Johnson's main task; he already knew the Oswald case was fishy.
Scott, probably out of the loop on the imposture, did a voice comparison himself, by buying a copy of the WDSU radio debate with Oswald in New Orleans in August.Win-Scott-cropped.jpgWin ScottNewman takes the view that any plot to kill Kennedy had this very handy 'WWIII pretext for a national security cover-up' , because Johnson couldn't risk an investigation into the JFK assassination that could start a nuclear war.
The significance of Oswald in Mexico could not be understood by most people in CIA headquarters in October, because information about Oswald was stashed in different files, but after 22 November it all came together, including Kostikov's role as an assassination expert.
The Secret History of the Kennedy Assassination, which draws its title from the first sentence of the commission's report.
Shenon was interviewed by Bob Schieffer on CBS' ""Face the Nation"" Sunday morning.
Cuban dictator Fidel Castro submitted to questioning by the Warren Commission in a secret meeting with one of the commission's investigators, William Coleman, off the coast of Cuba.Some of the FBI's other attempts to cover up their connections with Oswald have previously been revealed, such as the fact that Dallas-based FBI agent James Hosty had received and later destroyed a letter from Oswald protesting the FBI's questioning of Oswald's Russian-born wife, Marina.
The decision was made two days after the assassination to destroy this note.
In truth, we'll never know exactly what was in that note, and its been described in different ways,"" Shenon told host Bob Schieffer.
And that was Kelley's larger conclusion that President Kennedy's assassination could have been prevented, perhaps easily.
In the first chapter of the book, Shenon tells the story of how Navy pathologist James Humes threw his blood-stained notes from Kennedy's autopsy into the fire after he transcribed a fresh copy of the report.
He said that he wanted to keep the documents from falling into the hands of ""ghouls,"" and gave a similar rationale for ordering that the sheets that covered Kennedy's head wounds in Dallas be laundered during the autopsy.The commission's investigators never even saw the photos and X-rays from the autopsy, which were in Robert Kennedy's custody at the Justice Department.
Repeatedly in the history of the Warren Commission you see the chief justice making decisions that were designed to protect the legacy,"" Shenon said.
The decision to block access to the autopsy photos caused ""huge turmoil"" among the commission's staff, he added.
Shenon also points to the CIA as having taken great steps to cover up their knowledge of Oswald's visit to Mexico City before the assassination.
The book's prologue opens with the story of diplomat Charles William Thomas, a career State Department employee who uncovered details about Oswald's time in Mexico, including his affair with a Mexican woman who was a supporter of dictator Fidel Castro.
The reports Thomas wrote to CIA Mexico City Station Chief Winston Scott with those details were ignored, as was the memo he sent to then-Secretary of State William P Rogers when Thomas was forced out of the State Department in 1969.
A section of Scott's memoirs which included details about the extent of the CIA's monitoring of Oswald in Mexico was only declassified in the 1990s.
The agency photographed Oswald outside of the Cuban and Soviet embassies in Mexico City, and recorded his phone calls while he was in Mexico, evidence that never reached the commission.
Scott told the Warren Commission that he did not believe there was a conspiracy, and apparently in his memoirs he says he exactly the opposite,"" Shenon said.
The event will feature presentations from experts on the assassination.A reception featuring participants in this weekend's conference on the assassination of President John Kennedy, ""Changing the Historical Reality of November 22, 1963,"" was held Thursday night at The Holiday.The panel of experts on the assassination, who at times gave detail-heavy previews of their scheduled Friday and Saturday presentations, included Douglas P Horne, Edgar F Tatro, Phillip F Nelson, Dennis David, Rick Russo, Brian Edwards, Casey Quinlan and Judyth Vary Baker.
He said the ARRB was not allowed to re-investigate the case.He said he will talk about the ""extra credit work"" they did, including 10 depositions of autopsy witnesses and participants, noting it ""added significantly to the records of what happened the night of the autopsy.Horne, who wrote a five-volume work on the ARRB's efforts, said there has been a medical coverup in the case.
You will see we are not nutcases,"" he said of the panel's presentations.He went on to talk at length about incidents surrounding the case, including being at the trial of Clay Shaw as a 21-year-old.
Lee Harvey Oswald, David Ferrie, and Why Mary Sherman Had to Die — Judyth Vary Baker12:30-1:00m.Lunch1:00-1:30m.
A Congressional investigation led by G Robert Blakey, now a law professor at Notre Dame, had also indicated that the FBI was less than forthcoming with information about both Marcello and Scarpa.
Clemente, questioning why the FBI documents used in his investigation in the 1970s were so heavily redacted and expressing frustration with the FBI’s secrecy.For several years, Angela Clemente worked on a case tackling corruption and informants for the Brooklyn D.A., which required her to conduct an in depth investigation of Scarpa’s relationship with a former FBI agent accused of murder.
When the case fell apart, Clemente reviewed her research on Scarpa, and became suspicious when she recalled the difficulty of obtaining information on him for her former trial.
Now a 72-year-old reclusive grandmother, Marina has lived with her second husband, Ken Porter, in Rockwell, Texas, since the mid-1970s.Her reversal on the question of Oswald’s guilt came as a result of reading books and other material about the JFK assassination, according to a recent report by the London Daily Mail.Secret details of JFK’s assassination are finally unlocked.
Lee Harvey Oswald, the Soviet KGB, and the Kennedy Assassination,” Pacepa traced a wealth of Soviet operational patterns visible throughout the material on Oswald that had been turned up by United States investigators.
He became convinced Oswald was recruited by the Soviets when he was a Marine stationed in Atsugi, Japan, outside Tokyo.One of the more enigmatic characters in the JFK assassination saga is George DeMohrenschildt, who together with his wife, Jeanne, befriended Lee Harvey Oswald and Marina, when the couple returned to the Untied States and settled in the Dallas-Fort Worth area.Pacepa concluded DeMohrenschildt was Oswald’s KGB handler.
Pacepa described DeMohrenschildt as “a long-time Soviet illegal officer whose biography had frequently changed in order to accommodate his Soviet intelligence tasks.”In testimony to the Warren Commission, DeMohrenschildt was remarkably vague about how he and his wife met the Oswalds.“I tried, both my wife and I, hundreds of times to recall how exactly we met the Oswalds,” he testified under oath. “But they were out of our mind completely, because so many things happened in the meantime.
So please do not take it for sure how I first met them.”Jeanne DeMohrenschildt was equally vague in her testimony.“All of a sudden they arrived on the horizon,” she told the Warren Commission. “And actually, who discovered them for the first time, I don’t even know that.”Her vagueness on recalling how she and her husband first met the Oswald strains credulity.“I cannot even tell,” she said finally. “I would like to know, myself, now, how it came about.”George DeMohrenschildt had a tendency to show up just where the CIA might have needed him.
He was in Haiti just before a CIA-engineered effort by Cuban exiles to topple Duvalier and later in CIA training camps set up in Guatemala for Cuban exiles just before the Bay of Pigs invasion.When Warren Commission attorney Wesley Liebeler asked Ruth Paine if Marina Oswald ever mentioned George DeMohrenschildt to her, she answered, “Well, that’s how I met her.”Marina Oswald subsequently moved into Paine’s home as a roomer and was living there at the time of the assassination.
In the aftermath of the JFK assassination, the CIA brokered a substantial financial pay-off to Marina Oswald.
Jackson, who was the publisher of Life magazine.The anti-communist journalist and author Isaac Don Levine befriended Marina Oswald shortly after the JFK assassination.
Jackson had had become managing director of Time-Life International in 1948.
In February 1953, Jackson was appointed as a special assistant to President Eisenhower in a role that included coordinating with the CIA and advising Eisenhower on Cold War planning and the tactics of psychological warfare.As publisher of Life magazine, Jackson purchased the Zapruder film of the JFK assassination, from which he published only selected frames shown as still photographs.
Jackson resisted making the Zapruder film available for the public to view, arguing it was too graphically violent for widespread distribution.
Jackson as “Henry Luce’s personal emissary to the CIA.”Levine was born in Russia and spoke Russian fluently.
He spent an intensive week coaching Marina Oswald just prior to her first session before the Warren Commission on Feb., 1964.
Since the end of World War II, Levine had become involved with what was then known as the China Lobby, a group of supporters for Nationalist China opposing Mao and the spread of communism into China.Editing a magazine on behalf of the China Lobby called Plain Talk, Levine published a stream of articles analyzing the dangers to the United States from China after its fall to the communist Chinese following Mao’s revolution, which began in 1949.
For some people, apparently, making such connections was as dangerous as letting one live wire touch another.
The Bush Dynasty, America's Invisible Government and the Hidden History of the Last Fifty Years.
In this installment, Russ Baker examines Lee Harvey Oswald and his handlers.
NothingBy James Henry on Nov 4, 2013The feds are keeping us in the dark about the labyrinthine investigation on the Boston Marathon bombing.
But in the half-century of assassination lore that’s grown up around the murder of President John F Kennedy, Somersett has attained a kind of immortality as the man who heard about it first.You won’t find Somersett’s name in the 26 volumes published by the Warren Commission, the official government investigation that concluded Lee Harvey Oswald was Kennedy’s lone assassin.
Yet 13 days before that dark day in Dallas, Somersett elicited a chilling, police tape-recorded threat from a right-wing racist who talked of how the President would soon be shot “from an office building with a high-powered rifle” and how “they’ll pick up somebody within hours after…just to throw the public off.”Extremist Joseph A Milteer, of Quitman, Ga., made the threat against Kennedy in the kitchen of Somersett’s small apartment in downtown Miami.
Milteer’s uncanny prediction remains unexplained to this day.In the late 1970s, the House Assassinations Committee had experts analyze a photograph taken in Dealey Plaza moments before the first shot of an unidentified motorcade spectator “who bears a strong resemblance” to Milteer.
The experts, however, concluded the man was not Milteer, who died in 1974.
But now, a retired FBI agent who says that within hours of the assassination he was assigned to locate Milteer has told BrowardBulldog.org the man in the photograph is indeed Milteer.“I stood next to the man.
I interviewed him and spent hours with him,” said Don Adams, who spent 20 years with the FBI before working as a police chief in Ohio. “There is no question in my mind.
As soon as I saw that picture I almost fell off of my feet.” Enlarge imageMiami police informant Willie Somersett, left, and right wing extremist Joseph Milteer.Congressional investigators never contacted Adams, even though he was identified in several FBI reports as having interviewed Milteer.
The photograph renewed his interest in the case and ultimately led him to write the book, From an Office Building with a High-Powered Rifle, published last year by TrineDay.
His insider’s account raises disturbing questions about the FBI’s investigation of Kennedy’s death.Events leading to Willie Somersett’s Nov., 1963 recorded talk with Milteer began 21 months earlier after a bomb exploded outside the home of Miami Herald Editor Don Shoemaker.
The city’s entire detective force was assigned to the case, according to news accounts at the time.Somersett, a part-time union organizer with right-wing ties and a track record as a paid FBI snitch, came forward to point the finger.
As a member of that group’s board of directors, Milteer helped formulate “plans to put an end to the Kennedy, King, Khrushchev dictatorship over our nation.”Gelber, the father of former State Sen.
He wrote, “Somersett frequently uses the expression ‘the most violent man I know’” to describe Milteer. “I am beginning to suspect he is intuitively separating the talkers from the doers.”Following the meeting in Indianapolis, Gelber suggested police tape-record Milteer during an upcoming trip to Miami.Detective Everett Kay, Somersett’s police contact, set up a tape-recorder in a broom closet in Somersett’s residence in a building in the 1300 block of North Miami Avenue.
Today, the former apartment building is a giant billboard.What follows is a partial transcript.
Kennedy’s coming here, I think, on the 18th or something like that to make some kind of speech…Milteer: You can bet your bottom dollar he is going to have a lot to say about the Cubans because there are so many of them here.Somersett: Yeah, well, he will have a thousand bodyguards.
It’s in the working…Milteer mentions the name of a Klansman who might do the job, someone he claimed had stalked Dr.
Hitting this Kennedy I’ll tell you is going to be a hard proposition, I believe.
Now you may have it figured out how to get him…an office building and all that, but I don’t know how them Secret Service…they’d never cover all them office buildings and anywhere he’s going.
Boy, if that Kennedy gets shot we’ve got to know where we’re at because you know that would be a real shake if they do that.Milteer: They wouldn’t leave any stone unturned there, no.
Oh, hell no.Milteer: Hell, they’ll pick up somebody within hours after, if anything like that would happen, just to throw the public off.Somersett: Well, somebody is going to have to go to jail if he gets killed.Milteer: Just like Bruno Hauptmann in the Lindbergh case, you know.President Kennedy came to Miami on Nov. without incident and attended the Inter-American Press Association dinner at the Americana Hotel in Bal Harbour.
In his diary, Gelber wrote that police assured him the Secret Service knew Milteer’s whereabouts.
Former FBI Agent Donald Adams says yes.The 1979 report by the House Assassinations Committee says Miami police intelligence officers met with Secret Service agents on Nov. and provided a transcript of the Somersett recording.
The Miami Secret Service case agent forwarded the report and a copy of the recording to headquarters in Washington.On Nov., Miami Secret Service Agent Robert Jamison of Miami had Somersett call Milteer to verify that he was home in Georgia.
He was.But Milteer’s threat “was ignored by Secret Service personnel in planning the trip to Dallas,” according to the House report.
Detective Kay and other former police officials said a planned motorcade in Miami was abandoned because of Milteer’s threat, but the House committee later found that was not the case.Gelber, a senior judge in Miami-Dade’s child support enforcement division, said the FBI, too, was notified.
Enlarge imageMiami-Dade Judge Seymour GelberWhile it was Gelber’s belief the FBI didn’t immediately follow up, they did.
FBI Agent Adams, based in Thomasville, Ga., said Atlanta Special Agent In Charge James McMahon told him about a threat to the president and on Nov. ordered to him to do a “top priority” background investigation on Milteer.
Dan ChristensenFive hours after the assassination Atlanta Agent-in-Charge McMahon sent an “urgent” FBI teletype to his counterparts in Dallas and Miami and FBI Director J Edgar Hoover citing a “threat to kill Pres.
Milteer at Miami, Fla., Nov. nine last” and reporting, without attribution, that” Milteer’s whereabouts at Quitman, Ga. this date ascertained.”Adams, however, says that’s not true.
He says he knows because within hours of the assassination McMahon assigned him to locate Milteer for the Secret Service, and by about 4m. he was knocking on Milteer’s door in Quitman.
Adams called Agent Kenneth Williams for backup and later that evening the two men stopped and questioned Milteer.A Dec., 1963 report filed by Adams and Williams says Milteer “emphatically” denied ever making any threat against President Kennedy and denied knowing Oswald or Jack Ruby, Oswald’s killer.The report, and documentation about it, shows the agents never confronted Milteer with his words from the tape-recorded threat.
Adams says that’s because his FBI superiors never informed him that a tape of the threat had been made, and limited the scope of the questioning.
Enlarge imageFormer FBI agent Donald Adams Instead of charging Milteer with making a death threat against the president the FBI’s McMahon told Adams to release Milteer “since there was no indication he was involved in the assassination.”Meanwhile, police in Miami learned that Somersett rendezvoused with Milteer in Jacksonville the day after the assassination before traveling together to Columbia, S.C. for a KKK meeting.Milteer was jubilant about Kennedy’s death, Somersett told the Miami Police.“He said, ‘Well, I told you so.
He did not indicate the dates of his visits to these cities.”see link for full storytext size Lead FBI investigator in Boston bombing speaking in Mich.
Monday, November 11 2013, 08:44 AM EST AUBURN HILLS, Mich. The lead investigator in the Boston Marathon bombing case will speak Monday night at the Cooley Law School Auburn Hills campus.
Rick Deslauriers will address a national security law class on topics relating to the FBI and April's Boston Marathon bombing.
The now retired agent also played a significant role in other high-profile investigations during his time with the bureau, including the James ""Whitey"" Bulger case.
It was then that he met Wood who was staying alone at the resort in an effort to distance herself from her husband Robert Wagner following an argument between the two.
When Wilson and Wood met in 1973, Wood was several months pregnant with Wagner’s child.
Wilson and Wood carried on their long distance romance until 1977 when Wood supposedly ended the affair while visiting Wilson in Greensboro, North Carolina.
Wood had concerns about the impact that public disclosure of their relationship would have on both her film career and Wilson’s FBI career.
The investigation into the mysterious death of Wood, which occurred aboard her boat the “Splendour,” was recently re-opened by California authorities and is continuing.
Men arrested near scene shortly after assassinationNovember 16,2013author-image Jerome R Corsi About | Email | ArchiveJerome R Corsi, a Harvard Ph.D., is a WND senior staff reporter.
David V Harkness told the Warren Commission that he pulled “some people” he identified as “tramps and hoboes” off a long freight train in the railroad yard.
Harkness testified the men were arrested and “taken to the station and questioned.”Deputy Sheriff Harold E Elkins, in an affidavit given Nov., 1963, stated, “A little while later a Dallas policeman came to our office with three prisoners who he had arrested on the railroad yards.
Chambers documented the three “tramps” were Howard Doyle, John F Gedney and Gus W Abrams.
Gedney claimed he was arrested on a flatbed railroad car that was transporting large sheets of steel.
The CIA and the Assassination of John F Kennedy” argued the men in the photographs do not look like tramps.
Holt was carrying credentials identifying him as an undercover agent for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, United States Treasury Department.Holt described how he had driven Charles Nicoletti and Leo Moceri, two well-known gunmen with the Licavoli crime family in Detroit, from Tucson, Ariz., to Dallas in an Oldsmobile station wagon.Leaving Tucson on Nov., 1963, Holt explained a windstorm in El Paso, Texas, forced them to stop, delaying their arrival in Dallas to the early hours of Nov., 1963.
Arriving late in Dallas, Holt’s instructions were to drop Nicoletti and Moceri at a downtown Dallas hotel and then drive to the parking area behind Dealey Plaza.
Harkness and he ordered the army of police officers to search the rest of the train.
We were turned over to a deputy sheriff, who called Will Fritz, a man I knew we could trust.
That posting is here.The other posting relates to an interview that a former staff member on the House Select Committee on Assassinations in the 1970s, Dan Hardway, recently had at Black Ops Radio.
That posting is here.Hardway was a law student when he went to work for the House Select Committee, which was reinvestigating the Kennedy assassination.
He and another young staffer, Edwin Lopez, who was also a law student, were assigned to delve into CIA files relating to the assassination.The CIA required them to do all their work at CIA headquarters.
They could take notes but could not remove the notes or anything else from the building.
At first the CIA was cooperative, bringing whatever records Hardway and Lopez were requesting.At some point, however, when it became clear that the two staffers knew what they were doing and where they were going, the CIA abruptly abandoned its cooperative attitude.
It instead brought in a CIA agent named George Joannides to serve as the CIA representative with whom the two staffers would now have to deal.
From that point on, Joannides succeeded in blocking and obstructing the investigation being conducted by Hardway and Lopez.
Many years later, after Joannides had passed away, it was learned that Joannides was a rather interesting selection to serve as the CIA's liaison with the House Select Committee.
Rather than simply call on an active CIA official to serve as the CIA's contact with Hardway and Lopez, for some reason the CIA deemed it important to call Joannides out of retirement to serve as the CIA's contact man.As people later found out, there was another interesting twist to the Joannides selection.
In fact, witnesses said they sometimes saw Oswald in Bannister's offices.One of the interesting byproducts of the Kennedy assassination was that soon after JFK's assassination, the Fair Play for Cuba Committee went out of business, in large part because of its purported affiliation with Oswald.
Not only that, he was also responsible for delivering large sums of CIA money to the DRE to help fund its activities.
Thus, there is a good possibility that Joannides was fully aware of those contacts that Oswald had with the DRE, both when he offered his services to the anti-Castro organization and when he had his much-publicized altercation with the DRE.It gets more interesting.
Immediately after Oswald was apprehended, the DRE went on the offensive, issuing statements to the press detailing Oswald's purported devotion to communism.
Thus, there is a good possibility that Joannides was fully aware of the details and strategy behind that publicity campaign by the DRE.In fact, while it has always been assumed that Joannides lived in Miami when he was serving as the CIA contact with the DRE, the CIA, according to Morley, recently admitted in a court filing that Joannides was actually living in New Orleans when Oswald made contact with the DRE in the summer of 1963.
Results showed he had not fired a rifle recently.• Julia Ann Mercer, caught in traffic on Elm Street, saw a man get out of a truck and carry a rifle up the grassy knoll.
Then download the latest version of the free, Adobe Acrobat reader here:Daily Photo Galleries Saturday November 16, 2013 Allegheny Photo Galleries Anonymous donor sends thousands to shooting victim This Just In BlogThe mortician tweets “A family funeral is not a great second date,” says a mortician in Parkesburg, Chester County.
Updated 2 hours agoThey were born a year apart to Jewish immigrants in rural towns as the Great Depression took hold.Both served in the Air Force during the Cold War, studied law, went into politics.
They wrote books and fought public battles.Yet 3 centimeters of copper-jacketed lead forever separated Dr.
John Connally a combined seven times as the president's convertible rolled through Dealey Plaza.“It began as a theory, but when a theory is established by the facts, it deserves to be called a conclusion,” Specter wrote in his 2000 book, “Passion for Truth.”Wecht poked holes in the commission's findings during a 1965 meeting of the American Academy of Forensic Sciences.
He then starts pacing and describing the president's horrifying wounds in a louder, staccato style.
They murmur when Wecht mentions “a fairly young attorney, a junior legal counsel for the Warren Commission, Arlen Specter.”They ask, given the evidence he just described, how anyone can believe the commission's findings.“It's impossible to explain,” Wecht said.“If they heard him talk, everybody would know the truth,” said Jannie Saxon, 48, of Oakmont, one of dozens who asked Wecht to sign their books after the speech.Case a ‘launching pad'Wecht said he did not set out to become famous for this case.
A series of consultations led to what he called an “unplanned launching pad.”Los Angeles County Coroner Thomas Noguchi called Wecht to consult on slain Sen.
Work on other famous cases followed.Back home, Wecht started his first term as coroner.
So did Geraldo Rivera, who invited Wecht to appear on TV with him for an airing of the Zapruder film.
Then came testimony before the House Select Committee on Assassinations.“I was always into politics,” Wecht said recently in his Strip District office, where a wall contains a half-dozen photos of the Kennedy brothers. “But on a national level, it's certainly possible that I began to get these cases because of the name, the attention.”After losing a Senate race to John Heinz in 1982, Wecht stayed active in Democratic politics and returned to the coroner's office from 1995 until 2006.
Federal investigators accused and later dropped charges alleging he used his elected office to conduct his high-profile consulting career.“He bucked the system and paid for it,” said longtime Warren Commission critic Robert J Groden, who like Wecht served as an adviser on Oliver Stone's 1991 controversial film, “JFK.”Outright mistakesSpecter was an assistant district attorney in Philadelphia when Howard Willens, Robert Kennedy's deputy at the Justice Department, asked him to work for the Warren Commission.
Specter said he initally balked at the request because he was fighting the Teamsters in City Hall and considering a run for state Senate.
His friends urged him to join.In his book, Specter described missteps by the commission, the ways politics and Chief Justice Earl Warren pushed members to cut corners, and a few outright mistakes — such as the commission's failure to review autopsy photos and X-rays.He defended the commission's conclusion, though.In his book, he said he nearly sued Stone for libel because of the movie.
Friday, November 15, 2013, 6:42 PM In Wednesday's Nova special on the JFK assassination, private investigator Josiah Thompson is an avuncular presence, repeatedly explaining what happened on Nov., 50 years ago in Dallas.
JFK” of faking or staging any tests, but said the program failed to fully examine acoustic evidence that suggests four shots were fired that day, because doing so might have derailed the show’s conclusion, that Lee Harvey Oswald was probably the only gunman.
Former FBI Agent Dedicated To Case Believes He Knows AnswerNovember 16, 2013 11:43 PM On Friday Nov., 1963, less than an hour after he had arrived in Dallas for a rally, President John F Kennedy was gunned down.Now, 50 years later, we’re hearing from a man who’s dedicated his entire life to figuring out what really happened that day, and he says he knows the truth.“I smelled a rat,” said William Turner.He has seen it more times than he cares to count.
The grainy Zapruder film captured a pivotal moment in American history — the shot seen and heard around the world.President Kennedy was shot in the head and rushed to a Dallas hospital.
There was nothing doctors could to do save him.Turner saw the aftermath first hand, arriving in Dallas just hours after the assassination.“It was a somber and eerie situation,” he said. “It was half dark and people were crying.”Turner was a G-Man — an FBI agent from 1951 to 1961 — with counter espionage and major crime cases his specialty.However, He grew increasingly concerned by the way J Edgar Hoover was running the bureau.
Hoover found out and cut Turner loose.So, he parlayed his investigative talents into becoming a journalist.
A lifetime of research led Turner to a shocking conclusion — the Kennedy’s murder was choreographed by our own CIA.“I think what happened was a capacity for assassination was set up by CIA base in the Everglades called Point Mary.
That’s where they trained Cuban snipers,” said Turner.He says two of those Cuban snipers were sent to assassinate the president.
The CIA and Kennedy had a falling out after the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion in Cuba.
Turner believes President Lyndon B Johnson worried a full investigation could reveal plans to assassinate Castro — a finding he feared could escalate into a nuclear war with Cuba and their soviet allies.“National security is used as an excuse for all kinds of ridiculous activities and the failure to investigate the assassination of JFK was one of their worst failures,” said Turner.
In January 1955, he was named assistant superintendent of the New Orleans Police Department, where he was in charge of investigating organized crime and corruption within the force, as well as the role of left-wing groups in the local civil rights movement.Banister's career in the NOPD ended abruptly in March 1957, after he pulled a gun in a bar and threatened a waiter.
After a suspension, he refused to be transferred to the department's planning office and was dismissed.
He then became a private investigator.By 1963, Banister's views had intensified.
He believed the civil rights movement was a Communist plot, and The States-Item published an allegation that he had supplied munitions for the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion and continued to deal weapons from his office until 1963.
He and David Ferrie, an anti-Castro activist who emerged as a major player in Garrison's conspiracy scenario, began working for G Wray Gill, a lawyer, to try to block Mafia figure Carlos Marcello's deportation to Guatemala.On the afternoon Kennedy was killed, Banister and Jack Martin, one of his investigators, were drinking in a bar near Banister's office.
When they returned to the office, they got into a heated argument over files that Banister claimed Martin had stolen, according to Martin's testimony before the congressional committee that investigated the assassination in the late 1970s.Banister became so enraged that he hit Martin several times with his .357 magnum revolver.
Questions about the official story are derided as ""conspiracy theories"" by journalists who'd rather talk about fashion.Guests watch a JFK speech at a ceremony commemorating the 50th anniversary of his Cold War declaration ""Ich bin ein Berliner"", on June 26, 2013.
His wife Jackie reportedly told Monroe she was welcome to move into the White House.November 21, 2013 | Every day, people are charged with criminal conspiracy in courtrooms around the country.
In those cases, a “conspiracy” merely describes a criminal act involving two or more individuals.
Also every day, the establishment media reports on various criminal conspiracies — including racketeering, insider trading, political corruption, sex scandals and murder plots.Murder plots are their favorite, particularly when a husband or wife or crazed lover hires an assassin to knock off a troublesome or inconvenient spouse for personal gain.
The details and facts of those conspiracies attract a great deal of attention from journalists and news personalities who pore over police blotters, always looking for a good hook to a shocking story with “legs” and, therefore, a long life with lots of details and great ratings.Yet, over the last 50 years, the simple, descriptive word “conspiracy” has taken on a double life.
Rather than examining eyewitness accounts or reporting on the facts and notable names associated with the murder, they’ve become a pool of official stenographers.
They simply ignore conspiracy facts and make offhanded remarks about conspiracy theories.
Instead you get Chris Matthews and Rob Lowe and, most disappointingly of all, Ken Burns.
And they explain away “the people” who believe in conspiracy theories with callow psychobabble.In spite of all their talk, they literally say nothing.
There is no mention of the House Select Committee on Assassination’s determination that JFK was likely killed by a conspiracy or the invaluable book by Committee investigator Gaeton Fonzi.
And, perhaps most significantly, completely absent is Jim Garrison’s prosecutorial dismantling of the Warren Commission.It is as if none of it happened.
Just imagine if the blood, hair and brain tissue splattered and still preserved on Jackie’s pink dress elicited the same scrutiny and attention as did that tiresome little semen stain left on Monica’s blue dress.
But it is strictly verboten to mention the Mannlicher-Carcano’s notoriously skewed gun-sight.
Instead, the murder is treated like a moment frozen in time and consecrated by some preternatural force beyond the power of mortal men.On ”Face the Nation,” a recalcitrant and almost fanatical Bob Schieffer pronounces that Kennedy was killed by a “madman.” On “This Week with George Stephanopoulos,” Rob Lowe compares criticism of the Warren Commission with Charlie Sheen’s belief that the moon is hollow.
As David Talbot points out, it is exactly what the establishment media have been over the last 50 years.
They’re elusive about their bungled reporting on a sloppy criminal conspiracy of epic proportions.It is a failure that has metastasized over the five decades since, with those entrenched behind the privileged walls of network news, major newspapers and sanitized pulp-history continually doubling-down on a discredited theory that has them perpetually out of step with the majority of Americans who, not coincidentally, also distrust them.
Perhaps it is forgivable that many reporters and editors didn’t ask questions when faced with the rapid-fire public executions of a sitting president and his accused killer.
It’s even reasonable to sympathize with Chief Justice Earl Warren, who LBJ forced — practically against his will — into an untenable situation.But that was then.
Now there is no excuse for what journalist Jefferson Morley calls “JFK denialism,” or for the establishment’s growing track record of repeated “failures” just like it, with the lead-up to the Iraq War standing out in a crowded field of errors and supposed ignorance.Perhaps the anniversary of JFK’s death is also the anniversary of a birth — of the establishment media’s ultimate cover-story for ignorance and complicity.
By dismissing “conspiracy theories” it is instantly possible to elude conspiracy facts.
Ultimately, the real conspiracy may be the criminal contempt our media elites have for open inquiry and how it allows others to get away with murder.
Because of my interest in sailing I asked retired FBI agent Swearingen about his experiences sailing across the Pacific in his sailboat from San Diego to Hawaii.
When Quigley testified about this incident to the Warren Commission, he said Oswald simply explained to him why he was passing out the Castro leaflets.
Rankin's statement revealed the actual reason for Oswald's meeting with Quigley.
Fortunately we have the facts that within 48 hours of the assassination Robert Kennedy asked the French Secret Police force to investigate the murder of his brother.
Kennedy had spent the morning at a Justice Department conference on his intensifying war against organized crime.
Now, by the pool on an unseasonably warm day in November 1963, Kennedy talked optimistically about efforts to neutralize one of those mob leaders, Carlos Marcello.
At the very moment when Kennedy and his guests were digging into their sandwiches and clam chowder, Marcello was sitting in a packed courtroom in New Orleans, awaiting the verdict in his deportation trial.Kennedy had turned 38 just two days earlier, and his mop of brown hair, slim frame, and charging intensity had always combined to project an aura of youth.
Still, the bags under his eyes betrayed the weight of responsibilities he had been shouldering for the previous three years, serving as not just the nation’s top law enforcement official but also the president’s most trusted adviser and fixer.Just then his wife, Ethel, called over to him, holding the patio phone extension. “It’s J Edgar Hoover,” she said, a look of worry playing over her face.
They both knew the FBI director never called Bobby at home.Morgenthau, in a recent interview, recalled watching Kennedy drop his sandwich, race over to the phone, and then quickly cup his hand over his mouth as he heard the devastating news. “Jack’s been shot in Dallas,” Bobby said with a gasp. “It may be fatal.”In the half-century since that awful day, much has been made of Bobby Kennedy’s impossible burden following the assassination of his brother.
He needed to reassure a shaken nation, support his widowed sister-in-law and her two young children in addition to his own brood of kids, and maintain the cohesion and political relevance of the entire Kennedy clan — all while contending with his own soul-crushing sadness.But a closer examination of Bobby’s actions leading up to and immediately following Nov. offers a fresh vantage point on this still-unhealed gash on the American psyche.
The view has become clearer thanks to the accumulation of documents released over the last two decades — some as recently as a few months ago — that had long been kept from public view.
A review of those documents by the Globe, fortified by the work of historians and new interviews with former Kennedy aides, paints a picture of a brother responding to the assassination with equal parts crippling grief and growing suspicions.No one had done more than he to create enemies for the Kennedy administration — the right kind of enemies, to the brothers’ way of thinking.
In the mob, in corrupted labor, in Castro’s Cuba, in the rogue wing of the American intelligence system.It had been a brave, sometimes reckless crusade.
It all looked different now.In the five years between his brother’s murder and his own assassination in 1968, Bobby Kennedy voiced public support for the findings of the Warren Commission, namely that a pathetic, attention-seeking gunman had alone been responsible for the murder of President Kennedy.
Privately, though, Bobby was dismissive of the commission, seeing it, in the words of his former press secretary, as a public relations tool aimed at placating a rattled populace.
He made no mention of the hunches that appeared to be rattling around in his own mind.There is no indication that Bobby ever found evidence to prove a wider conspiracy.
Crucially, Bobby had become his brother’s point man in managing all three of those highly fraught portfolios.
The soft East Texas twang immediately identified the caller as one William Penn Jones, Jr. and he was calling me from his desk as Editor-in-Chief of the Midlothian Mirror, a weekly newspaper from the town just south of Dallas.
It was about two weeks before Christmas 1968 and winter in Toronto was fast approaching.
America, and indeed the entire world, had just endured what was possibly the worst single year of the century, excepting the Wars.
It was a presidential election year and Lyndon Johnson said he wouldn't run, but Robert Kennedy said he would.
By the end of the year, Kennedy was dead by assassins' bullets, Richard Nixon was President, Hubert Humphrey had lost the election by just over 25,000 votes and Johnson was back home in Texas after aging 20 years in the past five.
Martin Luther King, Jr.; the riots at the Democratic National Convention in Chicago; North Korea capturing the electronic spy ship USS Pueblo; the continuing war in south-east Asia; the Soviet Union occupying Czechoslovakia, a student and worker revolt in France and the few good things which occurred that year were all but invisible.
The first heart transplant in December, 1967 gave way to an avalanche of them in 1968; American astronauts orbited the moon in preparation for a lunar landing in mid-1969 and President John Kennedy's widow, Jacqueline, married Greek shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis.
So when Penn mentioned Farewell America, I asked him what was it about.
The rest of this story begins on 22 November 1963, with the assassination of President John F Kennedy in Dallas.
While the various timelines of history converged on that place at that time, what came out of Dallas was best described by a Hopi word koyaanisqatsi, meaning crazy life, life in turmoil, life out of balance, life disintegrating or a state of life that calls for another way of living.
For virtually every person connected with the assassination, this is true and it was especially true for the President's brother, then-Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
The report was, however, quite damning in its criticism of the Secret Service agents and the agency in general, as far as their collective performance was concerned.
When you look back at the weekend which followed the assassination in 1963, you can probably agree with Robert Kennedy's prime suspects.
Jimmy Hoffa was the most vocal of the detractors of the Kennedy White House as both John and Robert Kennedy had sat on the Kefauver Committee in the late 1950s looking into organized crime in America.
The very fact that the President was so completely defenseless naturally gave cause to cast disparaging glances at the organization whose primary duty is to protect him.
When we now look at who might have had a hand in the planning and execution of this execution, we normally list the CIA, the FBI, the Mafia, the anti-Castro and pro-Castro Cubans, the Joint Chiefs of Staff/Pentagon/DIA, the Texas oil fortunes of the Hunts and the Murchisons and even the massive interests involved in the Federal Reserve Bank.
It was during the first few months of 1964 that a copy of the Moynihan report to Robert Kennedy found its way across the Atlantic and into the caverns of French Intelligence and, eventually, onto the desk of President Charles de Gaulle.
Who actually was the genesis of what would become Farewell America must now be left to pure conjecture, as it was probably done verbally, covertly and quietly.
It became the provenance of two recently-retired French Intelligence operatives and one of their British counterparts to look into the murder of a president, again probably done verbally, covertly and quietly.
They were basically given carte blanche to travel wherever leads took them and to talk to whoever they thought had useful and pertinent information to give.
Their investigation took more than 3 years and covered practically the entire globe.
Because the operatives were just that, and not writers, they enlisted a rather peculiar-looking Frenchman who called himself Herve Lamarr.
It was this slightly-built, chain-smoking editor who took the voluminous notes, reports, interview transcripts and essays that the operatives had accumulated over the past 40+ months and collate them into a somewhat readable concise report.
It was also Lamarr who came up with the pseudonym ""James Hepburn,"" based on his overwhelming love and admiration for actress Audrey Hepburn.
It was most probably in mid-December, 1967 that Robert Kennedy received the final draft of the report and its effect was quite noticeable.
And it was quite soon thereafter that he did indeed throw his hat into the ring for the November presidential election.
In less than three days, Robert Kennedy lay dead in a Los Angeles hospital after being shot three times at point blank range 25 hours earlier, only minutes after winning the California Democratic Primary.
After waiting a few weeks, the Kennedy family was contacted about the status of 'the project,' meaning Farewell America.
It was now the duty of the last remaining son, Edward Kennedy to basically squelch the entire operation as he said to the effect that he and the Kennedy Family no longer wished to pursue any aspects of either of the brothers' deaths.
So now Lamarr had a book with content that could change the world's view of what had happened in Dallas.
After approaching nearly every major American and British publisher and getting rejections from all of them, Lamarr decided to begin in Europe.
One can also assume that those same attorneys would have cast a 'no' vote when asked by the editorial staff if they should publish Farewell America.
But that was the entire tone of the book, because the book was a natural product of the results of the research and that research named names and placed blames.
While I won't disclose what that research found, leaving it up to you to read the book, I will say that it cast light in directions which, at that time, had always been in shadows.
When it was published in France under the title America Brule , it quickly shot to the top of the non-fiction bestseller charts.
Italian and German editions soon followed, each a bestseller as well and soon it became apparent that the only way to get an edition published in English was to self-publish it.
It was registered in Vaduz, the tiny capital city of the even tinier Duchy of Liechtenstein, nestled in the Alps.
The books were actually printed in Belgium and shipped to Manchester, England and Montreal, Quebec.
The print run has never been disclosed but my research came up with an approximate number of copies in the 10,000 range.
It seems that 4,000 were shipped for distribution throughout the UK and the other 6,000 were off to North America, but by having them sent out from Montreal they kept them out of the reach of the American authorities.
While the copies which were in England were distributed without incident to various bookstores in the British Isles, the copies which were sent to Canada came under attack quite quickly.
After about one-third of the consignment had been shipped, a very odd thing happened.
I have been able to place together some random facts and oddities into a fairly reliable story of what indeed happened.
Through some logistical legerdemain they were able to create an excise on hardcover books which were printed in Belgium.
This means that the books would be seized for non-payment of a duty which didn't even exist when the shipment arrived in Canada.
From 1969 until 1984 two pallets of Farewell America languished in Montreal, in an unheated, bonded, government warehouse.
During this time the book became very tough to find and the price began to climb, eventually hitting more then $100.00 -if you could find a copy.
The scuttlebutt was that the FBI had bought up all remaining copies and had them destroyed.
Not good for the bottom line, but very good for the government relations.
But the rumors were untrue and for some reason, still unknown, the book showed up as part of a Canadian government auction back in the spring of 1984.
When I saw that there were two lots of about 2,000 copies each, I decided that I would attend the auction.
With most of the auction audience after office furniture and the like, I was unopposed when bidding for the first lot of 2,000 copies.
That changed in the few minutes that it took to begin bidding for the second lot.
When I paid for the lot and got my receipt and release slip I was approached by the two men and offered twice what they had just paid for the second lot in cash, right there and then, if I gave them my release slip and receipt.
Our national spirit and purpose have not been the same since Nov., 1963.
We were left confused and shocked by this one tragic, seemingly senseless murder.
Consequently, the presidential assassination became a national nightmare.
As years went by, we were lied to and truth was hidden. “Truth” was fabricated for us to consume because we were not willing to challenge it and too naïve to understand.
The media played along and were unwilling to pursue those who were responsible.
A patsy was held up to us as the alleged assassin only to have his life taken.
A false summary report was presented to us by the new president that did not correspond to the evidence found in the official 26 volumes of the Warren Commission testimony.
As a result, our national nightmare continued to be haunted by the lack of clear answers to the assassination.
Over the decades a majority of Americans refused to believe that one lone gunman was the assassin.
Researchers discovered that witnesses were intimidated, presidential security protocol measures were violated, state laws were broken, evidence destroyed, evidence planted, evidence fabricated, incompetent medical physicians were used to perform the presidential autopsy, and the result was a rush to judgment without regard to the truth.
We felt this way because no motivation could be established by government authorities for the alleged assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald.
Our national spirit was weakened because those in power did not accept the American constitutional way to change power.
Conspiracy theories emerged because legal forensic examination of the evidence was faulty and controlled by external government authorities.
A conspiracy was created to hide the truth and to ensure a successful assassination.
Because very high-level government officials were complicit in organizing, concealing and promoting falsehoods to cover their participation in the assassination plot.
Various government intelligence, security and military agencies went along because they were told to do so.Without answers for the tragedy of Dallas, the pain will continue to haunt the souls of thoughtful Americans.
Justice delayed is no justice at all to find those responsible and the American soul remains anguished.
None of the TV specials aired here or in the United States over the last few weeks have explored Oswald's life before Dallas in any depth, so I hope the film provides a counter-argument to the mythology still swirling around Oswald in the mainstream media.
It was heartening to see the film outscore Parkland in many reviews here yesterday.
Please help spread the word about the film within and beyond the research community.
We trace Oswald's bizarre transformation from United States Marine radar operator in Japan, monitoring U2 spy planes over Russia; to 20-year-old Marxist defector, decamping to Moscow threatening to share military secrets with the KGB; to pro-Castro activist in New Orleans and self-proclaimed patsy in Dallas.
We chart his secret life in the months and years leading up to Dealey Plaza, and the troubling intelligence connections that led to the “assassin” being assassinated.
Or, rather, is likely true, because we'll never know for certain.His arrest for attempting to export 7 tons of platic explosive is—although no one suspects it yet—one of the many twists and turns of the Watergate Scandal.
Answering that question, to my satisfaction and hopefully yours, is where this story will end.
Many people to whom you would like to sell weapons can only pay you back with an equivalent quantity of illicit drugs.
Finally there's what a retired United States Customs Agent who had spent much of his career investigating Barry Seal said when he learned how shocked I'd been at the solicitousness of so many Americans towards Fidel Castro back in the 50’s, when he was just another bandito in the hills.
There’s almost seven tons of C-4 explosives, there’s 7,000 feet of primer cord, 2,600 electric blasting caps and 25 electrical detonators.Authorities say the explosives are destined for Cuban exiles in Mexico, who plan to use them to overthrow the government of Fidel Castro.
My favorite part is the awareness training that takes place inside an old building, perhaps a former hospital, in which the interior was gutted and re-built to create an apartment setting.
The Secret Service and the Failure to Protect President Kennedy Vince Palmara, author of Survivor’s Guilt declares: “During all presidential motorcades during the period from 1961 to 1963, multi-story buildings were manned and guarded by either the Secret Service, the local police, the military, or some combination of the three except in Dallas, Texas on November 22, 1963.
And contrary to popular opinion and mythology, President Kennedy was very cooperative with the Secret Service and did not order either the Secret Service or his presidential staff to relax any security measures.
In particular, via many interviews with former agents and White House aides, the author discovered that President Kennedy did not order the agents off his limousine for the Dallas trip.
He disagreed with me about the Hunger Games being “bad books” and wondered why I — confusing my gender from lack of knowledge of who I am — would waste my time reading three books in a series I didn’t like.I had suggested in my own comments that the Hunger Games was a “social engineering” effort, a media psy-op.So I went back and resurrected what I had written just around Labor Day of 2012.
I’d been exposed to the trilogy after a short vacation stint in mid-coastal Maine where I’d stopped at the bar in a resort hotel at the tip of one of Maine’s infinitely-numbered rocky peninsulae and struck up a conversation with the bartender, a college girl working for the summer.
She wanted to be a novelist and was well down the path, and she said she’s been reading some of Stephen King’s material on how to write, with which I am intimately familiar.
She said she was deeply engaged in the first book in the trilogy and told me about it, and said it’d been written for adolescent girls.
There was already some street buzz about the series, and I was intrigued as to why someone would write a book about survival and murder for an audience of 15-year-old girls.
Not wasting her time here anymore suggested that perhaps it was to alert the audience to the New World Order.
I hope she is right, and I hope that the 15-year-old girls and boys pay close attention and practice their archery skills.
In particular, killology focuses on the reactions of healthy people in killing circumstances and the factors that enable and restrain killing in these situations.
The Psychological Cost of Learning to Kill in War and Society.The research group’s consulting practice and speakers bureau is dedicated to protecting our families and our children and to the strong defense of our country.Warrior Science Group consultants are human behavior studies specialists with credentials in psychology, educational psychology, training, military history, and modern warfare.
Each project is unique, and each project is customized to meet the needs of the client.
David Grossman, Director, personally contributes to and supervises all projects.Warrior Science Group examines how culture and society change when one human being kills another.
The lives of individuals and families in our society can be literally transformed and the world can become a safer place through education about the causes and impacts of violent behavior.
Mental Toughness Skills for a Nation’s Peacekeepers, Warrior Science Publications, 2010.
The Psychology and Physiology of Deadly Conflict in War and in Peace, WSG Research Publications, 2004.
Grossman, D., “The Ability to Kill,” in Police Sniper Training and Operations, D.Bartlett , American Sniper Association, 2008.
Grossman, D., “Aggression and Violence,” in Oxford Companion to American Military History, Oxford Press, 2000.
Grossman, D., “Evolution of Weaponry,” in Encyclopedia of Violence, Peace and Conflict, Academic Press, 2000.
Grossman, D., & Siddle, B.K., “Psychological Effects of Combat,” in Encyclopedia of Violence, Peace and Conflict, Academic Press, 2000.
Murray, K.A., Grossman, D., & Kentridge, R.W., “Behavioral Psychology,” in Encyclopedia of Violence, Peace and Conflict, Academic Press, 2000.
Conducting Critical Incident Debriefings and the Role of Television in Feeding the Need for Enemies.
Fairburn, R., & Grossman, D., “Preparing for School Attacks.” The Police Marksman, Nov/Dec 2006.
The Official Publication of the International Association of Ethics Trainers, Spring 2005.
A Moral Perspective On Our Current State of Affairs.” Tuebor: A Publication of the Michigan State Police Training Division, Winter, 2003.
Klinger, D., & Grossman, D., “Answering Foreign Terrorists on United States Soil.” Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy, Spring 2002.
The Psychology of Conflict, the Media’s Role in Creating an Explosion of Violent Crime, and the Implications to Law Enforcement,” Illinois Law Enforcement Executive Forum, Illinois Law Enforcement Training and Standards Board, August 2001.
The psychological cost of learning to kill.” International Journal of Emergency Mental Health, Summer 2001.
What Can Pediatricians Do About School and Media Violence.” Pediatric Annals, 30:2/Feb 2001.
He held that post for a decade, during which he was a member of the Governor's Commission on Criminal Justice, the Governor's Task Force on Drug Enforcement, the New Orleans Mayor's Citizens' Commission Against Crime and the Juvenile Courts Subcommittee of the Judicial Planning Committee.
He also was chairman of the Subcommittee on Police, Courts and Corrections.He returned to his hometown after an FBI career that began during World War II, when he worked undercover with the FBI in Mexico City.
During that period, he met Mary Louise Henderson; they were married in New Orleans.
Enroute from Los Angeles to New Orleans, where I would spend the next two years researching and writing a book about renowned CIA pilot-turned-infamous drug smuggler Barry Seal, I stopped to visit Dr.
In the two years of research which followed, I never forgot the question.Months later, while collecting old news clippings in Barry’s hometown of Baton Rouge, Louisiana, I struck up a conversation about Seal with the morgue librarian at the Baton Rouge Advocate.
Later, after I heard a story about Barry Seal from John Odom, a friend and classmate of Seal’s in high school, I began to realize that the rumor might be something more than that.
While it wasn’t common knowledge, in certain circles in Louisiana it is what is known as an “open secret.”“One Friday evening, while we were in high school, I got a call from Barry,” Odom began, “asking if I'd like to fly with him in the morning over to Lacombe, a little town on the north shore across Lake Pontchatrain from New Orleans."" “We left about 5.30 A.M. and flew over to the little airport there.
He was sitting in a director's chair, drilling a bunch of Civil Air Patrol cadets, all carrying the old M1 rifles, standing in formation in front of him.” “His name was David Ferrie.
And he had fake eyebrows, real weird, with one eyebrow turned up at a 45-degree angle.
And Barry didn’t like that, and told me to stay by the plane or he wouldn't let me fly back with him to Baton Rouge.”Big shout out to Oliver StoneEven if you’re not a JFK assassination researcher—and I wasn’t—you know who Ferrie was.
Many recall that Ferrie – just forty-eight hours after Kennedy died—was brought in for questioning on suspicion that he had been involved in the assassination.Odom watched them confer, he said, and saw Ferrie point to the 50-or-so wooden crates staged next to the tarmac.On the way back to Baton Rouge, Barry Seal told him that he was working for Ferrie, who he said was ""CIA.” “Seal said he making $400 a week flying ""runs"" of crates of weapons and ordinance for Ferrie,” said Odom.
And despite the 7-man ""clean-up crew"" from the State Department that came down from Washington to her home and combed through all of Barry's records in early 1995, it is still in her possession.
The photo, which she considered a keepsake, remained untouched in her safe.The photo was in a cardboard frame of the kind used by nightclubs and tourist attractions, with the date it was taken, January 22,1963, stamped on the back.
It was taken in the nightclub of the Aristos Hotel in Mexico City’s Zona Rosa.At the time the photo was taken, the CIA's covert action chief in Mexico City was David Atlee Phillips.
Philips, AKA Maurice Bishop, reportedly met with Oswald in Dallas before the assassination.The photo shows a group of ten men, wearing black suits and skinny ties, drinking around a table.
They appear to be a mixed group of Cuban exiles, Italian wise guys, and square-jawed military intelligence types.Identifying the men in the photo took months.
Front left, beside Goss, is the notorious Cuban ""freedom fighter"" Felix Rodriguez.
Rodriguez, a vice cop under the corrupt Mob-run Batista regime in Cuba, later became an Iran Contra operative and a confidant of the first George Bush.Felix Rodriguez has long been known to be one of the CIA's most vicious assassins.
According to law enforcement authorities, he keeps Che Guevara's hands in a jar atop his dresser.
On the other side of the table, the only celebrant displaying any regard for tradecraft is covering his face with his sport coat.
However, his swept-back “Big Wave in Hawaii” pompadour made him fairly easily identifiable as Frank Sturgis.
Researchers identify Seymour as the man said to have impersonated Lee Harvey Oswald, while Oswald was out of the country.It is certainly a well-connected group.
The answer is yes.Three men in suits at Redbird AirportAt about 1:00 P.M. that same afternoon, half an hour after the president was shot, neighbors who lived along the road that runs by the Redbird Airport, about 10 miles southwest of downtown Dallas, began calling the police.
For an hour it had been revving its engines, not on the runway, as per usual, but parked at the end of the airstrip on a grassy area next to the fence.
The noise was so loud it prevented nearby residents, glued to their TVs for the news about the terrible event downtown, from hearing.The police, perhaps understandably, were too busy to check it out.
Then, shortly thereafter I saw on the news that David Ferrie had committed suicide, said Gaudin.“That’s when I smelled a rat.”Redbird Airport is a small airfield between Dallas and Fort Worth.
But it wasn’t just any old airport.“The FAA had its general aviation headquarters there, said Gaudin. “Howard Hughes had a huge old WWII hanger there, with heavy security.
When I came on shift at 2 PM, we received a bulletin to report any suspicious activity immediately to an FAA Security number.
And we kept calling that number all afternoon, but got nothing but a busy signal.
And then, after we heard they had caught the ‘lone gunman,’ I guess they called it, we stopped calling, and let the matter drop.”From his perch atop the control tower, Mr Gaudin, between handling twenty or thirty flights into and out of the airport an hour, had noticed something suspicious about three well-dressed men in business suits standing, along with several suitcase, beside a Comanche painted green-and-white.So suspicious was he, Mr Gaudin related, that when the plane took off on runway 17, he asked the pilot if he needed any assistance.
The pilot stated south.Gaudin watched as the plane flew south for two miles, then made a hard left, and then flew north to Love Field.The pilot had lied.Suspicions aroused, Gaudin went over to the control tower’s receiver and listened as the plane made an approach and landed at Love Field, eight miles north of Redbird.An hour later, the plane was back at Redbird.
The third passenger—let’s call him the shooter–had been left at Love Field.James Garrison, American heroAnd that’s where the matter rested until Garrison’s investigator’s came calling.
Merrit Goble, who ran the fixed-wing operation, TexAir, at Redbird Field.“Merrit and I were friends,” Gaudin relates. “So one day, after filing the FBI report, I went down to see if the FBI had been by to visit him as well.
So I asked him if he had anything, any gas receipts, any record of the fueling of the plane in question.
But lacking an eyewitness willing to come forward and enough of a survivalist to live to tell his tale, we base a “yes” answer on his association with—and proximity to—the major players whose names get bandied about in connection with the assassination.The central thesis of most writers on the assassination is that the Kennedy assassination was the work of the Mafia, elements of the CIA, and right-wing Cuban exiles aligned with Guy Banister, Clay Shaw, and David Ferrie, all of whom were CIA-connected.
And his participation in Operation 40, the CIA’s assassination squad, the blackest of black ops, as attested by the photo taken in Mexico in January 1963.
In Venice, Florida, where the key conspirators got together, they spent more than a year.
Yet there’s been endless talk—leading absolutely nowhere—about thermite, about holograms, about Building 7.
And its all hooey, or, to use the technical term, disinformation.Why I’m so sure is because I was the only investigative reporter at the biggest 9/11 crime scene—Venice—that wasn’t reduced to rubble.
And I was continually made aware that I didn’t belong—and wasn’t wanted—there.The Kennedy assassination set the pattern.
Debating the minutiae of Dallas—the ‘magic bullet theory,’ the changing parade route, the standing down of military intelligence, and dozens of other unexplained anomalies—has proven only that a conspiracy had indeed taken place.But it was never going to put anyone in jail.
In New Orleans, Chicago, Miami, on No Name Key, and. most especially, in Lacombe, Louisiana, where the CIA kept a secret camp which trained assassins.Moreover the conspirators were pros.
Unlike the “big find” about the identity of the second shooter which one prominent author is currently using to flog his book—who was told by a friend of a friend of a guy who had it on good authority that so-and-so, who’s now, regrettably, dead, was in on the hit— they didn’t disappear from history after November 23, 1963.
In Laos, and Cambodia, at the Watergate complex, and in the drug trafficking scandal that was mis-named Iran Contra.They were people like Barry Seal.
Read in his own words as Wilson, one of the only remaining men alive who participated in the MLK Jr.
Assassination investigation, casts a bright spot-light on the tragic events of 1963 and 1968 and reveals the truth as it really occurred.
Who sold out MLK. “Evidence Withheld” provides not only words but actual physical evidence in the form of handwritten notes that one can view.
Make no mistake, this book will be attacked by the “people of darkness,” a shadow cabal that to this day controls the foreign policy of the United States of America regardless of who is President.About Donald G Wilson Donald G Wilson was born in Ridley Park, Pennsylvania in October of 1942.
He spent ten years as a special agent with the FBI and ten years in the private sector involved with domestic and international security matters.
He currently resides in the upper mid-west where he is an avid tennis player.
His writing projects, in addition to the current book “Evidence Withheld” include, in series form, the Exploits of Carter Holiday, A Modern Day Soldier of Fortune who divides his time between Chicago, Illinois; Fort Lauderdale, Florida and exotic world-wide locations.
The weekend America lost its innocence Shenon was interviewed by Bob Schieffer on CBS' ""Face the Nation"" Sunday morning.
He started the book in 2008, when one of the former staff lawyers from the commission contacted him to suggest he write a history of the Warren Commission like one he had just authored on the 9/11 Commission.
The investigators told Shenon they were certain they had never seen the memo, which disappeared before it reached them and only turned up in the classified archives of the CIA years later.
Cuban dictator Fidel Castro submitted to questioning by the Warren Commission in a secret meeting with one of the commission's investigators, William Coleman, off the coast of Cuba.
Some of the FBI's other attempts to cover up their connections with Oswald have previously been revealed, such as the fact that Dallas-based FBI agent James Hosty had received and later destroyed a letter from Oswald protesting the FBI's questioning of Oswald's Russian-born wife, Marina.
Under orders from his superior, Hosty destroyed the letter by ripping it into pieces, then flushing the pieces down the toilet at the Dallas FBI office, two days after the assassination when Oswald was killed by Jack Ruby.
Johnson confirmed the existence of the latter with former FBI director Clarence Kelley during his time at the Dallas Times Herald.
Despite the intentional destruction of evidence, Kelley, who succeeded Hoover as the head of the agency, came to see Hosty as a victim when he later conducted a private search of the FBI's own files about the investigation.
Hosty's note from Oswald was one of the earliest pieces of evidence the commission might have examined that disappeared, but it was certainly not the only example.
He said that he wanted to keep the documents from falling into the hands of ""ghouls,"" and gave a similar rationale for ordering that the sheets that covered Kennedy's head wounds in Dallas be laundered during the autopsy.
The commission's investigators never even saw the photos and X-rays from the autopsy, which were in Robert Kennedy's custody at the Justice Department.
The Kennedy family and Earl Warren, the Chief Justice and chairman of the commission decided to withhold the photos for fear that they would be leaked to the public and destroy the public image of Kennedy as a handsome young president instead of a crime victim with a gruesome bullet wound to his head.
Scott's memoirs also reveal that he thought there might have been a foreign conspiracy to kill Kennedy involving Oswald as a Communist agent, which contradicted what he told the Warren Commission.
Here, Mr Tatro recounts, for Us, the incredible story of his experience when, at 20 years old, he travelled to New Orleans and attended the Conspiracy Trial of Clay Shaw.
This is an updated version of the original Skyhorse hardcover edition, first published in 2011.
This book is about a man whose long history of criminal behavior has been documented, even in the absence of a court conviction for any of it.
His underlying mental issues -a deadly combination of personality and psychiatric disorders, all untreated until he left the presidency, formed the manic condition with which he climbed the political ladder.
His success in brazenly stealing the 1948 Senate election, followed by a series of murders gave him ever-increasing confidence to go further in his criminal activities.
His involvement with the Billie Sol Estes scandals in the mid-1950s, through selling his powerful influence to facilitate the Estes frauds against the government, was widely reported on in 1962, yet he cunningly escaped indictment through sheer willpower, threats against Estes and at least five murders of men who could have connected him to the crimes, all of them still ""unsolved cold cases"" fifty years later.
The murder of his sister Josefa was also directed by Johnson in this same period of time, according to Estes.
As soon as that scandal had been swept under the rug in 1962, the Bobby Baker scandals followed in 1963, threatening to end his political career through certain censure by the Senate and Justice Department indictments to follow.
