He also wrote the other presidential decisions in the re-creation series.
Copying of the product or its parts 10200 Jefferson Boulevard for resale is prohibited.
Only those pages of this simulation intended for student use as handouts may be reproduced by the teacher who has purchased this teaching unit from Interact.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording—without prior written INT335 v1.0 permission from the publisher.
It reconstructs the anger, tension, and agitation President Kennedy and his advisers experienced while they sought the best way to pressure Russia into removing its missiles from Cuba.
Identifying at least two specific clashes which characterized the Cold War 3.
Determining the military, political, and psychological implications of the Soviet missiles in Cuba 5.
Analyzing President Kennedy’s role in ending the Cuban missile crisis Attitudes 1.
Developing tolerance for how persons’ backgrounds shape their different points of view 2.
Appreciating how the structure of a group may help or hinder the free flow of ideas Skills 1.
Day 2 After you introduce Scene 1, the role players—John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy, Dean Acheson, Robert McNamara, and Adlai Stevenson—meet to consider their alternatives.
The president Interact's re-creations chooses his initial option. take only a few hours of class time.
Day 3 Acting as a commentator in Scene 2, you introduce the president to the TV audience before he makes his address to the nation.
Then, recounting the major events between John Kennedy’s speech and the receipt of Nikita Khrushchev’s second message, you introduce Scene 3 during which the Kennedy brothers, Dean Rusk, and General Curtis LeMay discuss the president’s next move.
Day 4 On the final day students discuss a debriefing case study and take a test.
For subsequent classes, duplicate the number in parentheses, using the masters in this Teacher Guide.
You will not need • ROBERT KENNEDY to duplicate the bulleted • DEAN ACHESON items the first time you • ROBERT McNAMARA use this re-creation, • ADLAI STEVENSON for Interact has given you different colored • DEAN RUSK handouts for those • GENERAL CURTIS LeMAY (one: two pages, back students playing roles. to back) If you choose to use the Optional: recommended optional * UNIT TEST UNIT TEST, you will have to duplicate it.
Assign roles There are seven roles in this re-creation. re-creation are in the Since the moderator’s role is unusually demanding, you Student Guide. should play that role.
President Kennedy’s and his brother Robert’s roles particularly require intelligence, sophistication, and preparation.
This book written for students presents a clear, concise interpretation of the events surrounding the crisis.
Detzer authors a very readable and interesting account of the entire Cuban affair.
He takes a somewhat jaded view of the participants’ motivations and actions in relationship to that of the standard textbook.
The book, while an interesting display of Kennedy’s mind and perspective, lacks real depth and analysis since he died before its completion.
This AND THE CUBAN part of the Xerox Values and Decisions series lays out MISSILE CRISIS the background and personalities involved in the crisis.
Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr., Robert Kennedy and His Times, Certain students—the Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 1978.
The author puts together one playing Kennedy a valuable biography for any Kennedy-phile to read.
Written shortly after JFK’s assassination, the author affectionately and accurately discusses Kennedy’s career, his opinions, his values, and his actions.
Introduce the topic with an interest catcher that will sensitize students to the issues they will examine.
A lecture, Be certain you have carefully filmstrip, or an appropriate current events discussion planned how to would achieve this objective. integrate this re2.
Try asking the students about the length of time it takes creation with the an ICBM fired from the Cold War history Soviet Union to hit Washington, D.C., . chapters you have had your Most students don’t realize this and will likely be doubly students read in appalled at the prospects in 1962 of nuclear armed rockets their textbooks. miles from Florida.
Distribute the Student Guides and have the students read the Purpose and Background Essay.
Point out that JFK had several more advisers than the six who take part in this re-creation.
Separate the actual role-players from the audience and distribute the proper handouts.
Move from group to group and satisfy yourself that all students understand their individual tasks.
If you can, draw circles on the map, with Cuba at the center, indicating the limits of the Cuban missiles.
After much heated debate these men are now to meet with the president to present their refined opinions.
Present besides JFK are his brother, Encourage your students Attorney General Robert Kennedy; Secretary of Defense to speak passionately.
Robert McNamara; United Nations Ambassador Adlai Stevenson; Work to get them and former Secretary of State Dean Acheson.” truly involved in their 3.
If you have a quality class Implications of the missiles’ presence are discussed. and you are considering The alternatives are analyzed. using this re-creation The president announces his quarantine decision. next year, videotape the 4.
If time permits, set up a presidential press conference and presidential decision so that you can show allow the class to question the president on his reasoning. portions next year to 5.
Remind all of Day 3’s participants to be thoroughly prepared. stimulate students’ performance.
Open this day with a summation of yesterday’s events. participatory nature of 2.
Inform students that they are now the national TV audiyour instruction.) ence gathered before their sets to hear what has only been described as an urgent presidential address.
After his speech, quickly sum up his points, possibly interview an average citizen for his/her reaction.
Introduce the final scene by carefully tracing the events between JFK’s speech and this October 27 meeting: The military has gone on full alert and American citizens have reacted by practicing air raid drills and hoarding food.
Adlai Stevenson has confronted the Soviet United Nations ambassador in a televised debate.
One ship, the Maracula, was boarded, searched, and allowed to continue.
A note from Khrushchev on Friday, October 26, was received which expressed hope for negotiation and offered to remove the Cuban missiles in exchange for a no-invasion pledge from us.
It demanded that we remove our missiles from our bases in Turkey and then the Russians would remove theirs from Cuba.
If time permits, set up a press conference and allow the about the activity they class to question the president about his choice.
However, have experienced try to save the crisis’ outcome for tomorrow.
Doing so will intensify their may enhance the tension and highlight the uncertainty learning.
Such speaking experiences also help of the president’s gamble. students’ personal growth.
After the groups have choosen their options, have the chairpersons report to the whole class.
