RICHARD L SMITHTribune-Herald staff writer 1193 Words Page: 1A OpenURL Link LORENA — Forty years have passed since James D Williams regularly wore an Army uniform, but he says the service never really left him.
After Williams, 64, retired two years ago from the private sector, he sought out fellow veterans around Lorena with whom he now drinks coffee each morning and discusses matters big and small.
A bond thrives with others who have been in the same situation with you, serving in the armed forces.
That sentiment of not just beaming pride as a veteran but finding comfort among other veterans resonates above all else on Veterans Day.
For his part, Williams says it is only right his past military service remains vital in his life.
The temperature of the Cold War fluctuated during the years Williams served in the Army.
Williams served in the National Guard after high school and enlisted in the regular Army in 1959.
After basic training, he was sent to Aberdeen Proving Ground, Md., where he worked in an Army guided missile program.
He was responsible for keeping up with various missile components there and then was transferred to Fort Hood.
With the Korean War at a truce, the United States was trying to make sure the peace held.
The unit Williams was in was originally slated to stay in Korea for one year, but newly elected President John F Kennedy extended its tour for another 12 months.
Williams was back at Fort Hood in October 1962 when the nuclear showdown between the United States and the Soviet Union occurred over Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy had told the world that the Soviets were secretly building missile bases in Cuba.
The president ordered a naval blockade to prevent Russian ships from bringing supplies to Cuba, the communist island-nation only 90 miles away from the United States mainland.
Soviet President Nikita Krushchev had authorized his field commanders to use tactical nuclear weapons against United States forces in response to the blockade.
Krushchev then backed down, ordering the removal of the missiles from Cuba as well as supply ships from the coast.
Williams says a wife and a new child were the reason he decided to leave the Army in 1963.
But before he left, he helped the effort to send equipment and men from Fort Hood to the long war in Vietnam.
Manpower in the then-divided Southeast Asian nation would jump from 16,000 soldiers in 1963, when ""advise rs"" were being sent, to 184,000 troops in 1965, when the United States first sent combat forces.
Although Williams would not go to the war that divided his own nation, he felt a loss from it early on when a friend with whom he had spent 3½ years became a casualty after volunteering for Vietnam.
Today Williams visits his veteran friends around Waco and at the Veterans of Foreign Wars post in Hewitt.
He also sees fellow veterans when he goes for care at the Waco Veterans Affairs Hospital.
In that sense, Williams says, the service in which he grew up continues to surround him and reassure him to this day.
About this series As the country honors veterans this week, the Tribune-Herald takes a look at Central Texans who served over the past seven decades.
Veterans profiled each day reflect on history and share insights about their service, the armed forces and fellow veterans.
Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez, who organized a similar conference on the Bay of Pigs invasion last year, provided no details about the documents when announcing the upcoming conference on Thursday.
Cubans will be able to sign petitions beginning on Saturday in support of Cuba's economic, political and social systems, Castro said during a live appearance on state television.
More than 120,000 petition stations will be set up around the island, he said.
Opposition activists say the government's appeals are a response to the Varela Project, an initiative that would ask voters if they favor civil liberties.
A Political Vision 40 Years Later,"" is expected to include people from the United States and the former Soviet Union who played roles in the event.
Most Russians associated with the crisis have since died, but several of the late President Kennedy's advisers are still alive, said Fernandez.
He said conference organizers also are studying the possibility of taking participants to sites related to the crisis in the Havana area.
He said the conference's aim is to shed light on events leading up to the crisis, which peaked when the United States learned there were Soviet nuclear missiles on the island -just 90 miles from United States shores.
The previously unknown incident that might have pushed the two superpowers closer to nuclear war was disclosed in a book released this week.
The four diesel submarines of the Foxtrot type, armed with conventional and nuclear-tipped torpedoes, sailed from the Arctic Kola Peninsula.
They managed to break through United States and NATO cordons unnoticed but were spotted by the United States Navy as they approached Cuba.
The submarines needed to come to the surface often to charge their batteries, and that made them easy prey for the United States anti-submarine cordons around the Communist island.
Valentin Savitsky's B-59 submarine was spotted by United States Navy patrol aircraft when it temporarily appeared on the surface.
American destroyers rushed to block the submarine and began dropping stun grenades to force it to resurface, said Vadim Orlov, who was in charge of the submarine's radio intelligence during the crisis.
The submarines' commanders had strict orders not to use their weapons without an order from Moscow, but the close surveillance by the United States Navy made it hard for them to resurface for scheduled communications sessions.
Savitsky eventually managed to control his anger and ordered the submarine to come to the surface.
It was dark and the area was brightly lighted by searchlights from United States ships and a United States helicopter buzzing overhead.
I enjoyed it very much,"" Costner told reporters Tuesday as he left the Hotel Nacional for an afternoon showing of the film.
The movie is told solely from the vantage point of President Kennedy and his staff, and focuses on the decision-making process that led to the removal of the Soviet missiles from Cuban soil in October 1962.
Castro, who was in power at the time of the crisis, and other Cuban officials are not portrayed in the film.
Costner and Castro were joined in the screening at the Palace of the Revolution, where Castro keeps his offices, by Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque, Vice President Carlos Lage and members of Castro's personal staff.
They later held a dinner that went into the wee hours of Tuesday, said Rivers.
Costner arrived here Monday afternoon, accompanied by fellow producers Aryan Bernstein, Beacon Pictures chairman, and Peter Almond, along with several others.
On Tuesday morning, the group was screening the film to Cuban audiences and the New Latin Cinema Film Institute.
The United States kept its guard up in the Caribbean Monday while President Kennedy sought speedy fulfillment of Russia's promise to pull her missiles out of Cuba.
American representatives were instructed to be cooperative, but alert to resist any delay that would permit the rockets to stay on their Cuban pads many more days.
The slow defusion of yet another nuclear crisis was coming to fruition.
Cuban leaders, notably Castro, had become convinced in early 1962 that the United States was on the verge of nuclear attack.
Relations between the countries were still touchy after the Bay of Pigs confrontation in April of 1961.
The Soviet Union sent missiles and materials to build launch pads on Cuban sites.
Intervention by the United Nations and cogent threats by the United States finally convinced the USSR to remove the missiles.
Castro raged, calling Soviet Premier Khruschev derogatory names, and accusing him of cowardice, but the interests of world peace had prevailed.
But in 1962, what's become known as the Cuban missile crisis caused sensible American families to stock their basements with canned goods and bottled water.
Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara wondered if he had seen his last sunset.
Last week in Moscow, survivors of the governing officials met to exchange what they knew of what actually happened 26 years ago-since, apparently, neither side yet knows the whole truth.
Much of what is known, however, is covered in the excellent documentary series War and Peace in the Nuclear Age on public television.
An hourlong installment to be broadcast Feb. is devoted to the Cuban missile crisis.
One grim possibility that emerged in Moscow is that the world may have been nearer disaster than has been believed.
Sergei Khrushchev, the son of the Soviet leader in 1962, told some Americans-so they thought-that his father had been urged by Fidel Castro to launch nuclear missiles on United States cities.
The younger Khrushchev and Soviet officials denied that he had told the Americans any such thing, leaving confusion as to whether Mr Castro actually had called for use of the missiles.
But a reason that he might have done so also was disclosed in the Moscow meeting-another frustrated American scheme to get rid of Fidel Castro.
Americans in Moscow said President John F Kennedy never took Mongoose seriously.
But if Mr Castro did urge the Soviet leader to shower nuclear missiles on American cities, Mr Khrushchev turned him down in a hurry.
In 1962, despite much Khrushchev bluster-the Soviet Union, he claimed, was producing rockets ""like sausages that come out of an automatic machine""-he knew that Moscow actually lagged far behind the United States in nuclear weapons.
And despite Mr Kennedy's 1960 campaign against the ""missile gap,"" the United States knew it, too.
Thus, Mr Khrushchev knew that a missile launch from Cuba-he had only 20 nuclear warheads there-would be suicidal for the Soviet Union, whatever damage might be inflicted on United States cities.
But Mr McNamara and presumably Mr Kennedy knew, for their part, that even after suffering a devastating response the Soviets still would be able to destroy the United States with their remaining nuclear weapons.
Actually, nuclear war probably was never as likely as feared at the time because leaders in Washington and Moscow were coming to realize what is now commonly understood -that nuclear war between them would be suicidal for the attacking as well as the target nation.
Thus, terrifying as it was at the time, the Cuban crisis dramatically taught the most crucial lesson for the nuclear era.
As recently as 1980, unfortunately, it had not been absorbed by George Bush.
If so, a world that remembers the missile crisis needs to hear it from the horse's mouth.
Over the past two years, Gorbachev has authorized disclosure of reams of new information on the 1962 crisis, said Raymond Garthoff, a former United States diplomat who played a role in the crisis and has written a book on it.
At a seminar on his book, Garthoff said the Soviets have decided the crisis stemmed from a decision reached by then-Soviet leader Nikita S Khrushchev to send nuclear missiles to Cuba without adequate consultation with other members of the Politburo.
Brezhnev and a handful of Politburo members, according to other Soviet disclosures.
Robert McNamara, who was the American defense secretary during the Cuban missile crisis, said Gorbachev's close attention to the incident shows his ``sensitivity to the dangers'' that nuclear weapons pose.
Garthoff and McNamara interpreted many of the reforms proposed by Gorbachev, such as enhancing the presidency, giving more power to the Soviet parliament and publishing reports on meetings of the ruling Politburo, as efforts to expand the number of people involved in decision-making.
McNamara, like Garthoff, has taken part in a series of U.S.-Soviet meetings on the missile crisis, including one in Moscow last January attended by Andrei Gromyko, who was foreign minister at the time of the crisis, and by Anatoly Dobrynin, who was the Soviet ambassador to Washington at the time.
Dobrynin angered United States officials during the crisis by telling them that there were no Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Dobrynin assured participants at the conference in Moscow last January that he had not known about the missiles and Gromyko confirmed that, according to McNamara, who also took part in the seminar.
United States officials at the time had aerial photographs showing launch pads for Soviet SS-4 and SS-5 missiles, capable of reaching the United States, but could not confirm that the warheads had been sent to Cuba.
Recent Soviet disclosures have revealed that 20 nuclear warheads were in Cuba, and that 20 more were en route aboard the Poltava, a Soviet freighter turned back by President John F Kennedy's naval quarantine.
U.S sources quoted a Soviet participant as saying that Cuban leader Fidel Castro sent a message to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev at the height of the crisis urging him to fire nuclear missiles based on the island in anticipation of a United States attack, a move that almost certainly would have triggered massive United States retaliation against the Soviet Union.
According to one account, that message convinced Khrushchev that the confrontation had gone too far and the Soviet leader decided to agree to United States demands that the missiles be withdrawn.
Soviets taking part in the conference said the United States cities were targeted for attack by the Cuban-based Soviet missiles and that at least half the 42 missiles deployed on the island were operational with nuclear warheads.
Cuban officials refused to confirm the report of Castro's message to Khrushchev, which was conveyed to United States participants privately and did not form part of the official conference record.
They acknowledged, however, that the Cuban leader sent a message to the Kremlin during the final weekend of the crisis warning that a United States air strike or invasion would probably take place within the next 72 hours.
The atmosphere of extreme tension in Havana was illustrated by former Soviet ambassador to Cuba Alexander Alexeev, who revealed that Castro spent the night of Oct., 1962, in an embassy air-raid bunker because he feared a United States attack.
The Cuban leader was depicted as agitated but ready to die for the cause in which he believed.
Several United States participants in the two-day conference said that they had previously underestimated the extent to which Cuban and Soviet officials thought that a United States invasion of the island was a real possibility.
Other participants in the conference included former Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, former ambassador to Washington Anatoliy Dobrynin and Sergei Khrushchev, whose father ordered the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba and their subsequent removal.
Details about the readiness of the Soviet missiles in Cuba were provided by Gen.
Dmitri Volkogonov, a military historian who said he had reviewed archive material on the subject.
United States officials have been debating for years whether the missiles were equipped with nuclear warheads, and many experts assumed that the United States naval blockade had prevented such weapons from reaching the island.
Volkogonov said that it would have taken four to five hours to make the missiles ready for launching and an additional 15 minutes to fire them.
Sergei Khrushchev said that although the warheads were in Cuba, they were not actually mounted on the missiles.
Although there have been numerous conferences on the missile crisis, this was the first time that highranking Soviet and Cuban participants had agreed to discuss the subject with former United States officials and academics.
The GCHQ base has been operational in the town since World War One, when it observed the movements of the German naval fleet, and moved to its current site beside a caravan park during World War Two, when it originally occupied an underground bunker.
During the Cold War, Scarborough's personnel were required to track Soviet naval traffic in the Baltic and merchant shipping in European waters.
Although monitoring the cargo vessels was seen as a relatively mundane task, it suddenly took on high importance when the Cuban missile crisis broke out.
The tension arose when the United States were told that the Soviet Union were secretly shipping nuclear missiles to Cuba.
There was talk of an American invasion, but instead a blockade on further shipping was enforced.
However, there was a fear that some ships en route would attempt to break the sanctions.
The operators in Scarborough's secret bunker reported the positions of these threatening vessels.
The report they sent to the White House, called Soviet Merchant Ship Changes Course, refers to the Kislovodsk, which appeared to have ended its journey and turned back towards the Baltic.
The reports are discussed in a new BBC Radio 4 documentary called The Secret History of GCHQ, which will be broadcast on October 21 at 8pm.
Scarborough's secret spy base The Yorkshire Post visited GCHQ Scarborough in November 2018, to coincide with the government intelligence organisation's launch of a new work experience scheme to boost awareness of employment opportunities on the base.
The site was built on what was once the town's racecourse in the 1970s, staff were moved from their wartime bunker to a more modern building above ground level.
It also has the capability to function as Britain's main GCHQ base should the primary nerve centre in Cheltenham be destroyed.
Intelligence analysts monitor threats such as cyber security. network defence, human trafficking, child sexual exploitation and drug smuggling.
Twenty years ago, most of the messages they intercepted were in written form, but the sheer volume of digital communications has made their roles significantly more challenging.
Former foghorn station near Whitby for saleThere's also an on-site museum about the history of the facility, which began life as a wireless signal station on the coast, when the telegraph was the main method of communication.
Everyone was on edge over the possibility of a nuclear conflict that never came.
The Missouri native spent much of his childhood in Ohio before earning his bachelor's degree in economics and psychology from Albion College in Albion, Mich.
He made his wish come true, enlisting in 1961 and, on Aug. of that year, reporting to Naval Station Newport in Rhode Island.
Following basic training, he went to the Boston Naval Shipyard and underwent training to become a communications officer.
In February 1962, Butcher was assigned to the USS Camp, an Edsall-class destroyer escort.
The Camp was part of the blockade off of Cuba during the 13-day standoff from Oct.-28.
The standoff between the United States and Soviet Union was over the Soviet installation of armed nuclear warheads on the communist island 90 miles from American shores.
To end tensions, Soviet leadership offered to remove the missiles in exchange for a promise that the United States wouldn't invade Cuba.
It was arguably the closest the two global superpowers came during the decades-long Cold War to initiating a nuclear conflict.
Butcher recalled there were times when ships nearly brushed against each other, which also had the potential to prompt an international incident.
During part of his tour aboard the Camp while in the Caribbean, Cuban refugees adrift on boats were frequently picked up and turned over to the United States Coast Guard.
Eventually, Butcher served as an interpreter whenever the Camp picked up refugees.
At the time, the captain asked if anyone was able to speak Spanish to assist in communication.
Toward the end of his time aboard the Camp, the ship spent time in the North Atlantic, based out of Grenock, Scotland.
When he returned to the U.S., he bnecame a base administrative officer at the Naval Weapons Lab in Dahlgren, Va.
After stints in Washington, D.C., Pittsburgh and Minneapolis, he was transferred to Minot, where he stayed for about 12 years.
His wife, Dina, was set to be appointed Deputy Agriculture Commissioner, a post she held for seven years.
Looking back, Butcher, who has no regrets from his service, said the missile crisis was a time in which everyone was on edge and he's proud to have been a part of it.
Mr McCain and Mr Trump were two of a number of politicians and Trump Administration officials to make appearances on United States television on Sunday – a day after a North Korean mid-range ballistic missile apparently failed shortly after launch, the third test-fire failure in April.
That launch has been seen as a clear act of defiance, after weeks of rising tensions in the region over the threat posed by North Korea.
Ballistic missile tests by the country are banned by the United Nations because they're seen as part of the North's push for a nuclear-tipped missile that can eventually hit the United States mainland.
The threat of such missiles also has North Korea's regional neighbours, South Korea, China and Japan, on high alert.
Mr Trump – speaking in an interview with CBS programme Face the Nation said that he believed China's President Xi Jinping, North Korea's major ally in the region, was putting pressure on the regime in Pyongyang, but was coy about the use of United States military force against the country.
Mr Trump said that he did not say North Korean leader Kim Jong-Un should not test a missile, but that Mr Kim knows further such action would not make the United States happy, or, he believes, Mr Xi either.
Asked about the failure of a number of the missile launches, Mr Trump also refused to give much away.
Mr Trump also told the show he was not going to talk about United States military options with North Korea because ""we shouldn't be announcing all our moves.
Turning his attention to Mr Kim, Mr Trump called the North Korean leader, ""a pretty smart cookie"" for being able to hold onto power after taking over at a young age.
He says North Korea poses ""a grave threat"" not just to the United States and its Asian allies, but also to China.
Mr McMaster added that it was important ""for all of us to confront this regime, this regime that is pursuing the weaponisation of a missile with a nuclear weapon.
That means, he said, working with partners in the region and globally on enforcing current UN sanctions and perhaps ""ratcheting up those sanctions even further.
Mr Trump spoke with the leaders of Singapore and Thailand on Sunday, inviting both to the White House.
Mr Trump also spoke to Philippines President Rodrigo Duterte about North Korea on Saturday, according White House Chief of Staff Reince Priebus, adding that Mr Trump was in regular contact with Japan's Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and that the president had become ""very close"" to Mr Xi.
Mr Priebus said the conversations were prompted by the ""potential for nuclear and massive destruction in Asia"" and eventually in the United States.
The North Korea missile launch comes after Mr Trump sent a nuclear-powered submarine and the USS Carl Vinson aircraft carrier to Korean waters.
The United States and South Korea also started installing a missile defence system that is supposed to be partially operational within days and their two navies are also staging joint military drills.
The Terminal High-Altitude Area Defence system , remains a controversial topic in South Korea and presidential front-runner Moon Jae-in even has vowed to reconsider the deployment if he wins a presidential election next month.
Mr Trump raised eyebrows in South Korea last week when he said he would make Seoul pay $1bn for the missile defence system, but Seoul's presidential Blue House said on Sunday that the White House National had confirmed that the United States will not be seeking money for the system.
Analysts say the missile apparently fired by North Korea on Friday was a KN-17, a new Scud-type missile developed by North Korea.
The North fired the same type of missile on 16 April, just a day after a massive military parade where it showed off its expanding missile arsenal, but United States officials called that launch a failure, just as another launch on 5 April was.
The two earlier launches were conducted from an eastern coastal area, but Friday's missile was fired in the west, from an area near Pukchang, just north of the capital, Pyongyang.
In “Back Channel,” novelist Steven L Carter keeps the KGB chief but substitutes an unlikely American for Scali — Margo Jensen, 19.
Through an incredibly complicated path of events that begins with a trip to Bulgaria with real-life chess whiz Bobby Fischer, Jensen finds herself one night in a bedroom in Washington with none other than John F Kennedy.
Instead, she meets with Kennedy on several evenings to report on what the KGB agent says are Nikita Khrushchev’s efforts to work around Kremlin hard-liners pushing for a showdown with the United States.
Then she meets with the KGB agent to report that Kennedy has problems of his own with hard-liners in places like the Pentagon, the CIA and even the State Department.
Margo finds it hard to believe that she’s at the center of an international drama.
But the reading is fascinating, in large part because of Carter’s insights into the pressures on blacks who live in largely white surroundings.
Carter peppers his pages with reallife people like Bobby Kennedy, McGeorge Bundy and Gen.
Although much of their dialogue is fictional, their words seem to stay well within what we know about them.
Whether the male law professor Carter (who has also written “The Emperor of Ocean Park,” “The Impeachment of Abraham Lincoln” and others) is on safe ground inside the head of a 19-year-old student seems like a dicier question.
The two of them had never slept together, but if she were headed to his place rather than her dorm, she had no doubt that tonight would be the night.
Although we all know how the Cuban missile crisis played out, we can find fascination in reading Carter’s version.
The pristine air, glorious foliage and football season are enthralling.
The Russians had secretly planted a nuclear arsenal in Cuba and the warheads were aimed in our direction only 90 miles from our border.
John Kennedy was a youthful president who had been in office less than 20 months.
He told the Russians to take their nuclear weapons out of the western hemisphere and gave them a short deadline to dismantle and go home.
I remember vividly a clear beautiful October afternoon during the 10-day standoff.
I was 10 years old and was practicing with my peewee football team for our biggest game but even as 10 year olds it was hard for us to concentrate.
We did not know what the results of a nuclear war would bring to the world.
On this same October afternoon another story took place in rural south Alabama.
Bill Baxley was a young district attorney for Houston and Henry Counties.
Houston has about 90% of the people in the circuit with Henry County being the home to about 10% of the people in the circuit.
This hamlet is a fork in the road exactly halfway between Abbeville and Headland.
This general store also served as a gas station and Squatlow was the mechanic.
Squatlow was nicknamed that because he would squat down close to the ground whenever he would talk with his folks.
Old Squatlow would hunker down with a chew of tobacco in his mouth and gossip and swap stories all day.
Baxley, like most politicians, would stop at this Tumbleton country store on his way to court and drink a coke and visit.
In fact, he had never been out of his native Henry County yet he was in rare form prophesying that day.
Baxley said, “There ain’t a place in Alabama that would even be on the Russians radar to bomb, maybe Huntsville because of the Redstone Arsenal.
Squatlow looked at Baxley like he was the most stupid person he had ever seen.
Fortunately, Kennedy’s standoff with Khrushchev and the Russians saved Abbeville.
Kaiser died of aspiration pneumonia at Sibley Hospital in Washington, his family said.
He had been admitted to the hospital three days earlier after he started to slur his words.
Kaiser, an assistant secretary of labor during the administration of President Harry S Truman, served as United States ambassador to Senegal and Mauritania from 1961 to 1964.
Kaiser earlier had accompanied President Leopold Sedar Senghor on a visit to the White House, where he had a warm meeting with President John F Kennedy.
When Kaiser went to see the Senegalese president and asked him to deny the Soviets access to the airport at Dakar, the West African country's capital, Senghor agreed.
President Jimmy Carter named Kaiser ambassador to Hungary in 1977, and Kaiser played a key role in convincing the Carter administration to return the Crown of St.
The important religious relic had been in United States hands, under guard since 1945 at Fort Knox, Kentucky, where the United States gold reserves are quartered.
We got a trade agreement"" giving Hungary favored trade status, Kaiser recalled in an oral history interview at the Harry S Truman Library.
Kaiser's parents had emigrated in 1905 from Ukraine, then part of Russia, where his four oldest siblings were born.
Robert G Kaiser, an associate editor of The Washington Post newspaper; David Kaiser, a professor of history in the strategy department at the United States Naval War College; Charles Kaiser, an author and journalist.
Charles Kaiser explained Thursday why all of Kaiser's sons had become writers.
A 13-day standoff ensued, but instead of resorting to a preemptive strike as many advised, President John F Kennedy initiated talks of peace and maintained safety for all parties involved.
Fearing the powerful weapons of another country, our own president, George W Bush, wants to take a very different approach to the situation in Iraq and its president, Saddam Hussein, than Kennedy used in Cuba.
We may, this time, choose to initiate a preemptive strike against a nation that we believe to harbor weapons of mass destruction.
While no one can predict the true effects of such a decision, it would be wise for our current government officials to take a closer look at the actions of President Kennedy in 1962 and compare them to today.
Pulitzer Prize-winning historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr. recently spoke in a panel discussion at the JFK Library and Museum in Boston.
He compared the events of October 1962 to today, saying, ""There were people in favor of a preventative war during the Cold War and they were regarded as a bunch of loonies.
While ""loonies"" may not be the most eloquent word to describe government leaders, Schlesinger's point reflects the opinions of many political scholars.
Oftentimes the complications of working through situations peacefully may be difficult, and it appears to be more effective just to go initiate a battle.
Yet, even though Hussein has not proven to be the most cooperative individual the United States has had to deal with, continuing peaceful negotiations has benefits over the initiation of a war, costing soldiers and possibly even civilian victims their lives.
The technology of the weapons of mass destruction that Iraq is feared to harbor greatly surpasses that of the missiles in 1962, and Iraq is not in quite the position of world power as the Soviet Union was thought to be in the 1960s.
But the overall message gained from President Kennedy's actions then should be replayed to our government officials today.
While it may seem more efficient to fight for our protection, effective peaceful negotiations require the most valiant of leaders.
Not only that, the Soviet officers commanding those missile batteries had been authorized to fire nuclear warheads if attacked without having to call Moscow first.
A ""brigade"" of four diesel-powered ""Foxtrot""-class submarines of the Soviet navy were cruising to Cuba just as President Kennedy deployed a United States Navy armada to quarantine the island.
Each of the four subs was equipped with a nuclear-tipped torpedo, intended to sink American aircraft carriers and kill anything within a 10-mile radius.
Like their ground-based counterparts, the four captains had orders to fire those torpedoes if attacked and in danger of being sunk or captured without prior orders from the Soviet Politburo or fleet headquarters.
Captains had to tune to the Voice of America to find out if their nation was at war.
Huchthausen's account of those times, is not a comprehensive account of the incident or of the duel of wits and wills between JFK and Soviet leader Nikita Krushchev.
Instead, it's a sailor's-eye view of the conflict, by and about those who cruised the Caribbean in those dangerous days.
Huchthausen was a newly-minted ensign aboard the USS Blandy, one of the many Navy destroyers assigned to the Cuban blockade.
Later, he would serve as United States naval attache in Moscow, acquiring close knowledge of the Soviet submarine program.
The result is a bit like the old movie, The Enemy Below, picturing the conflict alternately from the point of view of the Soviet submarine crews and of the American sailors and aviators who were stalking them.
Several reviews have compared October Fury to Tom Clancy's novels, but this nonfiction account is really closer to Das Boot than to The Hunt for Red October.
Huchthausen presents a picture of competent but cynical officers and sailors trying to carry out their duty in submarines that were falling apart.
One sub had key gears that cracked in midvoyage; another had a damaged hatch that leaked dangerously.
In the best of times, all four vessels stank and had to risk dangerously high levels of carbon dioxide when submerged.
Sonar and other key pieces of equipment worked erratically and had to be fixed with the Russian equivalent of chewing gum and ingenuity.
Even at the height of the crisis, the Russians enjoyed a freedom that their relentlessly tailed American counterparts, back in the U.S.S.R., could only envy.
Huchthausen slips into the sin of inventing dialogue he couldn't possibly have heard or verified to heighten the drama of his text.
He didn't need to do that; October Fury proves a shipshape narrative, with vivid, three-dimensional character portraits, with more than enough suspense to carry its readers along.
He died at Massachusetts General Hospital, which would not disclose the cause of death.
He served as special assistant for national security from 1961 to 1966.
People always had confidence in Mac,"" said John Kenneth Galbraith, a Kennedy economic adviser and ambassador to India.
Bundy supervised the staff of the National Security Council and was among a group of young, bright advisers Kennedy had called on that also included Ted Sorensen and Arthur Schlesinger Jr.
He was a scholar-in-residence at the Carnegie Corp. at the time of his death.
His books included On Active Service in 1948, The Strength of Government in 1968 and Danger and Survival in 1988.
Bundy was a grade-school classmate of Kennedy's at the Dexter School in the Boston suburb of Brookline, and ran for office himself once, as a Republican candidate for the Boston City Council in 1941.
He joined the Harvard faculty in 1949 and in 1953 became the youngest dean of the faculty of arts and sciences, serving until 1961.
