In both public and private, Russian officials had assured their American counterparts that the Soviet military build-up in Cuba that had begun in the summer was no threat to the United States, because it would not include nuclear missiles capable of striking American territory.
In fact, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev had decided in the spring to dispatch nuclear weapons to Cuba for a variety of reasons.
Among them was a desire to defend his ally, Fidel Castro – the communist revolutionary who had taken the reins of power in Cuba three years earlier – from an anticipated United States attack, and to close a nuclear gap that was heavily in America’s favour.
Superpower Tension takes over a All the tensions that had grown up between business/ industry.
Fidel Castro’s Cuba In 1959, the Communist Fidel Castro took power in Cuba.
This was very threatening to the USA because it was right next to America.
In 1960, Castro made a trade agreement with Russia, Source A whereby Cuba sent sugar to Russia, in return for We will not oil, machines and money.
This frightened the needlessly risk Americans more, and in 1960 they stopped world-wide trading with Cuba.
In retaliation, Cuba nuclear war in nationalised all American-owned companies which even victory 3.
The Bay of Pigs. would be ashes in In April 1961 the CIA encouraged, funded and our mouths – but transported an attempt by anti-Castro Cuban exiles neither will we to invade Cuba.
I call promised – weapons to defend Cuba against upon Chairman America.
Khrushchev to stop and On 14 October an American U2 spy-plane took dismantle this pictures of a nuclear missile base being built on Cuba. secret, reckless Kennedy’s advisers told him he had 10 days before and provocative Cuba could fire the missiles at targets in America. threat to world peace.
Speech by President Kennedy on American TV, 1962. ç The danger of the missile bases.
There were Russian troops in Cuba, and it would probably lead to a war with Russia.
Kennedy set up a Committee of the National was not a direct act of war.
Before Kennedy could reply, Khrushchev Turkish bases in a ‘tit-for-tat’ sent another letter, demanding that Kennedy agreement – the USA did not also dismantle American missile bases in see any need for them and that they would be dismantled Turkey.
He also ignored Khrushchev’s second letter – he wrote simply that would lift the blockade and agree not to invade Cuba if Khrushchev would dismantle the missile bases.
The two leaders set up a telephone ‘hotline’ to talk directly in a crisis.
