So letʼs approach the issue from the less threatening perspective of the awesome picture below.
Next, he does a steep climb to reconvert some of that speed into altitude so he can turn and land.
Given that the glider has no engine, you might wonder how the pilot can be sure heʼll gain enough altitude in the climb to safely turn and land.
The laws of physics tell us exactly how altitude is traded for speed and vice versa.
While there is a loss due to the air resistance of the glider, that is a known quantity which the pilot takes it into account by starting from a higher altitude than needed for the landing phase.
But itʼs important to read the fine print in that guarantee provided by the laws of physics.
If thereʼs a slight wind the difference is negligible, but if the air movement is unusually strong all bets are off – which is what happened to a friend of mine who had safely executed the maneuver many times before.
October 21, 2008, Page 1 but the model of stationary air was no longer applicable and he had no way of knowing his predicament until he approached the runway with much less speed than needed for a safe landing.
He managed to land without damage to himself or his glider, but was so shaken that he no longer does that maneuver.
While most experienced glider pilots sometimes do low passes (and some race finishes require them), Iʼve opted not to because I regard them as a 99.9% safe maneuver – which is not as safe as it sounds.
Even though they are clearly equivalent, one chance in a thousand of dying sounds a lot riskier than 99.9% safe.
The perspective gets worse when itʼs recognized that the fatality rate is one in a thousand per execution of the maneuver.
Worse, the fear that he feels the first few times dissipates as he gains confidence in his skill.
But that confidence is really complacency, which pilots know is our worst enemy.
Many people point to the absence of global war since the dawn of the nuclear era as proof that these weapons ensure peace.
Since World War III would mean the end of civilization, no one would dare start it.
Each side is deterred from attacking the other by the prospect of certain destruction.
It is true that no one in his right mind would start a nuclear war, but when people are highly stressed they often behave irrationally and even seemingly rational decisions can lead to places that no one wants to visit.
Less well known nuclear near misses occurred during the Berlin crisis of 1961, the Yom Kippur War of 1973 and NATOʼs Able Archer exercise of 1983.
In each of those episodes, the law of unintended consequences combined with the danger of irrational decision making under stress created an extremely hazardous situation.
Because the last date for a nuclear near miss listed above was 1983, it might be hoped that the end of the Cold War removed the nuclear sword hanging over humanityʼs head.
Aside from the fact that other potential crises such as Taiwan were unaffected, a closer look shows that the Cold War, rather than ending, merely went into hibernation.
In the West, the reawakening of this specter is usually attributed to resurgent Russian nationalism, but as in most disagreements the other side sees things very differently.
For our current purposes, the last of these concerns is the most relevant because it involves reading the fine print – in this case, Article 5 of the NATO charter which states that an attack on any NATO member shall be regarded as an attack on them all.
It is partly for that reason that a number of former Soviet republics and client states have been brought into NATO and that President Bush is pressing for Georgia and the Ukraine to be admitted.
Once these nations are in NATO, the thinking goes, Russia would not dare try to subjugate them again since that would invite nuclear devastation by the United States, which would be treaty bound to come to the victimʼs aid.
But, just as the laws of physics depended on a model that was not always applicable during a gliderʼs low pass, the law of deterrence which seems to guarantee peace and stability is model-dependent.
The assassination of Austriaʼs Archduke Ferdinand by a Serbian nationalist led Austria to demand that it be allowed to enter Serbian territory to deal with terrorist organizations.
This demand was not unreasonable since interrogation of the captured assassins had shown complicity by the Serbian military and it was later determined that the head of Serbian military intelligence was a leader of the secret Black Hand terrorist society.
War between Austria and Serbia resulted, and alliance obligations similar to NATOʼs Article 5 then produced a global conflict.
As it is being revised, in August 2008, the conflict has escalated to front page news of a low-intensity, undeclared war.
If President Bush is successful in his efforts to bring Georgia into NATO, and especially if the conflict should escalate further, we would face the unpleasant choice of reneging on our treaty obligations or threatening actions which risk the destruction of civilization.
A similar risk exists between Russia and Estonia, which is already a NATO member.
Returning temporarily to soaring, although I will not do low passes, I do not judge my fellow glider pilots who choose to do them.
The pilot in the photo has over 16,000 flight hours, has been doing low passes at air shows for over 30 years, will not do them in turbulent conditions, ensures that he has radio contact with a trusted spotter on the ground who is watching for traffic, and usually does them downwind so that he only has to do a “tear drop” turn to land.
The fact that such an experienced pilot exercises that much caution says something about the risk of the maneuver.
In the same way, I am not arguing against admitting Georgia to NATO or suggesting that Estonia should be kicked out.
October 21, 2008, Page 3 we do that, there is a much greater chance that we will find ways to lessen the true sources of the risk, including patching the rapidly fraying fabric of Russian-American relations.
The danger isnʼt so much in admitting former Soviet republics into NATO as in becoming complacent with our ability to militarily deter Russia from taking actions we do not favor.
An overly simplified model The circle on the left represents the current state of the world, while the one on the right represents the world after a full-scale nuclear war.
Because World War III is a state of no return, there is no path back to our current state.
Even though an arrow is shown to indicate the possibility of a transition from our current state to one of global war, that path seems impossible to most people.
The answer lies in recognizing that what is depicted as a single, current state of the world is much more complex.
October 21, 2008, Page 4 Society is partly correct in thinking that a transition from our current state to full-scale war is impossible because, most of the time, we occupy one of the substates far removed from World War III and which has little or no chance of transiting to that state of no return.
But it is possible to move from our current substate to one slightly closer to the brink, and then to another closer yet.
Fortunately, that view has been recorded by Fyodr Burlatsky, one of Khrushchevʼs speechwriters and close advisors, as well as a man who was in the forefront of the Soviet reform movement.
October 21, 2008, Page 5 matter of six or seven minutes missiles launched from that base could devastate major centres in the Ukraine and southern Russia.
In spite of the similarity between the Cuban and Turkish missiles, Khrushchev realized that America would find this deployment unacceptable and therefore did so secretly, disguising the missiles and expecting to confront the United States with a fait accompli.
However, Khrushchev did not adequately envision what might happen if, as did occur, he was caught in the act.
But compounded and viewed from their opponentʼs perspective, those steps brought the world to the brink of disaster.
During the crisis, there were additional, fortunately unvisited substates that would have made World War III even more likely.
As just one example, the strong pressure noted by Burlatsky to correct the Bay of Pigs fiasco and remove Castro with a powerful American invasion force intensified after the Cuban missiles were discovered.
But those arguing in favor of invasion were ignorant of the fact – not learned in the West until many years later – that the Russians had battlefield nuclear weapons on Cuba and came close to authorizing their commander on the island to use them without further approval from Moscow in the event of an American invasion.
Risk Analysis I have been concerned with averting nuclear war for over twenty-five years, but an extraordinary new approach only occurred to me last year: using quantitative risk analysis to estimate the probability of nuclear deterrence failing.
This approach is a bit like Superman disguised as mild-mannered Clark Kent but, before I can explain why it is extraordinary, we need to explore what it is and overcome a key mental block that helps explain why no one previously had thought of applying this valuable technique.
To understand this mental block, imagine someone gives us a trick coin, weighted so heads and tails are not equally likely, and we need to estimate the chance of its showing heads when tossed.
October 21, 2008, Page 6 precise) that the chance of heads is somewhere between zero and 6% per toss, but that leaves way too much uncertainty.
Thinking of the fifty years that deterrence has worked without a failure as the fifty tosses of the the coin, we are moderately confident that the chance of nuclear war is somewhere between zero and 6% per year.
But there is a big difference between one chance in a billion per year and 6% per year, both of which are in that range.
At one chance in a billion per year, a few more years of business as usual would be an acceptable risk.
But 6% corresponds to roughly one in 16 odds, in which case our current nuclear strategy would be the equivalent of playing nuclear roulette – a global version of Russian roulette – once each year with a 16 chambered revolver.
In the same way, risk analysis breaks down a catastrophic failure of nuclear deterrence into a sequence of smaller failures, many of which have occurred and whose probabilities can therefore be estimated.
Modern risk analysis techniques first came to prominence with concerns about the safety of nuclear reactors, and in particular with the 1975 Rasmussen Report produced for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
In Risk-Benefit Analysis, Wilson and Crouch note “ used event tree analysis … This new approach originally had detractors, and indeed the failure … to use it may have contributed to the occurrence of the Three Mile Island Accident.
An event tree starts with an initiating event that stresses the system.
For a nuclear reactor, an initiating event could be the failure of a cooling pump.
Unlike the catastrophic failure which has never occurred (assuming we are analyzing a design different from Chernobylʼs), such initiating events occur frequently enough that their rate of occurrence can be estimated directly.
The event tree then has several branches at which the initiating event can be contained with less than catastrophic consequences, for example by activating a backup cooling system.
But if a failure occurs at every one of the branches , then the reactor fails catastrophically.
Probabilities are estimated for each branch in the event tree and the probability of a catastrophic failure is obtained as the product of the individual failure probabilities.
Applying risk analysis to the catastrophic failure of nuclear deterrence, a perceived threat by either side is an example of an initiating event.
If either side exercises adequate caution in its responses, such an initiating event can be contained and the crisis dies out.
October 21, 2008, Page 7 the nuclear abyss, as almost happened with the 1962 Cuban crisis.
Because nuclear deterrence has never completely failed, the probability assigned to the last branch in the event tree will involve subjectivity and have more uncertainty.
Confidence in the final result can be increased by incorporating a number of expert opinions and using a range instead of a single number for that probability, as well as providing justifications for the different opinions.
His Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, wrote that he didnʼt expect to live out the week, supporting an estimate similar to Kennedyʼs.
I discounted Bundyʼs 1% estimate because invading Cuba was a frequently considered option, yet no Americans were aware of the Russian battlefield nuclear weapons which would have been used with high probability in that event.
As an example of faulty reasoning due to this lack of information, Douglas Dillon, another member of Kennedyʼs advisory group, wrote, “military operations looked like they were becoming increasingly necessary.
Step #1: conflict between America and Castroʼs Cuba: The current conflicts between Russia and a number of former Soviet client states are similar.
Russia demanding to be treated as a military equal and being denied this status: The same is true today.
Repeated American statements that we defeated Russia in the Cold War add fuel to that fire since the Russians feel they were equal participants in ending that conflict.
The Berlin Crisis and the Bay of Pigs invasion: Several potential crises are brewing which have similar potential.
The American deployment of IRBMʼs in Turkey: A missile defense system we are planning for Eastern Europe bears an ominous similarity to those Turkish missiles.
Khrushchevʼs deployment of the Cuban missiles: While there is not yet a modern day analog of this step, serious warning tremors have occurred.
The fact that we are not yet staring at the nuclear abyss is little cause for comfort.
In terms of the sequence of events that turn a 99.9% safe maneuver into a fatal accident, we are already at a dangerous point in the process and, as in soaring, need to recognize complacency as our true enemy.
Even minor changes in our nuclear weapons posture have been rejected as too risky even though the baseline risk of our current strategy had never been estimated.
Soon after recognizing this gaping hole in our knowledge, I did a preliminary risk analysis which indicates that relying on nuclear weapons for our security is thousands of times more dangerous than having a nuclear power plant built next to your home.
Equivalently, imagine two nuclear power plants being built on each side of your home.
October 21, 2008, Page 9 thousands of nuclear reactors surrounding you.
That is the level of risk that my preliminary analysis indicates each of us faces from a failure of nuclear deterrence.
While the analysis that led to that conclusion involves more math than is appropriate here, an intuitive approach conveys the main idea.
In science and engineering, when trying to estimate quantities which are not well known, we often use “order of magnitude” estimates.
In this intuitive approach I first ask people whether they think the world could survive 1,000 years that were similar to 20 repetitions of the last 50 years.
When asked that question, most people do not believe we could survive 1,000 such years.
I then ask if they think we can survive another 10 years of business as usual, and most say we probably can.
Thereʼs no guarantee, but weʼve made it through 50 years, so the odds are good that we can make it through 10 more.
In the order of magnitude approach, we have now bounded the time horizon for a failure of nuclear deterrence as being greater than 10 years and less than 1,000.
On an annual basis, that makes relying on nuclear weapons a 99% safe maneuver.
As with 99.9% safe maneuvers in soaring, that is not as safe as it sounds and is no cause for complacency.
If we continue to rely on a strategy with a one percent failure rate per year, that adds up to about 10% in a decade and almost certain destruction within my grandchildrenʼs lifetimes.
Because the estimate was only accurate to an order of magnitude, the actual risk could be as much as three times greater or smaller.
But even ⅓% per year adds up to roughly a 25% fatality rate for a child born today, and 3% per year would, with high probability, consign that child to an early, nuclear death.
Given the catastrophic consequences of a failure of nuclear deterrence, the usual standards for industrial safety would require the time horizon for a failure to be well over a million years before the risk might be acceptable.
Even a 100,000 year time horizon would entail as much risk as a skydiving jump every year, but with the whole world in the parachute harness.
While my preliminary analysis and the above described intuitive approach provide significant evidence that business as usual entails far too much risk, in-depth risk analyses are needed to correct or confirm those indications.
Richard Garwin, IBM Fellow Emeritus, former member Presidentʼs Science Advisory Committee and Defense Science Board • Adm.
This second phase effort will be aided by the initial studies because, in addition to estimating the risk of a failure of nuclear deterrence, they will identify the most likely trigger mechanisms, thereby allowing attention to be directed where it is most needed.
For example, if as seems likely, a nuclear terrorist incident is found to be a likely trigger mechanism for a full-scale nuclear war, then much needed attention would be directed to averting that smaller, but still catastrophic event.
While definitive statements about the risk we face must await the results of the proposed in-depth studies, for ease of exposition the remainder of this article assumes the conclusion reached by my preliminary study – that the risk is far too great and urgently needs to be reduced.
The Positive Possibility In the mid 1970ʼs Whit Diffie, Ralph Merkle and I invented public key cryptography, a technology that now secures the Internet and has won the three of us many honors.
Yet, when we first conceived the idea many experts told us that we could not succeed.
What was missed is that “the key” might become “two keys,” a public key for enciphering and a secret key for deciphering.
Everyone could encipher messages using my public key, but only I could understand them by deciphering with my secret key.
Just as many cryptographic experts thought we couldnʼt split the key and used arguments based on years of accumulated wisdom that were not applicable to the new possibility, most people have difficulty envisioning a world in which the nuclear threat is a relic of the past.
Adding hope to the model For the risk to truly be acceptable, this new state also must be a state of no return – its risk would not be acceptable if the world could transition back to our current state with its unacceptable risk.
In this new figure, our current substate is near the middle of the current state of the world.
We are not close to World War III, but neither are we close to an acceptable level of risk.
Much as people had difficulty envisioning public key cryptography before we developed a workable system, they also have difficulty envisioning a world that is far better than what they have experienced in the past.
The evolution of the movement to abolish slavery in the United States provides a good illustration of that difficulty.
In 1835 a Boston mob attacked the abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison and dragged him half naked through the streets.
In that environment or substate, few people could envision the end of slavery within thirty years, much less that citizens of Massachusetts, Illinois and Pennsylvania would give their lives to help bring about that noble goal.
The anti-abolitionist riots of the 1830ʼs – probably seen by most at that time as evidence of the insurmountable barriers to ending slavery – were actually a sign that a new substate had been reached and change was beginning to occur.
There were no such riots in 1787 because the abolitionist movement was almost non-existent.
By the 1830ʼs abolition was beginning to be seen as a serious threat to the supporters of slavery, resulting in the riots.
History shows that people have tremendous difficulty envisioning both negative and positive possibilities that are vastly different from their current experience.
As an example of the difficulty imagine the reaction if someone, prior to Gorbachevʼs coming to power, had predicted that a leader of the Soviet Union would lift censorship, encourage free debate, and not use military force to prevent republics from seceding from the union.
I had a milder version of that problem in September 1984 when I started a project designed to foster a meaningful dialog between the American and Soviet scientific communities in an attempt to defuse the threat of nuclear war, which was then in sharp focus.
I was aware of the limitations that Soviet censorship imposed, but believed there still was some opportunity for information flow, primarily unidirectional.
It had been eight years since my last trip to the Soviet Union and this visit was an eye-opening experience.
While I did not know it at the time, I was meeting with people who were in the forefront of the nascent reform movement which would bring Gorbachev to power six months later, with some of them directly advising him.
Censorship was still the law of the land, so the scientists with whom I met could not agree with those of my views that contradicted the party line.
I sensed something very different was brewing, but on returning to the United States I was often seen as extremely naive for believing that meaningful conversations were possible with persons of any standing within the Soviet system.
It is therefore counterproductive to lay out too explicit a road map to that goal.
Until I realized the applicability of risk analysis, I didnʼt see how that could be accomplished, but risk analysis provides an implicit, rather than an explicit map.
No single step can reduce the risk a thousand-fold, so if the risk analysis approach can be embedded in societyʼs consciousness, then one step after another will have to be taken until a state with acceptable risk is reached.
October 21, 2008, Page 13 The first critical step therefore is for society to recognize the risk inherent in nuclear deterrence.
If you agree, please share this article – or whatever approach you favor – with others.
Email is particularly effective since friends who agree can then relay your message to others.
This article, a sample email, and other tools can be found on the resource page at NuclearRisk.org.
Peter Finn,“Russian Bombers Could Be Deployed to Cuba”, Washington Post, July 22, 2008, Page A10.
Martin E Hellman, “Risk Analysis of Nuclear Deterrence,” The Bent of Tau Beta Pi , Vol.
David Morgan, “ United States general warns against Russian bombers in Cuba,” July 22, 2008 Reuters dispatch.
Vladimir Putin, “Press Statement and Answers to Questions following the 20th Russia-European Union Summit, Marfa, Portugal,” October 26, 2007.
