But they told a news conference Wednesday that it remains unclear whether Mikoyan reversed or circumvented the decision on his own or convinced Khrushchev of its perils.
The conference is the latest manifestation of Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's glasnost policy.
Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., and son, John F Kennedy Jr., will join McNamara; former National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy; Theodore Sorenson, former special counselor to Kennedy; Kennedy press secretary Pierre Salinger; Gen.
But the authors suggested that Alekseev, along with others in the Soviet diplomatic corps, were not receiving accurate information from Moscow about the missiles.
Edgar Hoover as a villain but not mentioning Nikita Khrushchev opened in a Moscow theater Wednesday to a lukewarm reception.
The audience gave polite applause to The Burden of Decision, seemingly unsure how to respond to the characterizations of former President Kennedy and other figures.
There were no curtain calls and only one bouquet of flowers was given to the actor playing Robert Kennedy, described by author Fyodor Burlatsky as the hero of the play.
The play was scheduled for only two performances at the Satirical theater.
The work opens with White House press secretary Pierre Salinger talking with Soviet envoy Alexander Fokin on a revolving stage.
A clock ticks slowly in the background as Salinger complains that the crisis, which occurred in October 1962, is shrouded in secrecy.
He tells her he has monitored 70 calls from the President to a night club singer with connections to the Mafia and hints at blackmail.
He also warns that Kennedy's life could be in danger if he does not take a tough line on Cuba.
The scene ends with the entrance of a character identified as Frank Sinatra and a woman described as Kennedy's lover, Judith Campbell Exner, a buxom blonde in a scanty black lace dress.
In another scene Kennedy seeks advice on the likelihood of war over the Cuban missiles.
Horrified by the possiblity of millions of deaths, he secretly dispatches his brother Robert to negotiate a missile withdrawal in return for a pledge of non-intervention in Cuban affairs.
Drama is created by the clock ticking louder and faster in the background.
The play ends after the crisis has been resolved and Kennedy walks off stage saying, ""I'm off to the theater, like Lincoln.
The curtain goes down on Kennedy standing at the back of the dark stage.
A young Soviet said the play brought home for the first time events he had heard little about when they occurred during his childhood.
The play presents Kennedy as a religious man haunted by the burden of office, plagued by a debilitating back injury and with a weakness for beautiful women.
It left the distinct impression that Hoover and administration rightwingers engineered Kennedy's assassination because of his handling of the crisis.
The Soviet envoy, portrayed as a reasonable and human character, is the sole representative of the Soviet side.
Burlatsky's suggestion that Kennedy's handling of the missile crisis led to his assassination is the official Soviet view.
He said ""technical difficulties"" prevented introducing Khrushchev, the Soviet Union's premier at the time, into the drama.
President Kennedy describes the capabilities of the Soviet nuclear missiles stationed in Cuba in a televised speech.
United States naval ships form a blockade to go into effect on Wednesday, Oct. at 10m.
Military forces go to DEFCON 2 for the first time in United States history when the Soviet tanker Bucharest continues toward the quarantine line.
The aircraft carrier USS Essex and the destroyer USS Gearing hail the Soviet tanker Bucharest and then allow it to continue on to Cuba.
Khrushchev offers to remove Soviet missiles in Cuba if the United States would remove Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
On Oct., 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to have Soviet missiles removed from Cuba.
This aerial photo taken on Nov., 1962, shows a Soviet ship traveling away from Cuba, carrying missiles and transporters.
At the meeting, a retired Soviet general said short-range atomic weapons were in place in Cuba.
Anatoly Gribkov, later chief of staff of Warsaw Pact forces, said that nine shortrange rockets with nuclear warheads had been placed in Cuba.
Gribkov told those at the Havana meeting that he had visited the island before the crisis with orders that, in case of a United States invasion of Cuba, the senior Soviet commander was authorized to use the short-range nuclear weapons without further approval from Moscow.
In contrast, the intermediate-range Soviet weapons that were the focus of the missile crisis and that could have wreaked devastation on much of the United States mainland, could have been fired only with the authorization of Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, Gribkov said.
McNamara and United States experts on the crisis said they had not known of the short-range weapons until the recent Soviet statement, although at the time there had been intelligence reports about them.
The short-range rockets did not have sufficient range to reach Florida, 90 miles away, but they could have been used against invading United States forces.
Cit at ion Washington Post, 'CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS WAS EVEN SCARIER A RETIRED SOVIET GENERAL SAYS SHORT-RANGE NUCLEAR WEAPONS WERE READY FOR FIRING IN 1962.
The book recounts several previously undisclosed instances in which key military sensors transmitted false signals or military officers took imprudent actions that could have caused United States or Soviet officials to conclude that a nuclear attack was under way.
In ""The Limits of Safety,"" Sagan wrote that his survey uncovered ""numerous instances of safety violations, unanticipated operational problems, bizarre and dangerous interactions, and unordered risktaking"" in the handling of United States nuclear weapons, not only during the Cuban missile crisis -provoked by the Soviet Union's plans to put nuclear warheads in Cuba -but also during the late 1960s and 1970s.
Although none of the incidents brought the country to the brink of a nuclear disaster, Sagan wrote, there ""were more close calls"" than previously known to the public or even to some senior military officers.
In an interview, Sagan said the record of unanticipated problems with United States nuclear operations bodes poorly for countries that only recently have acquired nuclear arms or that possess such a small nuclear arsenal that they lack the sophisticated understanding of nuclear risks the United States acquired through decades of experience.
Among the problems disclosed by Sagan were efforts during the crisis by some Minuteman missile engineers to hot-wire some of the missiles, bypassing safety controls and certain command links to ensure they could be launched.
Air defense fighters were dispersed with nuclear warhead-equipped, air-to-air missiles that lacked safety controls, and some United States nuclear forces in Europe were ordered to a higher state of readiness for war without approval from the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
At Incirlik Air Base in Turkey, pilots of nuclear weapons-equipped F-100 fighters sat for hours in their cockpits and slept under the planes at night during the crisis.
During the crisis, top civilian and military officials, including President John F Kennedy, ordered that no actions be taken to needlessly provoke Moscow into believing that a United States nuclear attack was imminent.
Yet on Oct., Air Force officers followed a long-standing schedule and test-fired an intercontinental ballistic missile from California into the Pacific Ocean.
Other missiles at the Vandenburg missile test site were then loaded with nuclear warheads.
Later that day, another United States intercontinental ballistic missile was test-fired from Florida over Cuba toward the South Atlantic, nearly causing panic at the Omaha headquarters of the Strategic Air Command, which had not been warned of the test in advance.
Soon Pyongyang will have a missile that can reach the United States, and when it does a second Cold War will begin.
The failed launch buys the United States some much needed time to revise its strategy for coping with a new set of nuclear-armed enemies.
The world survived the first Cold War in large measure because the United States faced rational opponents who did not think like terrorists.
But in the second Cold War, the United States will face incomprehensible foes that cannot be counted on to respond as traditional Cold War models would predict.
The danger is that heads of state who think like terrorists will not be deterred by the prospect of U.S. nuclear retaliation.
They may be suicidal and willing to make ""martyrs"" not only of themselves but of their countrymen.
They may refuse to believe the United States would kill millions in retaliation.
Or they may just behave in ways that are radically at odds with their nation's self-interest.
In the face of this threat, the United States will have to find new strategies to replace its current deterrence doctrine, a legacy of the first Cold War -that is, to prevent attack by threatening overwhelming retaliation.
North Korea's failed launch does not mean the need for this re-thinking is any less urgent.
It won't be long before will Pyongyang will have a rocket capable of boosting a satellite into orbit.
A successful 2007 launch would have particular historical resonance, coming 50 years after the Soviet Union sent up the world's first artificial satellite in 1957.
Once North Korea gets its rocket science down, it will replace the old Soviet Union as the communist nation with the capability to destroy United States cities with a strike from the blue.
A two-stage version of a North Korean missile could reach parts of the United States; a three-stage variant could reach all of North America.
Meanwhile, Iran is ready to stand in for our other Cold War communist adversary, China, which exploded its first A-bomb seven years after the first Soviet missile launch.
That is about how long Iran will need to build a nuclear weapon, if it continues with its development.
With the help of North Korea's rocketry experience, Iran too would be able to destroy American cities at the push of a button.
These two nations present an asymmetrical nuclear threat that the United States, with its traditional Cold War theories of deterrence, is no more prepared to deal with than it has been with non-nuclear terrorism.
Deterrence worked in the first Cold War because the men who led the Soviet Union and China, however rash they may have seemed at times, made the same types of rational calculations about national selfinterest as their United States counterparts.
This gave Pentagon planners the tools to think about nuclear war in the same ways economists calculate, and predict, the behavior of consumers.
Whether the North Korean leader, Kim Jong Il, accused by South Korea in the 1980s of ordering the bombing of two airliners and otherwise known for his bizarre behavior, will conform to these models is open to doubt.
The danger is that Kim may think less like the leader of a nation of 23 million and more like a terrorist.
And then there's Iran, where newspaper advertisements openly solicit suicide bombers.
Deterrence was also effective in the first Cold War because the overwhelming United States nuclear arsenal contained an implicit threat of annihilation.
The traditional theory of nuclear deterrence was grounded in the World War II era, when civilian populations were bombed without mercy.
The second Cold War, however, arrives at a time when precision strikes that minimize ""collateral damage"" are considered politically necessary.
United States war planners must consider whether they can any longer plausibly threaten to kill millions, if not tens of millions, of innocent people.
The United States should consider itself lucky that North Korea's test failed but should use the time that has been gained to prepare for Pyongyang's inevitable success.
PETERSBURG Joining the son of downed U-2 pilot Francis Gary Powers will be Sergei Khrushchev, son of the late Soviet dictator Nikita Khrushchev.
As the American spy and his parachute floated down, he watched as parts of his doomed Utility-2 surveillance aircraft fell onto the Russian countryside.
The date was May 1, 1960, when Powers, attempting the first U-2 flight over the entire width of Russia, was shot down by Russian missiles.
Now his son is collaborating with Russians and Americans to create the Cold War Museum in Virginia.
Tickets, $35, are available until noon today by calling Dianne Caton of the St.
N., where the latter will sign copies of his book, ""Nikita Khrushchev and the Creation of a Superpower,"" from 2 to 4 p.m.
The pilot's son, who heads the chamber of commerce in Vienna, Va., spoke Saturday at the Polk County Historical Museum in Bartow, where he called for donations of memorabilia to the Cold War Museum on the Net at coldwar.org He is concerned that many young people do not realize the existence of this uneasy period in history that began at the end of World War II and ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union.
His new museum will preserve memories of U-2 flights, fallout shelters, the Bay of Pigs, civil defense drills, spy trials and the Berlin Wall.
From Polk County the museum has received containers of water canned by Chalet Suzanne in Lake Wales for nuclear war survival kits.
Powers said that his father was flying at 70,000 feet when his plane was shot down and that the pilot never revealed this figure to his captors or to anyone else until it was declassified.
He said President Eisenhower issued a cover story when his father's plane was found to be missing.
Although some people wonder why Powers did not use the poison to commit suicide, he was not under orders to do so and kept it to use in the event of torture, his son said.
Though he was subjected to hours of interrogation, Powers was never tortured.
Convicted of espionage in Russia, he was returned to the United States in 1962 in an exchange involving Russian spy Rudolph Abel.
His son knew little about the U-2 incident until after his father's death.
Powers visited Russia, viewed the U-2 wreckage and toured the cell in which his father was imprisoned.
In the five decades since the nuclear standoff between Washington and Moscow, much of the long-held conventional wisdom about the missile crisis has been knocked down, including the common belief that Kennedy's bold brinkmanship ruled the day.
He instead engaged in intense behind-the-scenes diplomacy with the Soviets, other countries and the U.N. secretary-general.
It was ""the darkest, most dangerous day of the crisis,"" Cuba analyst Peter Kornbluh said.
That means that on Oct., when Secretary of State Rusk made his famous ""eyeball-to-eyeball"" statement reacting to supposedly up-to-the-minute intelligence, the vessels already were hundreds of miles away, steaming home.
Before the big bang Forget Dr Strangelove: the real-life records of our narrowest escape make for explosive reading.
The publication of these two detailed and authoritative books one based on hitherto-unseen Soviet documents, the other on secretly recorded tapes of White House meetings blows all such questions out of the water.
Fursenko and Naftali start at the beginning, just prior to Castro's victorious entry to Havana on New Year's Day, 1959.
They examine closely the revolutionary government's gradual alignment towards Moscow, a far from preordained outcome.
One of their strengths is that it treats the Cubans as more than simply a chip in the global game of superpower poker.
The book shows how extraordinarily dangerous a game that was, and how high the stakes.
From this distance the major players, Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro, look as though they are recklessly spoiling for a scrap.
The book argues convincingly that the Soviet commander in Cuba came within an ace of being authorised by Moscow to use tactical nuclear weapons in the event of a United States invasion.
Yet the locker-room machismo that fuelled the crisis is partly offset by the disarming naivety of some of the stratagems employed, in particular on the Soviet side.
When they wanted to fool United States intelligence into thinking the Cuban nuclear shipment was actually heading for Siberia rather than the Caribbean, they loaded it up with sheepskin coats, felt boots and fur hats.
With the Kremlin desperately seeking any indication of what the White House was thinking, they relied heavily on what Johnny Prokov, the barman at the National Press Club in Washington, overheard at the bar.
This isn't the Cold War of John Le Carre and Frederick Forsyth; more like Abbott and Costello.
The Kennedy Tapes, on the other hand, is an unremitting white-knuckle ride through the 14 crucial days in which the world seemed to be hurtling towards nuclear wipeout.
Unknown to anyone except his secretary, Kennedy recorded the meetings of the Executive Committee which he assembled to debate the options open to him.
The tapes were released in full late last year; now they have been painstakingly transcribed and expertly edited.
The febrile, closeted atmosphere in the Oval Office and Cabinet Room comes through strongly, as the Ex Comm debates lurch between ""eliminating the Cuban problem by actually eliminating the island"", as Secretary of State Dean Rusk puts it on day one, to the eventual decision to blockade Cuba and hope for the best.
The book is long but grips the reader with all the macabre compulsiveness of a Stephen King thriller.
The frequent elisions, where poor tape quality has defeated the editors' attempts at decipherment, only serve to crank up the tension.
This is a chilling drama, all the more so for the apparent sangfroid with which the most horrendous consequences are anatomised.
The Kennedy Tapes gives an extraordinary insight into high-level decisionmaking at a time of unprecedented crisis.
Taken together, these two books form the nearest thing to a definitive account of the period one could hope for.
An Apple Valley resident and native of Racine, Wisconsin, Gregor died last month after his 96th birthday.
He was remembered with military honors on Sept. at Riverside National Cemetery.
A 'good old boy' In a previous interview with the Daily Press, Gregor said he was among the first Americans to register for the draft after the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor in 1941.
He graduated from Colton Union High School in 1942 and was drafted the next year.
Gregor earned that ""good old boy"" moniker after he was baptized in a sea of bloodied and broken bodies as an Army medic during the June 1944 allied invasion of Normandy.
Little, who lives in Oak Hills with her husband, Russ, said Gregor was impressed by the strength and integrity of many of the wounded soldiers he treated on the battlefield in France, especially that of one young man who lost his arm.
He pulled off his blanket and I saw that his right arm had been blown clean off.
A secret kept for decades Little said Gregor revealed a secret several years ago, one that he kept for decades, when she and her husband helped him move out of his mobile home.
A home life Kamal Ebadpour, owner of Crystal Garden Assisted Living, told those gathered at the service that Gregor was a joy to everyone at the senior care center in Apple Valley.
The shock of what happened or the ache for what never will be,"" Ebadpour said.
Some members of Ebadpour's staff attended Gregor's memorial in Riverside.
He said they loved Gregor for his humility, humor, ability to belt out a song and stand from his wheelchair with assistance to perform a few dance moves.
Gregor was legally blind, but the Littles and Ebadpour often escorted him to Los Angeles or Anaheim when the Yankees played the Dodgers or Angels.
Little said Gregor spoke often of his love for the people at Crystal Garden, as well as the food and his favorite weekly indulgence — pizza and champagne on Friday nights.
Little said Gregor lavished his caregiver with gifts nearly every week and on birthdays.
A military man When the European conflict ended, Gregor departed for Boston and stayed in the United States Army Camp Myles Standish.
Later, he boarded a Los Angeles-bound train, spending Christmas Eve in St.
Gregor and his wife, Joan, married in 1952 after meeting in San Francisco.
Ten years later, he was sent to Vietnam, where he served as a military advisor for four years.
He later moved to the High Desert, where he managed the Hesperia Maple Motel and the Mojave Mobile Home Park in Victorville.
The unpublicized incident allegedly occurred Oct., 1962, at one of the tensest moments of the 13-day crisis, which had begun nine days earlier when a U-2 spy plane photographed Soviet nuclear missiles being installed in Cuba.
The Air Force denies having any evidence of the errant flights, but former pilots remember in varying degrees of detail a top-secret mission that was aborted at the last minute.
James Reynolds and Frank M Eichler lifted off from Florida's Homestead Air Force Base in two F-100s, their mission was so secret that even now, 30 years later, it remains a mystery not only to friends and relatives of the fliers but to many former Air Force officers who had stood long hours of nerve-racking alert in 1962.
It was unclear whether one or both F-100s were armed with nuclear weapons.
Two of Reynolds' relatives say he confirmed the nuclear incident to them years after the event.
While unaware of the specifics of the alleged launch of a nuclear armed fighter, Garthoff a senior aide to Secretary of State Dean Rusk in 1962 confirmed that the Air Force had placed a number of fighters with nuclear weapons on alert in Florida during the crisis.
Nine tactical nuclear artillery rockets had been secretly deployed on the island undetected by U.S. intelligence agencies.
That, in turn, could have impelled the Kennedy administration to launch an invasion of Cuba.
The flight itself was totally out of character for the F-100 units that scrambled to bases in Florida and other Gulf Coast states in anticipation of a war over the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The pilots were ordered to take off at 4m., well before sunrise, even though the F-100 had practically no night-fighting ability.
The fliers did not know the full aspects of their operation, a number of pilots and relatives said.
Charles B Hoskins, a squadron mate of the two fliers, said neither man was told specifically what the objectives were.
Foster, a veteran of tactical nuclear alert operations, said he is baffled by the allegations of nuclear weapons involvement.
To launch with nuclear weapons at that time, ``a whole echelon of people would have had to be involved,'' he said.
But the former Air Force pilot said it would not have taken long to load a tactical nuclear gravity bomb onto the F-100.
Despite the proximity of Homestead to Cuban airspace and the high level of tensions at the time, the mission was supposed to be flown in strict radio silence, several sources said.
A senior commander at Homestead during the crisis said he never knew the mission had been ordered and carried out.
He said he was the only officer at Homestead with the authority to launch aircraft but that he was never told about the mission or the incident.
In any event, Reynolds and Eichler allegedly were intercepted by two United States Air Force air defense fighters from another base in Florida just seconds before they would have penetrated Cuban airspace.
Woodfin Sullivan, a friend of Reynolds' and commander of the 307th Fighter Squadron at Homestead during the crisis, said in 1987.
Graham, the Air Force general at Homestead, said he was unable to resolve the mystery.
The official, asking not to be identified, said the Kennedy letters may contain some clarifications of the agreements Moscow and Washington reached in late October 1962 when the crisis was resolved.
According to Brenner, five Kennedy letters sent to Khrushchev before the crisis have been released, along with an equal number of messages from Khrushchev during the same period.
He said five Kennedy letters written after the crisis remain classified.
A United States official said at least one of letters has not been released because no copies were placed in State Department correspondence files.
We're not talking about a dispute on level of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis.
Instead, the standoff in Taylorsville is over a replica Sergeant missile and whether it can stand curbside along Redwood Road.
For many, the missile had become a landmark, a point of reference in front of John Mannos' General Army Navy Outdoor store.
Purchased from a private collector, it stood in front of the store for nearly seven years -Taylorsville became a city six years ago.
Mannos moved the missile when he decided to remodel and add a strip mall on his property last year.
He tried to move it back earlier this year, but the city demoted the missile's storefront status to the back door.
Even Mannos' beautification award for his new store and development couldn't get the city to budge.
The missile violates a strict sign ordinance by drawing attention to the store.
Mannos went before the City Council in defense of showcasing his missile.
The council decided it needed a city ordinance that would allow it to declare Mannos' faux ordnance a landmark.
On Wednesday, the council enacted a law that allows it to designate community landmarks on a caseby-case basis.
But when it came time to declare Mannos' missile as a landmark at the same meeting, the council stepped back and said it needed a site plan to determine whether the missile is a hazard before it could act.
The Sergeant missile was first deployed in 1962 as a short-range, surface-to-surface missile.
It's been cleaned up and painted, weighing in at over 1,000 pounds -certainly no Scud missile.
And the site plan, he said, could be as simple as Mannos preparing a crude drawing of where the missile would be placed on his property.
Councilman and mayoral candidate Keith Sorensen expects Taylorsville will have its first community landmark under the new ordinance by Thursday.
Mannos remains positive as well, buoyed by council members who, however reluctantly, support his plight.
The previously unknown incident which might have pushed the two superpowers closer to nuclear war is disclosed in a book just released.
The book, written by Russian journalist Alexander Mozgovoi, tells the story of four Soviet submarines engaged in a cat-and-mouse game with the United States Navy off Cuba at the height of the Cuban missile crisis.
The four diesel submarines, which were armed with both conventional and nuclear-tipped torpedoes, sailed from the Arctic Kola Peninsula.
They managed to pass unnoticed through United States and NATO cordons in the northern Atlantic, but were spotted by the Navy as they approached Cuba.
The submarines needed to come to the surface often to charge their batteries, and that made them easy marks for the United States anti-submarine cordons around the communist island.
Valentin Savitsky s B-59 submarine was spotted quickly by Navy patrol aircraft when it appeared on the surface.
American destroyers rushed to block the submarine and began dropping stun grenades to force it to resurface, said Vadim Orlov, who was in charge of the submarine s radio intelligence at the time.
The Americans encircled us and began dropping grenades that were exploding right next to us, Orlov was quoted as saying in the book.
It felt like sitting in a metal barrel with someone hitting it with a sledgehammer.
After an especially strong explosion shook the submarine, Savitsky got furious and ordered an officer in charge of a nuclear-tipped torpedo to arm the weapon, Orlov said.
The submarines commanders could use conventional torpedoes only on order from the navy chief, and the use of nuclear torpedoes could be authorized only by direct order from the Soviet defense minister, the book said.
However, the close surveillance by the United States Navy made it hard for submarines to resurface for scheduled communications sessions.
Under control Savitsky eventually controlled his anger and ordered the submarine to the surface.
It was dark but the area was brightly lit by searchlights from United States ships and a United States helicopter buzzing overhead.
A spokesman for the Russian Defense Ministry on Friday refused to comment on the incident described in the book.
However, Mozgovoi is deputy editor of Russia s military trade magazine, Military Parade, the mouthpiece of the military-industrial complex and his book is considered quite credible.
Mozgovoi said that according to his conversations with submariners, Savitsky was the only one of four submarine commanders to consider unauthorized use of a weapon, but added that it was hard to blame him.
Savitsky s crew was under terrible pressure at the moment, both psychologically and physically, Mozgovoi said by telephone.
Savitsky himself is not quoted in the book; he had died by the time Mozgovoi began work on it.
The Cuban missile crisis was triggered by the United States discovery in the fall of 1962 that Moscow had sent nuclear missiles to Cuba.
The crisis ended with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev s agreement to withdraw the missiles in exchange for President Kennedy s no-invasion pledge.
By Barton Bernstein, Los Angeles Times Section: INSIGHT 1091 Words Page: G6 OpenURL Link Twenty-three years after the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962, many citizens, including the loyal memoirists of Camelot, still claim it was John F Kennedy's ''finest hour'' -a judicious use of threat and restraint to force the Soviets to back down and remove their missiles from Cuba.
To an increasing number of analysts, however, it was an unnecessary confrontation, one that brought the two great powers near the brink because of JFK's pride and honor, his fear of seeming weak at home and abroad and possibly his concern about the voters in the forthcoming November congressional elections.
Some newly declassified evidence, the minutes for a White House meeting of Oct., 1962, while not directly addressing some of these larger issues, sheds useful light on the administration's decisionmaking in moving into that fateful crisis.
The next day Kennedy publicly announced the presence of Soviet ''offensive'' missiles in Cuba and his imposition of a naval quarantine around the island.
Those dramatic decisions, after secret administration deliberations, opened the week of crisis.
That Sunday meeting with the president was attended by only five advisers -McNamara; Gen.
Until the meeting, after five days of deliberations since learning of the Soviet missiles, the president had tentatively decided on a quarantine as his initial response.
But he was not fully committed to that strategy, and was still mulling over more bellicose strategies -most notably, bombing the Soviet missiles in Cuba and then launching an invasion of the island.
These acts of war had been repeatedly endorsed by most of the Joint Chiefs as well as by Dean Acheson, secretary of state under President Harry Truman.
The group realized that since each launcher could fire two rounds -one missile each time -there ''would normally be'' 80 missiles on the island.
So far, only about 30 missiles had been located, but the Soviet ship believed to be the chief carrier of these weapons had made enough trips in recent months that the CIA thought there were about 48 missiles.
The group knew that the addition of 48 or even 80 Soviet missiles in Cuba did not tip the strategic balance against the United States.
The CIA estimated that the Soviets had between 60 and 75 ICBMs in their country.
Even if the Soviets added 80 shorter-range missiles in Cuba, the United States still had a slight advantage -between 14 and 37 missiles.
And if there were only 48 missiles in Cuba, the American advantage was even greater -between 46 and 69.
And they knew that the United States was roughly doubling the size of its ICBM arsenal in the next nine months.
Because missiles were then not very accurate and often had mechanical flaws, the group knew that either side needed at least a 2-to-1 superiority, and probably a 3-to-1 or 4-to-1 superiority, before the other side should reasonably fear a first-strike attack -unless the attacker intended to commit national suicide.
Moreover, as the group understood, the Soviet MRBMs in Cuba had a range of only about 1,100 miles, and thus could not even reach America's ICBMs.
Because all 30 missiles spotted in Cuba were MRBMs, the Soviets were even further short of having a first-strike capacity.
Nevertheless, there was support among the military chiefs for a so-called ''surgical'' air strike against the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
No one had to tell the group what even a few Soviet MRBMs not destroyed by a ''surgical'' bombing attack could do to United States cities within their range.
Undoubtedly, there was a measure of greatness in JFK's decision not to side with most of his military chiefs and Acheson.
As the president once told his brother, if he took the military's advice and launched an attack, there would be nobody around to tell the chiefs they had been wrong.
What the president did not seem to realize, despite the April 1961 debacle at the Bay of Pigs, was how easily even seemingly carefully managed events might hurtle out of control, escalate the crisis and lead to war.
In dealing with the Soviet missiles, Kennedy should have first sought private negotiations, as his ambassador to the Soviet Union, Charles Bohlen, had urged.
But too often American presidents, along with many American citizens, have preferred confrontations.
In 1962 Kennedy acted in accord with his own inclinations and popular desires.
To have acted otherwise would have cost him political support at home and, he thought, even have risked impeachment.
