Charity Matters Autumn 2017 Welcome Welcome to our Autumn 2017 issue of election, and even more surprising result, Charity Matters. led to the Conservatives suffering a shock loss of majority.
In Europe, although A lot has happened since our last Angela Merkel won the German election, newsletter, and I am thrilled to announce this was marred by the right-wing AfD we have recently been joined by managing to secure 13% of the vote, Mike Marsham as Head of our Charities suggesting that the populist sentiment business.
Mike was with BlackRock for palpable across Europe earlier in the year 13 years and had most recently been is yet to dissipate. responsible for their charities business.
In keeping with politics, in our first article, I remain Head of Investec Wealth & David J Richardson looks at the Cuban Investment for London and will Missile Crisis and draws similarities with Louise Hall keep my role as an Investment Manager this and the current tensions between Head of London UK on the Charities Team, looking after United States president Donald Trump and North Investment Management clients as before.
Subsequently, Investec Wealth & Investment tremendous stability evidenced by the John Wyn-Evans, our Head of Investment louise.hall@investecwin.co.uk longevity of our Investment Managers Strategy, explores the recent proliferation who, on average, have been with the firm of Bitcoin and whether it can be viewed for over 16 years and this, combined with as a viable alternative to fiat money.
Mike’s arrival, gives me great confidence in the offering we have for UK charity Elsewhere, Bola Okunade interviews clients.
Jamie Thomson, our Head of Operational Risk and Data, about the risks that The two most prominent themes driving charities face, such as cyber breaches. markets this year are arguably economics Then, Andrew Mackie, a Senior Associate and politics.
On the other hand, aforementioned articles and, as always, the geo-political landscape has proven if there are any issues you would like to to be a source of trepidation for financial be covered in subsequent publications, markets.
Whilst concerns should not in any way be understated it is instructive once again to look at history to see if it offers any precedent to help investors gauge likely outcomes and timeframes.
This may predate the majority of our readers but was a real fear at the time.
The coup and countercoup that was the story of post-war Cuba was finally ended by Fidel Castro’s 1958 revolution and in the aftermath the country became very closely tied politically and economically to the Soviet Union.
The US, led by the World War Two commander, President Dwight Eisenhower, became concerned at this and covertly arranged a CIA organised invasion of Cuba, comprising anti-Castro Cuban exiles, to overthrow Castro and reinstate a pro‑US government.
All was prepared, but the 1960 United States presidential election saw the up and coming Massachusetts Senator John F Kennedy win a surprise victory against Richard Nixon.
Nevertheless the new president, strongly supported by his military advisors, decided to go ahead in April 1961.
It was a disaster and was easily repulsed by Castro’s forces, cementing their leader’s reputation and position.
In response to the failed invasion, and the US stationing missiles in Italy and Turkey, Such historical introspection may be interesting, even nostalgic for some, “Indeed the danger the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to Castro’s request to station but is only instructive if it can be related to current events.
A key difference for many may be nuclear missiles in Cuba, ostensibly to repel a repeat of the Bay of Pigs invasion. with the North Korea crisis is that the Cold War is long ended.
Whilst China that rhetoric or After a period of two weeks, in October and the United States may have different objectives in the Pacific region, China is unlikely miscalculations by 1962, the world held its breath as bluster and bombast were traded back and to be regarded as an enemy and would be reluctant to have a nuclear war on the commanders in forth between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
A further difference is that whilst senior military figures were said to chief could lead to common ground with intercessions by many world leaders, including the Pope, be urging Kennedy on, one is left with the impression that the military advisors an outcome that and the inarguable consequences for humanity of failure to reach agreement. are holding Trump back on jingoism.
Indeed, the danger for many may be neither leader nor Eventually the Soviets agreed to remove that rhetoric or miscalculations by the commanders in chief could lead to an their military wants.” their missiles from Cuba in return for an outcome that neither leader nor their undertaking by the United States that they would military wants. not organise another invasion and the little matter of the removal of United States ballistic In terms of stock markets, always a good missiles from Italy and Turkey.
North Korean crisis has caused markets to fall a couple of percent and they In the end Castro comfortably outlived have since recovered their losses either both Kennedy, who was assassinated reflecting a sangfroid amongst investors in 1963, and Khrushchev, who died of not apparent in the 1960s or more likely natural causes in 1971.
If all the The big buyers in 2015 and 2016 were cryptocurrencies in existence with an the Chinese, as money flooded out of issued value of more than $1bn were the country when the currency was aggregated into a single company, devaluing.
As the government tried to John Wyn-Evans, Head of they would be the fourth largest in the close the official floodgates, the easiest Investment Strategy at IW&I, FTSE100 Index.
The dollar value of Bitcoin I can see why people might want to buy All the ingredients for life on earth were and its imitators has been volatile to say some as an option against the tail-risk of available in the primordial soup, but it the least, and thus difficult to describe as cryptocurrencies becoming the norm – took some unknown catalyst to create a store of value.
However, it still seems to be round of money-printing by central banks. required for Satoshi Nakamoto, whoever a relatively difficult currency to spend, But, it is certainly not an asset class in its he might be, to launch Bitcoin in early although there are notable exceptions. own right as some of its proponents claim, 2009.
Like all good manias (and I believe The Boston staff restaurant of Fidelity, and as such, we have no current intention we are witnessing a mania of sorts), the the fund manager, accepts Bitcoin, of adding it to client portfolios. enthusiasm for Bitcoin has credible roots. for example.
But, it might take an Amazon to start accepting it for the Perhaps some degree of regret is felt by Bitcoin was born out of the chaos of the concept to become more mainstream. the gentleman who paid 10,000 Bitcoin for financial crisis.
Furthermore, a currency early days, mining could be undertaken which is equivalent to $28. million per which had a limited issuance could by an individual with a laptop and a bit of pizza.
It is inevitable that we will hear more be viewed as a counterweight to fiat nous, but the process has now become stories about people who have made or lost currencies which could be created by industrial as the value of cryptocurrencies a fortune, just as one hears of people who central banks.
Crucially, it was a currency has risen, with huge computing power bought Apple or Amazon for peanuts. that could live in its own closed system, and supplies of electricity required. free from government interference, as it All prices and valuations are correct at used the blockchain distributed ledger Bitcoins can also be purchased through the time of writing on 26 October 2017.
Head of Operational Risk In May 2018, the new General Data Protection Regulation ¹, and Data a European wide directive, will replace Data protection and cybersecurity are the existing Data Protection Act. garnering more attention than ever This will introduce stricter rules on how in the headlines.
Successful cyberdata is processed and will place greater attacks have become more prevalent onus on organisations to safeguard and cybercriminals are growing more personal data.
Attacks can have detrimental Trainee Investment Manager many organisations including charities. effects such as a significant disruption to Charities Team Whilst this enables them to operate more the provision of services, economic loss Investec Wealth & Investment efficiently, it also presents an opportunity (through financial penalties or remediation for adversaries to steal personal data and costs), reputational damage and perhaps, carry out cyber-attacks. most importantly, a breach of trust.
This can This can include conventional methods include details on communication such as up to date firewalls and antivirus We are aware of various with relevant authorities, donors and programmes, which act as a line of defence should a hacker attempt to instances of invoice fraud beneficiaries, and the media.
Under the GDPR, organisations will be required compromise a charity’s IT system. in recent times.
As phishing scams become This is why, for example, we always increasingly widespread, individuals telephone our clients when we receive should refrain from opening unexpected email requests for money. links and attachments, even if the sender appears familiar.
As the title of the report suggests, the proposals are largely technical in nature but, if implemented, they should lead to some genuinely practical benefits.
As things to ratify the appointment of trustees for charities to amend their governing stand, where too little has been raised where there is some doubt over the documents, and to ensure that a in an appeal, trustees must attempt validity of their appointment; and more standardised procedure applies to contact the donors to offer them across the range of charity structures. a refund, which can be disproportionately ·· a power for the Charity Commission The most fundamental amendments costly.
The report also recommends that that trustees be given power to apply and it is not yet known when the charities established by Royal Charter appeal funds of up to £1,000 for new draft Charities Bill will be put forward or Act of Parliament are given statutory purposes without having to seek Charity for review.
However, as it is unlikely to power to amend their constitutions, Commission consent. be deemed controversial it may well be which is likely to be welcomed. fast-tracked, using a procedure that was In addition, it recommends an alignment The report recommends a number approved in 2010 to improve the rate of the procedures that are applied to of changes designed to facilitate of implementation of Law Commission corporate and unincorporated charities charity mergers and incorporations reports.
In particular, it recommends that the ·· more flexibility for charities to use range of professionals that charities permanent endowment (assets that can approach for advice is broadened, must be retained as capital, rather and that the list of matters to be included than being spent as income), including in advisers’ reports is simplified and a power to borrow against the fund, rationalised.
The Law Commission provided that it is recouped over time; estimates that these changes alone could save the sector almost £3 million ·· new rules on the power to make ex every year. gratia payments, with a sliding scale of permitted amounts depending on the charity’s size; Autumn 2017 | Charity Matters | 11 Newsbites Ethical screening IW&I’s Approximately a third of our charity portfolios.
We employ the services of new Online and not-for-profit clients, by number, have ethical, social and governance considerations.
Our investment process an independent company called Ethical Screening to ensure that we are kept abreast of the pertinent issues with Portfolio naturally avoids investments which we deem to be inappropriate for our charity client base, and we also work regard to ethical and socially responsible investing, which are always changing.
Valuation with our clients to ensure that their unique requirements are accommodated within their investment policy and Please do get in touch with the team if you would like further information.
Rachel is embedded in the investment process ·· One log-on page for both private of the Charities Team, while taking into and IFA users account other issues such as tax and pensions for her clients.
Like the rest of ·· Can link other Investec accounts the team, Rachel’s aim is to provide a so you can view all accounts. bespoke and personal service over the Rachel Kerr long-term for her clients, as we believe We have a dedicated team that will be Charities Team that our ability to offer portfolios based able to assist you in the migration but Investec Wealth & Investment on our clients’ requirements is a key in the first instance you should contact advantage that we offer. your IW&I Investment Manager.
Autumn 2017 | Charity Matters | 13 Charity finance options Over the last couple of years we have , a charity well known for its become aware of an increasing number services and support for the charitable of charities willing to borrow money sector.
CAF Bank provides flexible in order to meet their objectives more secured loans from £50,000 to £5 million effectively.
Their reasons for doing this for UK charitable organisations, repayable can range from wishing to kick start an over 2-25 years.
CAF offers a free guide income generating project, to building explaining the potential benefits and or refurbishing properties.
Some have risks of repayable finance which you can found it a way to meet the rising need download at www.cafonline.org/finance. for support from their beneficiaries.
Borrowing will not be suitable for many Whilst we cannot comment on the merits charities and it is crucial that they prepare of different forms of finance, we thought thoroughly before taking on loan finance. it might be useful for some charities to know of finance options that may be A growing loan finance provider is CAF available to them.
Bank, owned by Charities Aid Foundation MiFID II – update on Legal Entity Identifier – the clock is ticking… Since our last report in the spring edition ·· From 3 January 2018, without a valid we have had a great response from our LEI, financial institutions will no longer Charities Team clients receiving over 90% be able to transact in exchange traded of the authority forms back.
Investors should remember that the value of investments, and the income from them, can go down as well as up and that past performance is not a guarantee of future performance.
