E Thomas Coleman Elton Gallegly Henry J Hyde Andy Ireland Jan Meyers John Edward Porter Carl D Purseil John J Rhodes.
Ill f AZ) Harold Rogers Lamar Smith Robert C Smith Olympia J Snowe Bob Stump William M Thomas Barbara F Vucanovich Vln Weber Frank R Wolf C.W Bill Young Ex Officio Willis D Gradison.
As we consider what constitutes stable reductions, it's worth studying the role we expect nuclear missiles to play in our strategic relationship with the Soviet Union.
One of the most important lessons learned then and still relevant today is what President Kennedy called ""the first direct test"" between the Soviet Union and the United States involving the political utility of nuclear weapons.
What makes this issue interesting today is that many of the leading participants on the American side have, since those weeks in October 1962, switched their views on the nuclear question.
WHAT WAS THOUGHT DURING THE CPISIS One or"" the most accepted points among President Kennedy's aides during the crisis was that America's nu ""ear superiority gave the United States political and military leverage over the Soviets.
This position was put forth in three ways, each showing that key officials acknowledged this role for nuclear weapons.
In other words, both advisers appeared to argue that the U.S., in order to protect its supreme national interests, would have to assume the greatest of risks, including the chance of a nuclear exchange.
All these moves were signals the Soviets could see and we knew they could see them.
No one would deny that America's overwhelming conventional superiority in the region contributed to the outcome of the crisis.
But neither should anyone deny that, as these participants made clear at the time, nuclear forces were also effective instruments for dealing with the Soviets.
The best that can be said about these recantations years after the fact is that, as Betts writes, "" United States leaders may not have recognized, agreed about, or relied consciously on an advantage inherent in numerical superiority.
According to many defense strategists, at issue is an ongoing debate over the role of nuclear weapons versus conventional weapons in military confrontations.
In their retrospective writings, most of these players are arguing the case that we cannot and should not rely on nuclear coercion to effect desired results.
Instead, so the argument goes, conventional capabilities are the only instrument available to military planners.
The best way to judge the validity of this claim is to examine just what influenced the Soviets at the time.
There is, of course, no way to get inside the Kremlin's document room to see what their participants thought and said during the crisis.
What we can do is look at the decisions taken in Moscow and how they were affected by what the United States did at the time.
Most importantly, on October 24 the Strategic Air Command moved up to DEFCON 2 — which meant the level just below deployment for combat.
During the crisis, the CIA prepared a daily memorandum on the responses that Russia made to every United States move.
The conclusion that many have drawn is that their strategic inferiority had a powerful effect on them, sufficient to deter them from taking a single move that might provoke the United States General Burchinal has aptly summed the effective coercion of America's nuclear forces by saying that Khrushchev ""never alerted a bomber or changed his own military posture one bit.
In this light, the infamous remark of Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznestov to John McCloy shortly after the crisis — ""You Americans will never be able to do this to us again"" — makes perfect sense.
A Critical Portrait by Tad Szulc) , which includes an interview describing how the Soviets told Castro that United States nuclear superiority was the reason they withdrew the missiles.
LESSONS FOR TODAY A reasonable conclusion from the above evidence is that America's nuclear superiority at the tiro was a significant factor during the crisis.
So although the United States apparently lacks both the capability and intention of again taking advantage of its nuclear weapons in the same way, it should be wary of letting the reverse happen.
That is, there is no reason why the United States one day could not find itself backed into a corner by Soviet nuclear intimidation.
The missile crisis teaches us that nuclear weapons do have this capability.
The SS-18 was designed to attack and destroy ICBMs and other hardened targets in the U.S., and, according to Defense estimates, could take out 65 to 80 percent of United States ICBM silos using two nuclear warheads against each.
In addition, the Soviets maintain the world's largest ballistic missile submarine force.
