Tanya Harmer In January 1962, Latin American foreign ministers and United States Secretary of State Dean Rusk arrived at the Uruguayan beach resort of Punta del Este to debate Cuba’s position in the Western Hemisphere.
Unsurprisingly for a group of representatives from 21 different states with varying political, socio-economic, and geographic contexts, they had divergent goals.
Ultimately, delegates at Punta del Este voted by two-thirds to exclude Cuba’s revolutionary government from the Organization of American States with six nations abstaining.
The foreign ministers also agreed to an arms embargo, to suspend Cuba from the Inter-American Defense Board, to examine the possibility of further trade restrictions through the OAS Council, and to establish a Special Consultative Committee on Security.
As host of the Punta del Este meeting, Uruguayan Foreign Minister, Homero Martínez Montero, reflected that “no other event” in the twentieth century had shaken the region and disturbed the established order in the hemisphere to the same extent as the Cuban Revolution.
First, the unanimity with which delegates regarded Cuba’s position in the Western Hemisphere is striking.
We tend to think of the Cuban Revolution as polarizing opinion in Latin America and feeding into Cold War divides.
Yet, by early 1962 all regional governments subscribed to the view that Cuba’s revolutionary regime was directly at odds with inter-American system.
The question is why and what this tells us about the history of the Cold War in Latin America.
Inter-American meetings before, during, and following the Cuban missile crisis also served as forums for debates on Cuba.
Together, these diplomatic encounters offer windows through which to grapple with the evolution of the Cuban Question in the inter-American system, with the emphasis here being the contested move to exclude Cuba’s government from the OAS and then the difficult road to imposing collective sanctions against it.
Given the impact of the Cuban Revolution on Latin American governments and the inter-American system in the early 1960s, it is surprising that Cuba’s relationship with the region has received little attention from international historians.
Scholarship on Cuba’s international relations since 1959 has focused mainly on U.S. responses to the Revolution.
We also know quite a bit about Cuba’s foreign policy goals and support for revolutionary movements.
To some extent this is because diplomatic archives in the region have only recently opened.
This was certainly how United States government officials privately represented their interactions with regional counterparts.
They saw themselves teaching Latin Americans to understand Cuba’s threat, expending enormous efforts managing the “noise-level” of information on Cuba through hemispheric media outlets.
United States documents can often give the impression that the Latin Americans passively awaited instructions.
Latin America binary account of the Cuban question can also be tempting.
Regional governments did not need to be fed stories about Castro to the extent United States policymakers believed, nor did their diplomats need coaching in antiCommunism to be alarmed by the radicalization of the Cuban Revolution or its relations with the Soviet Union with alarm, although United States efforts to raise the “noise level” undoubtedly helped.
Rooted in Catholicism, the military, and elites’ fear of hierarchical power structures being uprooted anti-Communism had a long internal history in Latin America prior to the Cuban revolution.
Communist parties were banned in eight countries by 1948 and all but three of fifteen states that had established diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union before or during World War II had broken off ties by the mid-1950s.
Declassified Latin American documents show that this longer tradition of anti-Communism in turn fed into interpretations over Cuba.
Even those governments that held out on imposing sanctions, and were perceived by Washington as “soft,” moderate, or “trying to sit on the fence” when it came to the Cuban Question, privately condemned Castro’s revolutionary regime.
Leaders in the region often deferred to the United States, shared similar concerns about the Cuban Revolution with U.S officials, and were also influenced by United States actions.
But not all conversations regarding anti-Communism and Cuba were routed through Washington.
The story of the Cuban question in Latin America fits within a historiography that emphasizes the importance of decentralizing Cold War narratives and recovering Latin American agency.
As Odd Arne Westad argued in 2005, we need to pay closer attention to ideas and protagonists in Latin America, Asia and Africa to get a sense of the conflict’s global dimensions.
And, to this end, historians like Renata Keller, Robert Karl, Eric Zolov, James Hershberg, Aragorn Storm Miller, Thomas Field, and Jonathan Brown have recently begun to shed light on the way in which the Cuban revolution was construed in Latin America.
Hershberg has tracked Brazilian attitudes to Cuba and Brasilia’s mediation in U.S.-Cuban conflicts of the early 1960s.
Bolivia and the Alliance for Progress in the 6 Chilean historian, Joaquín Fermandois concretely examined Chile’s interaction with the Cuban Question drawing on the Chilean press and congressional records, and in my own work I have also examined Cuba’s influence on the left in Chile.
Despite the important literature that has already appeared, a great deal remains to be learned.
In particular, we need to know more about the influence the Cuban Revolution had on inter-American relations and institutions.
The aim of this article is not to contribute another nationallyor bilaterallyframed study of Cuba’s impact but to begin piecing together a regional picture of diplomacy surrounding the Cuba question.
The article builds on the valuable research that Fermandois, Keller, Hershberg, Karl, and Field have already undertaken on Chile, Mexico, Brazil, Colombia, and Bolivia’s relationship to Cuba respectively, adding new perspectives from my own research in Chile, Uruguay, Argentina, and Mexico in addition to declassified sources from online United States collections.
For one thing, it is impossible in one article to examine all diplomatic and state-level discussions regarding la cuestión cubana throughout the Americas over a five-year period and in my analysis here I d not pretend to provide a full picture of all Latin American governmental perspectives on the crisis.
Second, I have not had access to all the diplomatic archives in the Americas, and the coverage of those I have consulted has been problematic.
Artículos y ensayos sobre Chile (Santiago, Chile: Centro de Estudios Bicentenario, 2015); Tanya Harmer, Allende’s Chile and the Inter-American Cold War . 7 in Washington, are reportedly “missing,” and more often than not, diplomatic cables from the field are far more extensively available than records of internal governmental meetings making it hard to discern the way that diplomats’ reports were processed.
Based on what is currently available, however, this is an initial opportunity to take a broader, inter-American view of the Cuban revolution’s diplomatic impact and its significance for the inter-American system.
We can already begin discerning the main turning points, fault-lines, and frameworks used within Latin America to interpret the Cuban revolution, as well as how they helped shape, and were shaped by, the Cold War in the region.
Rather than zooming in on countries that advocated a straightforward hardline position against Cuba from 1959, such as those in Central America governed by dictatorships, this article pays particular attention to countries that were democratic in the early 1960s and that opposed a hardline stance against Cuba in inter-American forums such as Chile, Uruguay, Brazil, and Argentina, and also Mexico’s nationalist revolutionary one-party state.
Brazil and Argentina had three different governments each in the period between 1959 and 1964, with the democratically elected reformist governments of Jaino Quadros and Arturo Frondizi falling in 1961 and 1962 at least in part as a result of domestic military opposition to both leaders’ moderate position on the Cuban Question.
Collectively, these perspectives illustrate that resistance to sanctions did not imply sympathy and support for Cuba’s revolution and that even those opposing them were Cold Warriors when it came to resisting Communism in the hemisphere.
The picture that emerges is of a region’s leaders more united than divided over Cuba’s significance.
Far right dictators, conservative democrats, nationalist revolutionaries, and centrist reformers were bound together by a shared antiCommunism that put them directly at odds with Havana’s leaders.
With Cuba magnifying the Communist threat in the region, conceptualizations of the Cold War in the region also changed.
Although anti-Communism had been prominent in the region for decades, many now spoke about Cuba having brought the “iron curtain” to Latin America.
Some Latin American leaders increasingly saw themselves and the interAmerican system as a whole, as part of a global Cold War in the early 1960s directly as a result of the Cuban question.
Until now, “these calamities had not been felt” in Latin America, he added, but Cuba had changed that.
On the question of what to do about Cuba, the picture is more complicated.
First, they were constrained in acting more openly against Cuba due to domestic pressure from nongovernmental political actors who sympathized with the Cuban Revolution or actively supported it.
Second, they did not agree that the inter-American system’s post-war institutions and collective security agreements mandated punitive actions against Cuba.
The principle of non-intervention at the heart of the inter-American system, in place mainly to contain the United States, was still considered sacrosanct.
Third, they argued that sanctions would be ineffective and counterproductive.
Finally, they worried about the precedent that intervention against Cuba would set.
They were meanwhile disdainful of extreme regional anti-Communists who sought aggressive action against Cuba.
Furthermore, they often regarded their United States interlocutors as more rational hemispheric players.
On the other side of the sanctions argument, particularly in the wake of the Cuban missile crisis, extreme anti-Cuban lobbyists bemoaned what they perceived as lackluster United States action against Castro.
Latin Americans did not therefore line up neatly against or for the United States; inter-American disagreements were multisided rather than binary.
Only by paying attention to perspectives from within the region can we appreciate the complexity that United States policymakers often missed in their simplistic belief they had to instruct their regional counterparts how to think and act.
Shared Concerns 10 Before Latin America’s Foreign Ministers met at Punta del Este, diplomats throughout the region had already come to view the Cuban revolution with concern.
When Castro gained power on 1 January 1959, he was widely regarded as nationalist, anti-dictatorial, and anti-Communist.
However, opinions rapidly changed, with diplomatic observers in the Americas concluding by late 1959 or early 1960 that first impressions had been misguided.
There are several reasons for this change of heart, including the radicalization of the Revolution inside Cuba, the growing influence of Communism on the island, its alignment with the Soviet Union, and Havana’s support for revolutionary insurgencies in the region.
Although left-wing groups in Latin America celebrated these developments, elites inside and outside the government, democrats, religious groups, members of the armed forces, and business sectors were increasingly worried.
Disenchantment with Cuba was also closely related to how diplomats conceptualized Latin America, its vulnerabilities, and their own domestic political contexts.
At a meeting of OAS Foreign Ministers in Santiago in August 1959, Cuba’s new revolutionary government had committed itself to respect representative democracy and human rights but the evidence available to observers suggested otherwise.
In particular, the new Cuban government’s reluctance to hold elections and its revolutionary tribunals drew criticism from regional observers.
We tend to associate this kind of condemnation with the United States, but Latin Americans were also outspoken.
As Hershberg has found, Brazil’s ambassador in Havana, Vasco Tristão Leitão da Cunha, an early admirer of Castro, had been one of the first diplomats to try and stop summary executions days after Castro came to power.
Admittedly, the complaints against revolutionary trials could also be farcical, such as Central American and Caribbean dictators denounced Cuba for being un-democratic and violating human rights.
However, it would be a mistake to dismiss all concerns with Cuban policies as the preserve of anti-Communist dictators.
Already in April 1959, previously sympathetic Colombian journalists were warning of “The Danger of Excesses” in Cuba.
What made Cuba different in a region familiar with repressive dictatorships was the increasingly prominent role of Communists in government.
Rather than exploring the historical appeal of Communism stretching back to the 1920s and 1930s in Cuba, for example, Emilio Edwards Bello, Chile’s ambassador, belonging to one of Chile’s most influential and elitist families, ascribed its influence to the island’s late independence.
Aspectos internacionales,” 19 July 1960, in Cuba/1960/Oficios Conf. y Ord.
He warned that “Cuba is heading in the direction of Haíti,” evoking the eighteenth-century slave revolt and the fear it inspired across the Americas.
Alongside these Chilean prejudices, Latin American diplomats were increasingly concerned with Cuba’s international alignments.
With the U.S.-Cuban relationship deteriorating in 1960, Castro’s ties to the Soviet Union loomed large.
Diplomats from Brazil and Argentina henceforth engaged in mediation to improve relations between Havana and Washington, and the Mexican government also offered to facilitate dialogue.
Latin American diplomats from these countries calculated that if further conflict could be avoided, Cuba’s position in the hemisphere and its relationship with the USSR, could be managed.
At least as far as the Chilean Foreign Ministry was concerned, U.S.-Cuban hostility was helping Cuba to mobilize support and boosting antiUnited States sectors in the region.
Chile’s domestic Cuban problem would “disappear” if U.S.-Cuban relations improved.
Even as U.S.-Cuban relations broke down decisively, Soviet ties to Cuba increased when the USSR offered to purchase the island’s sugar and invest heavily in its economic development.
Latin America’s diplomats kept a close eye on Cuba’s evolving relationship with the Soviet bloc.
It only remained in the inter-American system to “hide its position as a Russian satellite,” he added.
These specialists, he said, encountered language problems and the Cubans would have preferred Latin American specialists.
But regional governments had not shown the same “enthusiasm” for helping Havana’s new leaders.
Soviet campesinos looked like “soldiers” and were staying in the prestigious Habana Libre hotel, he warned, implying an ulterior military purpose on the island.
In many ways, the Cuban Revolution made the Soviet Union more visible in Latin America than it had been before.
However, very soon after 1959, the revolution’s outward looking nature and its potential to mobilize revolutionary fervor abroad caused alarm.
After all, no government–in Latin America or elsewhere in the world–wanted to be overthrown.
In 1959, Cuba’s revolutionary regime supported anti-dictatorial insurgencies in the Dominican Republic and Nicaragua, while in Panama, Cubans, without the apparent backing of their government, participated in an insurrection against the government.
Latin American diplomats also quickly perceived Soviet presence in Latin America to be growing thanks to Cuba.
Brazil’s Ambassador Leitão de Cunha told a United States official in late 1960 that he was extremely concerned over Cuban Government’s acquisition of huge stores of arms which he is convinced are destined for Castro-type extremist groups throughout Latin America.
He expressed opinion entire continent is facing grave hour and that action must be taken very quickly to remove danger posed by Castro.
In late 1960, Amoedo warned that, according to “confidential sources,” “communist propaganda” was being sent from Cuba to Argentina via Montevideo.
Around this time, Argentina’s Foreign Ministry also ordered all its diplomats to report on Communist influence in host countries.
The Argentine Chargé d’Affaires in Tegucigalpa warned Buenos Aires in early 1960 that “Communist penetration” was growing “every day” in Honduras as a result of the country’s standard of living.
In conversation with United States Secretary of State Christian Herter in August 1960, Argentina’s Foreign Minister Diagones Taboada pressed a similar point.
The fear among governments in the region that the Cuban Revolution could mobilize left-wing opposition and/or support revolutionary insurgencies inside their own countries made it an “internal problem” as much as an external one.
Rightwing dictators tried to control the effect that Cuba’s revolution had on their opponents’ increasing militancy through repression and militarized counter-insurgency.
However, nationalist and democratic governments like those in Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Uruguay, and Venezuela were more constrained.
Although repressive tactics were used at times against left-wing opponents in these countries, authorities also tried to ameliorate criticism by implementing reforms (or at least paying lip service to them) as promoted by the Alliance for Progress, and adopting a more moderate stance on Cuba.
For a similar Chilean perspective, see Edwards Bello to Señor Ministro, “Cuba y la OEA,” 19 July 1960, in Cuba/1960/Oficios Conf. y Ord.
As Field argues, Bolivia’s nationalist President Víctor Paz Estenssoro similarly believed he could only resist pressure from left-wing opponents– and Cuba’s support for them–by refusing to break relations with Castro.
Chile’s Eduardo Frei, the reformist Christian Democratic senator and presidential candidate in 1964 campaigning against a left-wing coalition that included Communists and Socialists, also confided that advocating sanctions against Cuba could cost him 100,000 votes.
And Chile’s conservative President Jorge Alessandri, conscious of critics to the left and the right, repeatedly insisted he did not want the Cuban issue to exacerbate divisions in Chile.
Elected Latin American governments also had to respond to the right and the military within their own countries by proving they were dealing with the problem of Communism effectively.
Just as he faced pro-Castro protests and mobilization, Alessandri faced sharp criticism in the National Congress for what conservative senators insisted was a lack of sufficient anti-Communism when it came to dealing with Cuba.
However, others in the country–above all people from banking, industry, and commerce–voiced their disquiet.
As the Chilean ambassador in Caracas reported, Venezuela confronted a “serious internal crisis” over Cuba.
However, many Latin American diplomats–including those that represented the so-called moderate group of regional states resisting more hardline action against Cuba – harbored concerns prior to the meeting that were similar to those of their United States counterparts.
By late 1960, the Cuban revolution was already isolated informally, and even formally, within the hemisphere.
True, it could count on strong support from leftwing parties, trade unions, and students in Latin America, many of whom were prepared to go out onto the streets to express their solidarity with the Revolution and who put considerable pressure on democratic governments not to oppose Cuba.
Others, mostly in Central America and the Caribbean, took up arms and vowed to overthrow their governments by force of arms following Cuba’s example.
On the other side of the Cold War divide, stood a growing state-led consensus among governments and diplomats of many different political persuasions that Cuba–and the growing Communist and Soviet influence it brought to the region–was a cause for significant concern.
By 1960, at least on the regional level, the fault-lines of the Cold War did not run between countries but between anti-communist governments on the one side and groups of their citizens who sympathized with, or actively supported, Havana’s revolutionary leaders on the other.
The situation in Venezuela grew particularly acute in this regard from October 1960, with the development of a Cuban-inspired revolutionary insurgency that received Havana’s support in the form of training at least from 1962.69 As well as breaking diplomatic relations with Havana and adopting a militarized counter66 Schoultz, Infernal Little Cuban Republic, 117.
The question that the inter-American system had to face was whether to turn shared governmental concern into collective action.
It did not help matters that the United States was regarded as not communicating its own position effectively.
As the Uruguayan ambassador in Washington warned after the Bay of Pigs, the lack of U.S.-Latin America consultation over the crisis had threatened the legitimacy of the Western Hemisphere’s institutional architecture.
Comprising the 1947 Treaty of Inter-American Reciprocal Assistance and the OAS, created in 1948, they committed the United States and Latin American states to collective defense of each other’s territory, nonintervention, and regional governance.
Member states had also agreed to a resolution on the “Preservation and Defense of Democracy in America” which labeled international Communism as “incompatible” with the inter-American system when they signed the OAS Charter in 1948.
This anti-Communist pledge had subsequently been updated in 1954 at the Tenth Inter-American Conference in Caracas.
After 1959, Cuba was then in the spotlight with the San José meeting having been the first effort to deal with it.
However, the San José Declaration’s failure to name Cuba and recommend decisive action against Castro left many governments in the region unsatisfied.
United States officials believed San José had fallen “considerably short” of desired objectives.
Fearful of setting a precedent for intervention in Cuba’s internal affairs (and other Latin American states in the future), eight foreign ministers had spoken in favor of the right to selfdetermination at the meeting.
The meeting had also been convened under the OAS Charter and not the Rio Treaty, meaning it could only recommend measures to be taken.
It was this latter mechanism that the United States and Latin American governments that ardently opposed Castro had subsequently begun pushing for in early 1961.
Despite broadly shared concern in Latin America concerning Cuba’s trajectory, governments in Mexico, Brazil, Chile, Argentina, Ecuador, and Bolivia nevertheless resisted such a meeting.
Until proof emerged of an armed Cuban attack on a Latin American state or a decisive threat to hemispheric peace, they preferred to deal with the situation in the OAS.73 Domestic politics also factored into their position.
Aside from the legalities of a meeting under the TIAR, for example, the Chilean Foreign Ministry wanted to avoid the domestic political “complications” that could arise from a new “tribunal” on Cuba.
Presumably having failed to get reassurances, and with the OAS vote days away, Castro suddenly announced he was a life-long Marxist-Leninist on 1 December.
As Edwards Bello noted from Havana, observers were “extremely surprised” by the announcement, “not because they did not think he was a Marxist-Leninist,” but because of its timing.
For the Foreign Ministers who met in Uruguay, Castro’s announcement– coming seven months after he had declared the Cuban Revolution socialist–confirmed the “incompatibility” of the island’s revolutionary regime with the inter-American system.
Those abstaining or voting against the meeting did so on the grounds that there had been no Cuban “aggression” and thus the Rio Treaty could not be invoked.
Brazil’s Foreign Minister, Clementino de San Tiago Dantas, noted the absence of democratic governance did not imply “radical incompatibility,” but “the deliberate and permanent acceptance” of a confrontational political ideology was a problem.
They therefore agreed by twenty votes to one that the island no longer fitted within the inter-American system.
See also Martínez Montero, “Informe Sobre la VIII Reunión de Consulta.” 26 country had a friendly attitude” at the conference.
However, agreeing on the Cuban revolution’s “incompatibility” was one thing.
As had been the case in San José, a number of concerns complicated agreement.
In addition to domestic constraints, the interAmerican system’s commitment to non-intervention and different interpretations of the legal frameworks that existed to manage hemispheric security were key.
Together, these issues contributed to what Chile’s Foreign Minister called the “profusion of contradictory ideas” at the meeting.
As Carlos Martínez Sotomayor, Chile’s new young centrist Foreign Minister , who tried to broker an agreement at the Meeting, reported home, the Central Americans’ “intransigence” on the issue was so extreme that not even the United States delegation shared their position.
On Martínez Sotomayor’s mediation efforts, see also Fermandois, “Chile y la ‘cuestión cubana,’” 349.
On Martínez Sotomayor’s appointment, his sympathy for the recently formed Non-Aligned Movement, his support for independence struggles in 27 Those arguing against sanctions meanwhile did so on legalistic grounds and on the basis of their purpose.
Tello, for example, rejected the idea that there was any proven threat to hemispheric peace or territorial integrity of any member state, meaning that the TIAR could not be evoked to apply punitive measures.
On the other hand, Tello had privately told the United States Ambassador in Mexico City, Thomas Mann, earlier that year that any action against Cuba would only “strengthen the Cuban government and pro-Communist groups” in Latin America.
Sanctions–despite whatever psychological value the United States attached to them–were also likely to increase Soviet bloc assistance to Cuba rather than reduce it.
Because 85 percent of Cuba’s trade by early 1962 was conducted with Communist countries, economic sanctions would also have little effect.
However, delegates voted seventeen to one with three abstentions for an arms embargo against the island and with a twothirds majority to exclude Cuba’s government from the OAS with six abstentions .94 Even so, this decision came at a cost.
To reach a two-thirds majority, the United States delegation had been forced to offer Haiti substantial economic aid.
Individual governments also faced concrete domestic political costs as a result of their position at the meeting.
Most dramatically, Frondizi was overthrown by a military coup d’état the following month in part because his government had not taken a harder line against Cuba.
Shortly before his overthrow, military generals had forced him, almost with a “pistol at his head,” to break diplomatic relations with the island.
Directly in response to Punta del Este, Fidel Castro issued his most explicit pledge to date to “make revolution” in Latin America in what became known as the Second Declaration of Havana.
The region had plenty of warning in the region that some sort of showdown was looming.
In July, August, and September 1962, Mexican and Chilean ambassadors in Havana warned of growing U.S.-Cuban tensions on the border of the United States military base in 94 Martinez Sotomayor to Señor Ministro, 26 January 1962.
Counterrevolutionary bands and skirmishes appeared to be rising in Cuba and the number of asylum cases grew as Castro’s opponents sought exile in Latin American embassies.
Meanwhile, in early September 1962, Edwards Bello reported that there had been a noticeable increase in people, goods, soldiers, and arms arriving in Cuba.
While he surmised that Soviet weapons being erected by Soviet technicians did not appear aimed at “armed aggression,” he underlined that “Communist infiltration” remained a serious problem in Latin America.
Attending a major rally held by the Cuban government in late September 1962, he also appears to have been particularly struck by the sight of 30,000 “sincere and convinced communists” singing the Internationale.
As Afonso Arinos, Brazil’s former foreign minister and senior diplomat at the Brazilian Foreign Ministry, told Uruguay’s ambassador after this meeting, more proof of what had arrived and its importance was needed before a meeting could be convoked.
In a conversation with Colombia’s ambassador, Arinos also reportedly stated that he was only aware of “technicians” having arrived in Cuba.
To Chile’s ambassador, Arinos meanwhile stated that another divided inter-American session on Cuba would be “catastrophic” for the hemisphere.
The “moment has arrived when they will believe us,” he proclaimed immediately after the announcement.
As Keller has argued, Nicaragua’s dictator, Luis Somoza Debayle was on the “warpath” and highly critical of Washington.
However, it was not just right-wing anti-Communists who responded to the crisis as a wake-up call.
President João Goulart ordered Brazil’s air force to prevent the Soviets flying cargo to Havana via Brazil.
Argentina and the Dominican Republic provided naval units to support United States navy operations.
Following a coup d’état against Frondizi in March 1962, Argentina’s position had shifted firmly in favor of the United States and different branches of the country’s armed forces now competed to offer Washington military support.
Governments in the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Colombia, Venezuela, Panama, Honduras, Haiti, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and El Salvador pledged assistance in imposing the quarantine and made their territories available to the United States should they be needed.
In Venezuela, President Betancourt ordered full-scale mobilization of the country’s armed forces, in part to control domestic upheaval generated by the Crisis that included armed attacks on United States targets and an electrical plant.
In Mexico, Bolivia, Argentina, and Brazil, too, police and military forces were called on to contain demonstrations and protect key infrastructure.9 Paradoxically, at an inter-American level, the resolution of the crisis only exacerbated the growing sense of urgency that Cuba generated.
Latin American governments that had long-since been arguing for punitive action against Cuba were angry Castro was still in power.
Caribbean states would have preferred “the invasion of Cuba and the overthrow of Castro’s regime” as part of the resolution of the crisis, Argentina’s ambassador in Washington reflected.
Latin American diplomats at the United Nations were reported as being “anxious” for news of what the United States would now do to resolve the Cuban problem.
As Washington’s UN ambassador, Adlai Stevenson, reported to Secretary of State Dean Rusk, requests for clarity and action meant that the “stakes and importance making right decision on next step” had risen substantially.
When United States Assistant Secretary of State for Latin American Affairs Edwin Martin met the region’s ambassadors in Washington on 13 November, he listened to Latin American “preoccupation over continuing threat” Castro posed and calls for further action.
In response, Martin and Secretary of State Dean Rusk found themselves on the defensive, reassuring representatives that there was “no basis for return to OAS” as long as it kept up its subversive actions in the hemisphere.
However, “trying to find a way of pleasing most dedicated allies” was not easy.
Many Latin American representatives refused to be mollified by these reassurances, this time raising concerns about continued presence of Soviet troops on the island.
Stevenson replied that troops had not been included in the agreement with Khrushchev.
Although he estimated that at least one of 21 thousand troops had withdrawn from Cuba, he could offer little more reassurance.
Although unilaterally involved in various actions against Castro under Operation Mongoose, the Kennedy administration was fearful that an invasion of the island would lead to another serious U.S.-Soviet confrontation.
United States officials meanwhile sat uncomfortably in between, apparently unable to reassure their most steadfast Cold War allies that they had a solution to the Cuban problem.
Following the discovery of a three-ton arms cache in the Paraguaná Peninsula on 1 November 1963, the Venezuelan government called for action.
Unfortunately, I was not able to locate an Argentine record of this meeting.
Philip Agee certainly believed it to be the work of the agency’s Caracas Station or a joint U.S.-Venezuelan intelligence operation.
Although Castro acknowledged that the Cubans provided moral support, “sympathy,” guerrilla training, radio broadcasts, and a location for Venezuelan revolutionaries to retreat to, he denied sending arms to guerrillas in Venezuela.
However, Jonathan Brown’s research in newly opened Cuban archives suggests that Cuban diplomats themselves accepted the arms cache came from the island.
A recently declassified internal CIA memorandum also refers to “incontrovertible evidence” that weapons came from Cuba.7 Whatever the case, the repercussions of the discovery were important, bringing lingering questions about Cuba to a head.
The Betancourt administration asked the OAS Council to convoke a Meeting of Consultation in line with Article 6 of the Rio Treaty to consider sanctions against states that practiced aggression affecting territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Meeting in late November, on the eve of Venezuela’s presidential election, the OAS Council agreed to form an investigating commission comprising representatives from Argentina, Colombia, Costa Rica, Uruguay, and the United States.
United States State Department officials welcomed a pause until July, believing, it allowed wide dissemination of the report’s findings to prepare the ground for punitive measures against Cuba.
Pushing for OAS sanctions amounted to “shoring up and extension” of a pre-existing “isolation policy” rather than a decisive new venture.
However, United States officials hoped they could insert a “juridical umbrella for use of force in future” against Cuba into the resolution by classifying subversion as aggression.
To obtain a majority in favor of sanctions prior to the Foreign Minister’s Meeting, the Johnson administration helped Raúl Leoni’s incoming administration in Venezuela (who had been eleced in Venezuela on 1 December 1963 and assumed power in March 1964) to prepare a resolution and encouraged it to consult other regional governments.
However, documents suggest there were a number of reasons for the delay.
Leoni was elected on 1 December and assumed power in March 1964. 39 historically resentful about United States intervention, the Johnson administration was keen for Venezuelans to take the lead, which they did enthusiastically.
In particular, the inclusion of a U.S.-designed article giving hemispheric states the right to act if similar proof of Cuban intervention was discovered as contentious.
As one Chilean Foreign Ministry official noted, this was “blank check” and an “unacceptable” precedent for interventionism.
With this amendment in place, Washington was confident it could gain a majority, and possibly even bring Mexico on side.
The military coup d’état in Brazil that toppled Goulart’s government brought an anti-Communist dictatorship to power on 1 April 1964, thus not only removing a a powerful opponent to sanctions but also signaling a new counterrevolutionary direction for the Southern Cone and a shift in the Cold War’s dynamics within the Americas.
The Brazilian government formally broke relations Havana in mid-May 1964, thus underscoring the Brazilian coup’s impact on the hemispheric balance of power–and the Cuban question.
Although Venezuela was thought to be a mere tool of United States policy, Venezuela’s foreign minister stridently opposed making sanctions mere recommendations.
As he told Mann, Johnson’s new assistant secretary of state for Latin American affairs, the issue was a “a serious domestic problem” and the future of Leoni’s administration was at stake.
Counting on strong support from eleven hardline OAS members, Venezuela was also confident of gaining a majority.
The Venezuelans thus acted much like the Central Americans had done at Punta del Este in putting forward an intransigent position.
Leoni also dispatched envoys to Uruguay, Chile prior to the Washington meeting to pressure their governments to support sanctions.
Rusk, after meeting Leoni, eventually backed down and agreed to revert to a resolution that required member states to impose sanctions rather than recommend them to.0 Ultimately, delegates at the meeting in Washington were asked to consider a resolution presented by Venezuela, the United States, Peru, and Colombia (the latter two joined preparations in July) to suspend all trade with Cuba, impose diplomatic sanctions, classify subversion as armed aggression, and help enforce an economic blockade against Cuba through pressure on non-abiding European states.
Venezuelan envoys had also travelled to Brazil to put similar pressure on Goulart’s administration prior to the Brazilian coup.
As Venezuela’s foreign minister urged his contemporaries, “nothing will be achieved” without the imposition of collective sanctions.
Mann and Rusk approached Uruguay’s new Foreign Minister, Zorrilla de San Martín, to pressure him to change his position.
Increasing Castro’s isolation, he added, could “finish” his regime.4 Bolivian, Uruguayan, Chilean, and Mexican governments nevertheless stood firm against sanctions and other aspects of the resolution that appeared to change the inter-American system’s institutional architecture.
True, these countries’ diplomats agreed to condemn Cuba for aggression against Venezuela, reaffirm Punta del Este’s conclusions, and take action to stop Cuban infiltration and subversion.
However, there were significant reasons for opposing any further action.
As Field has found, domestic concerns were key for President Paz in Bolivia.
Chile’s new Foreign Minister, Julio Philippi later recalled that he had not been subjected to as much pressure from the United States given United States policymakers’ understanding of the Chilean domestic political situation but that Chile had faced pressure from other Latin American states and particularly Venezuela as noted above.
Cuba’s embassy in Montevideo and Uruguay’s embassy in Havana did not act as a base for propagating ideology or subversion and closing the four remaining Latin American embassies in Havana, “would end . . . political support for the opposition” while removing “a source of direct and reliable information” about the island.
They also reasoned that support for Cuba inside Chile, along with the country’s forthcoming presidential elections, in which the left-wing coalition led by Salvador Allende was predicted to do well, made it unlikely that President Jorge Alessandri’s outgoing conservative government would vote for sanctions.
Moreover, as Chile’s new Foreign Minister, Jorge Philippi, underlined, Latin America accounted for one percent of all Cuban trade, so economic sanctions would be ineffective.
As Mexico’s representative told the conference,151 he had serious doubts Venezuela’s territorial integrity had been violated in line with Article 6 of the Rio Treaty.
Six months after arms were discovered, the country’s government was in control and at no point had the continent been in danger.2 Despite tese arguments, the four countries lost the argument when the Brazilian, Argentine, and Peruvian delegations decided to vote in favor of the resolution.
Although Mexican, Uruguayan, Chilean, and Bolivian representatives unsuccessfully tried to modify it and then abstained from the vote, the resolution to impose collective diplomatic and economic sanctions against Cuba passed by15 votes.4 Whether the four abstaining countries would abide by this vote was not clear.
This decision had been sanctioned at the last minute by a secret U.S.-Brazilian-Mexican deal, apparently because (as Zorrilla de San Martín had argued) retaomomg one Latin American embassy in Havana open could prove useful once all others closed.
The futures of the Uruguayan, Chilean, and Bolivian embassies in Cuba were nevertheless still in the air after the meeting.
With a large sector of the population against the move either on centrist grounds of non-intervention or leftwing sympathy for Castro, the Chilean foreign minister had assured his Uruguayan counterpart that Santiago would stand firm.
Then, on 11 August, less than a month before the Chilean elections, the country’s outgoing President, Jorge Alessandri, made a sudden, personal decision to break relations.
According to the explanation Chile’s Foreign Minister offered his Uruguayan counterpart, Alessandri made the decision after a 90-minute meeting with representatives of the left-wing coalition that Allende was standing for who had visited him to try and persuade him not to break relations.
The concerns this meeting raised regarding Cuba’s influence in Chile, and his fear of Chile being isolated in the inter-American system, meant that he did not want to leave the Cuban question to his successor.
After Chile’s decision, facing “unremitting” pressure from the United States along with other hemispheric powers, Bolivia and Uruguay quickly followed suit, with Montevideo being the last to break relations with Cuba in early September.
As those who resisted sanctions had predicted, this did not economically endanger Castro’s position.
Castro’s regime survived, continued to sponsor revolution abroad, and attract support from Latin American populations.
Cuba’s isolation meanwhile arguably boosted local actors who viewed Castro sympathetically and fought against their governments to change their approach to the island.
Reestablishing relations with Cuba and ending economic sanctions henceforth became a rallying cry for those opposed to United States intervention in Latin America.
The problem for those campaigning to overturn sanctions is that it was not just the United States that they had to convince.
In the mid-to-late 1960s, with Cuba no longer part of the OAS and collective sanctions imposed, the Cuban question therefore shifted more than ever to internal, domestic arenas, where it determined the course of an acute new phase of the Cold War, one that was fought within countries.
Conclusion The 1959 revolution did not result in an overnight change to Cuba’s position in the inter-American system.
Latin American states did not act together as one regional unit, even if they often collaborated in smaller groups.
They argued about how to react to Cuba even if they agreed on the threat Havana’s revolutionary government represented for the region.
The road to sanctions was long and problematic because the Cuban question intersected with domestic preoccupations, fundamental principles governing the inter-American system’s post-war architecture, and questions regarding the efficacy of sanctions.
As diplomats adjusted to the global Cold War’s new intrusion into hemispheric affairs, the Cuban question became increasingly perceived 46 as a measure of the inter-American system’s legal underpinnings, character, and framework.
Leaders seemed impelled to define themselves, each other, and the interAmerican system in relation to the Cuban Revolution.
Ideology and extra-continental relationships also mattered, having the power to disqualify states from the Americas, a message long-since promoted by the United States.
From the time of the Monroe Doctrine, Washington’s diplomats had called for excluding all non-hemispheric influences from the Western Hemisphere.
The OAS Charter had included reference to the Cold War and the need to exclude Communism from the hemisphere.
However, recently declassified Latin American documents illustrate these ideas about the prerequisites for inclusion in the inter-American system were also strongly held within the region.
At least among political elites in the early 1960s, the fight against Communism and fear of Soviet intrusion into the hemisphere mattered.
This is unsurprising given Cuba threatened domestic political balances of power by mobilizing groups demanding radical change.
The political and diplomatic elites who governed international affairs in the Latin America during the 1960s–and the history of anti-Communism in the region going back to the 1920s and 1930s–nevertheless need more attention lest we mistakenly relegate them to mere supporting roles in the history of the Cold War.
Latin American binary story of Washington telling regional partners what to do and them resisting such instructions also needs to be challenged.
All governments in the hemisphere were broadly on the same side of the Cuban question and the Cold War, even though the vehemence of some states 47 reminds us to explore the different shades of anti-Communism that existed in the hemisphere.
Important as the United States was, it does not appear to have been the only driver of hemispheric policy toward Cuba.
Nor was it able to control the way the Cuba question played out – at least not to the extent the Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson administrations would have liked.
To the contrary, particularly after the Cuban missile crisis, it was often on the back foot of more strident calls to do something about Castro.
Only by placing United States Cold War policies towards Cuba in an inter-American context can we begin to evaluate the significance and specificity of Washington’s role in the hemisphere.
At key moments, United States diplomacy and covert intervention were able to keep momentum going against Cuba and affected the calculations that regional governments made.
Anti-Communism and hostile reactions to the Cuban Revolution were explicit and abundant in Latin America as well as the United States, and to understand the Cold War in the region we must take them seriously.
What is perhaps most surprising is how important the Soviet Union and its involvement in Cuba were deemed to be by Latin American political elites.
Although we now know that the USSR was not hell-bent to spread revolution in the region–and that the Cubans and Soviets argued bitterly about this–recently declassified documents show the Soviet Union was an important ingredient in regional diplomats’ calculations.
The Cuban question, spanning the five years between 1959 and 1964, nevertheless crystallized this threat and brought it into focus.
And in doing so, it brought the global Cold War to the region in a way that it had not been present before.
In what would be a new violent chapter of the region’s history, this 48 conflict, in turn, was subsequently internalized, Latin Americanized, and bitterly fought out within the region.
At the heart of ideological divides within different countries that followed were sharp disagreements over Cuba, its example, its role in supporting revolutionary activity in the hemisphere, and what it meant for the region’s relationship with the rest of the world.
There is still much to be learned about the Cuban question and its disruptive impact in Latin America both at a state and a nonstate level.
