At one time, the programme was as sophisticated as those in the United States and Russia.
The projects were cancelled one by one as Britain's attempts to keep up militarily with the two superpowers weakened, as a consequence of Treasury pressure and the belief that there was no economic future in space technology.
Much of the material in this invaluable book has never been available before, due partly to the 30-Year Rule concerning government documents, and partly to the sensitive military nature of the work.
The projects covered include rocket-propelled aircraft, large military missiles such as the medium range ballistic missile Blue Streak, the test rocket Black Knight and the re-entry experiments it carried, and the satellite launcher Black Arrow.
In addition, proposed projects that could have been developed from these vehicles are covered in depth.
There is also considerable political analysis of why these projects were eventually discontinued.
Rocket MotorsRocket InterceptorsThe Blue Steel Stand Off MissileBlue Streak: The OriginsBlue Streak: The CancellationBSSLVELDO and EuropaBlack KnightBlack ArrowThe Could Have BeensThe UK and Space Readership: Readers interested in the history of technology and aerospace enthusiasts.
Reviews:“Much of the material published has never been available before, due partly to the 30-year rule covering government documents and partly due to the sensitive military nature of the work.
During the Cold War, the nations sought to balance limits on offensive weapons and defensive weapons so that they could maintain ¿strategic stability,¿ which refers to the ability of each side to launch a retaliatory strike after absorbing a first strike by the other side.
The Negotiating Framework; START Ratification; Resolving Competing Priorities; BMD Programs and Budgets; BMD in the 1980s, and 1990s; Current BMD Plans and Programs; BMD Budgets Over Time.
In the last decades, America has gone to war as supposed defenders of democracy.
The War on Terror was waged to protect the west from the dangers of Islamists.
In What The Spoils of War Andrew Cockburn brilliantly dissects the intentions behind Washington's martial appetites.
The American war machine can only be understood in terms of the ""private passions"" and ""interests"" of those who control it principally a passionate interest in money.
Avers works to save his life, Sam finds a vid recording of the logs his father recorded during his younger years before Neptune One.
As Sam initiates the recording through the vid com, his consciousness is pulled into the recording, he soon realizes that he has become his father through the vid com.
While his father battles for his life, Sam cannot resist reliving the early years of his father.
His love and empathy grows stronger towards his father as he witnesses firsthand the struggles of young Kennith Furgis, the troubles of a young teenager that was coerced into the Western Empires space fleet.
Sam learns of the day his father first noticed his mother Raynor Caso during boot camp through his first assignment with Commander Drake.
Sam now understands the meaning of family through his fathers eyes as he meets the different individuals that now are strong in his life, and understands the Tribulations his father and close friends have experienced.
The aim of this book is to look deeper, and to examine the technological, political and economic structures and capacities of the competing forces that shaped their ability to wage war, and the impact that colonial wars had on European and non-European states and societies alike.
Questions of the extent to which one side could adapt its military institutions, tactics and technology to those of its opponents figure prominently.
This was far from an inevitable one-way process, and environment and disease remained vital factors.
The studies also situate these conflicts within the broader debate concerning the so-called military revolution, and show that our ideas of this need to be reconsidered in the light of what was happening outside Europe.
This book examines the technology and combat performance of Britain's guided missile destroyers over half a century.
Uniquely among modern destroyers, three of these classes have been tested in battle against the aircraft and missiles of another modern navy in the Falklands War as well as being deployed during the Gulf War.
Written by an expert on British naval technology, this book assess the changing technology of the Royal Navy's destroyers over half a century, including an examination of the Royal Navy's newest and most capable warship, the Type 45.
Brodie considers the problems of the Strategic Air Command, of civil defense, of limited war, of counterforce or pre-emptive strategies, of city-busting, of missile bases in Europe, and so on.
The book, unlike so many on modern military affairs, does not present a program or defend a policy, nor is it a brief for any one of the armed services.
It is a balanced analysis of the requirements of strength for the 1960's, including especially the military posture necessary to prevent war.
A unique feature is the discussion of the problem of the cost of preparedness in relation to the requirements of the national economy, so often neglected by other military thinkers.
In Turbulent Empires Mike Mason analyzes the struggles for post-colonial sovereignty and economic domination and how these competing forces led to conflicts and shifting alliances around the postwar world.
Turbulent Empires surveys the major polities and economies of Africa, Asia, Latin America, Russia, and the West and traces the trajectory of nationalist ruling classes bent on exercising sovereign control over economic resources.
It emphasizes the convulsions that brought about unanticipated realignments and shocking reversals, such as the rise and fall of regimes, continuous interventions in the Muslim world, the sudden collapse of the commodities supercycle, and the continuing challenge of inequality.
By the second decade of the twenty-first century, the global economic crisis of 2008 raised the question of a new global order while the question of American decline, captured in the slogan ""Make America Great Again,” became commonplace.
Both erudite and accessibly written, Turbulent Empires provides an insightful and sweeping analysis of world political and economic history that is an ideal introduction to postwar political science, history, and development studies.
The tour was part of the Soviet-American cultural exchange, arranged by the governments of the United States and USSR as part of their Cold War strategies.
American fans lined up overnight to buy tickets to the Bolshoi, and Soviet audiences packed massive theaters to see American companies.
Political leaders, including Khrushchev and Kennedy, met with the dancers.
Each group experienced the other's ballet through the lens of their own aesthetics.
Americans loved Soviet dancers but believed that Soviet ballets were old-fashioned and vulgar.
Soviet audiences and critics likewise appreciated American technique and innovation but saw American choreography as empty and dry.
It suggests new ways to understand both Cold War cultural diplomacy and twentieth-century ballet.
The risk of catastrophe is now recognised by many to have been greater than realised by protagonists at the time or scholars subsequently.
The Cuban missile crisis remains one of the mostly intensely studied moments of world history.
Understanding is framed and informed by Cold War historiography, political science and personal experience, written by scholars, journalists, and surviving officials.
The emergence of Soviet and other national narratives has broadened the scope of enquiry, while scrutiny of the operational, especially military, dimensions has challenged assumptions about the risk of nuclear war.
A Critical Reappraisal brings together world leading scholars from America, Britain, France, Canada, and Russia to present critical scrutiny of authoritative accounts and to recast assumptions and interpretations.
The book aims to provide an essential guide for students of the missile crisis, the diplomacy of the Cold War, and the dynamics of historical interpretation and reinterpretation.
Offering original ideas and agendas, the contributors seek to provide a new understanding of the secrets and mysteries of the moment when the world went to the brink of Armageddon.
This book will be of great interest to students of the Cuban missile crisis, Cold War Studies, nuclear proliferation, international history and International Relations in general.
After the swift defeat of the Taliban in 2001, American optimism has steadily evaporated in the face of mounting violence; a new “war of a thousand cuts” has now brought the country to its knees.
In the Graveyard of Empires is a political history of Afghanistan in the “Age of Terror” from 2001 to 2009, exploring the fundamental tragedy of America’s longest war since Vietnam.
Following the September 11 attacks, the United States successfully overthrew the Taliban regime.
It established security throughout the country—killing, capturing, or scattering most of al Qa’ida’s senior operatives—and Afghanistan finally began to emerge from more than two decades of struggle and conflict.
But Jones argues that as early as 2001 planning for the Iraq War siphoned off resources and talented personnel, undermining the gains that had been made.
While observing the tense and often adversarial relationship between NATO allies in the Coalition, Jones—who has distinguished himself at RAND and was recently named by Esquire as one of the “Best and Brightest” young policy experts—introduces us to key figures on both sides of the war.
Harnessing important new research and integrating thousands of declassified government documents, Jones then analyzes the insurgency from a historical and structural point of view, showing how a rising drug trade, poor security forces, and pervasive corruption undermined the Karzai government, while Americans abandoned a successful strategy, failed to provide the necessary support, and allowed a growing sanctuary for insurgents in Pakistan to catalyze the Taliban resurgence.
Examining what has worked thus far—and what has not—this serious and important book underscores the challenges we face in stabilizing the country and explains where we went wrong and what we must do if the United States is to avoid the disastrous fate that has befallen many of the great world powers to enter the region.
Three new sections connect our recent, sudden shifts in foreign policy to ongoing historical patterns.
Whether cautioning against the “almost neurotic pursuit of absolute security” or examining the powerful influence of religion on military buildup, Ernest J.Yanarella uncovers the deeply ingrained attitudes that will determine the future of American missile defense.
In the debate over strategic defense, the Soviet dimension has not been adequately examined.
Parrott's multifaceted discussion of the Soviet approach to ballistic missile defense admirably fills that gap.
Based on an analysis of Soviet statements and Soviet weaponry, the study surveys Soviet perceptions of the shifting relationship between the superpowers and the effect of BMD on that relationship.
The author then traces the evolution of Soviet policies toward ballistic missile defense and the introduction of weapons into space.
After exploring the internal budgetary debates that will affect future Soviet decisions on BMD and space systems, the book outlines Soviet responses, political as well as military, to the Strategic Defense Initiative and concludes with recommendations for United States policy toward BMD and arms negotiations.
This study provides a new archive-based account of the Cuban missile crisis, providing the first detailed and authoritative account from the British perspective.
The diplomatic, military and intelligence dimensions of British policy are scrutinised.
New material is presented and existing interpretations of UK-US relations at this crucial moment are reassessed.
The book contributes a new aspect to the literature on the Cuban missile crisis, by exploring where the views of Washington and its closest ally converged and diverged.
This focus on memory extends the scope of the existing literature by exploring hitherto neglected aspects of the CMC, including an analysis of the operational aspects of Bomber Command activity, explored through recollections of the aircrews that challenge accounts based on official records.
The editors then go on to explore aspects of intelligence whose achievements and failings have increasingly been recognised to be of central importance to the origins, dynamics and outcomes of the missile crisis.
Studies of hitherto neglected organisations such as the United States Defense Intelligence Agency and the British Joint Intelligence Committee both extend our understanding of British and American intelligence machinery in this period and enrich our understanding of key episodes and assessments in the missile crisis.
Finally, the book explores the risk of nuclear war and looks at how close we came to nuclear conflict.
In particular, this book seeks to interrogate the theory and strategy of nuclear deterrence, and its relationship to the concept of missile defence.
Drawing widely on the theoretical literature in international relations and strategic studies, it identifies the key groups that have competed over America's nuclear policy post-1945 and examines how the concept of missile defence went through a process of gestation and intellectual contestation, leading to its eventual legitimization in the late 1990s.
Steff sheds light on the individuals, groups, institutions and processes that led to the decision by the Bush administration to deploy a national missile defence shield.
Additionally, Steff systematically examines the impact deployment had on the calculations of Russia and China.
In the process he explains that their reactions under the Bush administration have continued into the Obama era, revealing that a new great power security dilemma has broken out.
This, Steff shows, has led to a decline in great power relations as a consequence.
The 21st century, however, has seen the unexpected emergence of certain European states apologising to their former colonies.
Analysing apologies from Germany, Belgium, Britain and Italy, this book explores the shifting ways in which these countries represent their colonial pasts and investigates what this reveals about contemporary international politics, particularly relations between coloniser and colonised.
It is argued that, far from renouncing colonialism in its entirety, the apologies are replete with discourses that are reminiscent of the core legitimising tenets of empire.
Specifically, the book traces how the apologies both illuminate and recycle many of the inequalities, mind-sets and ambivalences that circulated at the height of empire.
This book will be of key interest to scholars and students of peace and post-conflict resolution studies, memory studies, colonial studies and postcolonial theory.
More broadly, it will be of interest to those studying political science, International Relations, sociology and development.
As United States military and economic influence grew, the federal government partnered with the aviation industry to deliver American power across the globe and to sell the idea of the ""American Century"" to the public at home and abroad.
The airplane promised to extend the frontiers of the United States ""to infinity,"" as Pan American World Airways president Juan Trippe said.
As it accelerated the global circulation of United States capital, consumer goods, technologies, weapons, popular culture, and expertise, few places remained distant from Wall Street and Washington.
Aviation promised to secure a new type of empire--an empire of the air instead of the land, which emphasized access to markets rather than the conquest of territory and made the entire world America's sphere of influence.
By the late 1960s, however, foreign airlines and governments were challenging America's control of global airways, and the domestic aviation industry hit turbulent times.
Just as the history of commercial aviation helps to explain the ascendance of American power, its subsequent challenges reflect the limits and contradictions of the American Century.
The author exposes the myths of the spontaneous emergence of the market economy and the role of government as a disincentive towards private initiative, when for centuries the state power has been carrying out a ""coercing to the market"" with all its strength.
This book presents a somewhat epic depiction of the development of Western hegemonic powers within the capitalist world system, from the struggles of the late Middle Ages to the rise and crisis of the American Empire.
It both develops and questions some of the traditional assumptions of the world-system theory, arguing that it was very much the political form of the state that shaped capitalism as we know it and that, though the existence of a hegemonic power results from the logic of the system, hegemony is often missing in reality.
A major work of historical Marxist theory, this book is essential reading for students of international political economy, globalisation and the crisis of capitalism.
This book is also ideal for students of politics, history, economics and international relations.
Here, Akbar responds with prayer as an act of devotion to dissonance—the infinite void of a loved one’s absence, the indulgence of austerity, making a life as a Muslim in an Islamophobic nation—teasing the sacred out of silence and stillness.
Richly crafted and generous, Pilgrim Bell’s linguistic rigor is tuned to the register of this moment and any moment.
As the swinging soul crashes into its limits, against the atrocities of the American empire, and through a profoundly human capacity for cruelty and grace, these brilliant poems dare to exist in the empty space where song lives—resonant, revelatory, and holy.
While there is no consensus on the state of United States hegemony or even on the precise meaning of the term, it is clear that under George W Bush the United States has not only remained the 'lone superpower' but has increased its global military supremacy.
At the same time, the United States has become more dependent on its economic, financial and geopolitical relationships with the rest of the world than at any other time in its history, markedly since the events of 9/11.
The distinguished scholars in this volume critically interpret United States hegemony from a range of theoretical and topical perspectives.
They discuss the idea of empire in the age of globalization, critique the Bush doctrine, analyze the ideologies underpinning a new American imperialism and examine the influence of neo-conservatism on United States foreign and domestic policy.
From the Portuguese in Africa to the Russians and Ottomans in Central Asia, empire builders could not avoid military interactions with native populations, and many discovered that imperial expansion was impossible without the cooperation, and, in some cases, alliances with the natives they encountered in the new worlds they sought to rule.
Empires and Indigenes is a sweeping examination of how intercultural interactions between Europeans and indigenous people influenced military choices and strategic action.
Ranging from the Muscovites on the western steppe to the French and English in North America, it analyzes how diplomatic and military systems were designed to accommodate the demands and expectations of local peoples, who aided the imperial powers even as they often became subordinated to them.
Contributors take on the analytical problem from a variety of levels, from the detailed case studies of the different ways indigenous peoples could be employed, to more comprehensive syntheses and theoretical examinations of diplomatic processes, ethnic soldier mobilization, and the interaction of culture and military technology.
From the earliest empires of the Sumerians and the Pharaohs to the modern empires of the USSR and the European Union, this is a story that reveals how empires are created and organized, how later empires resolve the problems of governance faced by earlier empires, and how the political and cultural legacies of ancient empires are still felt today.
As winter sets in and America’s survivors struggle to rebuild a semblance of civilization, terrifying new enemies are gathering—both in the lawless badlands and within the walls of the safe zone.
His zombified troupe of sideshow curiosities is but a fraction of his growing pack.
The Reaper’s quest to safeguard the humans he has befriended places him on the trail of these feral undead.
But he is sorely unprepared for the return of the zombie transformed by his own flesh, the Omega—a fiend driven by something more sinister than any virus.
Meanwhile, Death’s questions about his origin haunt him, and he is close to the answers... but the worst of both the living and the dead are rising in his path, and he’ll have to cut them all down to reach the cosmic endgame.
The drama of 1970s Chrysler Pro Stock drag racing unfolds in this new book, which focuses on the racing and technological evolution of the legendary Motown Missile and Mopar Missile racing programs from 1970 to 1977.
Unequaled by any other drag racing development program, this was a huge undertaking in term of time, money, and effort.
The 1970s saw great change in Detroit and in auto racing, with Pro Stock being a huge draw for fans.
Chrysler racing historian and author Geoff Stunkard presents a chronological recollection, drawing from many interviews and summaries of the actual technical efforts that the factory accomplished and including both rare, unpublished technical and personal images from the team members and some of the most dramatic images taken by the sport’s best photographers.
From the earliest days of owner/engine builder Ted Spehar, factory engineer Tom Hoover, and driver Don Carlton, the narrative is a colorful look at the team’s inner workings, programs, victories, and even defeats.
Set against a backdrop of characters like Bill “Grumpy” Jenkins, “Dandy Dick” Landy, and “Dyno” Don Nicholson, Carlton’s driving prowess had few equals.
Indeed, called by one period scribe as a “cyborg,” the likeable pilot would pay the ultimate price as a drag racing driver.
From the Challengers and `Cuda to the Demons and Colts, the book showcases the cars that made Chrysler so much a part of this racing era, as well as Ted Spehar’s never-before-revealed information on the 1970s Pro Stock engine program.
It was just a question of when and how it would collapse...."" —From the Introduction to Collapse of an Empire The Soviet Union was an empire in many senses of the word—a vast mix of far-flung regions and accidental citizens by way of conquest or annexation.
That instability made its demise inevitable, asserts Yegor Gaidar, former prime minister of Russia and architect of the ""shock therapy"" economic reforms of the 1990s.
Yet a growing desire to return to the glory days of empire is pushing today's Russia backward into many of the same traps that made the Soviet Union untenable.
Gaidar uses world history, the Soviet experience, and economic analysis to demonstrate why swimming against this tide of history would be a huge mistake.
The USSR sowed the seeds of its own economic destruction, and Gaidar worries that Russia is repeating some of those mistakes.
Once again, for example, the nation is putting too many eggs into one basket, leaving the nation vulnerable to fluctuations in the energy market.
The Soviets had used revenues from energy sales to prop up struggling sectors such as agriculture, which was so thoroughly ravaged by hyperindustrialization that the Soviet Union became a net importer of food.
When oil prices dropped in the 1980s, that revenue stream diminished, and dependent sectors suffered heavily.
Although strategies requiring austerity or sacrifice can be politically difficult, Russia needs to prepare for such downturns and restrain spending during prosperous times.
Collapse of an Empire shows why it is imperative to fix the roof before it starts to rain, and why sometimes the past should be left in the past.
