We were in Cuba and it was during the time Castro was fighting Batista.
Posted in Life in General, Personal | Tagged American moms, Batista, Castro, Cuba, Cuban fathers, I Love Lucy, my grandfather, my mother, Tampa, the 1950s, The Little Rascals, The Three Stooges | Leave a comment It’s Not About the Flying, It’s About Relationships Posted on November 15, 2014 by Joe Clark We fly.
We fly for enjoyment, to learn new things, to travel, to have fun, to sight see, and more.
Posted in Aviation, Flying, Life in General, Personal | Tagged airplanes, camaraderie, Cessna 170, Cessnas, co-workers, Cuba, discipline, Flight instructors, flight training, Florida, flying, friends, friendships, hangar parties, Hangars 9 and 10, learning to fly, memories, open cockpit biplanes, pilots, relationships, sleeping under the wing, Southern drawl, student pilots, taildraggers, training aircraft | Leave a comment Hurricanes and Emergency Diverts Posted on November 10, 2013 by Joe Clark Thirty years ago this month, I checked into my first operational squadron in Gitmo.
They gave me the “gouge” about flying in the Caribbean, including divert/bingo information for any reason when we could not return to Guantanamo.
Posted in Aviation, Flying, History, Life in General, Personal | Tagged A-4 Skyhawk, airplanes, airspeed, altitude, Cuba, discipline, divert/bingo information, flying, friends, Gainesville, Gitmo, Hurricane Kate, hurricanes, Hurricanes and Emergency Diverts, Jamaica, judgment, Kingston, Marines, memories, military service, Navy, Norman C Manley International, old friends, professional pilots, the Caribbean, The Gators, the “gouge”, Weather guessers | 2 Comments Life Only Began Yesterday Posted on April 23, 2012 by Joe Clark It was a moment one can only describe as profound.
We were driving northeast on Pacetti Road thinking about the recent visit of the grandkids.
Posted in History, Life in General, Personal | Tagged Cardenas Cuba, centuries, Cuba, decades, England, grandkids, Highway 16, instant “connections”, Life Only Began Yesterday, lifetimes, Pacetti Road, Saint Augustine, Saint Johns County, Spain, Tampa, the age of 30, the loss of a friend, the Pacettis, the passage of time, the passing of a grandparent, the Triays | 2 Comments Sleep, Food, Water, and Performance Posted on January 25, 2012 by Joe Clark I have taught about the relationship between a pilot’s need for proper rest and flying for a long time.
Corollary to having the proper rest is eating right and proper hydration.
Posted in Aviation, Flight Instructing, Flying | Tagged Air Force, airplanes, airspeed, altitude, Cuba, discipline, flying, judgment, memories, military service, Navy, pilots, professional pilots, sailors | 2 Comments 41st Anniversary of Airport Screening Posted on July 17, 2011 by Joe Clark Forty one years ago today, the United States instituted airport screening at New Orleans’ Moisant Field, now known as Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport.
Some of the recent news about Cuban politics includes Castro finally admitting socialism does not work and the Cuban economic situation is broke.
Subscribe If you have enjoyed reading my blog, please consider subscribing.
