Second, I use this information to try to determine if the most important decisions made by Kennedy and Khrushchev were “rational” in the sense of maximizing expected value, and if not, whether these individuals’ choices tend to conform to prospect theory’s prediction that people—when they perceive themselves to be experiencing losses at the time they make a decision and when their probability estimates associated with their principal policy options are in the moderate to high range—will be inclined to engage in risk-acceptant, though not value-maximizing, behavior.
When a utility function is concave, the utility for outcomes increases at a decreasing rate as outcomes are more preferred.
It must be remembered, however, that prospect theory does not predict that some people will be risk-acceptant and that others will be risk-averse, but that the same individuals will demonstrate both proclivities depending on domain.
Because this study uses qualitative estimates of individuals’ probability estimates and utility functions, and because the historical record does not provide perfect information for these variables for all of the policy options available to Kennedy and Khrushchev, this article does not claim that its analysis of the relative explanatory power of expected-utility and prospect theories for the events of the Cuban missile crisis is final and definitive, but only that it is a fair one given the information that is currently available.
In other words, Kennedy believed that not responding aggressively to the installation of missiles in Cuba could lead to world war.
In this new situation, the dangers of accepting the missiles and especially of reaching a negotiated way out of the crisis were not as high as they were before the crisis began.
Therefore, Kennedy’s choice to continue to threaten military action to remove the missiles after the blockade was established and subsequently respected by the Soviets, instead of pushing for a diplomatic solution to the crisis, was likely not a value-maximizing policy, given his own estimations of the costs, benefits, and probabilities of success associated with the available policy alternatives.
Although Khrushchev was not willing to take excessive risks to try to recoup all his losses, he was willing to do so in an attempt to recoup some of them.
Because prospect theory specifies the conditions under which particular outcomes are likely to result, it runs a smaller risk of becoming an unfalsifiable theory.
American military personnel stop and board a Lebanese freighter under charter to the Soviet Union.
