Email Reset password Go back Home Contact Archive May 2022 Donate Merch Register Subscribe Search Login Home Contact Archive May 2022 Donate Merch Register Subscribe Search Login The monthly magazine of opinion.
Khrushchev started from Square One in which he knew himself to be way behind in strategic nuclear capacity and way behind in conventional capacity, except in Europe.
Bluffing magnificently, he aimed for a huge increase in his nuclear capability by installing the missiles in Cuba.
He had only one real asset in the theater of the operation—Fidel Castro.After the crisis was over, he was back to Square One, and nothing had changed.
The United States, as part of the price for withdrawing the Soviet missiles, agreed, without consulting Turkey, Italy, or NATO, that all land-based Jupiter medium-range ballistic missiles, which were a real danger to the USSR, would be taken down and removed in six months.
Turkey, Italy, and NATO realized full well that the Soviet missiles had been taken out of Cuba at the cost of European security, without even a by-your-leave.
And more; the United States promised formally and openly never to invade Castro’s Cuba—a promise which might mean nothing to a state like the USSR, but which was a real inhibition on a state like the United States.
Thus the Soviets got out of Cuba as far as the missiles were concerned, but stayed in every other way; and they retreated with three prizes for their audacity.
If that is losing, it. would be interesting to see the Soviets win a crisis.The Camelot mythmakers, with whom Mr Rodman seems implicitly to agree, would reply to this analysis that JFK had earlier ordered the removal of the Jupiter missiles because they were obsolete, that America did not intend to invade Cuba anyway, and that international inspection of the Cuban missile removal turned out to be unnecessary.
But there is no evidence whatever that the President had earlier ordered the Jupiters to be taken down; the whole story was apparently concocted after the crisis to make it appear that a major concession by the United States was not a concession at all.
In the unlikely event that the President had issued such an order in early 1962, it was a strange order indeed, made without any consultation with Turkey, Italy, or NATO, and affecting as it did not United States government forces and installations, but the weapons inventory of allied foreign forces, who were not in any way obligated to jump when the United States President whistled.
Recall that at present the United States is trying desperately to put theater nuclear missiles into Europe under NATO auspices.
His argument that he had secured Cuba against invasion did not seem to impress his comrades.
Kuznetsov which foreshadowed the Soviet military build-up—“You Americans will never be able to do this to us again!”—hardly suggests that the Soviets saw it as a triumph.That the United States, in the long run, paid a huge price for missing opportunities in the crisis and lulling itself into complacency afterward is, of course, the whole point of my article.
Mr Bowling is correct, for example, that the removal of the land-based Jupiter MRBM’s, jointly operated by the United States and its allies, and their replacement by United States Polaris submarines, only opened up the problem we are facing today of having to redress the “decoupling” effect of sea-based systems.
But this reflects something bigger than Cuba; the real problem was the political blindness of the systems-analysis methodology that dominated too many decisions during the period.
Even with a no-invasion pledge, these errors need not have been committed.
The administration came out of the crisis with some of the same soft-headed attitudes that tempted the Soviets to think they could get away with such an adventure in the first place.
This is a much more fundamental indictment of the Kennedy and Johnson policies.
Nothing agreed to in October 1962 required us to halt our strategic missile construction a few years later or to fight the Vietnam war stupidly.Likewise, no Cuban “deal” prevented us from taking forceful action to block the Soviet-Cuban take-over in Angola thirteen years later.
The United States remains free to act in its supreme national interest against any new Soviet or Cuban threat, just as President Kennedy acted against the missiles in Cuba without the benefit of any pre-existing “understanding” that they shouldn’t be there.
No tactical victory will ever relieve us of the permanent responsibility of understanding our interests and defending them with vigilance and determination.
Subscribe You may also like A Fateful Intellectual Friendship by Edward Rothstein The Tragedy of Will Smith by John Podhoretz Why Joe Biden Is More Than Gaffe-Prone by Christine Rosen Scroll Down For the Next Article Next Read the latest issue Intelligent opinions since 1945.
You will be directly supporting our mission to deliver high-quality, well-reasoned commentary on the world's most important issues to as wide an audience as possible.<br \/>\r\n<p><\/p>\r\nBy helping us take inventory in and increase the storehouse of the best that has been thought and said, every C<small>OMMENTARY<\/small> subscriber makes a real difference.
