President Kennedy convenes his Executive Committee to consider America's options.
Wednesday, October 17 An SS-5 IRBM site, the first of three to be identified, is detected in Cuba.
Thursday, October 18 President Kennedy meets with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrie Gromyko and advises him that America will not tolerate Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Airdrop nuclear test over Johnston Island area..59 Megaton yield Hydrogen bomb test.
Friday, October 19 President Kennedy meets with the Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, and the members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Saturday, October 20 President Kennedy returns to Washington to discuss the discovery of additional Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Sunday, October 21 President Kennedy decides on a naval blockade of Cuba.
Monday, October 22 President Kennedy addresses the American public and announces his plan to implement a naval blockade of Cuba.
United States military alert is set at DEFCON 3 and Castro mobilizes all of Cuba's military forces.
High Altitude Russian Nuclear Test at Kapustin Yar Hydrogen Bomb on Rocket.
Kilotons Tuesday, October 23 The OAS supports the decision to quarantine Cuba.
Reconnaissance photos reveal that Soviet missiles are ready for launch.
Discussion of diplomatic efforts at the UN and the vote by the Organization of American States.
Wednesday, October 24 Soviet ships reach the quarantine line, but receive radio orders from Moscow to hold their positions.
Consideration of civil defense options and planning for possible Soviet responses in Berlin.
President Kennedy concludes that if we invade in the next ten days, the missile base crews in Cuba will likely fire at least some of the missiles at United States targets.
Detailed briefing on new reconnaissance photos from Cuba and discussion of the need to disperse planes at Florida bases in the event of attacks by MIGs based in Cuba.
McNamara talks of a very dangerous situation since ships approaching the quarantine line are being shadowed by a Soviet submarine.
Thursday, October 25 United States Ambassador Adlai Stevenson confronts the Soviets at the United Nations but they refuse to answer.
American military forces are instructed to set DEFCON 2 the highest ever in United States history.
Review of the movement of ships toward the quarantine line and potential United States responses.
Friday, October 26 EX-COMM receives a letter from Khrushchev stating that the Soviets would remove their missiles if President Kennedy publicly guarantees the United States will not invade Cuba.
The CIA reports that the construction of the missile sites is continuing and accelerating.
RFK meets secretly with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin and agrees after a phone call to the president that the removal of United States missiles from Turkey is negotiable as part of a comprehensive settlement.
Khrushchev receives a cable from Castro urging a nuclear first strike against the United States in the event of an invasion of Cuba.
Low Kiloton yield Saturday, October 27 While one U-2 spy plane accidentally flies into Russia, another is shot down over Cuba.
EX-COMM receives a second letter from Khrushchev stating that, in addition to a public promise not to invade Cuba, the United States remove its missiles from Turkey.
In a speech aired on Radio Moscow, Khrushchev announces the dismantling of Soviet missiles in Cuba and does not insist on his demands concerning the removal of United States missiles from Turkey.
Monday, October 29 President Kennedy orders United States ships to remain on the quarantine line and authorizes continuation of low-level reconnaissance flights.
Wednesday, November 21 Just over a month after the crisis began, President Kennedy terminates the quarantine when Khrushchev agrees after several weeks of tense negotiations at the UN to withdraw Soviet IL-28 nuclear bombers from Cuba.
