As bombs fall on Ukraine, many European governments are waking up to the sorry state of their own civil defenses.
Report | John Last How to Get Recent History All Wrong A new book identifies—and misunderstands—the structural forces behind today’s geopolitical chaos.
Review | Matthew C Klein Finland’s Foreign Minister on Why Helsinki Is Moving Toward NATO Now Pekka Haavisto once spearheaded efforts to engage with Russia and broaden cooperation.
Interview | Gordon F Sander NFTs in Video Games Bring Laundered Money and Angry Players Rushing to further monetize gaming adds to global social and environmental risk.
Special Report Cuban missile crisis This year marks the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962, the nerve-wracking peak of the Cold War.
To commemorate this event, Foreign Policy is tweeting the Cuban missile crisis in real time, chronicling the days, hours, and minutes when the world stood on the brink of nuclear destruction.
By FP Staff 626605_120710_CubanMissileBanner..jpg July 6, 2012, 3:16 PM This year marks the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962, the nerve-wracking peak of the Cold War.
Join us as we retell the story of the Cuban missile crisis as it was actually experienced by John F Kennedy, Nikita Khrushchev, and Fidel Castro -forward rather than backward, in all its cliff-hanging excitement and unpredictability.
Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War, will draw topical lessons from the gravest national security crisis of the Cold War.
The Thirteen Days A day-by-day examination of the events of the crisis.
This year marks the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962, the nerve-wracking peak of the Cold War.
On the Brink Michael Dobbs‘s blog on the world’s most dangerous nuclear confrontation.
Join FP’s new joint contest with the Kennedy School’s Belfer Center Tensions in SeptemberA closer look at the month preceding the crisis.
Russian President Vladimir Putin stands in front of Russian and United States flags at a G-20 summit in 2019 amid rising nationalism in both countries.
Elites Are Getting Nationalism All Wrong Russia, the United States, and the European Union are each suffering from resulting disasters.
United States President Joe Biden meets with Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Mark Milley, members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and combatant commanders at the White House in Washington on April 20.
No Endgame With his strategy to “weaken” Russia, the United States president may be turning the Ukraine war into a global one.
Russia's navy ships take part in a military exercise called Kavkaz 2016 at the coast of the Black Sea in Crimea on September 9, 2016.
Welcome to the Black Sea Era of War It has been the world’s bloodiest body of water since the Cold War—and not just because of Ukraine.
May 6, 2022, 5:04 PM See All Stories Sign up for Morning Brief Foreign Policy’s flagship daily newsletter with what’s coming up around the world today from Foreign Policy’s newsletter writer Colm Quinn.
Danish philosopher Soren Kierkegaard once noted that history is \""lived forward\"" but \""understood backward.
Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War<\/i><\/a>, will draw topical lessons from the gravest national security crisis of the Cold War.
