The Cold War Juan Carlos Ocaña Aybar Geography and History – Bilingual Studies – IES Parque de Lisboa, Alcorcón 1 The Cold War Introduction The Grand Alliance formed by the U.S., USSR and the UK in World War II managed to defeat European fascism and Japanese expansionism, but began to crumble even before Allied troops occupied Berlin.
The Cold War began, a long period of rivalry which pitted the United States against the Soviet Union and their respective allies and determined international relations for almost half a century.
Soviet soldiers in Berlin, May 1945 Potsdam conference, the alliance started to crumble, July 1945 The Cold War was fought on the political, economic, and propaganda fronts.
In almost all of these conflicts, the two superpowers and their allies supported diplomatically and armed the contenders.
Weapons did not defeat the USSR, but the ineffectiveness of its economic system and the lack of political freedoms.
Churchill proclaimed in 1946 that an ""Iron curtain"" separated communist Europe from free Europe.
In 1947, United States President Truman expressed their willingness to implement a policy of ""containment of communism"" to prevent its expansion to Greece and other parts of world.
To achieve this goal, the United States implemented the Marshall Plan, an economic plan that sent aid to Europe.
The goal of this plan was to prevent the impoverishment of the populations that favoured European communist expansion.
The first stage of the Cold War took place in the defeated country of Germany.
Soon there were increased differences between Western and Soviet authorities.
In 1949, the Federal Republic of Germany, in the western zones, and the German Democratic Republic in the Soviet zone, were born.
Henceforth, throughout the Cold War, there existed two Germanys, one a democratic and capitalist, the other a Soviet-style communist dictatorship.
The victory of Mao Zedong's communist forces led to the proclamation in October 1949 of the Republic of China.
Thereafter the two nuclear powers could face off anywhere in the world.
Joe-1, the American nickname for the first Soviet atomic test, referred to Joseph Stalin.
The Korean War led to the partition of Korea into two antagonistic countries.
The North was a tight communist regime backed by the USSR and China, while the South was a US-backed military dictatorship.
Thereafter, each block defended its hinterland against the advance of their opponent block.
The great Western bloc military alliance is still in existence to this day.
Second, Washington pushed the European integration process that culminated in 1957 with the birth of the European Economic Community.
Finally, the United States wove a network of anti-Soviet alliances worldwide.
The USSR signed military agreements and cooperation with communist China of Mao.
Finally, in 1955, the Warsaw Pact created a military alliance that joined the USSR with all European countries of the communist bloc with the exception of Yugoslavia.
Peaceful Coexistence 1955-1962 Stalin's death in 1953 and the rise to power of a new Soviet leader, Khrushchev opened a new period in the Cold War.
However, this new environment did not mean the end of international crises.
It was also during these years when, to the delight U.S., 5 that the two communist giants, China and the USSR, broke their alliance and became antagonistic powers.
The main factor that led to the ""thaw"" in relations between the two superpowers was what was called the ""balance of terror"",e. the situation created after the conversion of the USSR to atomic power and accelerated rearmament for both powers.
There was a general certainty that a war between the superpowers would lead to mutual destruction of both and much of the planet.
From 1951 to 1958 the German Democratic Republic , the German Communist, had seen more than two million East Germans fled to West Germany.
The differences in living standards and lack of freedoms prompted this exodus of the population.
On August 13, 1961, before the astonished eyes of the Berliners, the GDR authorities began building an impenetrable wall that would surround the entirety of western Berlin.
As it was known in the West, the ""wall of shame"" became the great symbol of the Cold War.
Two years earlier, with the triumph of the Cuban Revolution, Fidel Castro took the Cold War at the gates of the United States Hostility culminated when the United States failed to invade the island and were repulsed by Castro's forces in Playa Girón.
The Cuban Revolution was, in principle, was not communist, but the revolutionaries sided with the communist bloc.
The United States aggression allowed Cuban dictator to ask the USSR to deploy nuclear missiles to its territory.
When United States spy planes detected missile ramps, Kennedy reacted by declaring a blockade of the island and announcing in October 22, 1962 that the United States Navy would prevent the passage of any Soviet ship to be routed to the island.
The world held his breath at the prospect of an incident that could lead to fatal nuclear escalation.
Finally, on October 29, Khrushchev relented and gave the order to their ships to turn back.
The USSR agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba in exchange for the United States commitment not to invade the island.
The two communist giants, the USSR and China, broke relations and initiated a period of deep hostility.
The Détente 1962-1975 After peeking ""over the edge"" in the nuclear missile crisis in Cuba, Kennedy and Khrushchev decided to start a more systematic and enduring policy of détente.
This opened a new Cold War period in which agreements between the superpowers did not prevent serious conflicts such as Vietnam or the Middle East.
Among the treaties highlighted was the NPT , signed in 1968 by the U.S., the USSR, and the United Kingdom and the SALT I Agreement which limited the number of intercontinental missiles that the USSR and the USA could own.
Nixon and Khruschev after signing SALT treaty The détente did not prevent local conflicts from degenerating into bloody wars in which both superpowers intervened.
The Middle East conflict, which began with the birth of the state of Israel in 1948, reached a peak with the ""Six Day War"" in 1967 and the Yom Kippur War in 1973.
Israel, with United States support, went from being a small country besieged by enemies to becoming the hegemon of the region and occupied Palestinian territories and part of Syria.
The oil price increases that followed the Yom Kippur War in 1973 triggered the ""oil crisis"" that marked the end of a long period of expansion of capitalism in the developed countries.
The war in Vietnam, a country ravaged by conflict since the Second World War, is the biggest humiliation of the United States during the Cold War.
After a long war in the that saw the United States shipping half a million soldiers and not hesitating to use chemical weapons and massive bombings, the United States government had to accept defeat.
However, its economy had entered a period of stagnation that ultimately led to the collapse of the communist system.
United States President Reagan in the eighties returned to a policy of confrontation with the Soviet Union and the USSR could not cope with the new challenge that came from Washington.
The USSR international misread the situation and launched an expansion of its international influence regardless of the serious difficulties that depleted its economy.
Starting in 1974, pro-Soviet regimes in Ethiopia, Angola, and Mozambique were established.
Pushed by the serious economic situation, Gorbachov launched a reformist program called the “Perestroika”, which eventually dismantled the communist bloc and led to the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 and consequently the end of the Cold War.
