Share 'With A Heavy Heart...' -Secret JFK Speech Could Have Signaled Start Of WWIII share See comments Print Historians say the world has never been closer to nuclear conflict than it was during the Cuban missile crisis.
WASHINGTON -It could have been the start of a war the likes of which the world had never seen.
Films and history books have documented the the hair's-width margin that separated the United States and the Soviet Union from nuclear conflict during 13 days in October 1962, the height of the Cuban missile crisis.
The first page of a speech President John F Kennedy had prepared in the event of a United States attack on Soviet installations in Cuba This speech is the highlight of an archive containing nearly 3,000 pages of notes, transcripts, and other documents kept by Robert Kennedy, the president's brother and close adviser.
It was posted online by the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum last week to coincide with the 50th anniversary of the crisis.
The newly released material offers a fascinating glimpse of the limited options open to the United States leader during the tense standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Nail-Biting Diplomacy Kennedy's speech, of course, was never delivered.
The United States leader instead enacted a naval blockade of Cuba and as the world held its breath, the approaching Soviet ships turned back.
According to Thomas Putnam, the director of the John F Kennedy Presidential Library, the specter of war allegedly compelled the president's usual speech writer to turn down the assignment.
After days of nail-biting diplomacy, Moscow pledged to withdraw its weapons and Washington pledged to stay out of Cuba.
Arrows and question marks indicate that not all were convinced of which option was best.Raw Material Of History Memos detail the botched Operation Mongoose, a plan to overthrow Cuban leader Fidel Castro that helped convince Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev to send nuclear weapons to the island.
There are also notes referring to a secret deal for the United States to withdraw missiles from Turkey as well as CIA documents describing the failed Bay of Pigs invasion and a 1964 mafia-linked plan to assassinate Castro.
Graham Allison says one detail from the archive has particularly resonated with him.
