Canada, the one country in the Western Hemisphere to share a close military alliance with the United States, was profoundly affected by the events of October 1962.
Although Canadian involvement has been examined in some detail by observers of Canadian foreign policy,2 new evidence-gleaned from presidential papers, recent memoirs, and oral history interviews--offers the basis for a reassessment of Canada's political and military response to the crisis and lends fresh insight into the dynamics of the United States-Canadian relationship.
No less anti-Communist than cans, Canadians were more flexible and pragmatic in with Communist governments.
Heavily dependent on trade, they had little use for economic sanctions and view that maintaining normal relations did not signify of a particular regime.
Many Canadians also felt th shared with Cuba the status of economic satellite to American industry.
Hence they tended to view Castro's expropriations United States property as the ""legitimate efforts of a sma economy to free itself from excessive foreign influence.
Canadians further regarded American involvement in the B of Pigs fiasco as deplorable and condemned a presumed Ameri can right of forceful intervention as a means of blockin ""communist penetration"" of the hemisphere.
Against the vice of his External Affairs Minister, Howard Green, Prime Minister John G Diefenbaker made a personal effort to offset public and parliamentary criticism of American participation in the Bay of Pigs invasion.
In addition, External Affairs Minister Green cautioned Secretary of State Dean Rusk against further intervention ""on the grounds that it would stir up a hornet's nest in Latin America... and 3According to a Gallup Poll published in the Toronto Star, January 30, 1963, the sale of nonstrategic goods to Communist countries was opposed by only 26% of the public.
See ""Why We Won't Join the Blockade to Starve Castro Out of Cuba,"" MacLean's, LXXV (April 21, 1962), 2.
They were particularly upset by Howard Green's public suggestion in May 1961, that Canada might help by mediating the Cuban-American dispute.
Green had noted the nationalist rather than communist elements in the Cuban revolution, its irreversible quality, and the need for the States to let Cubans choose their own form of govern President John F Kennedy was personally ""concerned Green's statements, for in the American view, they refle ""distressing"" inattention to the facts.
Although Canada co ated in the American strategic embargo, sales of othe rose until the United States cut off Cuba's foreign ex Despite the consequent drop in Cuban-Canadian trade t 1962 and 1963, and regular assurances that no bootleg strategic goods were being exported, criticism of a pe ""fast buck"" policy persisted in the American press an gress.
Canadians thought the Americans had vastly over estimated and were seriously overreacting to Cuba's potenti threat.
Americans expected Canadians to cooperate in contai ing Cuban communism, because Canada was not only part o the Western Hemisphere, but part of an alliance system d signed to contain Russian communism.
These became cons quential factors in determining political behavior pattern during the missile crisis.
President Kennedy expressed growing United States concern with the Russian build-up of Cuban military power on Se tember 4, 1962, and reiterated it in a second statement on September 13.
It was also widely believed that Washington was being pushed into a more extreme position by Republicans campaigning in the off-year elections.
On October 16, 1962, the President was shown aerial reconnaissance photographs which revealed what flight surveillance patterns had previously missed.
With one exception, this intelligence was not imparted to the allies until October 22, after the Kennedy leadership had debated and decided upon a response.
Through his close friend the British ambassador,'4 Kennedy warned Prime Minister Harold Macmillan of the imminence of a crisis three days prior to informing the other allies.
In addition, day before sending personal emissaries to Paris, Rome, and Ottawa, Kennedy explained to Britain's Prime Minister need to make unilateral decisions and offered, from that p on, the most intimate consultation.
To President DeGaulle, Kennedy sent Dean Acheson Prime Minister Diefenbaker, Kennedy sent the former Uni States ambassador to Canada, Livingston Merchant.
Diefenbaker's coolness may also have been dictated by his recent receipt of a letter from the President.
Kennedy stated that he had learned, to his ""distress,"" that Canada intended to support a new UN resolution calling for an unverified moratorium on nuclear tests.
The Canadian vote, Kennedy wrote, ""will be tantamount to Canada's abandoning the Western position"" and ""will be seen by the Soviet Union as a successful breach"" of the West.
The longest part of the presidential communic however, served notice of a resolution to be proposed Americans at an urgent meeting of the Security Council for withdrawal of the missiles under UN supervision in for lifting the quarantine.
In the much s note to Diefenbaker, therefore, it appears that the Pr was placing a greater emphasis on a solution throu United Nations.
Indeed, if Diefenbaker did have previous intelligence, it could only have been of the vaguest sort.
Neither the Defence Minister, nor the Air Chief of Staff, nor the chairman of the Chiefs of Staff recall anything more than an indefinite sense of ""something being up"" which had filtered through the Canadian-American military network.
Finally, Merchant reported an incident which Diefenbaker does not mention in his memoirs-the Prime Minister's request that one sentence in the President's s characterizing Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko in unflatt terms, be deleted.
The ambassador telephoned Dean Rusk him that he agreed with Diefenbaker's objection and ha offending phrase removed.
Prime Minister states that he discussed his view of Khrushchev's intentions with Kennedy, as well as the merits of a U solution, and that he complained about the lack of consultatio ""tExcept where otherwise indicated, this sketch of the briefing session is based on t Merchant interview, June 18, 1974; interview with Lt.-Col. the Hon.
Howard Green was a interviewed, but his recollection of the encounter is vague.
Later that evening, in the House of Commons, he had little to say beyond urging calmness.
He commented on only one of the seven points in the President's speech, namely the resolution to be placed before the United Nations.
He went on to propose that in order to obtain a ""full and complete understanding of what is taking place in Cuba,"" the eight unaligned members of the UN disarmament committee make an on-site inspection.
None had any comment on the projected United States counteraction in the Caribbean.
In Vancouver, the national leader of the New Democratic party repeated the obvious skepticism of statements in the House, but put his feeling in stronger terms.
The request for additional evidence about the existence of an offensive base was a reflection of Canada's particular perception of Cuba and the Cuban-American issue.
National political leaders feared that the United States might once more be overreacting, while they also worried that it was not.
The White House log of telephone calls is not open to scholars and the receipt of this call cannot be verified.
Both his versions of a telephone call may have been a case of confusing what should have happened with what did happen.
Canada had consistently supported the UN; Canadian statesmen had played a major role in strengthening it.
The UN was one arena of world politics where the Canadians believed they could exert some influence.
Prime Minister Diefenbaker shared his colleagues' faith in the UN, but unlike the heads of other parties, he had seen photographic proof of the mi threat.
However, he had been given little time to contem appropriate Canadian action and, called before Parliamen had to make an immediate public statement.
Stressing the r that the UN might play, therefore, was not only the na Canadian response but probably seemed the wisest and s course for the time being.
Defence Minister Harkn immediately informed by the chairman of the Chiefs of Committee, Air Chief Marshall Frank Miller, that the en military apparatus of the United States had gone on ""Def alert,28 and that the Canadian units in NORAD should be brought to the same state of readiness.
Under the loosel phrased NORAD agreement, its commander, an American, was to ""operate within a concept of air defence approved by the appropriate authorities"" of the two governments.
Patterns of policy coor and communality of interest demanded that the Ca forces in NORAD be brought to equivalent status imme The question of who had the appropriate authority t ment an alert posed far more difficulty.
Except where footnotes indicate otherwise, the account of this meeting, w until approximately 2m. on October 23, has been put together from inte Harkness, Miller, Dunlap, and an interview with General G Walsh (Chief Staff) on October 25, 1974.
Harkness also talked about his actions on the October 22 during the television broadcast ""The Tenth Decade"" (transcri from the CBC) on November 24, 1971.
Telling the Chiefs to ""get ready,"" he lef to confer with the Prime Minister, completely confident th the matter would be a mere formality.
Diefenbaker, howeve refused to give his permission for an alert until the Cabi could meet and discuss the situation the next morning.
Believing that he had no other recourse, Harkness retur to the Chiefs of Staff meeting and authorized the alert on h own.
Apart from a few minor details, such as an offi announcement of the alert and the recall of men on leave which would, of course, have attracted the attention of both the public and the Prime Minister, all of the requirements were met.
Ships are not as easily dispersed as aircraft, and they must not be caught in harbor.
The Chief of Naval Staff, therefore, having received information through his own channels, acted on personal initiative and ordered the Atlantic fleet based in Halifax to ready for sea.
Of secondary accounts, only Reford, Canada and Three Crises, 178, correctly places the alert on the evening of October 22.
Most Canadians who took an interest in defense matters were well aware of the close cooperation of the Canadian a American air forces under the aegis of NORAD, but noticed the extent of naval coordination under the cover of NATO.3"" The integration of the Atlantic fleet into SA -a NATO comma headquarters at Norfolk, Virginia-meant that the Ca navy had a role to play during the Cuban missile crisi that has been either ignored or noted with only passing i in standard accounts.
Canadia deployment involved the detection and tracking of "" For example, the recall of men on longer leave and evacuations.
Peter C Dobell, Canada's Search for New Role Policy in the Trudeau Era , 26.
MSNone of the accounts written from the United States point of view mention it.
In a footnote, Lyon states that ""in vi steps the RCAF and RCN were taking,"" Harkness's answer to a question in concerning Canada's military response was misleading.
Reford mak statement but neither source deals with the NATO implications.
This activity in turn permitted units of the American navy to move south into the blockade zone.
Given the central part played by the USN during the missile crisis, the Canadian contribution offered significant military support.
It is probably safe to conclude that Canada was the only power to activate forces committed to NATO in order to aid the Americans.
Washington... been urging a NATO ""Alert,"" with all that this implies , I told him that we would not repeat not agree at this stage.
N agreed with this, and said he thought NATO powers would take the same view.
Nevertheless, at the political level, Prime Minister Diefenbaker and his Cabinet were under the impression that the decision to support or not support the United States militarily still rested in their hands.
The Cabinet met to discuss the situation twice on October 23 and again on October 24, decision ever emerged.
Secondary accounts have plac blame for this outcome on Prime Minister Diefenbaker and to a lesser extent on External Affairs Minister Green.
But these sources have paid insufficient attention to the divisions wi the Cabinet and have misunderstood the reasons behind the government's hesitation.
In believing that Canada's security interests were best served by a rapid alignment Americans, these sources have tended to downpla perceptions of those interests.
One group within the did agree immediately with Harkness that, given NORAD commitment and an apparent Russian threa entire continent, the nation's security interests could served by declaring an alert.
But a second group included Diefenbaker and Green, felt those interests wo better served by avoiding any action that might appear ative to the Soviet Union.
T agreement was renegotiated in 1975 and modified to provide that Canad would not go on alert at American command.
Montreal Gazette, April 15, 19 ""Robert Keohane and Joseph Nye have recently drawn attention to the im of transgovernmental activity in international relations-direct interactio governmental subunits that is not controlled or closely guided by the pol respective national governments.
Although these ministers later came to support Harkness, their varying degrees of resentment over the United States' failure to consult Canada initially strengthened the position enunciated by Diefenbaker and Green.
When the ministers gathered together on the morning of October 23, most knew only what they had seen on television or read in the newspapers.
None of them, except the three ministers who had been briefed by Merchant, had seen the photographic evidence.
Thus they were being asked to reach a decision concerning the advisability of supporting the Americans on the basis of essentially secondhand information.
This information had to be fitted, moreover, into existing images of the Cuba-United States issue, images which centered on the belief that the Americans had been overestimating and overreacting to the Cuban threat.
At no time during the crisis did Kennedy get in touch with Diefenbaker, or Rusk with Green, or even McNamara with Harkness.
The only United States official to speak to his Canadian counterpart was Maxwell Taylor, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs, who had one conversation with Frank Miller.
Miller was also in constant touch with the Americans at subordinate military levels through regula NORAD channels.
The absence of communication at the political level, however, fed existing fears that States was too excitable and too quick on the tri Cuba was concerned.
Diefenbaker telephoned Harold Macmillan to find out what the reaction had been in Great Britain to the Cuban crisis.
Macmillan told him that the United Kingdom had not gone on alert and would at this stage, since additional mobilization could eas interpreted as a provocative measure by the Russians. millan's caution was an important consideration because it with existing Canadian attitudes and interests, thereby m the presumed option of a nonalert seem even more attr One of these interests involved the government's n dilemma.
Approval of the alert could have meant that United States would request the movement of nuclear-equ interceptors to their bases in Canada, an action that w appear both provocative and perhaps compromise f government attempts to keep nuclear weapons off Can soil.
A nonalert was also in keeping with the traditional C an attitude towards a crisis situation-that of attempti avoid provocation, trying to settle the dispute in an am fashion, and taking the problem to the UN before end unilateral action.
This approach had been voiced b leaders of all national parties in the House of Commons the President's speech, and it was one that had always popular support.
Macmillan's memoirs now however, that this support was only political and that the British Prime Minis strongly opposed to an alert and considered it provocative.
In response to a quer the telephone call, Macmillan wrote that he was ""not prepared to add anything statement I have already published in my books regarding the matter in which especially interested.
Here is an occasion when it is better to swallow one's pride and fall Canada and Three Crises, 243.
It was also a constant in the responses of External Affairs Minister Green during a half-hour television interview on the evening of October 24.
I think it is essential that Canada should show some steadiness in this whole situation.
And that's what is being done. ... he Government has been ... k the people just as much informed as we possibly can do, and same time not endangering our defensive position and not m trouble abroad.... e're going to do everything we can to g crisis settled .... e don't want a nuclear war.
A good part of the questioning in the interview was an att to elicit a satisfactory response about the degree of sup Canada was offering the United States, but Green avoide endorsement of Kennedy's blockade.
The resentment of the majority of ministers at the American ""SGiven the successful outcome of the blockade, Diefenbaker's judgment prove wrong.
Some were outraged at the American assumptio Canada would offer immediate and unqualified suppor matter what the situation, but others would have been sa with at least the courtesy of token consultation.
On October 23, the OAS approved the quarantin only three countries abstaining from that section of the tion which authorized OAS members to use force against Early on Wednesday, October 24, the naval blockade went effect and Russian ships were reported to be advancing st towards Cuba.
The only new information available to m the rapidly increasing danger, however, was channeled th the military network.
On the other hand, it gave Harkness a di advantage in pressing his view on the majority.
By the en the third meeting on the morning of the 24th, three-four the Cabinet had set other considerations aside and supp the Harkness position.
External Affairs Minister Green never understood those who subsequently found fault with Cabinet behavior during crisis.
It is also likely, howeve that had the entire Cabinet initially favored an alert, Dief baker would have concurred.
Indeed, the Prime Minister d eventually approve it on the basis of new information which did not attempt to bring before his colleagues.
It was also learned that Strategic A Command and certain elements of United States naval forces had moved from a ""Defcon 3"" to a ""Defcon 2"" alert, indica full war footing, just one step removed from actual hostilit The Defence Minister tried once more to get the poli authorization he wanted.
This time he succeeded, for he convinced Diefenbaker that Canada's security was now gravely endangered by the preparations of the Soviet Union.
With the American alert increased and actual hostilities apparently s imminent, the question of nonprovocation seemed less impo tant than that of preparing for war.
To this day, the Prime Minister rejects the ide of any authorization other than his own.
Harkness later admitted that he ha ""very carefully"" phrased his answers to opposition queries.
All of the steps included in an alert had not bee authorized and the alert had not been officially proclaime Naval units were not under special orders, nor were th actually blockading Russian ships-they were merely repeat a NATO exercise.
Opposition members were also pressing the Prime Minister for information.
One plea for assurance that the government was ""doing everything possible to halt this race toward international suicide"" was ruled out of order, but to other requests for information, Diefenbaker responded by asking for restraint.
In order to deal with that situation, he announced that ""all Canadian military forces have taken precautionary measure and that NORAD's Canadian component had ""been place upon the same level of readiness"" as the forces of the Unit States.
It was later made clear, however, that the same level of readiness did not mean that Canada's weapons systems had been nuclear armed.
Canadians stand by their allies and their undertakings, and we intend in th present crisis to do the same.
On the other hand, we shall not fail to d everything possible to seek solutions to these problems without war.
Taking encouragement from the fact that some Soviet ship had turned back from Cuba, Diefenbaker still cautioned that ""i would be dangerously premature to assume that the critic phase"" had passed.
Returning to the basic theme of his state ment on October 22, he stated that the ""greatest hope"" of finding a peaceful solution lay in the United Nations.
While avoiding any expression of personal confidence in American leadership, Diefenbaker praised U Thant both for the way h was discharging his responsibilities and for his proposal of standstill which would permit time for negotiation.
Opposition Leader Lester Pearson, in concert with the heads of the smaller parties, spoke even more intensely of a debt to the United Nations and was less supportive than Diefenbaker had been o the quarantine as a security measure.
Criticism of the government's failure to declare an immediate alert and stand forthrightly beside the United Stat emerged in the aftermath of Green's television appearance and accelerated as the crisis subsided.
The censure became widespread and even extended to the ranks of Diefenbake Conservative party.
The Kennedy administration was undoubtedly dis pointed at the level of political response, but that response h exposed no weakness and posed no threat to national secur interests.
The informal ""agreed procedure"" p viding for presidential-prime ministerial consultation in event of a NORAD alert had not been followed.
The success of Kennedy's action in forcing Khrushchev back down was widely lauded both in Canada and abroad.
The idea that Canada failed militari to back, immediately, the United States lingers on.
Such sentiment left Diefenbaker with the lack of consultation and its consequent infringement of Canadian sovereignty as the only possible public justification for delay.
How could you act at the same time as your partner acted if no knowledge beyond an hour and a half prior to the speech. acted immediately.
In view of the American triumph, the Prime M was not able to explain Cabinet hesitation on the b another aspect of the truth-that a segment of Ca political leadership had perceived the nation's security in to be best served by avoiding any action that might provocative to Khrushchev.
Force had clearly won th Although a decision in favor of a nonmilitary respons have fit in with existing attitudes and interests, critics wo """"General Lauris Norstad to President Kennedy, Nov., 1962, POF, NATO Correspondence.
Lyon, Canada in World Affairs, 57, 62, co Diefenbaker's reaction with that of DeGaulle, noting that the French Preside accepted the American explanation and offered immediate support.
Lyon mention, however, that three years later one of the reasons behind DeGaulle' to have NATO bases in France removed was the lack of consultation during th crisis. ""gMemoirs, III, 82.
A summary of the foreign press response to the blockade, found in President Kennedy's office files, makes it clear that a differing perception was not expected from the Canadians.
But given the fact that Canada w the only country in the Western Hemisphere to share a clo military alliance with the United States, consultation was i perative.
The military integration of the two countries meant that Canada was inevitably involved, but the President and his advisors ignored this, and made no attempt to deal with th complications of integration at the political level.
Absorbed in their own concerns, they believed that a personal presidenti message and photographs of the missile sites would suffic ""0Green interview.
The diplomatic channels were blocked, such that even the token consultation given Macmillan was denied.
There was no intimacy between the President and the Canadian ambassador as there was between Kennedy and his friend the British envoy.
Indeed, the President's disdain for and contempt of the Prime Minister completely precluded the kind of communication Kennedy had with Macmillan.
In spite of this, Kennedy and his advisors expected that given the measure of the threat, Canada would offer full and immediate support.
In face of the same threat, Diefenbak and most of his Cabinet had expected consultation.
Th expectations were not fulfilled and the resulting disappoi ments provoked a further response accelerating the spiral misunderstanding.
Canadians wondered what had happene to their special relationship, and Diefenbaker became con vinced that the President intended to push him and Cana around.
Americans wondered what had become of their steadfast ally, and Kennedy, with his administration, became more certain that harmonious relations with Canada would only be possible once Diefenbaker was out of office.
Canada, the only NATO ally to back the United militarily, yet ironically criticized for insufficient supp fered other repercussions as a result of the missile cris next months, the government was subjected to incr pressures from domestic sources and from outside C come to a decision on nuclear arms.
The impotence of C weapons systems during the crisis came as a shock Canadians who had not previously focused on the issue.
At the same time, with the world having come to nuclear catastrophe, those who opposed nuclear ar more determined than ever to keep them out of Indeed, the catalytic effect of the crisis brought the issue to a head and Diefenbaker's administration to an end.
The Cuba confrontation was harrowing for everyone beneath the veneer of ""playing it cool"" the crisis may well been even more frightening to the Canadian political le ship than it was to the American.
Canadian fears inten because Canadians found themselves at the brink without consent and because after the proclamation of the aler found themselves helpless to influence the course of in which they were nonetheless inextricably involve the last evening of the crisis, Saturday, October 27, E Affairs Minister Green drove up to the Gatineau hill Ottawa with his wife.
In the middle of the night awakened by the explosion of a faulty electrical transfor thought that was it,"" he later reflected.
