Martin Luther posts his 95 theses on the door of theCastleChurchinWittenberg.
Citing failing health, Union General Winfield Scott resigns as Commander of the United States Army.
Battle of Britain ends – The United Kingdom preventsGermanyfrom invadingGreat Britain.
F4U Corsair accomplishes the first successful radar guided interception.
The Algerian National Liberation Front begins a revolt against French rule.
The United Kingdom and France begin bombingEgyptto force the reopening of theSuez Canal.
Citing progress with theParispeace talks,USPresident Lyndon B Johnson announces to the nation that he has ordered a complete cessation of “all air, naval, and artillery bombardment of North Vietnam” effective November 1.
Wells’s The War of the Worlds, causing a nationwide panic in theUnited States.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt approves United States $1 billion in Lend-Lease aid to the Allied nations.
The Soviet Union detonates the hydrogen bomb Tsar Bomba overNovaya Zemlya; at 58 megatons of yield, it is still the largest nuclear device ever detonated.
Just miles fromDa Nang,United StatesMarines repel an intense attack by wave after wave of Viet Cong forces, killing 56 guerrillas.
Among the dead, a sketch of Marine positions was found on the body of a 13-year-old Vietnamese boy who sold drinks to the Marines the day before.
Charles the Bold defeatsLiege 1618 – English adventurer, writer, and courtier Sir Walter Raleigh is beheaded for allegedly conspiring against James I ofEngland.
William E Broughton who spotted the mountain near the mouth of theWillametteRiver.
Battle of Wauhatchie – Forces under Union General Ulysses S Grant ward off a Confederate attack led by General James Longstreet.
Leon Czolgosz, the assassin of United States President William McKinley, is executed by electrocution.
In the United Kingdom, leading clergymen and political figures hold a public meeting to register outrage over Nazi Germany’s persecution of Jews.
InSouth Africa, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission presents its report, which condemns both sides for committing atrocities.
The plane instead lands inAnkaraafter the pilot tricked the hijacker into thinking that he was landing in the Bulgarian capital ofSofiato refuel.
Turkish forces under the Grand Vizier Sinan Pasha defeat the Mameluks near Gaza.
Imam Ahmad ibn Ibrihim al-Ghazi again defeats the army of Lebna Dengel, Emperor of Ethiopia.
Battle of White Plains – British Army forces arrive at White Plains, attack and capture Chatterton Hill from the Americans.
Second Battle of Fair Oaks ends – Union Army forces under General Ulysses S Grant withdraw from Fair Oaks, Virginia, after failing to breach the Confederate defenses around Richmond, Virginia.
Italian fascists led by Benito Mussolini march on Rome and take over the Italian government.
German SS forces arrange the massacre of more than 9,000 Jews of the Kaunas ghetto.
After the victims assembled on the Demokratu square at 6 am to be shot they are buried in gigantic ditches.
SS directive orders all Jewish children’s mittens and stockings to be sent from the death camps to the SS families.
Soviet Union leader Nikita Khrushchev announces that he had ordered the removal of Soviet missile bases in Cuba.
In short, Pope Paul VI announces that the ecumenical council has decided that Jews are not collectively responsible for the killing of Christ.
Lewis Libby, Vice-president Dick Cheney’s chief of staff, is indicted in the Valerie Plame case.
Negus Mikael, marching on the Ethiopian capital in support of his son Emperor Iyasus V, is defeated by Fitawrari Habte Giyorgis, securing the throne for Empress Zauditu.
Stock markets around the world crash because of fears of a global economic meltdown.
All companies formed the national ITV1 with regional references only before regional programmes.
United StatesNavy Day GreeceFlag Day TurkmenistanIndependence Day Saint Vincent and the GrenadinesIndependence Day R.C. saints – October 27th is the feast day of the following Roman Catholic Saints: Abban of Magheranoidhe Abban of New Ross St.
Giuseppe Garibaldi, conqueror of the Kingdom of Two Sicilies, gives it to King Victor Emmanuel II of Italy.
The city of Thessaloniki is unified with Greece on the feast day of its patron Saint Demetrius.
Battle of Caporetto; Italy suffers a catastrophic defeat at the forces of Austria-Hungary and Germany.
In the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands during the Guadalcanal Campaign, one United States aircraft carrier, Hornet, was sunk and another aircraft carrier, Enterprise, is heavily damaged.
The WHO and the CDC consider this date the anniversary of the eradication of smallpox, the most spectacular success of vaccination.
Choi Kyu-ha becomes the acting President; Kim is executed the following May.
Mossad agents assassinate Islamic Jihad leader Fathi Shikaki in his hotel in Malta.
Canadians and Mohawks defeat the Americans in the Battle of Chateauguay.
Adlai Stevenson shows photos at the UN proving Soviet missiles are installed in Cuba 1970 – The wreck of Confederate submarine Hunley was found off Charleston, South Carolina, by pioneer underwater archaeologist, Dr.
The United States and its Caribbean allies invade Grenada, six days after Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and several of his supporters were executed in a coup d’état.
Three months after the end of the Ten-Day War, the last soldier of the Yugoslav People’s Army leaves the territory of the Republic of Slovenia.
The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth is completely divided between Austria, Prussia and Russia 1812 – Napoleonic Wars: The Battle of Maloyaroslavets takes place near Moscow.
The Japanese aircraft carrier Zuikaku, and the battleship Musashi are sunk in the Battle of Leyte Gulf.
An R-16 ballistic missile explodes on the launch pad at the Soviet Union’s Baikonur Cosmodrome space facility, killing over 100.
Among the dead is Field Marshall Mitrofan Nedelin, whose death is reported to have occurred in a plane crash 1964 – Northern Rhodesia gains independence from the United Kingdom and becomes the Republic of Zambia 1973 – Yom Kippur War ends 1977 – Veterans Day is observed on the fourth Monday in October for the seventh and last time.
After the verdict, the United Kingdom breaks diplomatic relations with Syria, claiming that Hindawi was helped by Syrian officials.
British Prime Minister, Robert Walpole, reluctantly declares war on Spain.
Battle of Westport – Union forces under General Samuel R Curtis defeat Confederate troops led by General Sterling Price at Westport, near Kansas City.
An Italian pilot takes off from Libya to observe Turkish army lines during the Turco-Italian War.
Field Marshal Georgy Zhukov takes command of Red Army operations designed to prevent the further advance into Russia of German forces and to prevent the German armies from capturing Moscow.
Romanian Lieutenant-Colonel Nicolae Deleanu administered the executions.
The Second Battle of El Alamein starts – At El Alamein in northern Egypt, the British Eighth Army under Field Marshal Montgomery begin a critical offensive to expel the Axis armies from Egypt, never to return.
The Battle of Leyte Gulf begins – The largest naval battle in history begins in the Philippines; and also, the Soviet Red Army enters Hungary.
United States President Richard M Nixon agrees to turn over subpoenaed audio tapes of his Oval Office conversations about the scandal.
A French army barracks in Lebanon is also hit that same morning, killing 58 troops.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian Chairman Yasser Arafat reach a “land for peace” agreement.
A period of civil war and disorder began when King Fernando died without a male heir to the Portuguese throne.
Millerites, followers of William Miller, anticipated the end of the world in conjunction with the Second Advent of Christ.
Those widows and orphans who were unable to support themselves were evicted by the mine owners and likely sent to the Poor House.
A run on Knickerbocker Trust Company stock sets events in motion that will lead to a depression.
Crippen is convicted at the Old Bailey of poisoning his wife and was subsequently hanged at Pentonville Prison in London.
Kassel: RAF conducts an air raid on the city of 236,000 people, killing 10,000, rendering 150,000 homeless.
Battle of Aachen: The city of Aachen falls to American forces after three weeks of fighting, making it the first German city to fall to the Allies.
United States President John F Kennedy, after internal counsel from Dwight D Eisenhower, announces that American spy planes have discovered Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba, and that he has ordered a naval “quarantine” of the island nation.
In Saigon, Henry Kissinger and South Vietnamese President Nguyen Van Thieu meet to discuss a proposed cease-fire that had been worked out between Americans and North Vietnamese in Paris.
