Information has reached this Government in the last four days from a variety of sources which establishes without doubt that the Soviets have provided the Cuban Government with a number of anti-aircraft defense missiles with a slant range of twenty-five miles which are similar to early models of our Nike.
The number of Soviet military technicians now known to be in Cuba or en route—approximately 8,500—is consistent with assistance in setting up and learning to use this equipment.
As I stated last week, we shall continue to make information available as fast as it is obtained and properly verified.
There is no evidence of any organized combat force in Cuba from any Soviet bloc country; of military bases provided to Russia; of a violation of the 1984 treaty relating to Guantanamo; of the presence of offensive ground-to-ground missiles; or of other significant offensive capability either in Cuban hands or under Soviet direction and guidance.
Were to be otherwise, the gravest issues would arise.The Cuban question must be considered as a part of the worldwide challenge posed by Communist threats to the peace.
It must be dealt with as a part of that larger issue as well as in the context of the special relationships which have long characterized the Inter-American System.
The United States, in conjunction with other Hemisphere countries, will make sure that while increased Cuban armaments will be a heavy burden to the unhappy people of Cuba themselves, they will be nothing more. – President John F Kennedy 1 JFK met with congressional leaders before issuing the statement and requested 150,000 troops to deal with a possible international crisis.
He rejected an invasion, saying the missiles were not a threat to the United States and did not have nuclear warheads.
As Seen by the USSR August 30, 1962 Khrushchev met with the Cuban emissary, Che Guevara.
Khrushchev continued to resist Cuba’s request for a defense treaty, but assured Cuba that if the United States invaded, the Soviet Baltic fleet would respond.
Khrushchev believed that the United States would accept and not respond to the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
September 4, 1962 Khrushchev accepted Kennedy and British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan’s August 27 proposal to ban nuclear tests in the atmosphere, underwater and in outer space.
September 5, 1962 Khrushchev learned the United States had discovered anti-aircraft missiles in Cuba.
His reaction was to speed up the delivery before the United States learned more.
September 6, 1962 Khrushchev summoned United States Interior Secretary, Stuart Udall, to his villa.
Khrushchev said that western troops had to leave Berlin and that military traffic would no longer be allowed to Berlin, though civilian traffic would be allowed.
He led Udall to believe that the Soviet government would sign a peace treaty with East Germany.
Khrushchev claimed that JFK didn’t have the courage to solve the Berlin question so he would force him to sign a peace treaty with East Germany or go to war.
Khrushchev admitted he had provided Cuba with modern weapons, but said they were for defense.
These additional weapons were considered “tactical” as their purpose was to protect the more strategic weapons, in the event of attack and ground invasion.
The Soviet objective was now to be equipped for conflict – not merely to deter an invasion or achieve nuclear parity.
Malinovsky signed new instructions to Commander Pliev of the Cuban Task Force that he could use nuclear weapons to counter an invasion upon receiving orders from Moscow.
Instructions to allow Pliev to make the decision himself, in case communications with Moscow were not possible, were prepared, but not signed.
As Seen by the US September 8, 1962 JFK requested authorization from Congress to call up 150,000 troops, if needed.
Embarrassed by two U-2 incidents, the United States State Department asked the CIA to fly only over international waters and not over Cuba, claiming the recent incidents inhibited negotiations on Berlin.
A compromise was reached restricting CIA flights to cross over the width of the island where they couldn’t be tracked and shot down.
Udall later said he didn’t believe Khrushchev had said that; Frost was ill and tired when he spoke with reporters.
September 13, 1962 JFK began his news conference reiterating the conclusion that Soviet shipments to Cuba do not constitute a threat to the Western Hemisphere.
September 16, 1962 CIA chief John McCone was still on honeymoon in France.
He had received daily cables reviewing the Cuban situation and worried about the SAMs in Cuba.
September 19, 1962 A Special National Intelligence Estimate said that Soviet presence in Cuba was for political purposes, to build up the Communist regime and that it was unlikely the Soviets would put nuclear weapons there.
The Estimate, prepared by the CIA, and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and NSA, estimated that fewer than 4,000 Soviet troops were in Cuba.
September 20, 1962 A Congressional resolution authorized a United States invasion of Cuba, McCone learned that a CIA source had seen a ballistic missile being moved in Cuba on September 12.
September 28, 1962 Khrushchev complained of United States ships following and harassing Soviet ships and overflights.
Kennedy replied they should try to meet their target date for the treaty of 1/1/63 but did not mention Cuba.
October 9, 1962 McCone recommended to JFK that U-2 overflights be resumed to check the accuracy of MRBM sightings and the readiness of SAM sites.
Kennedy and his advisors believed there would be a 1 in 6 chance of a U-2 being shot down.
They couldn’t risk having a CIA pilot shot down and captured, so decided to use Air Force pilots.
The mission was delayed 3 days to train an Air Force pilot to fly the U-2, and was further delayed by bad weather.
The pilot was to fly from California to Florida and stray somewhat over western Cuba.
When reviewed by CIA experts on October 15th, the films revealed that Soviet MRBMs had been deployed.
Eisenhower was campaigning across the country on behalf of Republican Congressional candidates.
Eisenhower Calls President Weak on Foreign Policy In those eight years, we lost no inch of ground to tyranny.
We accepted no compromise of pledged word or withdrawal from principle.
Medium-range ballistic missiles could be launched on 10-hours notice, the time required to deliver nuclear warheads to the launch sites.
In his Memoir, Khrushchev explicitly stated that the USSR didn’t use submarine escorts for the delivery of weapons to Cuba.
Military police arrived 8 hour later and Meredith attended his first class with a bodyguard of six federal marshals and soldiers waiting outside in Army trucks.
As a work of the U.S.federal government, the image is in the public domain.
