Virginia and United States History Learning in Place 2020 Week 1 Task Text Write Virginia & United States History textbook 1.
Create a timeline of major events that the United States was involved in during the Cold War.
Additionally, write a paragraph describing Pgs.3-668 how the US’ foreign policy changed over this series of events.
Discuss the evidence presented by Presidents Kennedy and War” Johnson on the reasons why the United States needed to become involved, and the actions that each President did, or said they would, take.
Use specific quotes or evidence from the documents to support your answer.
Week 2 Task Text Write Virginia & United States History textbook Pgs.8-622 1.
Digital_Learning United States History Module 9, 11 Virginia & United States History textbook 2.
Digital_Learning United States History Module 10 What impact did Brown Board and Davis 2.
Background and key players determine who you believe to be the four most important people involved in these two landmark Civil Rights cases.
Create a timeline of major events and achievements in the expansion of civil rights.
Additionally, write a paragraph that discusses the role of Pgs.2-767 American citizens and the government in effecting these changes.
Compare and contrast the approaches to gaining Civil Rights in the 1950s/60s and United States History Module 10 1970s.
This action also contradicts the repeated assurances of Soviet spokesmen, both publicly and privately delivered, that the arms buildup in Cuba would retain its original defensive character, and that the Soviet Union had no need or desire to station strategic missiles on the territory of any other nation… Neither the United States of America nor the world community of nations can tolerate deliberate deception and offensive threats on the part of any nation, large or small.
It shall be the policy of this Nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union… Sixth: Under the Charter of the United Nations, we are asking tonight that an emergency meeting of the Security Council be convoked without delay to take action against this latest Soviet threat to world peace.
We are prepared to discuss new proposals for the removal of tensions on both sides--including the possibility of a genuinely independent Cuba, free to determine its own destiny.
President Johnson's Message to Congress August 5, 1964 Last night I announced to the American people that the North Vietnamese regime had conducted further deliberate attacks against United States naval vessels operating in international waters, and I had therefore directed air action against gunboats and supporting facilities used in these hostile operations.
This air action has now been carried out with substantial damage to the boats and facilities.
After consultation with the leaders of both parties in the Congress, I further announced a decision to ask the Congress for a resolution expressing the unity and determination of the United States in supporting freedom and in protecting peace in Southeast Asia.
These latest actions of the North Vietnamese regime has given a new and grave turn to the already serious situation in Southeast Asia.
They were further defined in the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty approved by the Senate in February 1955.
This treaty with its accompanying protocol obligates the United States and other members to act in accordance with their constitutional processes to meet Communist aggression against any of the parties or protocol states.
Our policy in Southeast Asia has been consistent and unchanged since 1954.
A threat to any nation in that region is a threat to all, and a threat to us.
This is not just a jungle war, but a struggle for freedom on every front of human activity.
Our military and economic assistance to South Vietnam and Laos in particular has the purpose of helping these countries to repel aggression and strengthen their independence.
The North Vietnamese regime has constantly sought to take over South Vietnam and Laos.
It has systematically conducted a campaign of subversion, which includes the direction, training, and supply of personnel and arms for the conduct of guerrilla warfare in South Vietnamese territory.
In Laos, the North Vietnamese regime has maintained military forces, used Laotian territory for infiltration into South Vietnam, and most recently carried out combat operations all in direct violation of the Geneva Agreements of 1962.
As President of the United States I have concluded that I should now ask the Congress, on its part, to join in affirming the national determination that all such attacks will be met, and that the United States will continue in its basic policy of assisting the free nations of the area to defend their freedom.
As I have repeatedly made clear, the United States intends no rashness, and seeks no wider war.
We must make it clear to all that the United States is united in its determination to bring about the end of Communist subversion and aggression in the area.
President Reagan argued that through a massive defense build-up, the United States would pressure the Soviet Union to continue to keep pace, which would ultimately deplete the Soviets of their resources.
During the 1980s defense spending increased from $134 billion in 1980 before Reagan took office to $253 billion in 1989 when he left office.
This meant that American defense spending was seven percent of Gross Domestic Product in 1989, and had dramatically increased the federal deficit.
Yet the Soviets responded to this increase in spending and in the first half of the 1980s, the Soviets increased their defense spending from 22 to 27 percent of GDP, while they did not increase the production of civilian goods.
The aim, Reagan explained, was to research a way to repel missiles launched by the Soviet Union.
Reagan hoped that this proposed technology would make nuclear war obsolete.
The Soviet Union was horrified, believing that the initiative would destabilize the careful Cold War balance between the United States and the Soviet Union, and give the United States firststrike capability.
We maintain the peace through our strength; weakness only invites aggression.
After careful consultation with my advisers, including the Joint Chiefs of Staff, I believe there is a way.
I know this is a formidable, technical task, one that may not be accomplished before the end of this century.
Yet, current technology has attained a level of sophistication where it's reasonable for us to begin this effort.
There will be failures and setbacks, just as there will be successes and breakthroughs.
And as we proceed, we must remain constant in preserving the nuclear deterrent and maintaining a solid capability for flexible response.
On May 17, 1954, United States Supreme Court Justice Earl Warren delivered the unanimous ruling in the landmark civil rights case Brown Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas.
State-sanctioned segregation of public schools was a violation of the 14th Amendment and was therefore unconstitutional.
This historic decision marked the end of the ""separate but equal"" precedent set by the Supreme Court nearly 60 years earlier and served as a catalyst for the expanding civil rights movement during the decade of the 1950s.
When Linda was denied admission into a white elementary school, Linda's father, Oliver Brown, challenged Kansas's school segregation laws in the Supreme Court.
The NAACP and Thurgood Marshall took up their case, along with similar ones in South Carolina, Virginia, and Delaware, as Brown Board of Education.
Oliver L Brown Oliver Brown, a minister in his local Topeka, KS, community, challenged Kansas's school segregation laws in the Supreme Court.
Mr Brown’s 8-year-old daughter, Linda, was a black girl attending fifth grade in the public schools in Topeka when she was denied admission into a white elementary school.
The NAACP and Thurgood Marshall took up Brown’s case along with similar cases in South Carolina, Virginia, and Delaware as Brown Board of Education.
Carter secured the pivotal involvement of social scientists, particularly Kenneth B Clark, who provided evidence in the Briggs case on segregation's devastating effects on the psyches of black children.
Harold R Fatzer As Attorney General of Kansas, Harold Fatzer argued the case for the appellees in Brown Board of Education of Topeka.
Mr Fatzer served as Kansas Supreme Court Justice from February, 1949, to March, 1956.
Jack Greenberg Jack Greenberg, who was born in 1924, argued on behalf of the plaintiffs in the Brown Board of Education of Topeka case, and worked on the briefs in Belton Gebhart.
Jack Greenberg served as director-counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund from 1961 to 1984.
Marshall, who also served as lead counsel in the Brown Board of Education case, went on to become the first African American Supreme Court Justice in United States history.
Mr Reeves was the first African American appointed to the District of Columbia Board of Commissioners, although he declined the position.
Charles Scott Topeka, KS based lawyer who initially began the Brown case on behalf of Oliver Brown and the other litigants.
John Scott Topeka, KS based lawyer who initially began the Brown case on behalf of Oliver Brown and the other litigants.
Earl Warren Chief Justice Earl Warren, who was born in 1891, secured a unanimous decision in Brown Board of Education, outlawing segregation in public schools and striking down the ""separate but equal"" doctrine of Plessy Ferguson.
Warren also delivered the opinion in the District of Columbia case, Bolling Sharpe.
Four hundred fifty African American students from Moton High School participated in the two-week protest.
The student strike committee requested assistance from the NAACP branch office in Richmond, Virginia.
The students believed that the deplorable conditions at the school deprived them of equal educational opportunities.
Moton had no gymnasium, cafeteria, infirmary or teachers restrooms, and the overflow of students was housed in an old school bus and three buildings covered in tar paper.
Local parents had repeatedly sought improvements from the local school board without success.
In May 1951, Spottswood Robinson and Oliver Hill from the local NAACP filed suit on behalf of one hundred seventeen students.
The plaintiffs asked that the state law requiring segregated schools in Virginia be struck down.
The school board was ordered to proceed with plans to equalize the African American students’ school.
Supreme Court overturned the ruling and ordered desegregation, white Virginians launched a campaign of massive resistance.
The Board of Supervisors for Prince Edward County refused to appropriate any funds for the County School Board for the period 1959-1964, effectively closing the public schools rather than integrate them.
It asked that the state law requiring segregated schools in Virginia be struck down.
Hill’s most famous case, Davis Prince Edward County, Virginia, became part of the Brown Board of Education decision.
The suit began, however, as a result of a student strike organized and led by 16 year-old Barbara Rose Johns, in an attempt to force the county to provide facilities equal to those provided to white high school students as required by law.
Their case eventually became one of five included in the landmark 1954 case, Brown Board of Education.
