Lessons Learned” Wednesday at 6m. in the City View Room at 1957 E Street.
And on Friday from 9m. to 8:30m., the school will host an all-day symposium to discuss new evidence on the crisis in the State Room.GW Professor of History and International Affairs James Hershberg recently provided insight into the crisis, including the events leading up to it and what ultimately averted a nuclear conflict.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev did this despite President Kennedy’s clear warnings not to send such “offensive” weapons to Cuba, and both types of missiles—about 42, by later United States estimates—reached the island with their warheads despite the United States “quarantine” Kennedy imposed around the island.Kennedy first learned of the Soviet missile deployment on Oct., and was immediately determined that the missiles must go.
That avoided firing the first shots and killing hundreds or thousands of Soviets, which risked retaliation by the Kremlin in another Cold War hotspot such as Berlin or Turkey where the Soviets had conventional superiority comparable to the United States military advantage around Cuba.As for Khrushchev, he initially blasted the quarantine as piracy on the high seas and vowed to defy it; but within less than two days, before it went into effect on Oct., he ordered Soviet naval commanders to turn around rather than confront American ships.
Then, as the crisis climaxed, both Kennedy and Khrushchev feared it might be spiraling out of control and acted to end it before that happened.While publicly preparing to invade Cuba and rebuffing Khrushchev’s demand to swap his Cuban missiles for comparable United States missiles in Turkey, Kennedy privately passed the word to Khrushchev that those missiles would in fact be gone if the Soviets removed their missiles from Cuba.
Kennedy even laid the groundwork to accept such a trade publicly or else tighten the blockade around Cuba rather than actually order an invasion of Cuba and risk uncontrollable escalation.Khrushchev, meanwhile, was appalled to receive a letter from Castro urging him to launch a nuclear strike against the United States should it invade Cuba, and disturbed by the unauthorized shoot-down of a United States U-2 plane over Cuba.
The most important impact of the crisis was that it scared the heck out of both Kennedy and Khrushchev, and they agreed that it was too dangerous to keep meeting at the brink.
As for the “lessons” of the crisis, these can be, and are, endlessly debated.
As the cliché goes, history never repeats itself precisely, but it can sometimes rhyme.
Khrushchev ultimately was willing to do so—and if he hadn’t “blinked” first, Kennedy would probably have done so as well.
