CALL IT CONSPIRACY LARRY ABRAHAM When the text for our book None Dare Call It Conspiracy was completed, it was December, 1971.
Mr Nixon was sitting comfortably in the White House, the Vietnam war was being brought to a close by an “accord,” inflation had been “harnessed” (their words, not mine), thanks to the wage and price controls Nixon imposed in August of the same year.
Gerald Ford’s only claims to fame were that he had been appointed to the Warren Commission which investigated President Kennedy’s death as safely as possible, and he was second banana on the popular “Ev and Jerry show,” where Senate Minority Leader Everett Dirksen dragged House Minority leader Jerry Ford out for weekly press conferences.
George McGovern was talking about running for president but nobody took it seriously except George himself, and Jane Fonda.
Ronald Reagan was Governor of California, and as such was disappointing his loyalists by appointments and policies which seemed so at odds with his campaign promises.
Angola and Mozambique were still part of the Portuguese colonial holdings.
Kaddafi had recently been an enlisted nobody in the Libyan army, and who knew anything at all about Libya other than Bunker Hunt, whose oil and equipment holdings were expropriated by the Libyans the follow(continued on back flap} ing year, while the West’s governments and the “Seven Sister” oil companies stayed politely silent.
There were no Sandinistas, no “contras,” and if someone said Grenada, we conjured up images of a Spanish love song.
Mao was still doing his best to toss the Chinese people, body and soul, back to the dark ages.
Members of the “Gang of Four” were not in prison, they were the wardens.
The Soviet Union had just suffered its umpteenth crop failure, but had firm control over its Eastern European satellites, and the world was going to be a much safer place, thanks to the SALT I treaty.
Maybe that’s why the Reagan administration still honors it years after it legally lapsed.
The only energy crises in August of 1971 was that felt by the owner of your friendly local service station.
Gloria Steinem still looked good enough to be invited to share her opinions on the “Tonight” show.
In less than fifteen years, the whole world has been tossed upside down and then back again.
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means without the prior written permission of the Publisher, except brief quotes in connection with reviews written specifically for inclusion in a newspaper or magazine.
Typesetting by Thoburn Press, Tyler, Texas Manufactured in the United States of America Published by Double A Publications 18000 Pacific Highway South, Suite 1105 Seattle, Washington 98188 Dedication For my children, Bick, Kye, Keely, Kerry, Birch, Larry Jr., Joseph, Patrick, Genny, Lorin, and Joshua.
May they know the peace that comes with “the fight for freedom” and the self respect that is the result of meeting ones responsibilities—no matter what the cost.
And for my mother and late father who always encouraged me to “be my own man” even when my deci‘sions may have disappointed them.
And since I don’t want to try and list them all for fear of the embarrassment of excluding someone, I shall thank those who were so much a part of my work, that without them it couldn’t have happened.
Gary North, whose unrelenting pressure on me to “get it done” was only surpassed by his brilliant contributions and technical help.
Next is William Hoar, for his genius as a researcher and crystal clear understanding of the enemy we face.
Without Bill, even Gary’s nagging would have delayed this effort untold months.
A special thanks goes to my friend, editor and partner, Chip Wood whose talents are only surpassed by his patience.
Also, I can’t thank enough my cherished friend, Scott Stanley for his encouragement and suggestions, or my assistant, Nancy Potts for all her dedicated attention to getting all the pieces in the right place at the right time.
Bobby Hansen, whose contribution will help “sell a million” and Pat Easter who bought the first copy months before there was a manuscript.
He gave a three-hour speech on the subject of conspiracy which Gary Allen heard.
Gary suggested that they flesh out the presentation and make it into a book.
People on my various mailing lists still send it to me from time to time, in order to introduce me to the story of the Conspiracy —fifteen years later.
The events of the last fifteen years have served Larry’s thesis quite well.
As far as Larry is concerned, the history of 1970-85 has been a kind of giant grab-bag of goodies that reinforce his original thesis, not the least of which was the creation by David Rockefeller of the Trilateral Commission in 1973, and the creation by David Rockefeller of Jimmy Carter in 1976.
The Conspiracy View of History People from time to time ask me what I think of the conspiracy view of history.
The world is not now, nor has it ever been, an impersonal product of random material forces.
This struggle is not simply personal, however; it is inherently conspiratorial.
It is a conspiracy which affects every area of life, including politics.
In David’s day, there was a conspiracy among the kings of the earth against God.
For as long as there is history and sin, members of this conspiracy will be enraged at righteousness.
They “breathe together” against God and God’s law, and also against all those who are faithful to God, or who may not even believe in God, but who are faithful to God’s precepts.
In this novel, Lewis creates a science fiction story about a government-funded scientific research organization which is hierarchically controlled by systematically evil men who intend to suppress the liberties of the whole population.
That Lewis understood that rationalism and materialism can combine with magic is remarkable enough; that he understood it in the 1940’s is astounding.
Conspiracies are organized groups of people who maliciously plot to undermine whatever it is you believe in.
Since there are always fringe groups who have not yet “seen the light,” and who plot against goodness and true justice, those who believe in goodness and true justice need defend themselves by stamping out these illegal groups.
These groups are clearly illegal, since good and just people get their rulers to pass laws making such conspiracies illegal.
It is not like the conspiracy of the Bolsheviks against the Czar’s establishment.
No, what we are facing is a successful conPrologue XV spiracy of the American Establishment against the Constitution of the United States and everyone who was intended by its authors to be protected by that Constitution.
Everyone knows this, even when the evidence points to other conclusions.
The Establishment interpretations of every presidential assassin after John Wilkes Booth invariably conclude this.
We know that several boarders at Mary Surratt’s boarding house were involved.
After all, one of them tried to kill Secretary of State Seward the same night.
But then an amateur historian named Otto Eisenschiml got a book published, Why Was Lincoln Murdered?, a book which reveals evidence that points to Stanton, the Secretary of War, and other anti-Lincoln Radical Republicans, as possibly involved.
This is not the sort of conspiracy which is discussed in college classrooms in United States history—or any other history.
Rushdoony remarked in 1965 that “The successful and continuing conspiracies of history are never admitted to be conspiracies.
Their known activities are extolled as virtues and patriotic works, never as illicit activities.
The offense of None Dare and Cleon Skousen’s The Naked Capitalist is that these authors have argued that America’s present rulers are the organizational and spiritual heirs of a band of “bloodless revolutionaries” who pulled off a true revolution in the United States, though a nearly invisible revolution, in the early decades of this century.
The kinds of questions they want asked are the only kinds of questions that wise (and prudent) men do ask.
The kinds of answers that they want investigators to come up with are the only kinds of answers that wise men do come up with.
In short, they have established that elusive but powerful “climate of opinion” which governs the affairs of men.
Those institutions in Western Civilization that have been marked by robes —the clergy, the judiciary, and university professors — were targeted a century ago by conspiratorial groups.
They did everything they could to capture the leadership of each group, in order to mold public opinion.
You can eventually lose control to other dedicated conspiratorial groups.
Therefore, control over people’s access to information, and more importantly, control over the moral and theoretical principles that govern their interpretation of information, is essential.
No civilization has ever fallen to outsiders that did not first suffer a loss of faith in its first principles.
It argues that what the conspirators have done is to short-circuit the true meaning, and true limitations on the federal government, of the United States Constitution.
Somebody has to XVili Call It Conspiracy challenge the prevailing misinterpretations.
Most people are afraid of calling attention to this capture of power, for in doing so, they would themselves become targets of the accusation that they had become “treasonous” or “conspiratorial”— conspirators against those who seem to be able to announce the standards of goodness and true justice.
In short, the success of the conspirators can be seen in their ability to make their critics look like conspirators.
It is a shift which they find difficult to control any longer, and which threatens their monopoly of influence.
This shift has taken place since 1972, the year None Dare was published.
This is why the new edition could become far more influential (and far more dangerous to the conspirators) than the first edition.
Federal legislation will protect the People, for the People have so willed it.
We can almost see Dorothy in front of the screen, with the Wizard’s glaring face looking out at her.
Meanwhile, Toto is behind the curtain, pulling at the old man’s pants leg.
They’ve even gone to the expense of training and employing three generations of professional historians to explain to you why nothing important is going on back there.
So, go ahead, tear back the curtain, read this book, and then you be the judge.
Rushdoony, “The Conspiracy View of History,” in his book, The Nature of the American System , 140.
Mr Nixon was sitting comfortably in the White House, the Vietnam war was being “wound down” by an “accord,” inflation had been “harnessed” , thanks to the wage and price controls that Nixon imposed in August of the same year, and the President was riding high and looking forward to the campaign of 1972.
Gerald Ford’s only claims to fame were that he had been appointed to the Warren Commission (which had investigated President Kennedy’s death as safely as possible), and he had been the second banana at the popular “Ev and Jerry show,” when Senate Minority Leader Everett Dirksen would drag out House Minority Leader Jerry for weekly press conferences.
During the intervening years, | went from a conservative young idealist who thought he knew how the world worked to an investment banker and “deal doer” who found out first-hand.
In these past fourteen years, I have traveled in most regions of the world; I have sat in board rooms of some of the very banks and multi-national corporations mentioned in the original book; and I have had an opportunity to see “up close and personal” some of the very people and situations that Gary Allen and I could only speculate about before.
The arguments for the existence of a Conspiracy are stronger today than they have ever been, especially when we lay them alongside of what was said and written before.
Therefore, chapters one through seven are going to remain the same as in None Dare Call It Conspiracy.
The bracketed updates are new, and so are chapters eight through thirteen, plus the various appendices.
It has often been said that the best way to value what anybody says or writes is to look back at what he had to say in 6 Call It Conspiracy the past.
So it is without apologies that I say to you now, gentle reader, “Check the record.
These rare books are still the only really critical accounts of Reagan that are written by a conservative, but Mr Steffgan now refuses to allow the books to be reprinted.
Chapter I Don’t Confuse Me With Facts Mosr OF United States have had the experience, either as parents or youngsters, of trying to discover the “hidden picture” within another picture in a children’s magazine.
Usually you are shown a landscape with trees, bushes, flowers and other bits of nature.
Try as you might, usually you could not find the hidden picture until you turned to a page farther back in the magazine which would reveal how cleverly the artist had hidden it from us.
If we study the landscape we realize that the whole picture was painted in such a way as to conceal the real picture within, and once we see the “Teal picture,” it stands out like the proverbial painful digit.
We believe the picture painters of the mass media are artfully creating landscapes for us which deliberately hide the real picture.
In this book we will show you how to discover the “hidden picture” in the landscapes presented to us daily through newspapers, radio and television.
Once you can see through the camouflage, you will see the donkey, the cart and the boy who have been there all along.
Millions of Americans are concerned and frustrated over mishappenings in our nation.
They feel that something is 7 8 Call It Conspiracy wrong, drastically wrong, but because of the picture painters they can’t quite put their finger on it.
We keep electing Presidents who promise faithfully to halt the worldwide Communist advance, put the blocks to extravagant government spending, douse the fires of inflation, put the economy on an even keel, reverse the trend which is turning the country into a moral sewer, and toss the criminals into the hoosegow where they belong.
Yet, despite high hopes and glittering campaign promises, these problems continue to worsen.
Each new administration, whether Republican or Democrat, continues the same basic policies of the previous administration it so thoroughly denounced.
It is considered poor form to mention this, but it is true nonetheless.
We are supposed to think it is all accidental and coincidental and that therefore there is nothing we can do about it.
We believe that many of the major world events that are shaping our destinies occur because somebody or somebodies have planned them that way.
If we were merely dealing with the law of averages, half of the events affecting our nation’s well-being should be good for America.
If we were dealing with mere incompetence, our leaders should occasionally make a mistake in our favor.
We shall attempt to prove that we are not really dealing with coincidence or stupidity, but with planning and brilliance.
This small book deals with that planning and brilliance and how it has shaped the foreign and domestic policies of the last six administrations.
We hope it will explain matters which have up to now seemed inexplicable; that it will bring into sharp focus images which have been obscured by the landscape painters of the mass media.
Of course, no one in this modern day and age really Don’t Confuse Me With Facts 9 believes in the conspiracy theory of history—except those who have taken the time to study the subject.
When you think about it, there are really only two theories of history.
Either things happen by accident neither planned nor caused by anybody, or they happen because they are planned and somebody causes them to happen.
In reality, it is the “accidental theory of history” preached in the unhallowed Halls of Ivy which should be ridiculed.
If you believe it is all accidental or the result of mysterious and unexplainable tides of history, you will be regarded as an “intellectual” who understands that we live in a complex world.
Primarily, most scholars follow the crowd in academic thinking just as most women follow fashion.
While professors and pontificators profess to be tolerant and broadminded, in practice it’s strictly a one way street — with all traffic flowing left.
A Maoist can be tolerated by Liberals of Ivory-Towerland or by the Establishment’s media pundits.
But to be a conservative, and a conservative who propounds a conspiratorial view, is absolutely verboten.
Secondly, these people have over the years acquired a strong vested emotional interest in their own errors.
Most people are highly reluctant to admit they have been conned or have shown poor judgment.
To inspect the evidence of the existence of a conspiracy, guiding our political destiny from behind the scenes, would force many of these people to repudiate a lifetime of accumulated opinions.
It takes a person with strong character 10 Call It Conspiracy indeed to face the facts and admit he has been wrong even if only because he was uninformed.
It was only because he set out to prove the conservative anti-Communists wrong that he happened to end up writing this book.
Politicians and “intellectuals” are attracted to the concept that events are propelled by some mysterious tide of history or happen by accident.
Most intellectuals, pseudo or otherwise, deal with the conspiratorial theory of history simply by ignoring it.
If and when the silent treatment doesn’t work, these “objective” scholars and mass media opinion molders resort to personal attack, ridicule and satire.
The idea is to force the person exposing the conspiracy to stop the exposure and spend time and effort defending himself.
However, the most effective weapons used against the conspiratorial theory of history are ridicule and satire.
These extremely potent weapons can be cleverly used to avoid any honest attempt at refuting the facts.
Rather than be ridiculed most people will keep quiet; and this subject certainly does lend itself to ridicule and satire.
One technique is to expand the conspiracy to the extent it becomes absurd.
Some conspiratorialists do indeed overdraw the picture by expanding the conspiracy to include every local knee-jerk liberal activist and government bureaucrat.
These people do not help to expose the conspiracy, but, play into the hands of those who want the public to believe all conspiratorialists are screwballs.
To ascribe absolutely everything that happens to the machinations of a small group of power hungry conspirators is overly simplistic.
On the other hand nothing is more simplistic than doggedly holding onto the accidental view of major world events.
In most cases Liberals accuse all those who discuss the conspiracy of simply being paranoid.
With the leaders of the academic and communications world assuming this sneering attitude towards the conspiratorial (or cause and effect) theory of history, it is not surprising that millions of innocent and well-meaning people, in a natural desire not to appear naive, assume the attitudes and repeat the clichés of the opinion makers.
These persons, in their attempt to appear sophisticated, assume their mentors’ air of smug superiority even though they themselves have not spent five minutes in study on the subject of international conspiracy.
They ignore the fact that organized conspirators use PID, real and imagined, as an excuse to build a jail for us all.
Most of the world has been in PID since time immemorial and it takes incredibly superficial thinking to ascribe to PID the ricocheting of the United States government from one disaster to another over the past thirty years.
Czechoslovakia was one of the world’s most modern industrial nations and Cuba had the second highest per capita income of any nation in Central and South America.
It is not true, however, that there are no members of the intellectual elite who subscribe to the conspiratorial theory of history.
Quigley has all the “liberal” credentials, having taught at the Liberal Establishment’s academic Meccas of Princeton and Harvard.
Quigley reveals the existence of the conspiratorial network which will be discussed in this book.
The Professor is not merely formulating a theory, but revealing this network’s existence from firsthand experience.
He also makes it clear it is the network’s secrecy and not its goals to which he objects.
In other words, this power seeking clique wants to control and rule the world.
Even more frightening, they want total control over Don’t Confuse Me With Facts 13 all individual actions.
It wants control over all natural resources, business, banking and transportation by controlling the governments of the world.
In order to accomplish these aims the conspirators have had no qualms about fomenting wars, depressions and hatred.
They want a monopoly which would eliminate all competitors and destroy the free enterprise system.
Professor Quigley is not the only academic who is aware of the existence of a clique of self-perpetuating conspirators whom we shall call Jnsiders.
Other scholars finding the same individuals at the scenes of disastrous political fires over and over again have concluded that there is obviously an organization of pyromaniacs at work in the world.
But intellectually honest scholars realize that if they challenged the Jnsiders head-on, their careers would be destroyed.
The author knows these men exist because he has been in contact with some of them.
There are also religious leaders who are aware of the existence of this conspiracy.
Godless society operates in an extremely efficient manner at least in its higher levels of leadership.
It makes use of every possible means at its disposal, be they scientific, technical, social or economic.
It holds almost complete sway in international organizations, in financial circles, in the field of mass communications; press, cinema, radio and television.
There are a number of problems to be overcome in convinc14 Call It Conspiracy ing a person of the possible existence of a conspiratorial clique of Insiders who from the very highest levels manipulate government policy.
We are dealing with history’s greatest “whodunit,” a mystery thriller which puts Erle Stanley Gardner to shame.
If you love a mystery, you’ll be fascinated with the study of the operations of the Insiders.f you do study this network of which Professor Quigley speaks, you will find that what had at first seemed incredible not only exists, but heavily influences our lives.
It must be remembered that the first job of any conspiracy, whether it be in politics, crime or within a business office, is to convince everyone else that no conspiracy exists.
The conspirators’ success will be determined largely by their ability to do this.
That the elite of the academic world and mass communications media always pooh-pooh the existence of the Jnsiders merely serves to camouflage their operations.
Probably at some time you have been involved with or had personal knowledge of some event which was reported in the news.
Perhaps it concerned an athletic event, an election, a committee or your business.
The reporter had time and space problems and there is a good chance the persons involved deliberately did not reveal all the facts.
Possibly the reporter’s own prejudices governed what facts went into the story and which were deleted.
Our point is that most people know from personal experience that a news story often is not the whole story.
But many of us assume that our own case is unique when really it is typical.
What is true about the reporting of local events is equally true about the reporting of national and international events.
Psychological problems are also involved in inducing people to look at the evidence concerning the Jnsiders.
When Columbus told people the world was a ball and not a pancake, they were highly upset.
They were being asked to reject their way of thinking of a lifetime and adopt a whole new outlook.
The “intellectuals” of the day scoffed at Columbus and people were Don’t Confuse Me With Facts 15 afraid they would lose social prestige if they listened to him.
And typical flat-earthers had such a vested interest involving their own egos, that they heaped abuse on Columbus for challenging their view of the universe.
Because the Establishment controls the media, anyone exposing the Insiders will be the recipient of a continuous fusilade of invective from newspapers, magazines, TV and radio.
In this manner one is threatened with loss of “social respectability” if he dares broach the idea that there is organization behind any of the problems currently wracking America.
Unfortunately, for many people social status comes before intellectual honesty.
Although they would never admit it, social position is more important to many people than is the survival of freedom in America.
If you ask these people which is more important — social respectability or saving their children from slavery —they will tell you the latter, of course.
People have an infinite capacity for rationalization when it comes to refusing to face the threat to America’s survival.
Deep down these people are afraid they may be laughed at if they take a stand, or ostracised.
Instead of getting mad at the Insiders, these people actually get angry at those who are trying to save the country by exposing the conspirators.
One thing which makes it so hard for socially minded people to assess the evidence objectively is that conspirators come from the highest social strata.
Nobody enjoys being put in the position of accusing prominent people of conspiring to enslave their fellow Americans.
Many business and professional people are particularly vulnerable to the “don’t jeopardize your social respectability” pitch given by those who don’t want the conspiracy exposed.
The Insiders know that if the business and professional community will not 16 Call It Conspiracy take a stand to save the private enterprise system, the socialism through which they intend to control the world will be inevitable.
They believe that most business and professional men are too shallow, too status conscious, too tied up in the problems of their jobs and businesses to worry about what is going on in politics.
Such men are told it might be bad for business, or jeopardize their government contracts if they take a stand.
We are hoping that the conspirators have underestimated the courage and patriotism remaining in the American people.
We feel there are a sufficient number of you who are not mesmerized by the television set; who put God, family and country above social status; who will band together to expose and destroy the conspiracy of the Insiders.
The philosopher Diogenes scoured the length and breadth of ancient Greece searching for an honest man.
We are scouring the length and breadth of America in search of hundreds of thousands of intellectually honest men and women who are willing to investigate facts and come to logical conclusions—no matter how unpleasant those conclusions may be.
Unlike 1971, the American people now have an inherent distrust of the national news media, and well they should.
Time after time we watch the handsome and mellow voiced anchormen of NBC, CBS, and ABC trash the defenders of freedom and glorify the high priests of Communist revolution.
Nguyen Cao Ky of South Vietnam, lan Smith of Rhodesia, General Samoza of Nicaragua, and the Shah of Iran.
In every case, these men were replaced by overt Communists, or in the case of Iran, a madman.
At this very moment we are watching the destruction of the anti-Communist leadership in South Korea, Taiwan, El Salvador, Chile, South Africa, and the Philippines.
Before Professor Quigley died, Gary Allen and I had a chance to debate him about the contents of his book, Tragedy and Hope.
In the fall of 1972, None Dare was starting to generate heated debate, especially on some radio talk shows.
In Salt Lake City, an enterprising talk show host struck on the idea of bringing together the principal players, Abraham, Allen, and Quigley.
He accused us of not only quoting him out of context but fabricating statements out of whole cloth.
As to the honest scholars who “realize that if they challenge the Insiders head-on, their careers would be destroyed,” there is no greater example than the case of Antony Sutton.
Sutton’s access to State Department decimal files and other highly sensitive records produced results absolutely devastating to the Insiders.
He proved conclusively that Western technology and money had not only propped up the Soviets but had actually saved them from disintegrating from within.
His estimate is that 95% of all Soviet technology has been imported or stolen from the West.
As soon as this happened, the powers that be at Hoover Institute decided his services were no longer needed.
Chapter II Socialism—Royal Road to Power for the Super-Rich Nosopy DISPUTES that Adolph Hitler existed.
The terror and destruction that this madman inflicted upon the world are universally recognized.
Hitler came from a poor family which had absolutely no social position.
The son of a petty bureaucrat, Lenin, spent most of his adult life in poverty, yet he has been responsible for the deaths of tens of millions of our fellow human beings, and the enslavement of nearly a billion more.
Like Hitler, Lenin sat up nights in a dank garret, scheming how he could conquer the world.
These men would be superbly educated, command immense social prestige and be able to pool astonishing amounts of money to carry out their purposes.
It is difficult for the average individual to fathom such lust for power.
The typical person wants to enjoy success in his job, to be able to afford a reasonably high standard of living complete with leisure and travel.
He wants to provide for his family in sickness and in health and to give his children a sound education.
He has no desire to exercise power over others, to conquer other lands or peoples, to be a king.
Since he has no “lust for power,” it is difficult for him to imagine that there are others who do... others who march to a different drum.
But we must realize that there have been Hitlers and Lenins and Stalins and Caesars and Alexander the Greats throughout history.
Like Columbus, we are now faced with the task of convincing you that the world is not flat.
The men at the apex of this movement are not Communists in the traditional sense.
And these men certainly do not believe in the clap-trap pseudo-philosophy of Communism.
Socialism is a philosophy which conspirators exploit, but in which only the naive believe.
Just how finance capitalism is used as the anvil and Communism as Socialism — Royal Road to Power for the Super-Rich 21 the hammer to conquer the world will be explained in this book.
The concept that Communism is but an arm of a larger conspiracy has become increasingly apparent throughout the author’s journalistic investigations.
He has had the opportunity to interview privately four retired officers who spent their careers high in military intelligence.
In addition, the author has interviewed six men who have spent considerable time as investigators for Congressional committees.
In 1953, one of these men, Norman Dodd, headed the Reece Committee’s investigation of tax-free foundations.
When Mr Dodd began delving into the role of international high finance in the world revolutionary movement, the investigation was killed on orders from the Eisenhoweroccupied White House.
Mr Dodd discovered it is permissible to investigate the radical bomb throwers in the streets, but when you begin to trace their activities back to their origins in the “legitimate world,” the political iron curtain slams down.
You can believe anything you want about Communism except that it is a conspiracy run by men from the respectable world.
It’s understandable to be concerned about Communism in Africa or Asia or South America with their tremendous poverty, ignorance and disease.
Suppose you were to lay this book down right now, pick up a clip board and head for the nearest shopping center to conduct a survey on American attitudes about Communism.
If we stick to our survey we would find that ninety-nine percent of the people are anti-Communist.
We would probably be hard put to find anybody who would take an affirmative stand for Communism.
So, on the surface it appears that the charges made against anti-Communists concerned with the internal threat of Communism are valid.
Rather than the near unanimity previously found, we now have an incredible diversity of ideas.
That is a totally simplistic question about an extremely complex situation.
Communism today, quite unlike the view held by the right wing extremists in America, is not an international monolithic movement.
Rather, it is a polycentric, fragmented, nationalistic movement deriving its character through the charismas of its various national leaders.
If you think we are being facetious here, you haven’t talked to a political science professor lately.
For the above is the prevailing view on our campuses, not to mention in our State Department.
We have something here that almost everybody agrees is bad, but we cannot agree on just what it is we are against.
You could take a sand lot team and successfully pit them against any major league team.
Thus it is not strange that for three decades we have been watching one country of the world after another fall behind the Communist curtain, simply because we still do not understand the enemy.
In keeping with the fact that almost everybody seems to have his own definition of Communism, we are going to give you ours, and then we will attempt to prove to you that it is the only valid one.
You will notice that we did not mention Marx, Engels, Lenin, Trotsky, bourgeois, proletariat or dialectical material24 Call It Conspiracy ism.
We said nothing of the pseudo-economics or political philosophy of the Communists.
These are the TECHNIQUES of Communism and should not be confused with the Communist conspiracy itself.
Unless we all understand the conspiratorial nature of Communism, we don’t understand it at all.
The way to bring down the wrath of the Liberal press Establishment or the professional Liberals is simply to use the world conspiracy in relation to Communism.
We are not supposed to believe that Communism is a political conspiracy.
We can believe that it is brutal, tyrannical, evil, or even that it intends to bury us, and we will win the plaudits of the vast majority of American people.
But don’t ever, ever use the word conspiracy if you expect applause, for that is when the wrath of Liberaldom will. be unleashed against you.
We are not disallowed from believing in all types of conspiracy, just modern political conspiracy.
We know that down through the annals of history small groups of men have existed who have conspired to bring the reins of power into their hands.
Even Life magazine believes in conspiracies like the Cosa Nostra where men conspire to make money through crime.
You may recall that Life did a series of articles on the testimony of Joseph Valachi before the McClellan Committee several years ago.
That is how little we know about this group, despite the fact that it was a century old and had been operating in many countries with a self-perpetuating clique of leaders.
Today, one can hardly pick-up a newspaper or magazine Socialism— Royal Road to Power for the Super-Rich 25 without reading something on organized crime’s involvement in the drug trafficking business.
We see that even Life magazine, Time and Newsweek believe in some sort of conspiracy.
Men like Lucky Luciano who have scratched and clawed to the top of the heap in organized crime must, of necessity, be diabolically brilliant, cunning and absolutely ruthless.
But, almost without exception, the men in the hierarchy of organized crime have had no formal education.
Yet, our book sold more copies in three months than Puzo sold of The Godfather in three years.
Let us suppose someone with this same Cosa Nostra type amoral grasping personality was born into a patrician family of great wealth, was educated at the best schools, then Harvard, Yale or Princeton, followed by graduate work possibly at Oxford.
In these institutions he would become totally familiar with history, economics, psychology, sociology and political science.
Become a politician and work for political power or, better yet, get some politicians to front for you.
Conspiracy to seize the power of government is as old as 26 Call It Conspiracy government itself.
We can study the conspiracies of Alcibiades in Greece or Julius Caesar in ancient Rome, but we are not supposed to think that men today scheme to achieve political power.
Whether you are studying Hitler, Alcibiades, Julius Caesar or a contemporary conspirator, you will find overwhelming evidence of patient planning.
In reality, Communism is a tyranny planned by power seekers whose most effective weapon is lying.
Communism is inevitable, and Communism is a movement of the downtrodden masses rising up against exploiting capitalism.
Let us go back to our imaginary survey and analyze our first big lie of Communism — that it is inevitable.
You will recall that we asked our interviewee if he was for or against Communism and then we asked him to define it.
Giving your opponent the idea that defending himself is futile, is as old as warfare itself.
If you study Marx’s Communist Manifesto you will find that in essence Marx said the proletarian revolution would establish the SOCIALIST dictatorship of the proletariat.
Marx said that when the dictatorship of the proletariat had accomplished these three things globally after some undetermined length of time, the all-powerful state would miraculously “wither away” and state socialism would give way to Communism.
Everything would be peace, sweetness and light and everybody would live happily ever after.
Socialism would be the bait . . . the excuse to establish the dictatorship.
Since dictatorship is hard to sell in idealistic terms, the idea had to be added that the dictatorship was just a temporary necessity and would soon dissolve of its own accord.
The drive to establish SOCIALISM, is at the core of everything the Communists and the Insiders do.
If you hear an official Communist speaker, he never mentions Communism.
He will speak only of the struggle to complete the socialization of America.
At a Communist bookstore you will find all their literature pushes this theme.
Others must be rubbing their eyes, for certainly the portents seemed all to the contrary.
Galbraith then proceeds to list the giant steps toward socialism taken by the Nixon Administration.
Many extremely patriotic individuals have innocently fallen for the conspirators’ line.
S “Conservatives should be realistic enough to recognize that this country is going deeper into socialism and will see expansion of federal power, whether Republicans or Democrats are in power.
The Establishment promotes the idea of the inevitability of Communism through its perversion of terms used in describing the political spectrum.
We are told that on the far Left of the political spectrum we find Communism, which is admittedly dictatorial.
But, we are also told that equally to be feared is the opposite of the far Left,e., the far Right, which is 30 Call It Conspiracy Dictatorship Democrecy Dictatorship Communism Fabian Socialism Fascism Total Govt.
Anarchy Communism Constitutional Fascism Republic Socialism Limited Govt.
Pharaohism Caesarism Chart 1 depicts a false Left-Right political spectrum used by Liberals which has Communism on tha far Left and its twin, Fascism on the far Right with the ‘middle of the road” being Fabian Socialism.
The entire spectrum is Socialistl Chart 2 is a more rational political spectrum with total government in any form on the far Left and no government or anarchy on the far right.
The U S. was a Republic with a limited government, but for the past 60 years we have been moving leftward across the spectrum towards total government with each new piece of socialist legislation. labeled Fascism.
We are constantly told that we should all try to stay in the middle of the road, which is termed democracy, but by which the Establishment means Fabian socialism.
We are given the choice between Communism on one end of the spectrum, Naziism on the other end, or Fabian socialism in the middle.
He is not represented here, yet this spectrum is used for political definitions Socialism— Royal Road to Power for the Super-Rich 31 by a probably ninety percent of the people of the nation.
If you have total government it makes little difference whether you call it Communism, Fascism, Socialism, Caesarism, or Pharaohism.
It’s all pretty much the same from the standpoint of the people who must live and suffer under it.
If total government (by any of its pseudonyms) stands on the far Left, then by logic the far Right should represent anarchy, or no government.
Our Founding Fathers revolted against the near-total government of the English monarchy.
So they set up a Constitutional Republic with a very limited government.
Although the free enterprise system is not mentioned specifically in the Consitution, it is the only one which can exist under a Constitutional Republic.
All collectivist systems require power in government which the Constitution did not grant.
Our Founding Fathers had no intention of allowing the government to become an instrument to steal the fruit of one man’s labor and give it to another who had not earned it.
Jefferson knew that if the government were not enslaved, people soon would be.
It was Jefferson’s view that government governs best which governs least.
Our forefathers established this country with the very least possible amount of government.
Although they lived in an age before automobiles, electric lights and television, they understood human nature and its relation to political systems far better than do most Americans today.
Primarily, government was to provide for national defense and to establish a court system.
But we have burst the chains that Jefferson spoke of and for many years now we have been moving leftward across the political spectrum toward collectivist total government.
Every proposal by our political leaders (including some 32 Call It Conspiracy which are supposed to have the very opposite effect, such as Nixon’s revenue sharing proposal) carries us further leftward to centralized government.
Since all Communists and their Jnsider bosses are waging a constant struggle for SOCIALISM, let us define that term.
Socialism is usually defined as government ownership and/or control over the basic means of production and distribution of goods and services.
When analyzed this means government control over everything, including you.
If the government controls these areas it can eventually do just exactly as Marx set out to do—destroy the right to private property, eliminate the family and wipe out religion.
In reality, there is a vast difference between what the promoters define as socialism and what it is in actual practice.
The idea that socialism is a share-the-wealth program is strictly a confidence game to get the people to surrender their freedom to an all-powerful collectivist government.
While the Jnsiders tell us we are building a paradise on earth, we are actually constructing a jail for ourselves.
Men like Rockefeller, Ford and Kennedy are for every socialist program known to man which will increase your taxes.
An article published by the North American Newspaper Alliance in August of 1967 tells how the Rockefellers pay practically no income taxes despite Socialism — Royal Road to Power for the Super-Rich 33 their vast wealth.
The article reveals that one of the Rockefellers paid the grand total of $685 personal income tax during a recent year.
The Kennedys have their Chicago Merchandise Mart, their mansions, yachts, planes, etc., all owned by their myriads of family foundations and trusts.
If they were really concerned about the poor, rather than using socialism as a means of achieving personal political power, they would divest themselves of their own fortunes.
There is no law which prevents them from giving away their own fortunes to the poverty stricken.
We are usually told that this clique of super-rich are socialists because they have a guilt complex over wealth they inherited and did not earn.
Again, they could relieve these supposed guilt complexes simply by divesting themselves of their unearned wealth.
There are doubtless many wealthy do-gooders who have been given a guilt complex by their college professors, but that doesn’t explain the actions of Insiders like the Rockefellers, Fords or Kennedys.
But the Kennedys, Rockefellers and their super-rich confederates are not being hypocritical in advocating socialism.
If it appears to be a contradiction for the super-rich to work for socialism and the destruction of free enterprise, in reality it is not.
Our problem is that most of us believe socialism is what the socialists want us to believe it is—a share-the-wealth program.
Let us examine the only Socialist countries — according to the Socialist definition of the word — extant in the world today.
The Communists themselves refer to these as Socialist countries, as in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Here in the reality of socialism you have a tiny oligarchial clique at the top, usually numbering no more than three percent of the total population, controlling the total wealth, total production and the very lives of the other ninety-seven percent.
Certainly even the most naive observe that Mr Brezhnev doesn’t live like one of the poor peasants out on the great Russian steppes.
If one understands that socialism is not a share-the-wealth program, but is in reality a method to consolidate and control the wealth, then the seeming paradox of super-rich men promoting socialism becomes no paradox at all.
Instead it becomes the logical, even perfect, tool of power-seeking megalomaniacs.
Communism, or more accurately, socialism, is not a movement of the downtrodden masses, but of the economic elite.
The plan of the conspirator /nsiders then is to socialize the United States, not to Communize it.
Chart 3 shows the structure of our government as established by our Founding Fathers.
The Constitution fractionalized and subdivided governmental power in every way possible.
The Founding Fathers believed that each branch of the government, whether at the federal, state or local level, would be jealous of its powers and would never surrender them to centralized control.
Many phases of our lives (such as charity and education) were put totally, or almost totally, out of the grasp of politicians.
No segment of government could possibly amass enough power to form a dictatorship.
In order to have a dictatorship one must have a single branch holding most of the power.
DEMOCRATIC SOCIALISM EXECUTIVE Lebor Finen i jsiative Judicial States Counties Cities Charity A dictatorship was impossible in our Republic because power was widely diffused.
Today, as we approach Democratic Socialism, all power is being centralized at the apex of the executive branch of the federal government.
These men lived after our Constitution was written, but our forefathers already understood such principles completely.
As we move along the political spectrum towards socialism, all the reins of power are being concentrated in the executive branch of the federal government.
This is being done by buying, with legislation or with “free” federal grants, all the other entities.
If you wanted control over the United States, it would be impossible to take over every city hall, county seat and state house.
You would want all power vested at the apex of the executive branch of the federal government; then you would have to control only one man.
If you wanted to control the nation’s manufacturing, commerce, finance, transportation and natural resources, you would need to control only the apex, the power pinnacle of an all-powerful SOCIALIST government.
Then you would have a monopoly and could squeeze out all competition If you want a national monopoly, you must control a national 36 Call It Conspiracy socialist government.
If you want a worldwide monopoly, you must control a world socialist government.
Listen to the words of Mr John Haley, Vicepresident of Chase Manhattan Bank.
This program was part of the series Bill Moyers Journal. intend to quote at great length from the transcript of this program, for in many respects, it is as reveal]ing as was Carroll Quigley’s book.
As part of his introduction to the program, Bill Moyers says the following.
We'll see just how redundant conSocialism— Royal Road to Power for the Super-Rich 37 spiracy is.
I went and saw Sadat for him and... when he can’t do it himself. draw less attention than he does.
It’s amazing to me that in his world the bank operates as, like a country does.
Well, what impresses me most is that I’ve represented a number of presidents, and spoken for a number of secretaries of state, but I’ve never seen doors open more easily than when I say I’m coming for David Rockefeller—it’s fantastic.
After a stop in France, Moyers, Rockefeller and friends head for Belgrade, Yugoslavia, where the world’s financial leaders are gathering for a meeting of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
Here David meets with such luminaries as Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker, a former Chase officer, then meets Secretary of the Treasury William Miller, and of course meets the host, Marshall Tito.
While Tito and Rockefeller talked finance, we spoke with Murray Seeger of the Los Angeles Times.
My own particular experience with him was in Moscow, I was working as a correspondent when Chase Manhattan opened the first American office.
Mr Rockefeller came in and they rented space for the bank and in their typical fashion they arranges a mammoth cocktail party.
They took over the dining room of the Metropol Hotel, which is an old landmark in Moscow, and put on the greatest spread anyone ever saw in their Socialism — Royal Road to Power for the Super-Rich 39 lives.
No one in America could believe anything like this, but here these people were standing out in the street in Moscow.
What was ironic, for those of us who lived there, was that within the week before the official Soviet press had been denouncing the Rockefellers by name for their investments in Chile and Peru, and in Latin America in general.
Referred to David Rockefeller’s brother, Nelson, especially, as being one of those of the Rockefellers who were financial imperialists in the Third World, Latin America specifically.
They probably hadn’t even read the article, or if they read it they didn’t pay any attention, and may not have associated this charming capitalist banker standing there in the Metropol Hotel.
Looking back, I can recall only one sentence I telegraphed from Moscow which was wholly true.
It may even be the only true sentence ever to be telegraphed from Moscow.
This was when I was temporarily standing in for the correspondent of an American news agency, and received a cable asking for the Soviet man-in-the-street’s reactions to the lavish scale of entertaining in Soviet embassies abroad.
Well, I have to say that having been in this business now for 33 years, I find one has to be very pragmatic and flexible about these things, and that relations with governments regardless of the political label that’s attached to them depends to a large extent on people and human relationships, and just because a country is technically called communist doesn’t mean that a capitalist institution such as the Chase Bank can’t deal with them on a mutually beneficial basis, and indeed we do deal with most of the so-called communist countries of the world on a basis that has worked out very well.
I could go on for pages quoting the text of this remarkable travelogue, but let’s let Bill Moyers do it for me.
One Chase executive likened multinational banks to a “giant heart which pumps the blood that sustains the world.
Karl Marx was hired by a mysterious group who called themselves the League of Just Men to write the Communist Manifesto as demagogic boob-bait to appeal to the mob.
In actual fact the Communist Manifesto was in circulation for many years before Marx’ name was widely enough recognized to establish his authorship for this revolutionary handbook.
All Karl Marx really did was to update and codify the very same revolutionary plans and principles set down seventy years earlier by Adam Weishaupt, the founder of the Order of Illuminati in Bavaria.
And, it is widely acknowledged by serious scholars of this subject that the League of Just Men was simply an extension of the Illuminati which was forced to go deep underground after it was exposed by a raid in 1786 conducted by the Bavarian authorities.
To think of writing a complete history of a nation covering even a year is absolutely incredible.
Not only is a historian’s ability to write an “objective” history limited by the sheer volume of happenings but by the fact that many of the most important happenings never appear in the papers or even in somebody’s memoirs.
In order to build his case, a historian must select a miniscule number of facts from the limited number that are known.
As Professor Stuart Crane has pointed out, this is why every book “proves” the author’s thesis.
The information in it is true, but the book is not 43 44 Call It Conspiracy objective.
Most of the facts which we bring out are readily verifiable at any large library.
But our contention is that we have arranged these facts in the order which most accurately reveals their true significance in history.
All the evidence made it look as if the butler were the murderer, but in the final scenes you find out, surprisingly, that it was the man’s wife all along.
This situation is very similar to the one in which millions of Americans find themselves today.
They have come in as the movie, so to speak, is going into its conclusion.
The earlier portion of the mystery is needed to make the whole thing understandable.
In order to understand the conspiracy it is necessary to have some rudimentary knowledge of banking and, particularly, of international bankers.
While it would be an over-simplification to ascribe the entire conspiracy to international bankers, they nevertheless have played a key role.
But it was the international bankers of whom Professor Quigley was speaking when we quoted him earlier as stating that their aim was nothing less than control of the world through finance.
Most, of course, comes from taxation; but governments often spend more than they are willing to tax from their citizens and so are forced to borrow.
Our national debt is now The Money Manipulators 45 $455 billion—every cent of it borrowed at interest from somewhere.
The public is led to believe that our government borrows from “the people” through savings bonds.
Actually, only the smallest percentage of the national debt is held by individuals in this form.
For centuries there has been big money to be made by international bankers in the financing of governments and kings.
The process through which one collects a debt from a government or a monarch is not a subject taught in the business schools of our universities, and most of us—never having been in the business of financing kings — have not given the problem much thought.
But there is a king-financing business and to those who can ensure collection it is lucrative indeed.
Economics Professor Stuart Crane notes that there are two means used to collateralize loans to governments and kings.
Whenever a business firm borrows big money its creditor obtains a voice in management to protect his investment.
Like a business, no government can borrow big money unless willing to surrender to the creditor some measure of sovereignty as collateral.
Certainly international bankers who have loaned hundreds of billions of dollars to governments around the world command considerable influence in the policies of such governments.
But the ultimate advantage the creditor has over the king or president is that if the ruler gets out of line the banker can finance his enemy or rival.
Therefore, if you want to stay in the lucrative king-financing business, it is wise to have an enemy or rival waiting in the wings to unseat every king or president to whom you lend.
Its founder, Meyer Amschel Rothschild of Frankfurt, Germany, kept one of his five sons at home to run the Frankfurt bank and sent the others to London, Paris, Vienna and Naples.
The Rothschilds became incredibly wealthy during the nineteenth century by financing governments to fight each other.
With every re-shuffling there was a balance of power in a new grouping around the House of Rothschild in England, France, or Austria.
They grouped nations so that if any king got out of line a war would be decided by which way the financing went.
Researching the debt positions of the warring nations will usually indicate who was to be punished.
In describing the characteristics of the Rothschilds and other major international bankers, Dr.
One major reason for the historical blackout on the role of the international bankers in political history is that the Rothschilds were Jewish.
Anti-Semites have played into the hands of the conspiracy by trying to portray the entire conspiracy as Jewish.
Morgan and Rockefeller international banking institutions have played a key role in the conspiracy.
But there is no denying the importance of the Rothschilds and their satellites.
However, it is just as unreasonable and immoral to blame all Jews for the crimes of the Rothschilds as it is to hold all Baptists accountable for the crimes of the Rockefellers.
The Jewish members of the conspiracy have used an organization called the Anti-Defamation League as an instruThe Money Manipulators 47 ment to try to convince everyone that any mention of the Rothschilds or their allies is an attack on all Jews.
Any individual or book exploring this subject is immediately attacked by hundreds of A.D.L. committees all over the country.
The A.D.L. has never let truth or logic interfere with its highly professional smear jobs.
Actually, nobody has a right to be more angry at the Rothschild clique than their fellow Jews.
The Warburgs, part of the Rothschild empire, helped finance Adolph Hitler.
They sat out the war in luxurious hotels in Paris or emigrated to the United States or England.
As a group, Jews have suffered most at the hands of these power seekers.
A Rothschild has much more in common with a Rockefeller than he does with a tailor from Budapest or the Bronx.
In fact, the one country in the world today which operates with less Jnsider control and influence is Israel, and as events in the latter part of this century unfold, I am convinced that the independance of Israel will contribute mightily to the dismantling of The Conspiracy.
This observation is not only the result of continued study on the subject but first hand observation and lengthy conversations with the leaders of the country, both in the government and the private sector.
Since the keystone of the international banking empires has been government bonds, it has been in the interest of these inter48 Call It Conspiracy national bankers to encourage government debt.
Nothing drives government deeply into debt like a war; and it has not been an uncommon practice among international bankers to finance both sides of the bloodiest military conflicts.
But while wars and revolutions have been useful to international bankers in gaining or increasing control over governments, the key to such contro] has always been control of money.
You can control a government if you have it in your debt; a creditor is in a position to demand the privileges of monopoly from the sovereign.
Money-seeking governments have granted monopolies in state banking, natural resources, oil concessions and transportation.
However the monopoly which the international financiers most covet is control over a nation’s money.
Eventually these international bankers actually owned as private corporations the central banks of the various European nations.
The Bank of England, Bank of France and Bank of Germany were not owned by their respective governments, as almost everyone imagines, but were privately owned monopolies granted by the heads of state, usually in return for loans.
All those who have sought dictatorial control over modern nations have understood the necessity of a central bank.
Such conspirators knew that you cannot take control of a nation without military force unless that nation has a central bank through which you can control its economy.
The international financiers set up their own front man in charge of each of Europe’s central banks.
Rather, they were the technicians and agents of the dominant investment bankers of their own countries, who had raised them up and were perfectly capable of throwing them down.
The substantive financial powers of the world were in the hands of these investment bankers (also called ‘international’ or ‘merchants’ bankers) who remained largely behind the scenes in their own unincorporated private banks.
Quigley also reveals that the international bankers who owned and controlled the Banks of England and France maintained their power even after those Banks were theoretically socialized.
Naturally those who controlled the central banks of Europe were eager from the start to fasten a similar establishment on the United States.
From the earliest days, the Founding Fathers had been conscious of attempts to control America through money manipulation, and they carried on a running battle with the international bankers.
During the nineteenth century the leading financiers of the metropolitan East often cut one another’s financial throats, but as their Western and rural victims started to organize politically, the “robber barons” saw that they had a “community of interest” toward which they must work together to protect themselves from thousands of irate farmers and up and coming competitors.
This diffusion of economic power was one of the main factors stimulating the demands for a central bank by would-be business and financial monopolists.
But aside from the major Eastern centers, most American bankers and their customers still distrusted the whole concept.
In order to show the hinterlands that they were going to need a central banking system, the international bankers created a series of panics as a demonstration of their power—a warning of what would happen unless the rest of the bankers got into line.
The man in charge of conducting these lessons was J Pierpont Morgan, American-born but educated in England and Germany.
Morgan is referred to by many, including Congressman Louis McFadden (a banker who for ten years headed the House Banking and Currency Committee), as the top American The Money Manipulators 51 agent of the English Rothschilds.
The “panic” which Morgan had created, he proceeded to end almost single-handedly.
The man who was to play the most significant part in providing America with that central bank was Paul Warburg, who 52 Call It Conspiracy along with his brother Felix had immigrated to the United States from Germany in 1902.
Paul Warburg married Nina Loeb, daughter of Solomon Loeb of Kuhn, Loeb and Company, America’s most powerful international banking firm.
Brother Felix married Frieda Schiff, daughter of Jacob Schiff, the ruling power behind Kuhn, Loeb.
After the Panic of 1907, Aldrich was appointed by the Senate to head the National Monetary Commission.
Although he had no technical knowledge of banking, Aldrich and his entourage spent nearly two years and $300,000 of the taxpayers’ money being wined and dined by the owners of Europe’s central banks as they toured the Continent “studying” central banking.
When the Commission returned from its luxurious junket it held no meetings and made no report for nearly two years.
Together with Paul Warburg and other international bankers, he staged one of the most important secret meetings in the history of the United States.
Morgan & Company; Frank A Vanderlip, President of the Rockefeller-owned National City Bank; A Piatt Andrew, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury; Benjamin Strong of Morgan’s Bankers Trust Company; and Paul Warburg.
They were all to accompany him to Jekyl Island, Georgia, to write the final recommendations of the National Monetary Commission report.
Warburg stressed that the name “central bank” must be avoided at all costs.
It was decided to promote the scheme as a “regional reserve” system with four branches in different sections of the country.
Out of the Jekyl Island meeting came the completion of the Monetary Commission Report and the Aldrich Bill.
Warburg had proposed the bill be designated the “Federal Reserve System,” but Aldrich insisted his own name was already associated in the public’s mind with banking reform and that it would arouse suspicion if a bill were introduced which did not bear his name.
However, Aldrich’s name attached to the bill proved to be the kiss of death, since any law bearing his name was so obviously a project of the international bankers.
When the Aldrich Bill could not be pushed through Congress, a new strategy had to be devised.
The only hope for a central bank was to disguise it and have it put through by the Democrats as a measure to strip Wall Street of its power.
The opportunity to do this came with the approach of the 1912 Presidential election.
The Democratic candidate, Woodrow Wilson, was equally the property of Morgan.
Woodrow Wilson and Teddy Roosevelt proceeded to whistle-stop the country trying to out-do each other in florid denunciations of the Wall Street “money trust” —the same group of Insiders which was financing the campaigns of both.
Wilson resurrected the issue and promised the country a money system free from domination by the international bankers of Wall Street.
The Insiders’ sheepdog who controlled Wilson and guided the program through Congress was the mysterious “Colonel” Edward Mandel House, the British-educated son of a representative of England’s financial interests in the American South.
He was strictly a behind-the-scenes wire-puller and is regarded by many historians as the real President of the United States during the Wilson years.
The graduated income tax and a central bank are two of the ten planks of The Communist Manifesto.
Seymour’s work contains 56 Call It Conspiracy numerous documents and records showing constant contact between House and Paul Warburg while the Federal Reserve Act was being prepared and steered through Congress.
In order to support the fiction that the Federal Reserve Act was a “people’s bill,” the Insider financiers put up a smokescreen of opposition to it.
It was strictly a case of Br’er Rabbit begging not to be thrown into the briar patch.
Both Aldrich and Vanderlip denounced what in actuality was their own bill.
Wilson had fulfilled to the Insiders the pledge he had made in order to become President.
There was genuine opposition to the Act, but it could not match the power of the bill’s advocates.
The whole central bank concept was engineered by the very group it was supposed to strip of power.
The myth that the “money trust” had been defrocked should have been exploded when Paul Warburg was appointed to the first Federal Reserve Board—a board which was handpicked by “Colonel” House.
Paul Warburg relinquished his $500,000 a year job as a Kuhn, Loeb partner to take a $12,000 a year job with the Federal Reserve.
Since Woodrow Wilson took his oath of office, the national debt has risen from $1 billion to $455 billion.
The total amount of interest paid since then to the international bankers holding that debt is staggering, with interest having become the third largest item in the federal budget.
Interest on the national debt is now $22 billion every year, and climbing steeply as inflation pushes up the interest rate on government bonds.
Meanwhile, our gold is mortgaged to European central banks, and our silver has all been sold.
With economic catastrophe imminent, only a blind disciple of the “accidental theory of history” could believe that all of this occurred by coincidence.
When the Federal Reserve system was foisted on an unsuspecting American public, there were absolute guarantees that there would be no more boom and bust economic cycles.
The men who, behind the scenes, were pushing the central bank concept for the international bankers faithfully promised that from then on there would be only steady growth and perpetual prosperity.
Having built the Federal Reserve as a tool to consolidate and control wealth, the international bankers were now ready for a major killing.
Between 1923 and 1929, the Federal Reserve expanded the money supply by sixty-two percent.
Carroll Quigley of Harvard, Princeton and Georgetown Universities wrote book disclosing international bankers’ plan to control the world from behind the political and financial scenes.
Quigley revealed plans of billionaires to establish dictatorship of the super-rich disguised as workers’ democracies.
Morgan created artificial panic used as excuse to pass Federal Reserve Act.
Morgan was instrumental in pushing U S. into WWI to protect his loans to British government.
After his death, his partners helped finance the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia.
At a secret luncheon of the Federal Reserve Board and heads of the European central banks the committee warned, the international bankers were tightening the noose.
Montagu Norman, Governor of the Bank of England, came to Washington on February 6, 1929, to confer with Andrew Mellon, Secretary of the Treasury.
Immediately after this mysterious visit, the Federal Reserve Board reversed its easy-money policy and began raising the discount rate.
The balloon which had been inflated constantly for nearly seven years was about to be exploded.
This meant that the stock brokers and the customers had to dump their stock on the market in order to pay the loans.
This naturally collapsed the stock market and brought a banking collapse all over the country because the banks not owned by the oligarchy were heavily The Money Manipulators 61 involved in broker call claims at this time, and bank runs soon exhausted their coin and currency and they had to close.
They were either out of the market or had sold “short” so that they made enormous profits as the Dow Jones plummeted.
For those who knew the score, a comment by Paul Warburg had provided the warning to sell.
Sharpies were later able to buy back these stocks at a ninety percent discount from their former highs.
To think that the scientifically engineered Crash of ’29 was an accident or the result of stupidity defies all logic.
Each of these has followed a period in which the Federal Reserve tromped down hard on the money accelerator — 62 Call It Conspiracy and then slammed on the brakes.
Chart 5, based on one appearing in the highly respected financial publication, Indicator Digest of June 24, 1969, shows the effects on the Dow-Jones Industrial Average of Federal Reserve policies of expanding or restricting the monetary supply.
This is how the stock market is manipulated and how depressions or recessions are scientifically created.
If you have inside knowledge as to which way the Federal Reserve policy is going to go, you can make a ton of money.
The members of the Federal Reserve Board are appointed by the President for fourteen year terms.
These appointments, which should be extensively debated by the Senate, are routinely approved.
But, here, as in Europe, these men are mere figureheads, put in their positions at the behest of the international bankers who finance the Presidential campaigns of both political parties.
And, Professor Quigley reveals that these international bankers who owned and controlled the Banks of England and France maintained their power even after those banks were theoretically socialized.
The American system is slightly different, but the net effect is the same —ever-increasing debt requiring ever-increasing interest payments, inflation and periodic scientifically created depressions and recessions.
In every trip around the track, the rate of price inflation went to higher levels than the previous round, and during the pull-back, it came to rest at new higher ground.
In other words, each new high was higher than the previous high, and each new low was higher than the previous low.
The inflation of the 70s and the 80s was much worse than 64 Call It Conspiracy anything we had experienced since the end of the Civil War.
I remember as if it were yesterday sitting in Honolulu, listening to President Nixon on August 15, 1971, when he announced that the United States Dollar would no longer be redeemable in gold.
He also announced in the same speech that in order to “curb” inflation, he was invoking wage and price controls.
Investors— possibly only American investors who are selling foreign currencies and investments2!—have rushed into the dollar only because it is strong relative to the other currencies which have been inflated even more than the dollar itself, or because the United States economy is somewhat stronger than the socialist economies abroad. | will have much more to relate on this entire subject in subsequent chapters, but suffice it to say that the role of the Federal Reserve is greater today than at any time in the past.
When Gary and I outlined the role of the Fed and its relation to the movement of the stock market, hardly anyone paid any attention, yet now it’s almost impossible to listen to the radio or watch TV and not have the commentator explain the movement of the market by it’s relation to Federal Reserve policy and the impact of the interest rates.
Nixon did this in 1972, Ford did it in 1976, and Reagan is doing it now.
The reality is, that breaking the back of inflation without the discipline of gold in the monetary system is tantamount to breaking the back of a King Cobra by wrestling it to the ground.
As inflation engulfs the whole world, it is vitally important to recall the words and dreams of Montagu Norman as quoted above.
For when the dollar does finally collapse, you can bet your last Krugerrand that the /nsiders of World Finance will be standing in the wings with a money system that will sound the death knell of all national currencies, including the dollar.
But when it does happen, the world will rush to the “new money” as a panacea, regardless of who issues it.
It is my personal opinion that the source will be the World Bank or some future look-a-like.
Emden, Paul H., Money Powers of Europe, D Appleton, Century Company, 1938; Eaton, Clement, History of the South66 Call It Conspiracy ern Confederacy, MacMillan, 1954.
Marx, Karl, The Communist Manifesto, Henry Regnery Co., Chicago, 1954, $5.
House Banking And Currency Committee Hearing on H R. 7230, 75th Congress, March 2 and 19, 1938, 214.
Lindbergh, Charles A Sr., The Economic Pinch [reprinted by Omni Publications, Hawthorne, Calif.68, 95.
Rothbard, Murray, America’s Great Depression, Nash Publishing, Los Angeles, 1972, 86.
Bryan, William “John,” The United States Unresolved Monetary And Political Problems.
McFadden, Congressman Louis T., On The Federal Reserve Corporation, remarks in Congress, 1934, Forum Publication Co., Boston, 89.
Louis, a more “conservative” or “Friedmanite” Federal Reserve regional publication.
Chapter IV Bankrolling the Bolshevik Revolution lee ESTABLISHING of the Federal Reserve System provided the “conspiracy” with an instrument whereby the international bankers could run the national debt up to the sky, thereby collecting enormous amounts of interest and also gaining control over the borrower.
Two months prior to the passage of the Federal Reserve Act, the conspirators had created the mechanism to collect the funds to pay the interest on the national debt.
That mechanism was the progressive income tax, the second plank of Karl Marx’s Communist Manifesto which contained ten planks for SOCIALIZING a country.
One quite naturally assumes that the graduated income tax would be opposed by the wealthy.
Some, no doubt, out of altruism and because, at first, the taxes were very small.
But others backed the scheme because they already had a plan for permanently avoiding both the income tax and the subsequent inheritance tax.
While the Populists had the wrong answers, they asked many of the right questions.
Unfortunately, they were led to believe that the banker-monopolist control over government, which they opposed, was a product of free enterprise.
Since the Populist threat to the cartelists was from the Left , the Insiders moved to capture the Left.
Professor Quigley discloses that over fifty years ago the Morgan firm decided to infiltrate the Leftwing political movement in the United States.
This was not difficult to do since these Left groups needed funds and were eager for help to get their message to the public.
There was nothing new about this decision, says Quigley, since other financiers had talked about it and even attempted it earlier.
Radical movements are never successful unless they attract big money and/or outside support.
The great historian of the Twentieth Century, Oswald Spengler, was one of those who saw what American Liberals refused to see — that the Left is controlled by its alleged enemy, the malefactors of great wealth.
While the Populist movement was basically nonconspiratorial, its Leftist ideology and platform were made to order for the elitist Insiders because it aimed at concentrating power in government.
The /nsiders knew they could control that power and use it to their own purposes.
They were not, of Bankrolling the Bolshevik Revolution 69 course, interested in promoting competition but in restricting it.
Professor Gabriel Kolko has prepared a lengthy volume presenting the undeniable proof that the giant corporate manipulators promoted much of the so-called “progressive legislation” of the Roosevelt and Wilson eras—legislation which ostensibly was aimed at controlling their abuses, but which was so written as to suit their interests.
The oversight was due to the illusion that American industry was centralized and monopolized to such an extent that it would rationalize the activity in its various branches voluntarily.
Despite the large numbers of mergers, and the growth in the absolute size of many corporations, the dominant tendency in the American economy at the beginning of this century was toward growing competition.
The best way for the Jnsiders to eliminate this growing competition was to impose a progressive income tax on their competitors while writing the laws so as to include built-in escape hatches for themselves.
Actually, very few of the proponents of the graduated income tax realized they were playing into the hands of those they were seeking to control.
The Insiders’ principal mouthpiece in the Senate during this period was Nelson Aldrich, one of the conspirators involved in engineering the creation of the Federal Reserve and the maternal grandfather of Nelson Aldrich Rockefeller.
In earlier years Aldrich had denounced the income tax as “communistic and socialistic,” but in 1909 he pulled a dramatic and stunning reversal.
By the time the Amendment had been approved by the states , the Rockefellers and Carnegie foundations were in full operation.
One must remember that it was to break up the Standard Oil and United States Steel monopolies that the various anti-trust acts were ostensibly passed.
These monopolists could now compound their wealth tax-free, while competitors had to face a graduated income tax which made it difficult to amass capital.
As we have said, socialism is not a share-thewealth program, as the socialists would like you to believe, but a consolidate-and-control-the-wealth program for the Insiders.
The Reece Committee which investigated foundations for Congress in 1953 proved with an overwhelming amount of evidence that the various Rockefeller and Carnegie foundations have been promoting socialism since their inception.
Bankrolling the Bolshevik Revolution 71 The conspirators now had created the mechanisms to run up the debt, to collect the debt, and to avoid the taxes required to pay the yearly interest on the debt.
The American public was extremely opposed to America’s getting involved in a European war.
Staying out of the perennial foreign quarrels had been an American tradition since George Washington.
But as Wilson was stumping the country giving his solemn word that American soldiers would not be sent into a foreign war, he was preparing to do just the opposite.
His “alter ego,” as he called “Colonel” House, was making behind-thescenes agreements with England which committed America to entering the war.
The same crowd which manipulated the passage of the income tax and the Federal Reserve System wanted America in the war.
Morgan, John D Rockefeller, “Colonel” House, Jacob Schiff, Paul Warburg and the rest of the Jekyl Island conspirators were all deeply involved in getting us involved.
In fact, J P, Morgan & Co. served as British financial agents in this country during World War I While all of the standard reasons given for the outbreak of World War I in Europe doubtless were factors, there were also other more important causes.
The assassination of an Austrian Archduke was merely an incident providing an excuse for starting a chain reaction.
After years of fighting, the war was a complete stalemate and would have ended almost immediately in a negotiated settlement had not the United States declared war on Germany.
As soon as Wilson’s re-election had been engineered through the “he kept us out of war” slogan, a complete reversal of propaganda was instituted.
In those days before radio and television, 72 Call It Conspiracy public opinion was controlled almost exclusively by newspapers.
Many of the major newspapers were controlled by the Federal Reserve crowd.
Although after the war many historians admitted that one side was as guilty as the other in starting the war, Germany was pictured as a militaristic monster which wanted to rule the world.
Remember, this picture was painted by Britain which had its soldiers in more countries around the world than all other nations put together.
So-called “Prussian militarism” did exist, but it was no threat to conquer the world.
Actually, the Germans were proving to be tough business competitors in the world’s markets and the British did not approve.
In order to generate war fever, the sinking of the Lusitania— a British ship torpedoed two years earlier—was revived and given renewed headlines.
German submarine warfare was turned into a major issue by the newspapers.
The Germans could not allow those supplies to be delivered any more than the English would have allowed them to be delivered to Germany.
If Morgan wanted to take the risks and reap the rewards of selling munitions to England, that was his business.
It was certainly nothing over which the entire nation should have been dragged into war.
The Lusitania, at the time it was sunk, was carrying six million pounds of ammunition.
It was actually illegal for American passengers to be aboard a ship carrying munitions to belligerents.
House’s influence over Wilson is an example that in the world of super-politics the real rulers are not always the ones the public sees.
Warburg masterminded establishment of Federal Reserve to put control over nation’s economy in hands of international bankers.
The Federal Reserve controls the money supply which allows manipulators to create alternate cycles of boom and bust,e., a roller coaster economy.
This allows those in the know to make fabulous amounts of money, but even more important, allows the Insiders to control the economy and further centralize power in the federal government.
In fact, the Lusitania was registered in the British navy as an auxiliary cruiser.
Yet the sinking of the Lusitania was used by clever propagandists to portray the Germans as inhuman slaughterers of innocents.
Submarine warfare was manufactured into a cause célebre to push us into war.
During the “war to end all wars,” Jnsider banker Bernard Baruch was made absolute dictator over American business when President Wilson appointed him Chairman of the War Industries Board, where he had control of all domestic contracts for Allied war materials.
Baruch made lots of friends while placing tens of billions in government contracts, and it was widely rumored in Wall Street that out of the war to make the world safe for international bankers he netted $200 million for himself.
It should be noted that Sir William Wiseman, the man sent by British Intelligence to help bring the United States into the war, was amply rewarded for his services.
He stayed in this country afer WWI as a new partner in the Jacob Schiff-Paul Warburg-controlled Kuhn, Loeb bank.
But it was a catastrophe of such magnitude for the United States that few even today grasp its importance.
The war reversed our traditional foreign policy of non-involvement and we have been enmeshed almost constantly ever since in perpetBankrolling the Bolshevik Revolution 75 ual wars for perpetual peace.
Winston Churchill once observed that all nations would have been better off had the United States minded its own business.
The Bolshevik Revolution in Russia was obviously one of the great turning points in world history.
Th myth-makers and rewriters of history have done their landscape painting jobs well.
The establishing of Communism in Russia is a classic example of the second “big lie” of Communism,e. that it is the movement of the downtrodden masses rising up against exploiting bosses.
This cunning deception has been fostered since before the first French Revolution in 1789.
Most people today believe the Communists were successful in Russia because they were able to rally behind them the sympathy and frustration of the Russian people who were sick of the tyranny of the Czars.
When Czar Nicholas II abdicated, a provisional government was established by Prince Lvov who wanted to pattern the new Russian government after our own.
But, unfortunately, the Lvov government gave way to the Kerensky regime.
Kerensky, a so-called democratic socialist, may have been running a caretaker government for the Communists.
He kept the war going against Germany and the other Central Powers, but he issued a general amnesty for Communists and other revolutionaries, many of whom had been exiled after the abortive Red Revolution of 1905.
The Allies include Russia, the British Commonwealth, France and by April 1917, the United States.
In March of 1917, purposeful planners set in motion the forces to compel Czar Nicholas II to abdicate.
Lenin was in Switzerland and had been in Western Europe since 1905 when he was exiled for trying to topple the Czar in the abortive Communist revolution of that year.
There the Canadians grabbed Trotsky and his money and impounded them both.
This was a very logical thing for the Canadian government to do for Trotsky had said many times that if he were successful in coming to power in Russian he would immediately stop what he called the “imperialist war” and sue for a separate peace with Germany.
This would free millions of German troops for transfer from the Eastern front to the Western front where they Bankrolling the Bolshevik Revolution 77 could kill Canadians.
Then all of a sudden the British (through future Kuhn, Loeb partner Sir William Wiseman) and the United States (through none other than the ubiquitous “Colonel” House) pressured the Canadian government.
In fact, practically the whole Bolshevik Revolution took place in one city—Petrograd.
The two Germans most responsible for the financing of Lenin were Max Warburg and a displaced Russian named Alexander Helphand.
They could claim that they were serving their country’s cause by helping and financing Lenin.
For the father-in-law of Max Warburg’s brother, Felix, was Jacob Schiff, senior partner in Kuhn, Leob & Co.
One of the best sources of information on the financing of the Bolshevik Revolution is Czarism and the Revolution by an important White Russian General named Arsene de Goulevitch who was founder in France of the Union of Oppressed Peoples.
Schiff spent millions to overthrow the Czar and more millions to overthrow Kerensky.
He was sending money to Russia long after the true character of the Bolsheviks was known to the world.
Schiff raised $10 million, supposedly for Jewish war Bankrolling the Bolshevik Revolution 79 FINANCING BOLSHEVIK REVOLUTION Paul Warburg Max Warburg Jacob Schiff Col.
The result was that the subject of financing the Communist takeover of Russia became taboo.
Later evidence indicates that the bankrolling of the Bolsheviks was handled by a syndicate of international bankers, which in addition to the Schiff-Warburg clique, included Morgan and Rockefeller interests.
Long interview with R., who confirmed what I had previously been told by M After referring to the German hatred of himself and his family, he turned to the subject of the Revolution which, he claimed, was engineered by the English, more precisely, by Sir George Buchanan and Lord Milner.
He could, he asserted, name the streets and numbers of the houses in which British agents were quartered.
It should be noted parenthetically that Lord Milner, Paul, Felix and Max Warburg represented “their” respective countries at the Paris Peace Conference at the conclusion of World War I If we can somehow ascribe Max Warburg’s financing of Lenin to German “patriotism,” it was certainly not “patriotism” which inspired Schiff, Morgan, Rockefeller and Milner to bankroll the Bolsheviks.
Both Britain and America were at war with Germany and were allies of Czarist Russia.
To free dozens of German divisions to switch from the Eastern Front to France and kill hundreds of thousands of American and British soldiers was nothing short of treason.
However, if you conclude that this is anything but coincidental, your name will be immediately expunged from the Social Register.
Lord Alfred Milner, wealthy Englishman and front man for the Rothschilds, served as paymaster for the international bankers in Petrograd during the Bolshevik Revolution.
The American subsidiary of this conspiracy is called the Council on Foreign Relations and was started by, and is still controlled by Leftist international bankers.
The admitted goal of the CFR is to abolish the Constitution and replace our once independent Republic with a World Government.
According to his grandson John, Jacob Schiff , long-time associate of the Rothschilds, financed the Communist Revolution in Russia to the tune of $20 million.
Schiff’s partner and relative, Paul Warburg, engineered the establishment of the Federal Reserve System while on the Kuhn Loeb payroll.
It may or may not have been coincidental, but Russia was the one major European country without a central bank.
In Russia, for the first time, the Communist conspiracy gained a geographical homeland from which to launch assaults against the other nations of the world.
In the Bolshevik Revolution we have some of the world’s richest and most powerful men financing a movement which claims its very existence is based on the concept of stripping of their wealth men like the Rothschilds, Rockefellers, Schiffs, Warburgs, Morgans, Harrimans, and Milners.
It is only logical to assume that if they financed it and do not fear it, it must be because they control it.
The EastWest balance-of-power politics is used as one of the main excuses for the socialization of America.
Although it was not their main purpose, by nationalization of Russia the Insiders bought themselves an enormous piece of real estate, complete with mineral rights, for somewhere between $30 and $40 million.
Undoubtedly much of the control is economic, but certainly the international bankers have an enforcer arm within Russia to keep the Soviet leaders in line.
The organization may be SMERSH, the international Communist murder organization described in testimony before Congressional Committees and by Ian Fleming in his James Bond books.
A clique of American financiers not only helped establish communism in Russia, but has striven mightily ever since to keep it alive.
Ever since 1918 this clique has been engaged in transferring money and, probably more important, technical information, to the Soviet Union.
Using, for the most part, official State Department documents, Sutton shows conclusively that virtually everything the Soviets possess has been acquired from the West.
In 1933, the same Insiders pushed FDR into recognizing the Soviet Union, thus saving it from financial collapse, while at the same time they were underwriting huge loans on both sides of the Atlantic for the new regime of Adolph Hitler.
In so doing they assisted greatly in setting the stage for World War II, and the events that followed.
In 1941, the same /nsiders rushed to the aid of our “noble ally,” Stalin, after his break with Hitler.
In one country after another Communism has been imposed on the local population from the top down.
The most prominent forces for the imposition of that tyranny came from the United States and Great Britain.
Here is a charge that no American enjoys making, but the facts lead to 84 Call It Conspiracy no other possible conclusion.
The idea that Communism is a movement of the downtrodden masses is a fraud.
None of the foregoing makes sense if Communism really is what the Communists and the Establishment tell us it is.
But if Communism is an arm of a bigger conspiracy to control the world by power-mad billionaires (and brilliant but ruthless academicians who have shown them how to use their power) it all becomes perfectly logical.
It is at this point that we should again make it clear that this conspiracy is not made up solely of bankers and international cartelists, but includes every field of human endeavor.
Starting with Voltaire and Adam Weishaupt and running through John Ruskin, Sidney Webb, Nicholas Murray Butler, and on to the present Henry Kissinger and John Kenneth Galbraith, it has always been the scholar looking for avenues of power who has shown the “sons of the very powerful” how their wealth could be used to rule the world.
We cannot stress too greatly the importance of the reader keeping in mind that this book is discussing only one segment of the conspiracy, certain international bankers.
Other equally important segments which work to foment labor, religious and racial strife in order to promote socialism have been described in numerous other books.
One must draw the distinction between competitive free enterprise, the most moral and productive system ever devised, and cartel capitalism dominated by industrial monopolists and international bankers.
The difference is the private enterpriser operates by offering products and services in a competitive free market while the cartel capitalist uses the government to force the public to do business with him.
These corporate socialists are deadly enemies of competitive private enterprise.
Liberals are willing to believe that these “robber barons” will fix prices, rig markets, establish monopolies, buy politicians, exBankrolling the Bolshevik Revolution 85 ploit employees and fire them the day before they are eligible for pensions, but they absolutely will not believe that these same men would want to rule the world or would use Communism as the striking edge of their conspiracy.
However, if you think with logic, reason and precision in this field and try to expose these power seekers, the Establishment’s mass media will accuse you of being a dangerous paranoid who is “dividing” our people.
Just since 1975, there have been five major changes in the tax code, and these changes are now coming at the rate of once a year.
It is virtually impossible to keep up with these changes as we try to go about our every-day lives.
And, if we do get a so-called flat tax that actually reduces the income tax bite, it will be followed shortly by the Value Added Tax, which is just another catch phrase for a national sales tax.
Starting in the Wilson administration and working forward through the creation of the Federal Reserve and the passage of the personal graduated income tax, the /nsiders have repeatedly foisted off on the American people the very schemes that were put in place throughout Western Europe, but most specifically Sweden and England.
In the year we published None Dare, Colin Simpson’s book, The Lusitania , proved these facts and much more.
The conventional academic reviews were predictably unfavorable to the book, but they did not do much damage to his case.
Dall, Curtiss, FD.R. — My Exploited Father In Law, Christian Crusade Publications, 1968, Tulsa, Okla, 71.
Willert, Arthur, The Road To Safety, London, Derek, Verschoyle, 1952, 29.
Hagedorn, Herman, The Magnate, John Day, N.Y. see also Washington Post, Feb., 1918, 195.
The best general reference covering other areas of the conspiracy is Rose Martin’s Fabian Freeway.
Chapter V Establishing the Establishment Onz OF THE primary reasons the Insiders worked behind the scenes to foment WWI was to create in its aftermath a world government.
If you wish to establish national monopolies, you must control national governments.
If you wish to establish international monopolies or cartels, you must control a world government.
After the Armistice on November 11, 1918, Woodrow Wilson and his alter ego, “Colonel” House (the ever present front man for the /nsiders), went to Europe in hopes of establishing a world government in the form of the League of Nations.
When the negotiations revealed one side had been about as guilty as the other, and the glitter of the “moral crusade” evaporated along with Wilson’s vaunted “Fourteen Points,” the “rubes back on Main Street” began to waken.
Americans certainly didn’t want to get into a World Government with double-dealing Europeans whose specialty was secret treaty hidden behind secret treaty.
The guest of honor, so to speak, stalked out of the banquet before the poisoned meal could be served.
And, without American inclusion, there could be no meaningful World Government.
Aroused public opinion made it obvious that the United States 89 90 Call It Conspiracy Senate dared not ratify a treaty saddling the country with such an international commitment.
In some manner the American public had to be sold on the idea of internationalism and World Government.
Elections were to become mere charades conducted for the bedazzlement of the booboisie.
The idea was to use both the Democrat and Republican parties as instruments to promote World Government.
The part about the Jnsiders establishing a worid dictatorship quite naturally was left out.
The role of Weishaupt’s Illuminists in such horrors as the Reign of Terror is unquestioned, and the techniques of the Illuminati have long been recognized as models for Communist methodology.
Weishaupt also used the structure of the Society of Jesus as his model, and rewrote his Code in Masonic terms.
Apparently for stragetic reasons Lord Rothschild was subsequently removed from the forefront of the scheme.
The “secret society” was organized on the conspiratorial pattern of circles within circles.
Professor Quigley informs us that 92 Call It Conspiracy the central part of the “secret society” was established by March, 1891, using Rhodes’ money.
The organization was run for Rothschild by Lord Alfred Milner, discussed in the last chapter as a key financier of the Bolshevik revolution.
The American organizers were dominated by the large number of Morgan ‘experts,’ . . . who had gone to the Paris Peace Conference and there became close friends with the similar group of English ‘experts’ which had been recruited by the Milner group.
According to Quigley, the most important financial dynasties in America following WWI were the Rockefeller family; Kuhn, Loeb & Company; Dillon Read and Company and Brown Bros.
The Insider crowd which created the Federal Reserve System, many of whom also bankrolled the Bolshevik Revolution, were all in the original membership.
These men did not create the C.F.R. because they had nothing better to do with their time and money.
This semi-secret organization unquestionably has become the most influential group in America.
One of the extremely infrequent articles to appear in the national press concerning this Council was published in the Christian Science Monitor of September 1, 1961.
Indicative of the C.F.R.’s power to maintain its anonymity is the fact that, despite its having been operative at the highest levels for nearly fifty years and having from the beginning counted among its members the foremost lions of the Establishment communications media, we discovered after poring over volumes of the Reader’s Guide To Periodical Literature covering several decades that only one magazine article on the C.F.R. has ever appeared in a major national journal—and that in Harper’s, hardly a mass-circulation periodical.
Similarly, only a handful of articles on the Council have appeared in the nation’s great newspapers.
Kraft, incidentally, aptly titled his article on the C.ER., “School for Statesmen,” — an admission that the members of the Council are drilled with a “line” of strategy to be carried out in Washington.
A second world war would greatly enhance the opportunity for establishment of World Government.
Chief legal counsel to the J Henry Schroeder Bank was the firm of Sullivan and Cromwell, whose senior partners included John Foster and Allen Dulles.
The Council’s first task was to infiltrate and develop effective control of the United States State Department —to make certain that after World War II there would be no slip ups as there had been following World War I The story of the C.F.R. takeover of the Department of State is contained in State Department Publication 2349, Report To The President On The Results of the San Francisco Conference.
It is the report of Secretary of State Edward R Stettinius to President Truman.
This is the group which designed the United Nations— the first major successful step on the road to a World Superstate.
At least forty-seven C.F.R. members were among the American delegates to the founding of the United Nations in San Francisco in 1945.
Members of the C.F.R. group included Harold Stassen, John J McCloy, Owen Lattimore (called by the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee a “conscious articulate instrument of the Soviet conspiracy”), Alger Hiss , Philip Jessup, Harry Dexter White , Nelson Rockefeller, John Foster Dulles, John Carter Vincent (security risk), and Dean Acheson.
The landscape painters of the mass media have outdone themselves painting the United Nations as a Establishing the Establishment 97 peace organization instead of a front for the international bankers.
Not only did members of the Council on Foreign Relations dominate the establishment of the U.N., but C.ER. members were at the elbow of the American President at Teheran, Potsdam and Yalta— where hundreds of millions of human beings were delivered into the hands of Joseph Stalin, vastly extending the power of the International Communist Conspiracy.
Administrative assistant to FDR during this time was a key member of the C.ER. named Lauchlin Currie— subsequently identified by J Edgar Hoover as a Soviet agent.
While Rogers is not a member, Professor Henry Kissinger, Mr Nixon’s chief foreign policy advisor, came to the job from the staff of the C.F.R., and the undersecretaries of state, almost to a man, are C.F.R. members.
Today the C.F.R. remains active in working toward its final goal of a government over all the world—a government which the Insiders and their allies will control.
The goal of the C.ER. is simply to abolish the United States with its Constitutional guarantees of liberty.
International banking organizations that currently have men in the C.F.R. include Kuhn, Loeb & Company; Lazard Freres (directly affiliated with Rothschild); Dillon Read; Lehman Bros.
Also in the C.E.R. are men from such openly Leftist organizations as the Fabian Socialist Americans for Democratic Action, the avowedly Socialist League for Industrial Democracy — , and the United World Federalists which openly advocates world government with the Communists.
In theory, these men and organizations are supposed to be the blood enemies of the banks and businesses listed above.
The fact that the C.ER. operates in near-complete anonymity Establishing the Establishment 99 can hardly be accidental.
Surely the C.F.R. could get a few blurbs of publicity if publicity were desired.
The case of Adolph Ochs of the Times and David Sarnoff of RCA are examples of this control.
Both were given early financial aid by Kuhn, Loeb & Company and Morgan Guaranty.
These are the Establishment’s official landscape painters whose jobs it is to make sure the public does not discover the C.ER. and its role in creating a world socialist dictatorship.
You will recall that “Colonel” House believed we should have two political parties but only a single ideology — One World Socialism.
In 1968, when George Wallace maintained that there wasn’t a dime’s worth of difference between the two parties, he may not have known how right he was or why.
Averell Harriman, George Ball, Henry Fowler, Dean Rusk, Adam Yarmolinsky, Hubert Humphrey and John Lindsay.
Undersecretary of State George Ball went with Lehman Brothers; Secretary of the Treasury Henry Fowler was taken in by Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Fowler and Deming were largely responsible for policies which led to European nations claiming half of our gold as well as denuding the United States Treasury of all of the silver reserves it had built up over a century of time.
Henry Kissinger, the “Colonel” House of the Nixon Administration, came to his job directly from employment on the C.E.R. staff.
Kissinger represents the very opposite of everything Nixon said he stood for in his campaign.
Both Liberals and Conservatives admit Kissinger is by far the most important man in the Nixon Administration.
Administrations, both Democrat and Republican, come and go—but the C.ER. lingers on.
This is why the more things seem to change, the more they remain the same.
The fix is in at the top, where the same coterie of /nsiders, bent on control of the world, runs the show.
While the Jnsiders are serving champagne and caviar to their guests in their summer mansions at Newport, or entertaining other members of the social elite aboard their yachts, their agents are out enslaving and murdering people.
They have used the prestige that their wealth, their social position, and their education have given them to lead their country toward bankruptcy and military debacle.
It goes without saying that the C.F.R.’s hands are bloodier now with the gore of 50,000 Americans in Vietnam.
Shamefully the Council has succeeded in promoting, as American policy, the shipment of American aid and trade to the East European arsenal of the Viet Cong for the killing of our sons in the field.
If scarcely one American in a thousand has any familiarity with the C.F.R., it is doubtful that one in five thousand has any knowledge of the Bilderbergers.
The strange name of this group is taken from the site of the first meeting in may, 1954 —the Hotel de Bilderberg —in Oostebeck, Holland.
The man who created the Bilderbergers is His Royal Highness Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands.
The Prince is an important figure in Royal Dutch Petroleum (Shell Oil) and the Societe General de Belgique, a huge conglomerate cartel with worldwide holdings.
Those in attendance include leading political and financial figures from the United States and Western Europe.
In the meantime, while the “new world order” is being built, the Bilderbergers coordinate the efforts of the European and American power elites.
Prince Bernhard’s counterpart among the American Bilderbergers is David Rockefeller, chairman of the board of the C.F.R., whose economic base is the giant Chase Manhattan Bank and Standard Oil.
Warburg & Co., Ltd., Pierce Paul Schweitzer of the International Monetary Fund, and George Ball of Lehman Brothers.
Not everyone who attends one of the Bilderbergers’ secret meetings is an /nsider, but only men of the Left are allowed to attend the private meetings following the general sessions.
Bilderberg policy is not planned by those who attend the conferences, but by the elite steering committee of Insiders composed of 24 Europeans and 15 Americans.
Those who adhere to the accidental theory of history will claim that it is sheer coincidence that every single one of those named as past and present members of the Bilderberger Steering Committee is or was a member of the Council on Foreign Relations.
The Bilderberger Advisory Committee forms an even more “inner circle” than the Steering Committee.
But, of course, the landscape painters merely brush the Bilderbergers right out of existence and focus the public’s attention on something like the conditions in the prisons or Coke bottles littering the highways.
Since the Bilderbergers are a group of the Left (or, as the Liberals in the media might say, but don’t, “a group of progressives”) they are allowed to go on in peace and quiet planning for 1984.
The fact that there is heavy Rockefeller (Chase Manhattan Bank and C.F.R.) influence in the media might also have something to do with the fact that while everybody has heard of, say, The John Birch Society (and almost always in a derogatory manner from the Eastern Establishment media), practically nobody has heard of the Bilderbergers.
They usually last three days and are held in remote, but plush quarters.
The participants are housed in one location and are protected by a thorough security network.
Decisions are reached, resolutions adopted, plans of action initiated, but only Bilderbergers ever know for sure what occurred.
We must assume that these people did not congregate merely to discuss their golf scores.
The press, naturally, is not allowed to be present, although occasionally a brief press conference is held at the end of the meeting at which time the news media are given in very general terms the Bilderberger version of what was discussed.
The most recent meeting took place at Laurance Rockefeller’s Woodstock Inn at Woodstock, Vermont, April 23, 24, 25, Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands, head of the secret, one world Bilderberger movement, confers with President Nixon.
A former Nazi SS storm trooper (“We had a lot of fun”), Bernhard now works with the Rothschilds and Communists to promote a World Super State of the elite.
Bernhard holds yearly secret meetings with high U S. officials, bankers and industrialists to map plans for merging the U S. and the Soviet Union into a world government.
After last meeting, Nixon devalued the dollar and opened up trade with Red China.
The Rothschilds are closely connected with Prince Bernhard in business (Royal Dutch Shell) and in the building of a one world super-government with the Soviets.
Edmond, reputedly the richest of the French Rothschilds, is worth $500 million personally, according to estimates.
Apparently the only newspaper to carry a substantial story on the meeting was the Rutland, Vermont, Herald, whose reporter could acquire only sketchy information about what the meeting was all about.
A closed-door meeting was held in Woodstock last week to brief a handful of local officials on some phases of the conference.
Present at the scene to carry back orders to Mr Nixon was C.F.R.-Rockefeller errand boy, the President’s Number One advisor on foreign affairs, Henry Kissinger.
Henry Kissinger went to Peking and arranged for the acceptance of Red China as a member of the family of trading nations; and an international monetary crisis developed after which the dollar was devalued.
Over the past two years the above mentioned Antony Sutton has poured his extraordinary research capabilities into a study on the background and power of a Yale based secret society called The Order, commonly known as Skull & Bones.
Sutton has brought into the light some very significant and potentially damning revelations about this shadowy organization.
Much research still needs to be done on the background, antecedants and interconnections of this group, but even at this date, Sutton has compiled enough valid material to show that Skull & Bones is something far beyond just a group of college seniors looking for a reason to throw a beer bash and Lord it over their fellow students in the process.
One of the more interesting facts the good professor’s research confirms is that almost without exception, key members of the C.E.R., since its founding at the end of WWI, were also members of The Order.
W Averrill Harriman, William P and McGeorge Bundy, Henry L Stimson, J Richardson Dilworth, Henry Luce, Henry P Davison, George P Bush, and current C.ER. president Winston Lord are just a few of “the boys” whose names appear on both membership rosters.
The founders, partners, and directors of some of this countries most powerful financial institutions, both past and present, appear far too frequently in both The Order and the C.F.R. to be mere coincidence.
Chase Manhattan Bank City Bank Morgan Guaranty Trust The Carnegie Foundation The Rockefeller Foundation The Ford Foundation The Standard Oil Company These are but a sample of the bastions of power and influence represented in both organizations.
Sutton’s continuing research on The Order should prove most interesting and valuable.
Richard Nixon now claims that he no longer belongs to the C.ER., having dropped out when the organization became an issue in his primary campaign for the governorship of California in 1962.
It should come as no surprise that the very same Richard Nixon who campaigned in 1968 as a conservative had already made his real position very clear to the Insiders of the C.F.R. by authoring an article in the C.F.R. magazine, Foreign affairs, in October 1967.
The title of this article, “Asia after Vietnam,” revealed how the aspiring President Nixon would open a new policy toward Red China and bring “realism” to our Asian foreign policy.
The C.ER.’s Annual Report for 1952, admitted that sometimes members in sensitive positions were forced to go underground and keep the membership secret.
Chapter VI The Rockefellers and the Reds Th MOST IMPORTANT Americans of those “different personages” who run the world from behind the scenes are the Rockefellers.
The Rockefeller clan reportedly has worked with the Rothschilds and their agents since the 1880’s when the original John D arranged to get a rebate on every barrel of oil he and his competitors shipped over Kuhn, Loeb & Co. controlled Pennsylvania and Baltimore & Ohio railroads.
It has been a profitable partnership ever since, although there appear to have been areas in which the two financial dynasties competed.
The involvement of the Rockefellers with their supposed blood enemies, the Communists, dates back to the Bolshevik Revolution, During the 1920’s Lenin established his New Economic Policy (the same name Mr Nixon applied to his wageprice control package), when the supposedly hated capitalists were invited back into Russia.
The Federal Reserve-CFR Jnsiders began pushing to open up Russia to United States traders soon after the revolution.
However, at that time public opinion ran so high against the Bolsheviks because of their barbarism that it was official United States government policy not to deal with the outlaw government.
The United States did not officially recognize the Bolsheviks until 1933.
The Bolsheviks were originally saved from collapse by Herbert Hoover who raised money to buy food which was appropriated by Lenin and his gangsters.
They used it as a tool to subdue starving peasants who had been resisting their newly imposed slave masters.
While Hoover’s “humanitarian” gesture saved the Soviet regime, the Russian economy was still in total chaos.
The Rockefellers assigned their public relations agent Ivy Lee, to sell the American public the idea that the Bolsheviks were merely misunderstood idealists who were actually kind benefactors of mankind.
After the Bolshevik Revolution, Standard of New Jersey bought 50 percent of the Nobel’s huge Caucasus oil fields even though the property had theoretically been nationalized.
Wherever Standard Oil would go, Chase National Bank was sure to follow.
In order to rescue the Bolsheviks, who were supposedly an archenemy, the Chase National Bank was instrumental in establishing the American-Russian Chamber of Commerce in 1922.
The Rockefeller’s Chase National Bank also was involved in selling Bolshevik bonds in the United States in 1928.
But the Rockefellers apparently were not alone in financing the Communist arm of the Jnsiders’ conspiracy.
Sutton shows that there is hardly a segment of the Soviet economy which is not a result of the transference of Western, particularly American, technology.
For fifty years the Federal Reserve-CFR-Rockefeller-Insider crowd has advocated and carried out policies aimed at increasing the power of their satellite, the Soviet Union.
Meanwhile, America spends $75 billion a year on defense to protect itself from the enemy the Insiders are building up.
The leader in promoting the transfer of technology and increasing aid and trade with the Communists is the Council on Foreign Relations.
Virtually every one of these “non-strategic” items has a direct or indirect use in war.
Later, items such as rifle cleaning compounds, electronic equipment and radar were declared “non-strategic” and cleared for shipment to the Soviet Union.
The Viet Cong and North Vietnamese receive 85 percent of their war materials from Russia and the Soviet bloc nations.
Since their economies are incapable of supporting a war, the Communist arm of the conspiracy needed help from the Finance Capitalist arm.
Again, the landscape painters in the mass media have kept the American public from learning this provable fact.
Not surprisingly, the Rockefellers have been leaders in championing this bloody trade.
International Basic Economy Corporation is run by Richard Aldrich, grandson of Federal Reserve plotter Nelson Aldrich, and Rodman Rockefeller , Rocky’s son.
Rothschild & Sons of London had entered into partnership with the firm.
Cyrus Eaton Jr. is the son of the notoriously pro-Soviet Cyrus Eaton who began his career as secretary to John D Rockefeller.
It is believed that Eaton’s rise to power in finance resulted from backing by his mentor.
The agreement between Tower International and IBEC continues an old alliance.
Although Eaton’s name does not appear on the CFR’s membership rolls, the Reece Committee which investigated foundations for Congress in 1953, found that Eaton was a secret member.
Among the “non-strategic” items which the RockefellerEaton axis is going to build for the Communists are ten rubber goods plants, including two synthetic rubber plants worth $200 million.
The Rockefeller and Eaton families have now joined forces to build war production plants behind the Iron Curtain so that the Communists can become a bigger threat to U S. survival.
America spends $70 billion a year ostensibly on defense and then the Rockefellers build aluminum mills for the Communists.
Only the absence of a formal declaration of war in Vietnam keeps the Eatons and Rockefellers from being actionable for treason.
They have the blood of nearly 50,000 American servicemen on their hands.
When Communist dictators visit the U S. they do not visit laborers or union leaders, but hob-nob with industrial Jeaders.
There is little, if any, attempt by the Red Dictators to identify with the working class.
Here Nikita Khrushchev greets the avowedly pro-Communist industrialist Cyrus Eaton.
Eaton started his business career as secretary to John D Rockefeller and the Rockefeller family is believed to be largely responsible for his fortune.
The United States will provide the Soviets with both the facilities to build the trucks and the tires for them to roll on.
In addition, the Rockefellers and Eatons are constructing a $50 million aluminum producing plant for the Reds.
Aluminum for jet planes is considered “non-strategic” under JohnsonNixon doctrine.
This means that the Rockefellers and Eatons have a monopoly on the transfer of technological capability to the supposed enemies of the super-rich, the Soviet Union.
The Rockefellers and the Eatons have solved that problem for the Communists.
Now, instead of dealing with an official agency of the Soviet government, American concerns will be dealing with the Rockefellers.
Only the technicality of the lack of a formal declaration of war prevents the Rockefellers’ trading in the blood of dead Americans from being actionable as treason.
Thus by the purchase of patents for the Communists the Rockefellers are virtually in charge of research and development for the Soviet military machine, allowing the Soviets to mass produce American developments.
The transfer of such knowledge is even more important than the sale of weapons.
A process that may have taken an American corporation a decade to develop is transferred in toto to the Communists.
Since the Rockefellers have contracted to arrange for patents for the Soviets, they are by dictionary definition Communist agents.
Indicative of this was a strange event which occurred in October of 1964.
David Rockefeller, president of the Chase Manhattan Bank and chairman of the board of the Council on Foreign Relations, took a vacation in the Soviet Union.
A few days after Rockefeller ended his “vacation,” in the Kremlin, Nikita Khrushchev was recalled from a vacation at a Black Sea resort to learn that he had been fired.
Obviously the position of premier in the Soviet Union is a figurehead with the true power residing elsewhere.
Yet we find that for five decades the Rockefellers have been involved in building the strength of the Soviets.
We are supposed to believe those international cartelists do this because they are foolish or greedy.
If a criminal goes up and down the streets shouting at the top of his lungs that as soon as he gets hold of a gun he is going to kill Joe Doaks, and you learn that Doaks is secretly giving guns to the criminal, one of two things must be true.
Either Doaks is a fool or all the shouting is just “show biz” and the criminal secretly works for Doaks.
While David runs the financial end of the Rockefeller dynasty, Nelson runs the political.
But, unfortunately for him, he is unacceptable to the vast majority of the grass roots of his own party.
Nelson Rockefeller and Richard Nixon are supposed to be bitter political competitors.
In a sense they are, but that still does not preclude Rockefeller from asserting dominion over Mr Nixon.
When Mr Nixon and Mr Rockefeller competed for the Republican nomination in 1968, Rockefeller naturally would have preferred to win the prize, but regardless of who won, he would control the highest office in the land.
There was no political reason why Mr Nixon needed to crawl to Mr Rockefeller.
The Chicago Tribune cracked that it was like Grant surrendering to Lee.
The meeting produced the infamous “Compact of Fifth Avenue” in which the Republican Platform was scrapped and replaced by Rockefeller’s socialist plans.
Whatever honor they might have been able to carry from their services on the platform committee had been wiped out.
The whole story behind what happened in Rockefeller’s apartment will doubtless never be known.
But it is obvious that since that time Mr Nixon has been in the Rockefeller orbit.
After losing to Kennedy by an eyelash, Mr Nixon, against his wishes, and at the request of Rockefeller, entered the California gubernatorial race and lost.
After losing to Pat Brown in the California gubernatorial race in 1962, Nixon had universally been consigned to the political trash heap.
At the same time, according to his own financial statement, his net worth multiplied many times and he became quite wealthy.
Nelson Rockefeller , who helped make Nixon acceptable to Conservatives by appearing to oppose him, rescued Nixon from political oblivion and made him President of the United States.
When Nixon left Washington, he, by his own claim, had little more than an old Oldsmobile automobile, Pat’s respectable Republican cloth coat, and a government pension.
While in law practice Nixon had an income of $200,000 per year, of which more than half went to pay for the apartment in Rocky’s building.
By 1968, he reported his net worth as $515,830, while assigning a value of only $45,000 to his partnership in his increasingly flourishing law firm.
It may be that the frugal Mr Nixon acquired the after-tax investment capital that mushroomed into $858,190 in assets by faithfully plugging his change into a piggy bank.
Then again, it may have been part of Nixon’s deal with Rockefeller and the Jnsiders that Mr Nixon’s personal poverty problems should be solved.
The man most observers agree is the most powerful man in the Administration of domestic policy matters is Attorney General John Mitchell.
Mitchell, who had been a Nixon law partner, served as campaign manager in 1968, and reportedly will serve in that capacity in 1972.
The Wall Street Journal of January 17, 1969, revealed that Mitchell was Rocky’s personal lawyer.
The Establishment’s landscape painters have etched a picture of Mitchell as a tough cop-type conservative bent; it appears that in reality Mitchell is but another Rockefeller agent.
Richard Nixon was elected President on a platform which Nelson Rockefeller and Richard Nixon are theoretically political enemies, but Rocky arranged '68 election so that if he could not be President, someone whom he controlled would be.
The Rockefeller family, through their Chase Manhattan Bank and other entities, have been great benefactors of the Soviet Union ever since Communist Revolution in Russia.
During campaign Nixon promised to halt shipment of war materials from America to North Vietnam via European Communist bloc because these supplies were being used to kill American soldiers.
But much of this bloc trade is controlled by Rockefellers and Nixon has reversed himself and greatly multiplied such trade.
The press, quite naturally, remains silent about killing American soldiers by proxy.
The boss and his two employees—the three musketeers of the CFR—Rocky, President Nixon and Henry Kissinger confer.
Kissinger of Harvard was made virtual Assistant President by Rockefeller on whose staff he had served for a dozen years, Kissinger also had been on the staff of the CFR just prior to joining the Nixon Administration.
Kissinger was the very embodiment of everything Nixon denounced during his '68 campaign.
Among those to hail Mr Nixon's move to the left is Alger Hiss, the Communist spy Richard Nixon helped convict.
It was the Hiss Case which catapulted Nixon from obscurity into the Senate, the Vice Presidency and, eventually, the White House.
Yet he appointed Henry Kissinger, a man who represented the opposite of the stands Mr Nixon took during his campaign, toa position which is virtually Assistant President.
We are told by Time magazine that Mr Nixon met Kissinger at a cocktail party given by Clare Boothe Luce during the Christmas holidays in 1967.
Kissinger’s cocktail party repartee that he appointed him to the most powerful position in the Nixon Administration.
Mr Nixon would have to be stupid to have done that; and Mr Nixon is not stupid.
Kissinger had served for five years as Rockefeller’s personal advisor on foreign affairs and at the time of his appointment he was serving as a paid staff member of the Council on Foreign Relations.
Mr Nixon’s fantastic about face was praised by LBJ in the Washington Star of Dec., 1971.
Alexander Haig and Malcolm Toon must have met themselves coming and going, as they rushed from one network studio to another, to be interviewed by the morning mavens of mush.
The same “Liberal” media that tried to sell us Yuri Andropov as “a closet liberal” has a new, improved version for us.
Mikhail Gorbachev is a media happening, and the purveyors of disinformation are having a field day.
It was this kind of believeable pap that led British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher to say of the new Russian leader, “I like Mr Gorbachev.
And if you think “good ol’ Mike” is neat, wait until you meet his wife Raisa.
The wives of most Politboro leaders look as though they should be building dams in Siberia, but not this honey.
Ever since the death of Joseph Stalin, the leadership of the U.S.S.R. has carried with it some interesting contradictions.
Georgi Malenkov was heralded as the undisputed leader following Stalin’s death, only to vanish within a very short time.
Next came the troika, out of which emerged Bulganin, then Nikita Khrushchev, both of whom apparently reigned supreme only to be summarily set aside.
Of the most recent group— Brezhnev, Andropov, and Chernenko—two common threads make for interesting speculation.
Those threads are Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, and United States Soviet Ambassador Anatoliy F Dobrynin.
Gromyko has been at the helm for almost forty years, and Dobrynin, who presumably answers to him, has been ensconced in Washington, D.C. as Soviet Ambassador for almost twentyfive years.
In nearly a quarter of a century in Washington, he has developed an Encyclopedic knowledge of American affairs.
He is a brilliant man, possessing that rare intellectual combination, a retentive mind and a gift for the quick, apt reply.
He schools himself on every aspect of every issue, and more often than not knows more about almost any subject than the ever-changing combinations of American officials with whom he deals.
Molotov as Foreign Minister during the de-Stalinization period, has either been a faithful apparatchik or, in all likelihood, the real power down through the years.
I don’t have any definitive answers to these questions, but let’s make some observations that might help supply some.
While Gromyko has been moved up to the “Presidency,” thanks to his protégé Gorbachev, there is still no doubt as to who is calling the shots in Soviet foreign policy.
It seems obvious to me from the propaganda onslaught that the Soviets are about to launch a “peace” offensive, and the West is being set up to take the hook like a big-mouth bass.
Unless I miss my guess, the very near future for the “I like Mike” bandwagon is going to produce a summit, friendly visitation, new loans, and in all likelihood, a disarmament agreement that will make Salt II look like a study in a George Patton defense plan.
Affectionately called “Jay,” he has grabbed the political reigns for the family since the death of his uncle Nelson, and as a former Governor and now Senator from West Virginia, there is little doubt about his presidential ambitions.
Chapter VII Pressure from Above and Pressure from Below Tie ESTABLISHMENTYS official landscape artists have done a marvelous job of painting a picture of Richard Nixon as a conservative.
Richard Nixon could not have been elected had he run as a Rockefeller liberal, but he can get away with running his Administration like one simply because the landscape painters fail to call the public’s attention to the fact.
However, columnist Stewart Alsop in writing for a sophisticated audience of approving Liberals, reveals the real Nixon.
Alsop claims that if Nixon were judged by his deeds instead of his ancient image, the Liberals’ attitude toward him would be different.
If only the Liberals’ Pavlovian response to the Nixon name could be eliminated, says Alsop, they would realize how far Left he is.
If President Liberal were actually in the White House, it is not at all hard to imagine the reaction to his program.
Richard Nixon is the first professional politician and ‘real Republican’ to be elected President in 40 years —and it is not in the self-interest of the liberals to give credit to such a President for liberal initiatives.
The withdrawal of half a million men from Vietnam is quite obviously the greatest retreat in American history.
The President, in his rhetoric about a ‘strong defense,’ plays the same game.
To the liberals, especially the liberal commentators who dominate the media, Richard Nixon is Dr.
Fell ( ‘The reason why I cannot tell, but this I know and know full well, I do not like thee, Dr.
Nixon leading the assault on the President for his ‘bug-out,’ ‘fiscal irresponsibility,’ ‘galloping socialism,’ and all the rest of it.
If you liked the Richard Nixon who ran for the Presidency, then you cannot, if you are consistent, like the Richard Nixon who is President.
Nixon and his fellow “moderates” have turned the Republican elephant into a donkey in elephant’s clothing.
The Nixon “Game Plan” is infinitely more clever and dangerous than those of his predecessors, because it masquerades as being the opposite of what it is.
While centralizing power at a rate which would have made Hubert Humphrey blush, Mr Nixon has continued to pay lip service to decentralization.
The first part of the “New Federalism” is the Family Assistance Program which would, contrary to his campaign promises, provide a Guaranteed Annual Income.
Based on suggestions from John Gardner of the C.ER. and Daniel Moynihan, a member of the board of directors of the socialist ADA, the FAP would double the number on welfare and increase tremendously the power of the executive branch of the federal government.
The second major segment of the President’s “New Federalism” is revenue sharing with the states, touted as a step in the decentralization of power from the federal government.
The money must first go from the states to Washington before it can be shared.
As soon as the states and local governments get hooked on the federal funds, the controls will be put on just as they were in education and agriculture.
The Executive branch will give up some power and the Congress will give up some power and the people will gain by having these powers returned to them.
He speaks of the “Executive branch in Washington” giving up some of its power.
Three days later it became obvious why Mr Nixon added the seemingly redundant “in Washington,” when it was announced that the country was being carved up into ten federal districts.
The federal districts would soon be used to administer the wage and price controls which centralize in the federal government almost total power over the economy.
It is generally believed in England among students of this conspiracy that John Maynard Keynes produced his General Theory of Money and Credit at the behest of certain Insiders of international finance who hired him to concoct a pseudo-scientific justification for government deficit spending—just as the mysterious League of Just Men had hired Karl Marx to write the Communist Manifesto.
The farther a government goes into debt, the more interest is paid to the powerful Insiders who “create” money to buy government bonds by the simple expedient of bookeeping entries.
Otherwise, you can bet your last farthing that the Insiders of international banking would be violently opposed to inflationary deficits.
During 1967, while on the primary trail, Richard Nixon made exorbitant Democrat spending his Number Two campaign issue, just behind the failure of the Democrats to win the Vietnam War.
Mr Johnson’s 1967 Budget was $158. billion, which at the time seemed astronomical.
Mr Nixon claimed that if that amount were not sliced by $10 billion the country faced financial disaster.
At a time when the Vietnam War was a far bigger financial drain than it is now, Richard Nixon argued that we should be spending around $150 billion.
President Nixon is now spending $230 billion, and bills already introduced in Congress and likely to pass could push the 1972 Fiscal Budget (July 1, 1971 to July 1, 1972) to $250 billion.
And some experts are predicting that Mr Nixon could spend as much as $275 billion next year.
For his own part, he renounced any “massive step-up” in federal spending.
While it took LBJ five years to run up a $5 billion deficit, Senator Harry Byrd notes that the accumulated deficit for Mr Nixon’s first THREE years will reach at least $88 billion.
Congressional experts are now predicting Richard Nixon could well pour on the red ink to a total of $124 billion in this term of office alone.
In order to halt inflation Mr Nixon has now instituted wage and price controls.
Most Americans, sick of seeing their paychecks shrink in purchasing power each month, have overwhelmingly approved.
But this is because most people are not aware of the real causes of inflation.
And you can be sure that the Establishment’s landscape painters will not explain the truth to them.
The truth is that there is a difference between inflation and the wage-price spiral.
When the government runs a deficit, brand new money in the amount of the deficit is put into circulation.
As the new money percolates through the economy it bids up wages and prices.
This is easy to understand if you think of our economy as a giant auction.
Just as at any other auction, if the bidders are suddenly supplied with more money, they will use that money to bid up prices.
It causes the wage-price spiral which is generally mislabeled inflation.
To say that the wage-spiral causes inflation is like saying wet streets cause rain.
In the past decade, the Federal Government spent more than it took in—$57 billion more.
Mr Nixon has fastened wage and price controls on the economy supposedly to solve a problem which Mr Nixon created by running huge deficits.
If he sincerely wanted to stop “inflation,” he would have put wage and price controls on the government rather than on the rest of us and would have stopped deficit spending.
This is akin to cheering for a motorist who shoots a pedestrian he has just run over.
You can’t have a totalitarian government without wage and price controls and you can’t have a free country with them.
In his Phase II speech, Mr Nixon made it clear that the 90-day wage and price controls are with us in one disguise or another from now on.
They are a major step towards establishing an allpowerful Executive branch of the federal government.
After the Insiders have established the United Socialist States of America , the next step is the Great Merger of all nations of the world into a dictatorial world government.
This was the main reason behind the push to bring Red China into the United Nations.
The Insiders’ code word for the world superstate is “new world order,” a phrase often used by Richard Nixon.
One of the most important groups promoting the “world union” is the United World Federalists, whose membership is heavily interlocked with that of the Council on Foreign Relations.
The UWF advocate turning the UN into a full-fledged world government which would include the Communist nations.
Richard Nixon is, of course, far too clever to actually join the UWF, but he has supported their legislative program since his early days in Congress.
World government has a strong emotional appeal for Americans, based on their universal desire for world peace.
The Insiders have the Communists rattling their sabers with one hand and dangling the olive branch with the other.
Voters were given the choice between CFR world government advocate Nixon and CFR world government advocate Humphrey.
A world government requires a world supreme court, and Mr Nixon is on record in favor of a world supreme court.
And a world government must have a world police force to enforce the laws of the World Superstate and keep the slaves from rebelling.
Not surprisingly, the Jnsiders have their pet planners preparing to administrate their world dictatorship.
We need so many males, so many females, so many of this occupation and so many of that occupation, so many of this age and so many of that age.
That is why the /nsiders of the Ford, Carnegie and Rockefeller foundations are making these plans.
We will have systematic population reduction, forced sterilization of anything else which the planners deem necessary to establish absolute control in their humanitarian utopia.
But to enforce these plans, you must have an allpowerful world government.
And before you can facilitate the Great Merger, you must first centralize control within each nation, destroy the local police and remove the guns from the hands of the citizenry.
You must replace our once free Constitutional Republic with an all-powerful central government.
And that is exactly what is happening today with the Nixon Administration.
Every action of any consequence, despite the smokescreen, has centralized more power in what is rapidly becoming an allpowerful central government.
What we are witnessing is the Communist tactic of pressure from above and pressure from below, described by Communist historian Jan Kozak as the device used by the Reds to capture control of Czecho-Slovakia.
The pressure from above comes from secret, ostensibly respectable Comrades in the government and Establishment, forming, with the radicalized mobs in the streets below, a giant pincer around middle-class society.
COMMON CAUSE fl l of elitist conspirators working above to turn America’s limited government into an unlimited government with total control over our lives and property.
In the streets we have avowed revolutionary groups such as the Students for a Democratic Society (which was started by the League for Industrial Democracy, a group with strong C.FR. ties), the Black Panthers, the Yippies, the Young Socialist Alliance.
Virtually all members of these groups sincerely believe that they are fighting the Establishment.
In reality they are an indispensible ally of the Establishment in fastening Socialism on all of us.
The naive radicals think that under Socialism the “people” will run everything.
Actually, it will be a clique of Jnsiders in total control, consolidating and controlling all wealth.
That is why these schoolboy Lenins and teenage Trotskys are allowed to roam free and are practically never arrested or prosecuted.
Instead, we find that most of these radicals are the recipients of largesse from major foundations or are receiving money from the government through the War on Poverty.
Remember Bakunin’s charge that Marx’ followers had one foot in the bank and the other in the Socialist movement.
These men are the world’s leading industrialists and they convene to decide how our lives are going to go.
The only way McCarthy could win is if the crazies and young radicals act up and make Gene look more reasonable.
John Gardner, a “Republican,” and member of the C.F.R., has established a grass roots proletarian organization called Common Cause.
This may become the biggest and most important organization in American history.
Common Cause’s goal is to organize welfare recipients, those who have not voted before, and Liberals to lobby for Socialism.
That lobbying will not only be expressed in pressuring Congress to pass Socialist legislation but will also be expressed as ballot power in elections.
Other key financiers are Andrew Heiskell , chairman of the board of Time, Inc., Thomas Watson , chairman of the board of IBM, John Whitney of the Standard Oil fortune, Sol Linowitz , chairman of the board of Xerox, and Gardner Cowles of Cowles publications.
Needless to say, the landscape painters hide Common Cause’s financial angels so that only those who understand that the Establishment’s game plan is SOCIALISM understand what is going on before their very eyes.
The blatant pro-left stance on issue after issue ultimately proved to be its undoing, along with a shifting climate of political opinion which is clearly moving right.
Another very positive development has been the rise of conservatism on the college campus.
Fourteen years ago, those colleges which boasted of any conservative organizations on campus were few and far between.
Today, almost every college has at least one organization doing a job for the promotion of constitutional principles.
It was very satisfying to yours truly when I would meet someone either still in college or recently graduated, who upon finding out about my connection with None Dare would enthusiastically tell me how that book had influenced his or her thinking.
And that in many cases it had become almost a “cult” book on some campuses.
We have examined their New World Order and why so many important men want to impose it on us.
In actuality, of course, it is a totalitarian world government which they seek.
A recent tactic of the conspirators is to claim that they cannot be so evil or involved in a furtive strategem because their actions are not secret.
Exposure on a wide scale has hurt, so now they play down their influence and use ridicule as a weapon.
And Winston Lord, president of the Council on Foreign Relations, now says he welcomes being thought of as a conspiracy.
The most powerful men in the Western world would have us think they are a lodge of Odd Fellows discussing their next civic project.
Yet these elitist power-brokers still hold the reins (invisible or otherwise) of influence in America and other Western governments— Whether Republicans or Democrats are in office at the national level, and/or liberals or conservatives are our elected leaders.
But Orwell also said that “freedom is the freedom to say that two plus two equals four.
Calling the conspirators out at their game has not yet broken their hold on our free institutions.
But while there is liberty, there is hope and reason to resist those who seek power.
That they were not, can be attributed to the deliberate strategy of Richard Nixon and his re-election campaign.
It was a personal victory for Nixon but brought few Republicans in on the coattails of the standard bearer.
A man such as McGovern who would have crawled on his belly to Hanoi, was simply not acceptable to the American people, regardless of the unpopularity of the Vietnam war.
He sought, as a gesture of bipartisan unity, to appoint Democratic Senator Henry Jackson as his Secretary of Defense — Jackson turned him down.
He sought David Rockefeller as either Secretary of Defense or the Treasury — David Rockefeller turned him down.
It seemed that whatever concessions Nixon would make, he could not be accepted fully by the “Liberal” Establishment.
But there can be little doubt that Mr Nixon betrayed the Conservatives who supported and elected him.
To the extent that the American people had any settled notions on the issue, they were decidedly the reverse.
President Nixon’s own course of action, however, has perceptibly softened United States feeling toward Red China.
Yes, publicly perceived anti-Communist Nixon got along just fine with the Communist powers-that-be, and vice versa.
Many Soviet officials, said Newsweek for July 17, 1972, “seem to be rooting for Mr Nixon.
But Establishment Jnsiders view elections and agreements as but one step in their plan for a New World Order.
And the Establishment has its lackeys willing to cut down to size all those who might step out of line . . . or to dispense discipline as an example of the power held by the unelected elite.
The media hatchet men would get their pound of Nixon flesh one way or the other, even if it took years.
It was especially distressing for Gary Allen and me to watch the Wallace campaign come to an end, particularly after we had delivered to the Governor a speech written at his request that was about to blow the lid off the CFR, Richard Nixon, and George McGovern.
Two days later, on the afternoon of the evening when the speech was to be delivered, the Wallace campaign came to a tragic end.
The cold war will continue in a muted sort of way as the East and the West maneuver stealthily to win the allegiance of the Third World countries and to compete on the oceans.
Nixon hopes to build trade rela152 Call It Conspiracy tions with the Soviets that will make for a situation which neither Washington nor Moscow can afford to disrupt.
When Soviet natural gas begins to move through pipes to tidewater for shipment to the West, the Kremlin will no longer be able to afford open war.
What is not discussed much these days is that it was United States taxpayers’ money and the United States Corps of Engineers , that constructed the modern highway that stretches from the Soviet border to the Khyber Pass.
The percentage of eligible casting ballots dropped from the 61 percent of four years earlier, to 56 percent in 1972.
The scandal of Watergate alone—from its onset in June of 1972 —changed many things.
It convinced some skeptics, eventually, that there were such things as conspiracies, even coming out of the White House; it also postponed a potential realignment which might have put Conservatives in the driver’s seat nationally, instead of being treated as so much baggage.
We now have a firmer appreciation of how ready the public was for an articulate, populisttinged conservatism.
And in the House of Representatives, the gain might have been twenty to thirty seats instead of just twelve, to near-controlling levels that could have fueled at least a dozen party switches in 1973, most by Southerners.
In the beginning it seemed so paltry, and in hindsight the episode is nothing more than a tiny blemish on the body politic.
He said that the Democratic official who came to police headquarters, deputy chairman Stanley Greigg, speculated that ‘it will be a good thing if we can blame it on the Republicans.
It now seems sure the Democrats had advance warning of the Republican espionage attempt.
That wasn’t widely reported on network television . . . it might have spoiled the drama before the hanging at the behest of the jury of reporters.
But, as Victor Lasky remarked in the aforementioned summary of Presidential misdeeds, Franklin Delano Roosevelt “lied about not getting involved in foreign wars; Eisenhower lied about the U-2 flight; Kennedy lied about the Bay of Pigs; and Johnson lied about Vietnam.
And in each of those cases far more was at stake than a third-rate-burglary.
The full Central Intelligence Agency involvement in Watergate may never be fully known.
One clue may lie in the fact that every C.I.A. director, from its founder Allen Dulles, right up to this very moment, has been a long-time member of the C.F.R., and that includes George Bush.
Squealer John Dean (who revealed Alexander Butterfield’s knowledge of the White House taping system; the latter gave details to the Ervin investigators) also commented in Blind Ambition how those with Agency connections seemed to come through the episode well.
Speech writer Raymond Price in With Nixon thought a C.I.A. counterplot was in operation.
And Howard Hunt believed James McCord set up the whole bungled affair and had the authorities alerted.
But the press is also capable of conspiring to bring down the elected government, blowing the horn to cause the crash of the wall protecting even a President of the United States.
Each index page lists about 38 stories, and during three months of the Ervin Committee hearings many thousands of words were printed each day of testimony and document texts, so that the average story that year probably exceeded 1,000 words.
At a minimum estimate, the Times published three million words on Watergate in 1973, or 30 books of 100,000 words each.
On the other hand, that avuncular Establishment newsman Walter Cronkite charged—on behalf of his colleagues — that the Nixon team was conspiring to discredit and malign the media.
Judge Sirica, ‘maximum John,’ the kind of hanging judge civil libertarians worry most about, applied the awful pressure of lifetimes in jail for first offenses; first James McCord, then Jeb Magruder and Howard Hunt; the press, which had tried and failed to make Watergate the issue, came alive again, and came up off the bloody sand swinging a mace.
In point of fact, many of the problems of the generic “Watergate” situation lead back to the formation of the Special White House Investigating Unit, nicknamed the “Plumbers,” who were themselves supposed to stop the leaks.
Here the odor of conspiracy rises like a cloud which would envelope the President and which reeked of the scent of Rockefeller and Nelson’s man in the White House, Henry Kissinger.
In exercising this power, McCloy has served as Chairman of the Council on Foreign Relations before David Rockefeller —one of only three Chairmen in the C.F.R.’s 60-year history —and also as Chairman of Chase Manhattan Bank before David Rockefeller.
There seems little doubt that both conspiracy and vested interest were intertwined here.
It is universally admitted that the Watergate story was never the same after the tapes and the details of what was on them was revealed.
Haldeman awaits trial for his part in Watergate, the Secret Service chief he ousted from the White House last year has landed a plum job.
Nelson knew enough not to go down with a sinking ship, let alone a ship he was getting ready to sink.
Western aid and trade have built up our Communist enemy which has then used that technology against us.
President Nixon announced the blockade of Haiphong Harbor in North Vietnam, explaining that this step was necessary to protect American lives in Southeast Asia.
In support of Nixon’s action, the Department of Defense released a series of photographs portraying the influx of Soviet supplies into North Vietnam.
The cargo ship Michurin so graphically exposed by the Department of Defense photo is powered by a diesel engine designed and built in the United States and features a hull constructed in the United Kingdom.
They needed 30. million metric tons of grain, and we supplied them with rg million tons, about one-quarter of our total crop.
Thus the United States provided wheat (subsidized by the taxpayers at 47 cents a bushel) costing at least $800 million.
Trade analyst Miles Costick reported that the “sale” of grain “contributed to the highest round of food price increases for the American consumer since 1947.
And there can be little doubt of the Kremlin’s satisfaction or the reasons for vodka toasts in Moscow.
Soviet dictator Leonid Brezhnev plainly set forth the strategy to other Warsaw Pact leaders in the summer of 1973.
Senator Barry Goldwater, a friend of the Nationalist Government in Taipei, didn’t want to believe we would betray our ally; he wanted to believe in the soothing words of Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger, and must rue that day.
Its existence provided Carter with an excuse to withdraw recognition of Nationalist China and abrogate our mutual defense treaty.
At the time both Nixon and Kissinger assured me this would never happen.
In the course of discussing this dastardly turn-about, I found that the people remembered the event in much the same way that the American people remembered hearing of the assassination of President Kennedy.
They recalled exactly what they were doing and where they were when they first heard the shocking news.
Those who benefitted from this duplicity, the Red Chinese leaders, were responsible for the deaths of upwards of 64 million of their own people, according to a Senate Report issued in 1971.
The Nixon reputation for anti-Communism then became useful whenever negotiations with the Reds needed a disguise.
This enabled the Communist powers to become, or at least ac162 Call It Conspiracy quire, reputations as superpowers with whom to share power in the New World Order envisaged by the /nsiders.
Consider the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT I was ratified before Nixon’s reelection in August of 1972) and the missile negotiations in 1973 and 1974.
The upshot of all of this was to make us weaker and the Kremlin stronger.
The Soviets have carefully and deceptively negotiated provisions to accommodate the deployments originally programmed by them, and they have taken maximum advantage of every loophole and ambiguity in the agreements.
Indeed, Soviet strategic advantages in many categories have widened throughout this period.
Democratic Senators Sam Ervin , Herman Talmadge , and Daniel Inouye repeatedly had crippled attempts to get at the truth in the earlier case.
Hatred was kept focused on the Republican President as though he had personally tortured puppy dogs in the Oval Office.
Haldeman, John Erlichman, John Dean, and Attorney General William Kleindienst had stepped down.
In October 1973, Vice President Spiro Agnew was picked off—in an unrelated case having to do with campaign contributions in Maryland when he was governor.
Pleading no contest to a charge of income tax evasion, Agnew paid a fine and resigned his office.
Cox leaked information about his investigatory activities to his Kennedy friends on Capitol Hill.
It quickly became obvious that a semi-judicial lynching was forthcoming.
The minority counsel was Albert Jenner, who actually had been first choice of Democratic Judiciary Chairman Peter Rodino; Jenner had recommended Doar, then took the opposite number later.
Attorney Jenner, commented Bill Safire, was supposedly, “a Republican conservative.
But after he had been chosen, word leaked out that Jenner had been a fund-raiser for Democratic Sen.
But lying was only considered criminal if it happened in the Nixon White House.
Senator Goldwater told the President that he could count on perhaps a maximum of 15 votes in the Upper Chamber against his conviction.
The so-called “smoking gun,” was revealed on August 5, 1974, when transcripts of tapes made on June 23, 1972, revealed that Richard Nixon was early on involved in the cover-up, and had ordered what appeared to be obstruction of the F.B.I.’s Watergate investigation.
Richard Nixon’s involvement in Watergate was pennyante stuff, hardly constituting the crime of the century.
Richard Nixon, who made his reputation as the Congressman who gave Whittaker Chambers his opportunity to “blow the whistle” on Alger Hiss, gained the White House by placating the Establishment at every opportunity after 1962.
He sent Henry Kissinger to Red China, and later recognized that butcher government.
Richard Nixon was probably the most astute political technician of the second half of the twentieth century.
He had an incomparable knowledge of the way that men get elected and stay in office.
Richard Nixon used his political savvy to get himself the Republican nomination in 1968.
The little fish fried, Nixon jumped into the fire while calm and cool, the big fish silently swam away from the conflagration.
So far as I can tell, as I look back on Watergate, not one C.E.R. member went down with the Nixon ship.
C.I.A. man E Howard Hunt, with a reputation as an anti-Communist (which most people don’t realize is a genuine rarity in “the Company”), was simply doing in 1972 what he had done for the C.I.A. and White House four years before.
Costick, Miles M., Economics Of Détente And U.S.Soviet Grain Trade, Heritage Foundation, Washington, D.C., 1976.
Hoar, William P., Architects of Conspiracy, Western Islands, Boston, 1984.
Ford & Rockefeller Weraen THE PRESIDENT of the United States resigned because he was about to be impeached and convicted, he was replaced by an appointed Number Two man who had never been elected to any public office at state or national level.
Governor Rockefeller had resigned from his Albany office in late 1973 to run for President in 1976, albeit in a thinly disguised role as head of the National Commission on Critical Choices for Americans.
But there are more ways than one to skinacat... or grab for the Presidency.
In any event, Rockefeller was ready and willing when on August 20, 1974, President Ford nominated him Vice President.
Rocky had been in the business for “the long run,” and could not lose in the short run by his granting of approval.
Still it is best not to be caught gloating over a regicide, whether figurative or not.
Nelson Rockefeller had come within a proverbial heart-beat of the Presidency, and Gerald Ford had said (upon his own nomination for Vice President) that he had no further ambitions.
But even before Ford’s accession to the Number One spot, there were hints that the compromising Jerry might not be so malleable once he tasted the power that went with being President.
Rockefeller, who had frequently declared that he would not take the Number Two slot, did just that under President Ford.
But once that brass ring was in Ford’s grasp, the 1976 race became a clash of ambitions.
However the story of how close Rockefeller came to attaining his goal of the Oval Office, is a telling one in the annals of conspiracy.
Moving up the Establishment power structure has always meant moving politically Left.
What some would call unprincipled is a plus in the eyes of the ambitious.
He’ll vote against programs — say, hot lunches for school kids—but once it’s passed, he uses his influence to get as big a share of the money for the district as he can.
As a party leader, he has defended the party line, no matter how it twisted.
If President Eisenhower was against American intervention in Vietnam at Dien Bien Phu, he was against intervention.
If President Nixon later on was in favor of intervention in Vietnam, or opposed to accommodations with the Communists or eager for accommodations, Gerry was a faithful Ford, obeying the commands of the driver.
But privately, in the endless cloak room discussions on how to resolve practical, personal and political dilemmas on ambiguous questions, his record is quite different.
Nixon had proclaimed the Ford nomination “a new beginning for America,” though when he made the announcement of Ford’s selection he offered no explanation of Spiro Agnew’s demise.
Richard Reeves, in A Ford, Not A Lincoln, states outright that “Gerald Ford was not Richard Nixon’s first choice.
Haig, of course, was the longtime Kissinger surrogate who later was to bring the bad news to President Nixon, namely, that it was time to go.
Meanwhile, Gerald Ford seemed determined to show himself to be a man the New World Order boys could trust to do their bidding.
The Vice-President Designate told inquiring Senators that he was an internationalist and that Henry Kissinger was a “superb” Secretary of State.
Mr Ford went down the line supporting the Nixon-Kissinger reapproachment and détente policies with the Communist world, and in some cases seemed to carry them further.
As far back as 1952, Prince Bernhard of The Netherlands, the sponsor of the secretive Bilderberger meetings, visited Ford’s District to help out the Congressman, and Jerry himself attended their hush174 Call It Conspiracy hush conclaves in 1962 and 1964.
And he publicly “bought” the finding of the Warren Commission—or so he said of the conclusions of the panel on which he served to investigate the assassination of John F Kennedy.
Virtually nobody believed or yet believes the anti-conspiracy line handed down by that Commission.
Jerry repeatedly denied a fix, saying there was no trading off for the Presidency.
Yet, according to Seymour Hersh, the day before the Watergate pardon was announced, Nixon called Ford (a lawyer representing Jerry then said to be in San Clemente negotiating with the former President) and made a threat to his successor.
In any event, Conservatives again found themselves being sold out by a man they were told was one of theirs.
Scarcely a month into the Ford Presidency there were rumbles on the Right.
Conservatives, noted syndicated columnist Jeffrey Hart, say that every prominent move the new Chief Executive made “has so far vectored to the left politically.
But, this friend adds, ‘The important thing to say about our new President is that he really wants to find solutions to human problems.
Accordingly, in two years Jerry Ford, to the delight of the Left, ran up an increase in the National Debt of $105 billion— which was more than that of the combined Administrations of the 24 years of Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson.
As a leader of the Free World, or just at home, the image of Jerry Ford was totally underwhelming.
Indeed, he seemed overwhelmed even as he took over the job of President.
Bob Cantrell, a fourteen-year-old in Pasadena, California, gave up his stereo to save energy.
One friend told me we could probably whip — just understand this— whip inflation with the contents of our trash cans.
Inflation is simply an increase in the supply of money and credit, which produces a corresponding price rise.
If there was general malaise it was not alleviated by any particular cooperation from the Congress.
He has never wavered from his consistent course of unilateral disarmament.
It has been established that he made to the Soviets in the SALT I agreements concessions which may be fatal to our national survival, and that the Soviets are exploiting these concessions.
Until the conference was actually under way, he had not the foggiest notion that he was to negotiate a strategic arms limitation pact.
The conference continued under marathon pressure for more than nine hours, ending after midnight.
Naturally conservatives were outraged by this, especially those who remembered how disloyal Rockefeller had been to the Republican Presidential nominee in 1964.
He was automatically acceptable to the powerful internationalists who have controlled American foreign policy most of this century.
Mr Rockefeller’s unsuccessful attempts to attain the Presidency hopefully prove that money can’t buy everything ... but it certainly makes things easier.
As a nonpartisan, nondenominational, noneverything organization of high and empty purpose it provides him with a platform to stay in the news and run for office using money from government, foundations, and his own fortune that he couldn’t legally touch if he were an honest, confessed candidate.
Some of the money, such as that which went for higher education, may have been well spent, but much of it, like the billion dollars that went for his new state capital complex called the Albany Mall, might cause some people to think we’re getting off cheap with San Clemente.
At the same time private developers were putting an office building adjacent to it for $40 a usable square foot.
It was Rocky who taught Nixon to buy labor votes, which the governor did by this kind of unrestrained spending.
Nelson A Rockefeller says as president he would work toward international creation of ‘a new world order’ based on East-West cooperation instead of conflict.
With Kissinger as a cat’s paw, this happened anyway under Nixon and Ford.
President Ford’s espousal of Nelson Rockefeller’s grandiose plan for a $100 billion energy corporation to lend funds to private industry to develop new fuel technologies.
The President — whose attitudes were fiscally conservative but who sometimes deviated — justified the scheme in a public statement as a ‘catalyst and stimulant’ to inspire energy independence.
Earlier we pointed out how the Rockefeller family has conspired with Communists and non-Communists alike.
In the Eisenhower Administration he helped to create the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, which now takes an even larger portion of the federal Budget than does defense.
Eisenhower’s first Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles , was a Rockefeller cousin.
Dulles’ successor, Christian Herter , had displayed the good sense to marry into the Standard Oil fortune.
Rusk took a leave of absence as head of the Rockefeller Foundation to accept the post.
Bowles has been a trustee of the Rockefeller Brothers Fund and a director of the Rockefeller Foundation.
Democrat Kennedy then named Standard Oil executive Alexander Trowbridge as Assistant Secretary of Commerce, and President Johnson later promoted him to Secretary of Commerce.
The President’s chief advisor on foreign policy is now Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, who came to the Nixon Administration from a staff position at the C.F.R., and had for ten years been on Nelson Rockefeller’s payroll as a personal foreign policy advisor.
It was Rockefeller who arranged for him to be appointed a virtual Assistant President for Foreign Affairs.
His demand for top patronage was reluctantly agreed to after he threatened to cut off all Rockefeller and Rockefeller-controlled financial contributions.
Jimmy Carter was of course no Conservative, but he had to try to win over the moderate-to-Right voters in his campaign against Ford.
Such a lickspittle attitude to appease the Kremlin did not appease American voters.
Rockefeller was dropped from the 1976 ticket, no mean feat considering how close the Jnsiders had come using one of their more powerful leaders.
Former California Governor Ronald Reagan raised the Sun Belt standard in a bid to deny Ford the 1976 nomination, and almost succeeded.
Even before Reagan’s move, conservative pressure created a climate in which Ford had to announce that Vice President Nelson Rockefeller would step down and not seek election in 1976.
But that was before the voters handed the ball of wax to the supposed “outsider” from Georgia—an outsider beloved by the Insiders.
Schlafly, Phyllis and Chester Ward, Kissinger On The Couch, Arlington House, New Rochelle, 1975.
In discussing “an incredibly complex tangle of issues,” later wrote Press Secretary Ron Nessen, “a Russian general usually sat close to Brezhnev, serving as the Soviet leader’s technical adviser on the complicated issues involved.
Schlafly, Phyllis and Chester Ward, Ambush At Vladivostok, Pere Marquette Press, Alton, Illinois, 1976.
While claiming to be ‘‘an outsider” Jimmy Carter was the creation of David Rockefeller, the C.F.R. and the Tri-lateral Commission.
Clausen—Clausen took over the reigns at the World Bank from Robert McNamara after leaving his chairmanship at Bank of America.
Over the past 20 years Walter Cronkite probably did more to shape the opinions of the American people than any other insider.
George S McGovern and John B Gary Hart makes pilgrimage to Anderson, both members of the C.F.R. establishment C.F.R., presented a populist profile, while knowing who calls the shots.
Robert Mugabe, terrorist, communist and now one man ruler of Zimbabwe, being entertained at C.F.R. headquarters.
Their friendship goes all the way back to the days when “Teddy” White was calling Mao the Abraham Lincoln of China.
Martin S Feldstein and Alan Greenspan, two key Reagan economic advisors, both long-time C.F.R. members.
The Insiders’ Outside Man L T WAS absolutely fascinating and most amusing to watch the news media promote Jimmy Carter as a 1970’s version of Abe Lincoln.
They tried and succeeded in convincing enough Americans that the Plains, Georgia “barefoot boy with cheek” was the reincarnation of the American Dream.
Mr Carter was the first “creation” by the Jnsiders and the national news media.
Granted the press pundits have had their favorites in the past and promoted them successfully; this time they didn’t have to choose from among the ranks of warmed over, hand-me-downs.
This time they could “dream the impossible dream” with their very own “bionic” politician.
Just think, selling the American People a no-name former southern governor, who professed to be a “born again” Christian, that talked out of both sides of his mouth, with his greatest asset being a Cheshire cat’s envy.
Add to that such “down home” extras as Miss Lillian, Brother Billy, blue jeans, good ’ol boys, peanuts, a hand-carried suit bag, and you had the ingredients for the biggest Madison Avenue hustle since the Edsel.
We can make him all things to all people . . . he will be our very own production.
No voting record, no books or articles coming back to haunt him, and most importantly, no principles to live up to.
So as it was with Serutan and Preparation H, Madison Avenue, compliments of the C.FR. and David Rockefeller, served us up a concoction that would clean us out and ease the pain, all at the same time.
Wanting to believe the man, enough of the electorate gave the politician its support.
Carter even called the Insiders the “insiders,” and pegged the blame correctly at the doorstep of the Establishment conspirators who—as we have seen—had betrayed American interests for years, in both major political parties.
He was, he said, just the man for the job, though even his mother seemed obligated to tell the folks that wee Jimmy wasn’t beyond stretching the truth when it came to tales.
It was a minor fib, but a rags-to-fame story has appeal even if only Carter corn-pone.
A mere one percent of the Democratic voters polled by George Gallup 10 months before the convention, in October of 1975, were for Carter; five months later, Carter was in second place barely trailing Hubert Humphrey.
By the middle of May of 1976 he was the top dog in the polls among the potential candidates for President.
Reg Murphy, former editor of the Atlanta Constitution, called the onetime Peach State governor “one of the four phoniest men I have ever met,” and predicted his Presidential victory because of his ruthlessness.
They had belatedly learned in Georgia that the populist “redneck” they had elected was quick to throw out or ignore campaign promises — especially to curry favor from the national “Liberal” Establishment.
With his seemingly favorite color being plaid, and his mascot a chameleon, Jimmy Carter often played both sides of the political street.
Also, the yearning crowds seem to go away believing, including a surprisingly high proportion of the working press.
The primaries were the place that the nomination would be won, especially now that proportionate shares of delegates were picked off in most states, and it was no longer the winner-takeall system.
As Ham Jordan had said, personal qualities such as trust and integrity had to be emphasized over hard points of ideology.
New Hampshire, that little-populated state with the first primary, built on the momentum started by the miniscule lowa caucuses, where but 47 delegates were to be selected out of 3,008 needed at the convention.
Carter had won a plurality of the vote (almost 30 percent), with 24 percent going to Udall, 16 percent to Bayh, 11 percent to Harris, and g percent to Shriver.
By splitting the liberal vote four ways, Carter’s foes gave him what appeared to be a clear-cut victory.
The fact that 60 percent of the state’s voters had voted for the four more ‘liberal’ candidates was ignored by the media.
On the inside pages, he received 2,630 lines of coverage, while Udall, who came in second, wound up with 96 lines.
Syndicated cartoonists had a field day with Carter’s broad smile, his overstocked supply of teeth and his peanut farmer background.
No less a person than Zbigniew Brzezinski had laid out the blueprint for a 1976 Presidential winner three years earlier —about the time he and David Rockefeller were founding the infamous Trilateral Commission.
Well, in a letter reprinted in the 7rialogue publication of the Trilateral Commission, Brzeninski came out for “a more just and equitable world order,” innocuous enough unless you know it is Jnsider talk for New World Order or world government.
Mr Brzezinski helped found the Trilateral Commission before Carter named him as National Security Advisor.
They stress that he has supported Kissinger’s policies of détente with the Soviet Union and Communist China.
All of the above except Ford, as chance would have it, are members of the Rockefeller Establishment’s powerful Council on Foreign Relations.
Which may be why Henry Kissinger has proclaimed an anticipated foreign policy as compatible with his own.
Promises are something to be elected with, not necessarily kept —at least that was a premise of the Carterites.
O.U.s that Carter had run up—pledges from the man who vowed “I will never promise you anything that I do not intend to deliver” and “The value of my candidacy is that I don’t owe anyone anything.
But he was captive not only of the Trilateralists and Council on Foreign Relations, but also of every “Liberal” group he could bribe with taxpayers’ money.
Large corporations were promised there was nothing to fear from tax reform; Ralph Nader received a pledge for a Consumer Protection Agency; a vow was made for passage of a compulsory, comprehensive National Health Insurance Program; home builders were assured of a subsidy on mortgages above 7%; and the Governors’ Conference was the site of the Carter vow for a guaranteed income support program as part of Welfare reform.
All of this was supposed to be done at the same time that the Budget was balanced; go percent of the people received a tax cut, and only those earning more than $25,000 annually would pick up the tab.
The man who vowed “never to lie” to people was telling one whopper after the other.
Vance wound up at State, while Zbig took over the National Security Council.
Counting Carter and Mondale, there are six top government officials who belong to the David Rockefeller subsidiary known as the Trilateral Commission.
The media, all across the political spectrum, were picking up and publicizing the fact that the “new faces” on the Carter team were the same old Establishment players.
Altogether, 16 high posts in the Administration are held by men and women associated with that organization.
Barnes called the Trilateralists “a true elite, comprised of what many have called America’s ‘shadow government’— leaders in business, industry, international finance and law.
The symbolism in the pre-Inauguration memo, referred to earlier, was instituted to the nth degree.
While the American people are not royalists, neither are they used to seeing the leader of the Free World as an example of the common place and of the namby-pamby.
He followed in a few days by slashing to the bone the use of official limousines by White House personnel.
The Marine Corps orchestra was silenced as he greeted his first audience in the East Room—no ceremonial ruffles and flourishes or ‘Hail to the Chief’ when JimmyCarter entered.
A White House thirty-three page rebuttal had to be issued by the press office to deal with one anonymous allegation that the President’s top assistant had spit his drink down the bosom of a young lady who was not predisposed to Jordan’s charms.
That part of the female anatomy surfaced again in November of 1977 when the wife of the Ambassador from Egypt was reported insulted by Ham, whose leering comments linked her décolletage with his desire to see the pyramids.
Withdrawal of United States troops from Korea was approved (but not carried out, thanks in part to the career-sacrificing, outspoken opposition of Gen.
John Singlaub); the President tried to ignore Captive Nations Week (but was forced to recant by an angry Congress); Carter’s man at the United Nations advocated admission of Communist Vietnam to that world body, said Cuban Reds brought stability and order to Africa, and charged that British foreign policy was built on racism; the President returned the Holy Crown of St.
Appeasement is the nicest way Republican Senator Barry Goldwater might have termed the actions of President Carter.
Candidate Carter, recalled Senator Goldwater, “displayed enormous indignation over what he called the secrecy surrounding the conduct of foreign affairs.
He promised that if he were elected, these negotiations would be conducted in public with citizen participation.
The Panama Canal treaties which provoked such acrimonious division in 1977 and 1978 were written in secret.
But Young, though a Trilateralist, was a loose cannon rattling around on the deck.
Speaking of the Soviet Union’s harassment of “dissidents,” Young equated this to his own arrest at a garbage strike in Atlanta years before.
Ambassador Young was finally forced to resign after being discovered in 1979 in secret negotiations with the terrorist Palestine Liberation Organization.
It was, commented Clark Mollenhoff, “an unrepentant Andrew Young who spoke before a press conference to explain his resignation.
As that election grew closer, the American people grew impatient with this President who criticized his countrymen like a schoolmarm.
It then rose to 38% after Ronald Reagan announced, and reached 61% in early December.
In California, in a three-man poll, even Governor Moonbeam (as Jerry Brown became known) outpolled the sitting President.
Yet when the smoke cleared, by the spring of 1980, the Democratic nomination was again Carter’s.
Another document was prepared for Jimmy Carter by Patrick Caddell, who had years before urged style over substance.
Dated June 25, 1980, the general election’s first memorandum was blunt.
More to the point, the American people do not want Jimmy Carter as their President.
Even the writer’s own penchant for salted-in-the-shell peanuts diminished during the Carter administration.
We have already said it would be unfair to claim that the Trilateral Commission dominated the Carter Administration.
But once in the limelight, and seen for what it was, this manifestation of the Insiders’ conspiracy was rejected resoundingly.
After the campaign was concluded, Carter recalled in his book Keeping Faith, he was not surprised or shaken when the bad news came in from the final pre-election polls.
To lose all but six states and to have our party rejected and the Republicans gain a majority in the Senate were additional embarrassments for me.
If he thought “it was a relief,” it was peanut shells compared to what the American people were feeling.
John, Jeffrey, Jimmy Carter's Betrayal Of The South, Green Hill Publishers, Ottawa, Illinois, 1976.
In May of 1977 a pre-inauguration memo by Caddell— which quoted Marx and Hegel—came to light, urging that a new coalition for 1980 be built by emphasizing style over substance.
Sutton, Antony C and Patrick M Wood, Trilaterals Over Washington, August Corporation, Scottsdale, Arizona, 1978.
Bourne was a British-born Leftist activist who helped found the pro-Hanoi Vietnam Veterans Against the War and was very influential in not only drafting a pro-abortion plank to the Democratic platform but also (with his wife Mary King, a former racial agitator with Stokely Carmichael) changed Carter’s professed stance against protecting the unborn.
That is, until he was himself caught by reporters smoking marijuana and sniffing cocaine and then having signed a prescription for a phony name.
Bourne resigned over the illegalities involved, but was later named to a United Nations position.
Scheer, Robert, “Jimmy, We Hardly Know Y’ all,” Playboy, November, 1976.
After well-founded opposition was mounted, led by Conservatives, especially the late Representative Larry McDonald , Sorensen had to withdraw his nomination.
Barnes, W E., “Was Carter An Insider All Along?,” San Francisco Examiner & Chronicle, December 12, 1976.
Reagan I N NOVEMBER 1979, Ronald Reagan became the tenth G.O.P. candidate to enter the Presidential race.
A year later he had beaten all the other Republicans, and went on to defeat (for the first time in 50 years) a sitting, elected President who was seeking re-election.
It had been a long road from 1964 and “the speech” that Reagan had given on behalf of Barry Goldwater.
We will preserve for our children this, the last best hope for man on earth, or we will sentence them to take the last step into a thousand years of darkness.
If we fail, at least let our children, and our children’s children, say of us we justified our brief moment here.
Oh, the phrases over the years that Americans have come to appreciate and finally —or so they think —to embrace.
However, the deeds of the first Reagan term, on balance, proved bitterly disappointing to those who thought the Administration would make a break from the path so long before marked out by the Establishment Insiders.
There were, pointed out the G.O.P. candidate, 19 key members of the Carter team who were then, or had been, Trilateralists.
To the dismay of many supporters, Reagan then placed the man he had beaten, his “Liberal” competitor Bush, onto the G.O.P. ticket under the guise of unifying the party.
As the Reagan Administration took over, the evidence of business as usual took over also.
There will be plenty of “moderates” reassured United States News & World Report, aboard the Reagan team as he saddled up in late 1980.
Now, I don’t believe that the Trilateral Commission is a conspiratorial group, but I do think its interests are devoted to international banking, multinational corporations, and so forth.
I don’t think that any administration of the United States government should have the top nineteen positions filled by people from any one group or organization representing one viewpoint.
It would surely be polite to call this selling out to those on the /nside.
In 1976 he worked against Ronald Reagan for Gerald Ford and managed Ford’s losing Presidential campaign; and, in 1980 (after Baker had lost his own race for Texas Attorney General two years before) managed Bush’s poor showing against Ronald Reagan.
Years later, “Liberal” columnist David S Broder looked back on what happened and feigned ignorance.
Broder saw no evil, much like the pro214 Call It Conspiracy verbial monkey with eyes hidden behind hands.
And Lou Cannon noted that the New Right was dismayed that pragmatism was taking hold in the Reagan White House, just as it had in Sacramento.
Selecting “a former opponent’s principal strategist as one’s own White House chief of staff was unheard of.
At the same time the staffing problems predicted by Conservatives came home to roost.
A survey of top Reagan department and agency posts, outside of the White House and ambassadorial posts, was made in late summer of 1981 and revealed that almost half had worked in previous administrations (37% under Ford or Nixon, 12% under Democrat Carter); and only 14% of the appointees worked in the Reagan campaign, in a sort of reverse spoils system.
Indeed as the thrust of the Administration became more obvious, the “Liberal” Washington Post was happily announcing that the gap between rhetoric and reality had set in.
But Congress had no intention of really cutting the Budget, and the numbers game soon involved by how much the growth of spending would be reduced —as if a patient could be said to be getting better because his fever was increasing slower today than yesterday.
A trade was supposedly arranged in 1982 to pass the 3-year, $99 + billion Dole tax bill— which, according to the Senate Finance Committee chaired by Kansas G.O.P. taxer Robert Dole, would total $228 billion by 1987.
As for the trade, that was bait for those who don’t believe in collusion.
The supposed reduction in future outlays was, went the tale, going to accompany the tax rise that came first.
What these Reaganites believe is that there’s no way — once the dust settles— that Congressional spending cuts are going to outnumber tax increases by a margin of three-to-one.
In your steadily deepening commitment to tax increases, you are embarked on a profoundly self-destructive course.
There could be no surer sign of this than Tip O’Neill’s invitation to go before a joint session of Congress to urge passage of the pending $100 billion tax increase.
But now the Washington elite, the pollsters and the fashionable media have led you step by step into reversing yourself on the centerpiece of the first year of your administration.
Worse, everyone — Mr O'Neill, your supporters in Congress, the public at large —understands full well that you do not.
The G.O.P. lost two dozen seats in the United States House of Representatives and what had been a Conservative coalition disappeared.
Veteran syndicated columnist Patrick Buchanan called the midterm contest “a major defeat for President Reagan—the worst of his career—and a thrashing for his party.
Even the Republican cheerleaders at Human Events saw the 1980 mandate slipping away and yielding to the “pragmatists,” such as Tennessee Senator Howard Baker , the Majority Leader expected to run for President in 1988.
Many of us believe that you began to lose your way a bit last August when you successfully pushed through a $227-billion tax hike , and went along with that U.S.-China communiqué which, in our view (though we know you vehemently disagree), seriously undermines our good friend Taiwan.
But, lo and behold, you suddenly found yourself embracing a gas tax hike that was more than double the previous tax.
United States News took note, for example, that Reagan had appeared to have “given up” on eliminating Budget deficits, adding “if re-elected, Reagan sees no hope of balancing the budget during his second term.
Quite sensibly, his emphasis has shifted from supply-side dogma to boosting demand as a means of reviving the economy.
In the messages unveiling his $200 billion-a-year deficits, one finds no word —not even a whisper — about a constitutional amendment for a balanced budget.
Nor do I wish to imply that there were no reasons for Reagan’s popularity with the public at large, if not with Conservatives in general.
Prime interest rates over that period fell as well, from around 21.5% at the end of 1980 to 9.5% in the summer of 1985.
Unemployment, though it rose from 7.5% to 10.7% in 1982, at the height of the recession, then fell again to 7.4% by election time.
And tax rates were cut and indexing introduced (as an attempt to offset increases in taxes caused solely by inflation)—though the tax “cuts” were offset by increases elsewhere as mentioned earlier.
Now President Reagan can point to the lowest ‘misery index’ since the early 1970s at 11. percent.
He has accomplished the miraculous feat not only of cutting inflation by almost nine percentage points, but modestly lowering unemployment as well.
Conservatives and antiCommunists were appointed, though many fell by the wayside in attacks by “Liberals,” three of the more prominent being National Security Advisor Richard Allen, Interior Secretary James Watt, and Domestic Affairs Advisor Dr.
Nor should it be neglected that “Liberal” attacks on the President were often unfair.
First, from the 1980 election until June 1981 over 67 percent supported the president.
Second, from September 1981 until February 1982 a clear majority supported the president.
Moreover it is becoming clearer that the low point of approval was at the end of January 1983.
With the Big Banks in trouble, the average man who must meet a family budget, bailed out the “one-Worlders” who are above that sort of thing.
The nine largest American international banks had a total of $21 billion in total capital, as the Conservative Caucus reported in spring of 1983.
These institutions had “lent” the Communist Eastern European countries $4 billion, and the “less developed countries” another $61 billion, before trouble set in.
So the bankers wanted Uncle Sam to produce more money, under the aegis of the world banking fraud called the International Monetary Fund, which would then allow the debtor nations to repay some of those bad loans to the Big Banks.
Having lent two and onehalf times their capital to borrowers who could not, or would not, repay, the international bankers got a Conservative President to dun the man in the American street.
Gary Allen has remarked that “probably the most damning indication that the President may be in the pocket of the megabankers is his unrelenting personal support for the bill authorizing an increase of over $8. billion in America’s ‘contribution’ to the International Monetary Fund.
This money would in turn be ‘loaned’ by the I.M.F. to deadbeat Third World governments to help them make interest payments on the gargantuan debts they owe to the Big Banks.
Acting as host was the President; “Reagan’s left-hand man,” Richard Darman (the protégé of Establishmentarian Elliot Richardson who was so dubbed by Time magazine) briefed the Trilats.
Once again, the staffing with “Liberals” in the Reagan White House had left its mark.
But perhaps David Rockefeller would put the author of the Declaration of Independence down as a member of a fringe group.
As for Phillips, Viguerie and the rest, Deaver has run out of fraternal feeling.
And Morton Kondracke advised readers of the Left-wing New Republic to count their blessings, even before the 1984 re-election.
The pragmatists were in charge of everything in early 1984, acknowledged Editor Kondracke.
It’s not clear how much the pragmatists act out of moderate Republican conviction and how much out of the perception of the need to cooperate with Congress and operate somewhere near the mainstream of American politics in order to succeed.
There was a flurry of rhetoric although in his September 2nd statement the President could not bring himself to mention the Congressman’s name.
President Reagan has sought more arms control agreements with the Kremlin even though it is violating many of those pacts to which it is already a signatory.
At somewhat over 26% of the total Budget, it is a tad higher than that spent by Jimmy Carter, but lower than the 1975 percentage under Gerald Ford—not to mention the 45% in 1969.
Yet Reagan adds to the confusion by, on the one hand, pretending to have reduced the Budget —in actuality changing the growth rate.
Recall how Jerry Ford claimed that no one to his Right could be elected President.
A Conservative platform was elected along with the candidate that seemed to believe in it—but the implementation of that platform is sadly lacking.
So the 1984 elections came and went with the MondaleFerraro duo proving one of the worst in Presidential election history.
The American people had once again rejected overwhelmingly the “old politics” and cast their vote for conservative principles.
Mondale’s only memorable line during the entire campaign sums up perfectly the reality of the situation.
Donald Regan to the White House, Jim Baker to Treasury, Deaver to private life, Pat Buchanan to communications, and Jeane Kirkpatrick back to the halls of academe.
But the real policy positions are still firmly in the grip of the C.F.R. in the State Department, Defense Department, the CIA and every other place of real importance.
The conservatives do not have a candidate, but as has been the case time after time over the past 70 odd years, the Jnsiders do.
While on the other side of the aisle, the Democrats are getting ready to field a team that could include Lee Iococca, Bill Bradley , Mario Cuomo , Jay Rockefeller in any combination.
In either case the Jnsiders have their bases covered—unless the mask of respectability is firmly and finally ripped away from the faces of those who do the bidding for the conspiracy.
As for Ronald Reagan, I am sad to report he has not fought the Establishment, but has become one with it.
Too much government run by a conspiracy seeking ever more power through whatever means it can, on the way toward the goal of a New World Order.
Stang, Alan, “The Reagan Administration And The C.F.R.,” American Opinion, Aprii, 1982.
In a release dated November 4, 1980, said Harris, “it was their efforts which largely turned around the Baptist vote in the South.
The more things change, goes the aphorism, the more they stay the same.
See Chapter VII , for how Richard Nixon announced that he had become a Keynesian in economics also, thus justifying spending more money than was covered by tax receipts supposedly to boost the economy.
Devine, Donald J., Reagan Electionomics, Green Hill Publishers, Ottowa, Illinois, 1983.
Allen, Gary, “Too Much Of The Wrong Stuff,” American Opinion, February, 1984.
Patterson, Rachelle, “He’s Last Stop Before Reagan,” Boston Globe, January 25, 1981.
Kondracke, Morton, “Baker Takes The Cake,” The New Republic, February 20, 1984.
John, Jeffrey, Day Of The Cobra, Thomas Nelson Publishers, Nashville, Tennessee, 1984.
Pincus, Walter, “Soviets’ Violations Of Arms Curbs Cited,” Washington Post, October 11, 1984.
Evans, M Stanton, “Our Non-Buildup for Defense,” Human Events, April 21, 1984.
Personally, I have come to the conclusion that somewhere within the membership of all the aforementioned groups, lies the nucleus of “an inner-circle” of the Conspiracy.
But I am equally convinced that within the membership of all the contemporary groups, such as the C.ER. or the Trilateral Commission, are people whose intentions are honorable and in all likelihood diametrically opposed to the ultimate goals of the organizations to which they lend their names and influence.
Or, how really small the ruling group is in relation to the membership as a whole.
This tactic of using good people as a cover for “real objectives” was first used by Adam Weisphut in the Illuminati and has been a vital part of every conspiratorial group since that time.
Its permanent roster now numbers approximately 2,300 men and women, yet the “real movers and shakers” are but a handful.
Leffingwell, Allen Dulles, Henry Wriston, Grayson Kirk, Bayless Manning, and Winston Lord.
Archibald C Coolidge, Hamilton Fish Armstrong, William P Bundy, and William Hyland.
A close examination of the board of directors, past and present, reveals a game of musical chairs, with the players being small in number versus the membership as a whole.
Yet this close-knit group has without doubt wielded more power over more people with more devastating results than any similarly small number in recorded human history.
However, it must be pointed out that some few members of the C.F.R. have hurt the plans for “the new world order” by their actions.
The person who most quickly comes to mind was the late Admiral Chester Ward, and more recent examples are Arnaud de Borchgrave, Midge Decter, Norman Podhoretz, J Peter Grace, and former United States Ambassador to the United Nations Jeane Kirkpatrick.
What is so vitally imperative is to know the game plan and to counter the moves and measures to bring it about.
This is not to say that we shouldn’t put the heat on the C.F.R. or T.C. or any of the other groups mentioned above.
In fact, if enough pressure is brought to bear in revealing the true nature and goals of the organization, the good people will get out and take their credibility, money, and protective covering with them.
If this happens, the real Jnsiders will be standing alone for all the world to see.
Yet you may rest assured that they will launch some other group with some equally innocuous or high sounding name and start the recruitment process all over again.
The fight for freedom and the rolling back of the Jnsider’s Communist onslaught is not going to be fought by scouring pages of Who’s Who or dusty archives; rather, it will be fought and won by correcting the “bi-partisan” treason and the policies of the past sixty-odd years.
Some will pooh-pooh the idea of the Conspiracy, perhaps because they lack the intellectual honesty to break with a lifetime of being conned by the picture painters of the media and/or the classroom.
They will go on about their business, but as they watch the future and see the same names continue to crop up time after time, with the result being the increasing loss of freedom both at home and abroad, a doubt may start to creep into their minds.
They may push it back, because the “conspiracy theory” is “simplistic,” but they may start to lack conviction.
Some will ultimately come to see that the logic of it all cannot be suppressed, and join the fight; but most will not.
Let me address the latter group first by telling a story that happened just a short time ago.
In the course of the conversation, Bobbi, who had just recently been introduced to the scope of the Conspiracy and its role in our lives, asked the inevitable question.
Gary North and I both jumped to answer, with my comment being that when Gary, Sam, and I started our involvement in the Freedom movement back in the late fifties and early ’sixties, we could have taken all the people who felt the way we did and held a meeting in a large phone booth.
Then Gary told her the story of Whittaker Chambers, and how he took on the whole of the Conspiracy’s establishment when he pushed Alger Hiss into suing him for libel, and in the subsequent trial wherein Hiss was convicted of perjury for denying his role in a Communist espionage ring.
College students today—indeed, yesterday—don’t remember the story of Hiss and Chambers.
In the mid-1970’s, William F Buckley asked an audience of college students who Alger Hiss was, and not one hand went up.
Liberals and conservatives still line up on opposite sides, even if they have long forgotten the details, just as they still do over the trial of Sacco and Vanzetti, two decades earlier.
Gary went on to explain how at the time Chambers decided to “go public” about his collaboration with Hiss in the Communist cell operating in Washington, D.C., Chambers did so with a heavy heart, knowing the wrath he would call down upon his head, and that for the rest of his life he would walk with the hatred of all those who would rush to the defense of Alger Hiss (i.e.
As soon as I heard Gary recall the Chambers story, I knew I had found the source for this concluding chapter.
I had been wrestling for weeks with a way to express the seriousness of the situation yet to offer very real optimism that many of us “old warriors” felt as we looked back over the years.
Where we had been, what had been accomplished and how we now felt, a vast multitude of people were ready to be mobilized for the final destruction of “that Hideous Strength” which has wreaked such havoc on the body of mankind throughout the 20th Century.
After returning home, I went straight to my library and pulled out Witness.
It had probably been 20 years since I had sat transfixed by Whittaker Chamber’s heart-wrenching prose.
I sought Him with the hopeless sense that by finding Him I must at once lose what I have scarcely found.
In those days, I often moved about or performed tasks more or less blindly from habit, while my mind was occupied with its mortal debate.
As I stepped down into the dark hall, I found myself stopped, not by a constraint, but by a hush of my whole being.
Perhaps there were no words, only an uttered meaning to which my mind supplied the words.
What was there was the sense that, like me, time and the world stood still, an awareness of God as an envelopment, holding me in silent assurance and untroubled peace.
This moment of truth for Chambers is the stuff out of which the tides of history are changed.
His inspiration is more pertinent today, for us, his heirs, than it was when he wrote it over 30 years ago.
The words are Kierkegaard’s; the experience that gave them life for me is mine.
Nor did I ever regard myself as an instrument of God. only sought prayerfully to know and to do God’s purpose with me.
I only knew that I had promised God my life, even if it were His will, to death.
We must expose the Conspiracy with all the tools and resolve we can muster.
We must resist their every attempt to erode our Constitutional and national sovereignty.
Lift up your voice regardless of which party is doing the Conspiracy’s bidding.
And finally, we must come immediately to the defense of those who the /nsiders and their puppets in the media, will attempt to destroy.
For always and everywhere, in this world gone crazy, we really can judge a man more by his enemies than by his friends.
When you see the /nsider media unleash a smear-bund, in all likelihood the object of their hatred is experiencing the same venom that was directed at Chambers.
The list is potentially endless — Joe McCarthy, Robert Welch, Jerry Falwell (be careful, Rev.
Falwell, that they don’t compromise your effectiveness with “respectability” ), Larry McDonald, Ariel Sharon, etc. etc.
The list will continue to grow for as long as honest men challenge them.
Yet in spite of the viciousness of the attacks by the other side, even more devastating was the cowardice of those who knew these men were right, but who were afraid to come to their defense.
But far more important as a negative factor against the truth is the perceived “moral force” of Establishment respectability.
It was, not invariably, but in general, the ‘best people’ who were for Alger Hiss and who were prepared to go to almost any length to protect and defend him.
But the important fact to bear in mind is that the public —the little people who are the backbone of any civilization —were generally aware of the problem.
It was the Establishment against the people, and when the people were given the facts, they knew who was guilty, unlike “the best people” who still persist in doubting Chambers’ story, or worse, who know Hiss was guilty, but dare not admit it publicly.
Yet there is one experience which most sincere exCommunists share, whether or not they go only part way to the end of the questions it poses.
The daughter of a former German diplomat in Moscow was trying to explain to me why her father, who, as an enlightened modern man, had been extremely proCommunist, had become an implacable anti-Communist.
It was hard for her because, as an enlightened modern girl, she shared the Communist vision without being a Communist.
But she loved her father and the irrationality of his defection embarrassed her.
She did not know that the soul has a logic that may be more compelling than the mind’s.
They come from husbands torn forever from their wives in midnight arrests.
They come, muffled, from the execution cellars of the secret police, from the torture chambers of the Lukianka, from all the citadels of terror now stretching from Berlin to Canton.
They come from those freight cars loaded with men, women and children, the enemies of the Communist State, locked in, packed in, left on remote sidings to freeze to death at night in the Russian winter.
They come from minds driven mad by the horrors of mass starvation ordered and enforced as a policy of the Communist State.
They come from the starved skeletons, worked to death, or flogged to death in the freezing filth of sub-arctic labor camps.
They come from every corner of the globe, and midst and agony and terror comes the cry, “Help us, please help us.
Presumably, you have formed an opinion about the validity of Abraham’s thesis.
If you think he is overwhelmingly incorrect, then this Epilogue will not do you much good.
If you think he is essentially correct, then you need to consider a few more issues.
If you answer, “Yes, most Americans would throw out the conspirators, if they only knew about them,” you are saying that you would throw them out because you know about them, and you think other Americans would agree with you.
I think the whole “Gang of 2300” should be tossed out into the cold, cruel world of economic competition.
I doubt that I could gain many votes for President in terms of such a campaign promise, other than from those who have read the earlier edition of this book, even if the power elite stood on the sidelines and refused to get involved in the election.
I want to get the leaders of the future to see the issues — the Constitutional issues—and abide by the Constitution, or change it openly, according to the rules.
I think that voters (or at least those who care enough to take leadership positions locally) can eventually be persuaded to return to Constitutional principles.
Back from apathy, back from compromise, and back from false interpretations of the Constitution that have led to the centralization of power.
A fundamental moral shift took place simultaneously with the rise of the conspiratorial groups.
The more thoughtful elitists no doubt did what they could to accelerate this shift, but they could not have created it —not in a “bottomup,” decentralized society, which the United States still was.
The shift came because of widespread changes in theology, philosophy, and morality in the late nineteenth century, especially in urban churches and in the better universities. believe that the most important factor in that shift was the rise of theological liberalism and the spread of Darwinism and other forms of evolutionistic thinking.
The 14th amendment wasn’t ratified legally, either, since certain states were not allowed to vote.
The point is, the public in 1913 was willing to ratify it, even though certain technicalities were missing.
There was no hue and cry of outrage when the amendment was announced as having passed.
It led to the capture of the middle-class voters by the rich who were supposedly the targets of the law.
Rockefeller, Harriman, Morgan, Carnegie, and all the others knew how to appeal to the voters.
They tossed them into the briar patch —the briar patch of tax-exempt foundations, tax loopholes, family trusts, and all the rest.
The difference between the conspirators and the victims was the difference between the professional con artist and the petty thief.
If the intended victim of a sting operation had not been a thief in his heart, and willing to cheat the professional con, the operation could not have worked.
What he was really saying was that virtually everyone he encountered was dishonest.
My contention is that my proposed educational campaign must be a lot more than just intellectual.
It will involve a lot more than persuading the average voter of the existence of a conspiracy which is misusing political power to the detriment of most voters.
We need to appeal to the Constitution and to free market principles, for they are both moral institutions.
I realize that some conservatives and most free market economists have not argued this way in the past, especially academic types.
The other side appeals to our basest instincts in order to manipulate us.
The proper response is to appeal to men’s highest instincts, and to show them that the United States Constitution and the free market economy are grounded in moral values that are among the highest that any civilization has ever adopted.
Nothing else stands a chance of overturning the present power-drunk political system.
We must appeal to ethics in order to overcome our Opponents’ raw power.
We must also understand that they, too, have a moral vision, a theology.
We must understand our opponents’ theology, and then do whatever we can to cleanse our own thinking of our opponents’ first principles.
Given their extent of their existing power, they will beat us every time.
Men live by ideas, and no idea in man’s history produced more evil than this one.
Man’s conquest of Nature, if the dreams of some scientific planners are realized, means the rule of a few hundreds of men over billions upon billions of men.
But to achieve progress without tyranny, we must elevate ethics over power.
We must recognize that in a cosmically personal universe, there are perpetually binding moral rules.
They should remind us that all autonomous power corrupts, and absolute autonomous power (in the hands of sinful creatures, meaning all of us) corrupts absolutely.
It is always necessary for righteous men to possess power if they are to reconstruct a civilization that has been run by evil men who possess raw power.
Limited Power Western Civilization adopted biblical ethics as its moral foundation.
Man is a creature; he cannot possess ultimate power, and it is a sign of men’s evil intentions if they pursue power as such—power divorced from ethics.
All political power should therefore be limited by statute law and also by tradition, because man is a sinful creature.
Power is delegated to specific men by God through other men, and all legitimate delegated power is therefore limited power.
The Old Testament required that the people of Israel be assembled once every seven years to hear the reading of God’s law.
Everyone would know when the provisions of God’s law were being violated.
They could predict both the State and each other’s actions far better, for all of them knew the public, revealed law.
Limited authority was delegated from God to rulers, but only by means of revealed and fixed law.
The rulers could not legitimately change the law, and a bottom-up system of monitoring the rulers was established by the public reading of the law.
The United States Constitution, as a written document which binds the State itself, was a product of this biblical approach to law.
A dozen of our peers are presumed to be better than robed judges at deciding both the facts and the law of the case.
The Founding Fathers recognized this, and they attempted to construct a legal order which restrains political power.
But to maintain itself from power-seekers of a rival faith, a society must be self-governed and self-restrained.
Men must say to themselves, “My power is limited; therefore, the State’s power is limited.
The State is not Savior; therefore, the State is not absolutely sovereign.
Historically, this has meant that members of society must see themselves as under an authority other than the State.
From the beginning, the essence of “the American experiment” was the attempt of wise men to design political institutions of legally limited power.
Today, we get the likes of Tom Wicker and Jack Anderson, and congratulate ourselves at how literate we are for reading the editorial page first — or even if we read it after the comics, the business news, and the sports section.
In all things, the State is to be the pre-eminent power, the initiating agency as well as the final court of appeal.
Napoleonic law (“guilty until proven innocent”); common law precedents vs.
The Russian Revolution was simply a better-executed, more thoroughly centralized extension of the French Revolution.
The Church-State Alliance There must be a sustaining philosophy — indeed, a sustaining religion—to undergird every society.
Rather, the ideals determine which sort of economy and political order can emerge.
We must not become economic determinists, Freudian determinists, or environmental determinists.
Without a broadly based sense of moral legitimacy concerning the civil government , rulers cannot rule their subjects indefinitely.
To remove the king’s throne, you must first remove the priests, or else convert their leaders to new beliefs.
This shift in the thinking of influential priests literally took place in the decades before the French Revolution.
That was one of the most brilliant and successful aspects of the program adopted by the conspirators who directed the French Revolution.
This is why we find that in all cases of civilizations that have fallen into some version of the heresy of centralization, there has emerged a new alliance between Church and State, between new priests and kings, between new intelligentsia and politicians.
We must recognize that in every era, anti-conspiratorialists also have their priests, kings, intelligentsia, and politicians.
But what we seem to be short of is presidents of major commercial banks or directors of central banks who cry out against the use of fractional reserve banking to centralize power at the expense of the public in general and borrowers in particular.
Because modern banking is fractional reserve banking —the process is described in the book —and it inescapably involves fraud.
This is not the place to go into the details of the process by which fractional reserve banking produces counterfeit money, and why governments exempt the banking system from prosecution against counterfeiting.
Let me simply say that the monopoly of fractional reserve banking is inherently corrupt, inherently a process of legalized theft, and inherently power-seeking.
Over and over, the plans of the conspirators have originated in conference rooms of the great banks, or in conjunction with the banking establishment.
Because money is the central institution in a division-of-labor economy, so control over the issue of money becomes the singlemost-important grant of monopoly privilege that the national government can make to any private or quasi-public organization.
Those who receive such a monopolistic grant know how to use it to their advantage.
Those who do not receive it seldom understand the process of money creation, the benefits it gives to those who do understand, and the catastrophes such monopolistic power invariably has led to in history.
The supposed reforms otherwise go from bad to worse, from less centralized to more centralized.
For over a thousand years, the West, being Christian , historically affirmed the unity of mankind.
But at the same time, orthodox Christians and orthodox Jews—I don’t limit this to Orthodox Jews alone—have always simultaneously proclaimed that mankind is divided ethically.
There are good men and bad men, saved and lost, saints and sinners, covenant-keepers and covenant-breakers.
The point is, then, to construct institutions that will preserve the peace — civil, ecclesiastical, educational, economic, etc. —but which will also suppress the outward manifestations of evil.
In the West, we have always recognized that God saves men, not the State.
Laws must suppress outward evil, but they must never be designed to save men ethically.
It is not supposed to make men good; it is only supposed to restrain men from public evil acts.
Thus, Western Civilization has historically avoided the doctrine of salvation by law, especially statist law.
Whenever and wherever the doctrine of salvation by civil law has been preached, then and there we have found a conspiracy against Western Civilization.
The conspiracies of the West, being Western, have also adopted the notion of the unity of the godhead.
Diversity of opinion concerning these “humanistic” goals must not be tolerated.
Mankind must not be allowed to reveal differences of opinion on fundamentals.
The first approach takes forever, or at least it seems to take forever.
There is no third alternative, given the false doctrine of the ethical unity of man.
Man is in principle ethically unified, this theology proclaims; therefore, any visible deviations from this hypothetical unity must be suppressed, one way or another.
What the average citizen does not readily recognize is the existence of the other form of conspiratorial organization, the kind described in this book.
This form of conspiracy operates under a very different set of presuppositions and assumptions about the way to achieve universal ethical unity.
Ideological differences cannot possibly be ultimate, for we know that all ultimate disagreements are ethical disagreements, and mankind cannot possibly be ethically divided.
By definition, any perceived ethical disunity just has to be a temporary phenomenon.
To admit that such ethical disunity is fundamental and permanent is to admit that mankind is not God, for God cannot be ethically divided against Himself.
The best way to overcome this temporary disunity, of course, is to make a deal, preferably a business deal.
Conspiratorial humanists all agree that mankind ought to be unified ethically, where all men share the same cosmic vision.
But they disagree about the hypothesis that mankind is, in fact, ethically unified.
The “conspirators of execution,” acknowledge that all men clearly are not yet ethically unified; therefore, some men — indeed, millions of them —will have to be removed from visible existence if they persist in their rebellion against the Truth.
In contrast, the “conspirators of manipulation,” dare not admit such a thing.
They, of course, are just the people to “properly understand” mankind, whether mankind agrees with them or not.
They realize that at this stage of history, men publicly disagree about the fundamentals.
Voters in the United States do not want to join together in a one-world government with the Soviet Union.
If “conspirators by manipulation,” were to try persuade the average American voter to allow them to move forward in the creation of such a New World Order of ethically unified humanity, they would not gain much co-operation.
Since 1973, the Trilateral Commission has published its intention repeatedly to create a New World Order.
True, they did not announce their intention to liquidate specific numbers of specific groups, but they announced their general intentions.
Because the “conspirators by manipulation,” always said that these were just verbal excesses.
They were secret about the real intentions of the Federal Reserve System before it was voted into law in 1913.
They were secret about the real intentions of the federal income tax before it was voted into law (or people were fo/d that it had been voted into law) in 1913.
Nevertheless, prior to Dan Smoot’s Invisible Government, the C.F.R. kept an incredibly low profile.
I happen to have bought a used copy, probably for under a dollar, at some long-forgotten used book sale.
How could Adlai E Stevenson, Hubert H Humphrey, Henry Cabot Lodge, and Sen.
Adam Weishaupt, founder of the IIuminati, an important late-eighteenth-century secret revolutionary society, recognized the importance of books very early.
He laid down guidelines concerning the proper concealment of a secret society.
None is fitter than the three lower degrees of Free Masonry, the public is accustomed to it, expects little from it, and therefore takes little notice of it.
Next to this, the form of a learned or literary society is best suited to our purpose, and had Free Masonry not existed, this cover would have been employed; and it may be much more than a cover, if may be a powerful engine in our hands.
Today, the college and university have taken the place of reading societies.
So have literary reviews and book review services, so that lazy pseudo-intellectuals can appear to be wellinformed without actually having to read fat books.
And the biggest discussion group of all is the Council on Foreign Relations.
The C.ER. sponsored many meetings around the country in 1983-84, as it does every year — meetings that featured C.-R. members in the military.
Four years later, he was a four-star general, skipping the third star completely.
Academic books have for two centuries been part of the manipulators’ cover.
Two things have recently changed that have forced the manipulators to become more open about part of their activities.
So they are attempting to deflect the charge of “conspiracy” by going partially public.
For $10 a year, anyone can subscribe to its quarterly magazine, “Trialogue,” and also receive periodic mailings of task force reports.
Furthermore, we publish a list of the source of all United States contributions in excess of $5,000.
The only part of our proceedings that is “off the record” are discussions at commission meetings, and we keep these private to encourage uninhibited criticism and debate.
It is public where it has to be, secret where it has to be (“discussion group secrecy”), and conspiratorial from day one.
The Communists want better and better terms on their deals with the West, and American voters are growing tired of the deals that benefit the reds and the manipulators, and nobody else.
They now need to scare the public into allowing them to take charge in order to stave off a national emergency—it doesn’t matter which emergency —that their policies have created.
The conspirators hope that people will not believe the story that is contained in this book.
But they still use the tactic of ridiculing all conspiracy theories of history, as we have seen.
So they have adopted the tactic of ridiculing everyone who advocates a conspiracy view of history as being infantile.
Contrary to what you might think, conspiracy theories can be very sophisticated.
On the contrary, a serious conspiracy theorist relies heavily on social and economic analysis, especially the analysis of ideas.
People are starting to reject the political ideas that allowed the creation of the conspiratorial system of economic control.
In other words, it is the big picture that dominates—the shift in opinion of millions of Americans, as well as a growing minority of articulate intellectuals—rather than Larry Abraham and his book, or even the earlier book.
Shoot one enemy, and another one appears, on either side of the conflict.
Because it is the struggle—a religious struggle—over the acceptable world-andlife view, the first principles of society, which is central, not the specific conspirators.
Or as Abraham might say, it is the script, not the players, who are central.
The field is a climate of opinion—the same field used by the rulers of any society.
If we answer, “yes, it was all done in the open according to the rules,” then when we talk about a conspiracy, we must be talking about a group that doesn’t do it by the rules.
To write Abraham’s book off as “just another conspiracy thesis” is to miss the whole point.
But he knows that the key to stopping the conspiracy is above all educational.
Because the Russian rulers, like the Russian people, had lost faith in the moral and intellectual foundations of Old Russia.
Also, the Czar had a massive centralized bureaucracy, all ready and waiting to be captured.
It is a question of conspiratorial mobilization within a particular climate of opinion and within particular historical circumstances.
And they also understand that if any hostile critic of their actions dares to mention the existence of their conspiracy, which has been successful in using the climate of opinion to manipulate the majority, he can be cut off at the knees simply by sneering, “Oh, yes, a conspiracy thesis of history.
That sneer, coupled with threats to professional careers, has worked incredibly well.
But these men understood Rushdoony’s principle that “intellectual respectability in the eyes of either the liberals or anyone else is an irrelevant matter in the discussion of any question.
Instead of an outraged cry, they have hired professional historians to sneer for them.
It is especially unpopular in university classrooms, though not so unpopular as it was in the classroom prior to 1965.
Those who hold a conspiracy view of history are also interested in discussing the climate of opinion, or economic forces that create the historical setting for a shift in the climate of opinion.
Those who favor a conspiracy view argue that there are fundamental issues — moral, religious, and political issues — that divide good from evil, good guys from bad guys.
They view history as a continuing personal struggle between the forces of good and the forces of evil.
They are weaned on a diet of ethical relativism; this perspective is basic to all the social sciences and humanities.
Don’t push them on why it is more evil to slaughter Jews than kulak peasants.
He was a conspirator who got caught before he had consolidated his power.
But there was a period before the War when he looked as though he would be successful.
In this period (you will never be told in any university classroom), some very powerful and influential Americans were sending him money.
Then write Wall Street and the Bolshevik Revolution, and have it published by Arlington House, the conservative publishing company.
He demonstrated beyond any shadow of a doubt that profit-seeking United States firms have gotten rich by selling the Soviet Union the military technology that alone makes them a credible threat to the West.
One doesn’t voice such embarrassing conclusions to “the conservative rabble” if one is on the staff of the Hoover Institution, a respectable conservative Establishment think-tank.
Its one visible manifestation in the United States is Skull and Bones, Yale’s ancient secret society, which Vice President Bush and William F Buckley, Jr. belong to.
Sutton got a newsletter publisher, Research Publications, to handle it.
Any graduate student or untenured scholar who starts writing articles demonstrating how selfinterested groups have captured America’s liberal, democratic, and progressive institutions, and still control these institutions, will find himself isolated and ultimately unemployed.
If he is incorrect about the details of his thesis, he will be easily dismissed as a crank, and I do mean dismissed.
If he is correct, and his case starts getting a hearing, those who set the climate of opinion need only make a few discreet phone calls, or publish a devastating review or two in prestige academic journals.
Such things as existing conspiracies that are successfully misleading the people are simply not supposed to be mentioned by prudent scholars.
But we are not supposed to think of this arrangement as a form of bribery.
Those who never attend nice parties don’t get to meet important people, either.
There are few aspects of successful conspiratorial groups more important for both recruiting and control that people’s desire to be in the presence of powerful and famous people.
The C.F.R. uses this weakness of men—and it is a dangerous weakness —to manipulate local leaders and businessmen through regional World Affairs Council meetings.
Entrance into the C.ER. itself is very important as a motivating device.
In a little-known but important essay, “The Inner Ring,” Lewis warned young men against the quest for what I call the “unholy grail” of the inner circle.
In non-profit institutions, performance is judged by one’s peers, not by consumers, as it is in a free, competitive market.
People who work for universities or foundations must please their peers and their immediate superiors.
A person cannot prove his or her importance to the organization by pointing to the corporate profit-and-loss statement.
They are psychologically tied to their jobs in a way that people in the business world are not.
The tighter the job market — and it grew incredibly tight in 1969 and has remained so—the more fearful they are.
They can imagine few employment alternatives outside their non-profit universe.
Thus, a raised eyebrow from a superior, especially if an assistant professor has not received tenure —a legal guarantee of lifetime employment —can work wonders.
Especially in your first few jobs, you need the support and recommendations of senior professors.
To make it into the academic “big time” in the social sciences, you have to be an absolute genius, and one who has a knack at writing articles for professional journals, or you have to have the right contacts.
Thus, contacts are 80% of the game for 80% of the players in the big time competition.
The manipulators offer young, aggressive, ambitious men the necessary contacts.
They believe that there are no permanent standards of national morality.
What Osgood wants is a New World Order, although this term was not in use in academic circles back in 1953.
He wants to see it established, however, in the name of what he thinks should be acceptable to good, realistic, pragmatic Americans, meaning people without fixed moral principles.
You know, the kind of people who sold repeating rifles to the Sioux Indians in 1875.
When Custer got killed a year later, the salesmen no doubt blamed Custer for foolhardiness.
In history and political science departments around the country, this commitment to pragmatic flexibility has also long been recognized as the highest moral ideal for nations.
The manipulators and the academics share rhetoric because they share basic principles.
Here is an ethical ideal dear to the hearts of pragmatists —and also to thieves, traitors, and other skilled professionals in search of new victims.
But the ultimate form of idealism is national self-sacrifice, which demands the deliberate surrender of one’s own nation’s selfinterest for the sake of other nations and peoples or for the sake of some moral principle or universal goal.
This sounds like a public relations bulletin from the League of Women Voters.
You can almost hear the committee that must have edited this letter getting the giggles.
The anti-conspiratorial perspective of most academic historians obviously works to the advantage of conspirators.
This “ill-informed rabble” might take steps to reduce their vulnerability to the manipulators.
Mavericks Nevertheless, from time to time a certified scholar breaks loose and publishes a book which demonstrates the power and influence of conspiracies in history.
Oddly, Macmillan decided not to reprint it, just about the time that None Dare and Cleon Skousen’s The Naked Capitalist made it popular in certain conservative circles.
But this is normal; book publishers often suppress fat, expensive books that cost a fortune to typeset, just as they start to become best-sellers.
Tragedy and Hope is available in a “pirate” edition, since Macmillan killed it in the late 1960's; The Anglo-American Establishment was, at last report, out of print.
In fact, he published only one minor, obscure, and totally harmless book prior to Tragedy and Hope.
His insights on such otherwise ignored (and crucially important) topics as Japanese military history and its relation to family dynasties is fascinating.
But it did not gain its notoriety or its sales because of these non-conspiratorial insights.
It has no footnotes, so it looks like a textbook, and few textbooks ever reveal anything unconventional.
In fact, it was substandard pabulum; in 1965 the Vietnam war was escalating.
The head of Macmillan could not read every book manuscript in advance, especially one so huge that it becomes a 1300-page book.
The Secret Six reveals the details of the conspiracy of Unitarian ministers behind the murderous John Brown in the 1850’s.
Then, according to Scott, the parent company lost interest in promoting it.
Scott bought back the publishing rights and the remaining copies later that year.
A similar case, according to legal scholar Henry Manne, happened to him when a pro-free market book of his got into print, and outraged a senior official in the publishing company, who told Manne face to face that he intended to kill it.
That book, too, became a minor sensation, but in the economics profession and scholarly legal circles.
This was not the intention of the publisher, although it had been Manne’s intention.
Tragedy and Hope was published four years before the conservatives began getting excited about it.
Don Bell stumbled upon that single copy in 1966 and featured it in one of his newsletters, but not many people paid any attention.
It began to be quoted by Gary Allen in American Opinion, the John Birch Society magazine, beginning in early 1969.
By 1985, it had sold over a million copies; the first half million came by 1973.
Sales of Tragedy and Hope took off, but supplies ran out, and Macmillan declined to reprint it.
I know one man who paid $150 for a used copy, so tight was supply, before the “pirate” edition appeared around 1975.
Larry Abraham and Gary Allen once appeared on a radio talk show where interviewer had scheduled Quigley to debate with them over the phone.
Quigley immediately denied that he had written the sensational material that Abraham and Allen had attributed to him.
As soon as Abraham read one of the denied passages over the air, reading directly from Quigley’s book, Quigley hung up.
It seems clear in retrospect that Quigley never expected the book to become the source of ammunition for the conservatives, nor did Macmillan.
Whatever their motives for allowing him access to documentary material (which he claimed that they had),'® they later changed their minds about the wisdom of this.
Or perhaps they never expected him to write a book using their materials.
After all, he had never published anything controversial before, and it was late in his academic career.
The sender said that he had been a friend of Quigley’s, and that at the end of his life, Quigley had concluded that the people he had dealt with in the book were not really public benefactors, as he had believed when he wrote it.
According to the anonymous writer, Quigley had come to think of them in the same way that Allen did, and that Quigley had been very fearful of reprisals toward the end of his life.
It is one of those exceedingly rare books which is simultaneously seminal and seemingly definitive—not just a path-breaker, but a four-lane highway.
It is a standing testimony to the failure of all previous certified Establishment scholars to take seriously the role of conspiracies in European history.
Furthermore, while Quigley almost never provided footnotes (though there are a lot of them in Anglo-American Establishment), Billington buries the reader in footnotes, in more languages than any of us care to learn, and from more obscure books and scholarly journals than any of us care to know about.
He does not discuss events after 1917, nor does he provide much material that would link today’s Establishment manipulators to revolutionary movements.
Billington had previously been a Harvard and Princeton history professor, and is a C.R.R. member.
They still remember Quigley, whose book discussed the Establishment groups that have financed such revolutionary groups, and that have used and misused portions of this revolutionary ideology to further their own ends.
Billington did not write a Quigley-type book, but it turned out to be a spectacular account of the organizational roots of modern revolutionism.
What is still needed is a comprehensively researched fusion of these two approaches which demonstrates the existence of a continuing alliance of the revolutionary underground and the Establishment.
He does not pursue the topic, but his book begins with the most important of all these alliances historically, the alliance between alienated segments of the French nobility (especially the King’s cousin, Philip of Orléans) and the perverts of the Parisian underground.
Philip gave them legal and geographical sanctuary and a forum for their ideas in the gigantic garden spot in central Paris, which he controlled, the Palais-Royal.
Nevertheless, he makes it clear that the Parisian mob was the tool of this alliance, not an independent force in the coming of the French Revolution.
Justifying Surrender Nevertheless, sensible Americans and sensible Soviet leaders both know that the United States Constitution cannot presently be reconciled with the Gulag Archipelago.
Slave labor camps were not part of the Founding Fathers’ original program.
But if men are really unified ethically , then the two social orders involved, the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R., cannot in principle be divided.
It is only “surface” differences, meaning historical differences, that at present divide the two social orders.
These differences will fade away someday, if we can just remain patient.
Slave labor is basic the Soviet economy, and terror is basic to the Soviet political system.
Thus, they are not about to change their opinions for the sake of some overall unity with the capitalist West.
All three approaches have been used by “conspirators of manipulation,” for at least a century.
Destroying the Will to Resist There is one way that you can promote convergence without changing constitutions or other pieces of paper.
You destroy the United States military by creating a devilish strategy called Mutually Assured Destruction , a program imposed on the military by Robert McNamara in the early 1960’s.
Instead of protecting American citizens, you remove all anti-missile defenses, leaving your cities wide-open targets.
They built a sophisticated antimissile defense system in violation of the A.B.M. treaty.
Then they intensified their financing of guerilla wars against Western and neutral nations.
Meanwhile, back in America’s real strategy centers, you then humiliate the military by getting involved in a no-win war in Vietnam.
Then you bankrupt American taxpayers by pouring money into fixed site MX and Minuteman III missiles, instead of into a high-technology, space-based defense program , coupled with low-cost, “low-intensity” guerilla278 Call It Conspiracy type warfare teams to be sent quietly abroad to help foment revolution against Soviet satellite nations, and to help train counter-guerilla units for our allies.
When this MAD defense strategy “somehow” fails to stop the Soviet build-up, you then create the Committee on the Present Danger, and staff it overwhelmingly with your people.
One reason why you do this is that if the money should happen to be appropriated by Congress, it winds up in the bank accounts of such defense companies as Bechtel, which employed George Schultz, Caspar Weinberger, etc., before their present employment opportunities materialized.
Again, you don’t recommend High Frontier’s spacebased defense, since it probably would work, and it is relatively cheap, and you don’t recommend low-intensity warfare, which is also cheap.
Then you wait for Congress to refuse to spend the trillions needed to catch up with the Soviets.
About a decade later , you can then come to the voters and say, “See, it’s your fault.
My old professor of foreign relations back in 1960 sang the praises of Paul Nitze, the youthful millionaireturned-statesman.
On November 15, 1984, The Ethics and Public Policy Center of Washington, D.C. sponsored a fund-raising dinner.
They sent me a fancy, pseudo-engraved invitation to a $150 a plate dinner, in honor of Mr Nitze.
The Chairman of the Sponsoring Committee was C Douglas Dillon , who served as Kennedy’s Secretary of the Treasury.
Saul Bellow, Zbigniew Brzezinski, William Bundy, Jimmy Carter, Gerald Ford, John J McCloy, Robert S McNamara, Edmund Muskie, Richard Nixon, Robert E Osgood , and Cyrus Vance.
And, of course, our old friend, Henry the K There were a few good souls on the list, but not many.
He is always happy to accept your tax-deductible checks, however, you Right Wing extremist, you.
The inmates are getting restless — and the inmates still have the vote.
The New World Order keeps slipping away, just as it seems to be within their grasp.
If you were a manipulating elitist, it would almost make you believe that someone even more powerful than David Rockefeller, and even smarter than combined brilliance of Henry Kissinger and Zbigniew Brzezinski, is really in charge.
But you’re busy writing a conference paper suggesting the need to license and centrally plan all free world computer software over the next fifteen years, so you stop thinking such thoughts.
I am tempted to compare the two kinds of conspiracies with two kinds of droppings that you might stumble into when walking through a barn.
But the comparison would not convey the sinister nature of the problem.
Most of us who came into the conservative movement prior to 1964 came in as anti-Communists.
Along about the time Goldwater got sandbagged by the Eastern Republican Establishment , a shift took place in the thinking of many conservatives.
We can see it retrospectively in the shift of focus in American Opinion, the John Birch Society’s magazine.
It went from anti-Communism to anti-conspiracy Robert Welch’s book, More Stately Mansions , announced this shift in focus.
In 1967, Welch republished John Robison’s 1798 exposé of the Illumunati, Proofs of a Conspiracy.
This shift from anti-Communism to anti-conspiracy took place in numerous conservative groups.
In a very real sense, it constituted a shift in conservatives climate of opinion.
Simultaneously, William F Buckley Jr.’s magazine, National Review, began to fade as the journal of American conservative opinion.
Buckley’s support in 1976 of the Panama Canal “giveaway” — meaning the payaway of the American Canal in Panama — sealed his fate.
He started writing spy novels after that, and books about sailing, activities for which he is far better equipped than directing American conservative opinion.
There was a tendency in the late 1960’s and 1970’s for conspiratorialists to argue that Communism is simply one branch of a single conspiracy, which the manipulators really control.
They sold it high technology tools for making weapons, they sold it wheat, they loaned it and its satellites money at below-market interest rates, and yet this ungrateful beast is still threatening to conquer the world and slaughter millions of innocent victims.
Even worse, in their view, it might even default on its loans to private Western banks.
Their banks are very nearly broke, unless the Federal Reserve System creates “soft” dollars to bail them out.
Without the dealdoing conspirators, the Gulag conspirators could not function.
The problem is, the former just can’t learn from history, and the Communists know it.
The manipulators are paralyzed by their own ideology, namely, that there is no permanent ideology, no truly antagonistic first principles.
While they rule the affairs of the West, those of us who are under them cannot mount a sustained resistance to international Communism.
Thus, the West needs to get rid of the manipulators before we will ever get rid of the Communists.
It would be far less devastating for Western Civilization, and far more productive for our lifestyles, if we do it ourselves.
The Climate of Opinion The manipulators are in trouble—the worst trouble they have been in since 1913.
The seventy-year romance between the American voter and big government is turning into a series of lovers’ quarrels.
While the voters still want the government to protect them, and they still want the rich to pay “their fair share,” there is a growing realization that the federal governmernt is bankrupt —economically, intellectually, and above all, morally.
The rise of the neo-conservative movement since 1965 is one indication of this shift.
Midge Decter is the wife of Norman Podhoretz, the editor of the highly literate and increasingly conservative magazine, Commentary.
I know of no other comparably stupendous year of editing in book publishing history.
All over the landscape these days, intellectuals are singing the praises of decentralization.
The manipulators are trying to join in the song fest, but it’s like dressing a Russian dancing bear in ballet shoes and calling it the Bolshoi’s prima ballerina.
I think they are faking it; they still know that they have to have centralized power to maintain their power.
But if they are forced to decentralize, they want to be able to say what and how far.
On the other hand, the shift of public opinion may be so powerful that some of them are actually defecting, especially the younger scholarly types.
They successfully used the pro-government shift in the American climate of opinion after, say, 1880 to further their statist ends.
Now that the public has seen the results of this experiment in government centralization, voters are having second thoughts.
The manipulators are now beginning to swim upstream intellectually, the way conservatives were forced to swim for three or four generations.
Intellectually speaking, they resemble Tip O’ Neill more than they resemble Mark Spitz.
They are desperately worried about the growing possibility of finding themselves up liberty creek without a paddle.
Because they are opportunists by conviction and windtesters by training.
The conservatives, especially the neoconservatives, may not be offering consistent, free market, Constitutional solutions in many instances, but that is not the issue.
As the public, through new intellectual leadership, catches on, the power base of the conspirators will be threatened.
After all, these are the people who, after seventy years, finally got their very own hand-picked man to be President of the United States, and it turned out to be grinning Jimmy, with his beer-loving brother (a paid Libyan agent), his evangelist sister (a pornographer’s spiritual counsellor)—the President who produced simultaneously the worst foreign policy record in decades (including Salt II, which even the liberal, Democrat-controlled Senate refused to sign), and the most inflationary economic policy in the twentieth century.
In short, Jimmy Carter was visibly the least competent President in United States history.
These include the Persian gulf and southern Africa, as well as the Caribbean and the Panama Canal.
They will continue to pressure the United States to abandon a spacebased defense system.
And step by step, the Soviet empire will grow too big to govern, even by means of terror, and too complex to finance, even by means of Western loans and stolen Western property.
The Establishment conspirators will do their best to keep people calm with respect to the solvency of the big banks, and keep them worried about the solvency of the economy in general.
We can expect to see a steady loss of confidence on the part of the public concerning political and economic leaders.
We can also expect to see the imposition of emergency economic controls as the economy unravels.
The dollar will eventually tumble, throwing the world trading economy into a crisis.
If voters can be frightened into allowing a Constitutional convention or similar event, the Establishment will shove a new Constitution down our throats.
Jf we can successfully implement a two-part program of reconstruction, then this shift in psychology will destroy the prevailing conspiracy.
The anti-utopias of George Orwell and Aldous Huxley will at last be imposed.
What we also need is a will to remove those from power over us who do not possess the will to resist, and whose very “let’s make a deal” philosophy prevents them from ever resisting a truly dedicated force.
The next step is a program of education and mobilization—a morally grounded campaign — from the bottom up, to remove those above us who believe in a bottom-down control over society.
It demonstrates that it is not “impersonal forces” that control the affairs of men; it is the responses of specific men to specific environments in specific historical periods.
Second, it is useful as an introduction to the history of conspiratorial organizations in twentieth-century history.
Members of these groups know each other and co-operate with each other for at least limited ends, some of the time.
Furthermore, the victims of these co-operative efforts are not supposed to know what is happening to them, or why.
Third, it is useful as an antidote to those who have focused on Communism as the only form of conspiracy.
Fourth, the book opens up the possibility for effective counter-action.
If secrecy is basic to conspiratorial actions, then exposure is one effective tactic to be used against the conspirators.
We are no longer safe on the streets, precisely because the resources of the State have been misdirected into salvationary projects.
Lyndon Johnson’s use of Graham Wallas’ ghastly phrase, “the Great Society,” illustrates the lure of political messianism.
Raw for taxpayers, entrepreneurs, and freedom-lovers; beneficial for the manipulators.
But they cannot live without the grants of State power that secure them from the competitive market economy — from the nipping at their heels by brighter, more innovative, and leaner competitors.
It is a wasted effort if we cut off the head of any conspiracy, but leave available to their replacements the raw power of the State, especially the centralized State.
Like the hydra-headed monster of Greek mythology, for every head cut off, two more will spring up from the stump.
The searing sword of economic liberty must be used to cauterize the monster’s open wound and seal it.
The Question of Faith The second step after self-education also primarily internal, though partially institutional.
It is our acceptance of the principle that ethics is more fundamental than power, that the good guys win in the end.
Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.
Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.
Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little.
If you are not building in terms of this foundation, then the highly useful tool that this book really is will do you precious little good.
Larry Abraham offers us a shovel by which to bury the plans of evil men.
The will to dominion is the fourth—not the quest for power apart from ethical law, but the quest for authority by means of ethical action.
This four-stage program, above all else, is what the conspirators fear, and cannot deal with successfully.
Even if we personally do not win in our lifetimes, our successors who organize in terms of our principles will win.
Now is not the time for caution; the stakes are too high, and it is too late in the conflict.
The most important book which undermined the academic world’s self-confidence in its own neutrality was Thomas Kuhn’s Structure of Scientific Revolutions (2nd ed.
Quoted in John Robison, Proofs of a Conspiracy ; reprinted by Western Islands, Boston, 1967, 112.
Lest readers be skeptical, be it noted that the Rockefeller Foundation in 1947 appropriated over $100,000 to produce a history of the United States’ entry into World War II which would counter any “revisionist” histories that might argue that we were tricked into war by the Roosevelt Administration, the way several highly successful academic studies of World War I demonstrated in the 1920’s and 1930's.
Major General John Singlaub protested once too often against Jimmy Carter’s announced intention to pull United States troops out of South Korea.
Ironically, it is published by a libertarian publishing house which is neither conservative nor modern liberal.
Robert E Osgood, Ideals and Self-Interest in America’s Foreign Relations , 7.
APPENDICES Appendix I Council on Foreign Relations Officers and Directors as of June 30, 1984 Officers David Rockefeller Peter G Peterson Chairman of the Board Treasurer Winston Lord John Temple Swing President Vice President and Secretary Directors Term expiring 1985 Term expiring 1986 Term expiring 1987 Graham T Allison, Jr.
Abram, Morris B Abramowitz, Morton I Abrams, Elliott Abshire, David M Achilles, Theodore C Adam, Ray C Adams, Ruth Salzman Adamson, David M Adelman, Kenneth L Agee, William M Agnew, Harold M Agronsky, Martin Aho, C Michael Aidinoff, M Bernard Ajami, Fouad Akins, James E Albert, Judith D Albright, Archie E Albright, Madeleine Alderman, Michael H Aldrich, George H Alexander, Robert J Alibrandi, Joseph F Allan, F Aley Allbritton, Joe L Allen, John R Membership Roster as of June 30, 1984 Allen, Lew, Jr.
Atkins, Charles Agee Attwood, William Auspitz, Josiah Lee Ayers, H Brandt Babbitt, Bruce Bacot, J Carter Bader, William B Baeza, Mario L Bailey, Charles W Baird, Charles F Baird, Zée E Baker, Howard H., Jr.
Barger, Thomas C Barghoorn, Frederick C Barker, Robert R Barkin, Solomon Barlow, William E Barnathan, Joyce Barnds, William J Barnes, Harry G., Jr.
Bares, Michael D Barnet, Richard J Barnett, A Doak Barnett, Frank R Barnett, Robert W Barr, Thomas D Barrand, Harry P., Jr.
Call It Conspiracy Bellamy, Carol Benbow, Terence H Bennet, Douglas J., Jr.
Benson, Lucy Wilson Beplat, Tristan E Berger, Marilyn Berger, Suzanne Bergold, Harry E., Jr.
Bergsten, C Fred Bernstein, Robert L Berry, Sidney B Bessie, Simon Michael Betts, Richard K Beyer, John C Bialer, Seweryn Bialkin, Kenneth J Bienen, Henry S Bierley, John C Bierwirth, John C Billington, James H Binger, James H Bingham, Jonathan B Birk, Roger E Birkelund, John P Birnbaum, Eugene A Bisnow, Mark C Bissell, Richard E Bissell, Richard M., Jr.
Brown, Seyom Brown, Walter H Browne, Robert S Bryant, Ralph C Brzezinski, Zbigniew Buchman, Mark E Buckley, William F., Jr.
Burgess, Carter L Burke, James E Bums, Arthur FE Burns, Patrick Owen Burt, Richard R Bush-Brown, Albert Bush, Donald F Bushner, Rolland Bussey, Donald S Butcher, Goler Teal Butcher, Willard C Butler, George Lee Butler, Samuel C Butler, William J Buttenwieser, Benjamin J Bymes, Robert F Byrom, Fletcher C Cabot, Louis W Cabot, Thomas D Cabranes, José A Cahn, Anne H Calder, Alexander, Jr.
Membership Roster Campbell, Glenn Campbell, John C Campbell, Thomas J Camps, Miriam Canal, Carlos M., Jr.
Canfield, Cass Canfield, Franklin O Cannon, James M Carey, Hugh L Carey, John Carey, William D Carlson, Robert J Carlucci, Frank C Carmichael, William D Camesale, Albert Carrington, Walter C Carroll, J Speed Carroll, Mitchell B Carson, C W., Jr.
Carswell, Robert Carter, Ashton B Carter, Barry E Carter, Edward William Carter, Hodding, III Carter, Jimmy Carter, Robert L Carter, William D Cary, Frank T Casey, William J Castillo, Leonel J Cater, Douglass Cater, John T Cates, John M., Jr.
Cline, Ray S Cloherty, Patricia M Clurman, Richard M Coffey, Joseph Irving Cohen, Barbara Cohen, Benjamin J, Cohen, Eliot A Cohen, Jerome Alan Cohen, Jerome B Cohen, Joel E Cohen, Roberta Cohen, Stephen B Cohen, Stephen F, Cohen, William S Colby, William E Coleman, James S Coleman, William T., Jr.
Coles, James Stacy Collado, Emilio G Collingwood, Charles C Combs, Richard E., Jr.
Comstock, Phil Conant, Melvin A Condon, Joseph F Cone, Sydney M., III Conlon, Richard P Connor, John T Connor, John T., Jr.
Coombs, Philip H Coon, Jane Abell Cooney, Joan Ganz Cooper, Charles A Cooper, Chester L Cooper, Richard N Corrigan, Kevin Cott, Suzanne Cotter, William R Cousins, Norman Cowan, L Gray Cowles, Gardner Cowles, John, Jr.
Crane, Winthrop Murray Crassweller, Robert D Crawford, Anne W Crawford, John F Creel, Dana S Cremin, Lawrence A Crittenden, Ann Crocker, Chester A Crook, William H Cross, June V Cross, Sam Y Crow, Trammell Crowe, William J., Jr.
Crystal, Lester M Culver, John C Cummings, Robert L Cummiskey, Frank J Cuomo, Mario M Curtis, Gerald L Cutler, Lloyd N Cutler, Walter L Cutter, W Bowman Cyr, Arthur D Dale, William B Dalley, George A Dallin, Alexander Dalton, James E Dam, Kenneth W Damrosch, Lori F Danforth, William H Daniel, D Ronald Call It Conspiracy Darlington, Charles F Darman, Richard G Davant, James W Davidson, Daniel I Davidson, Ralph K Davidson, Ralph P Davis, John A Davis, Lynn E Davis, Nathaniel Davis, Vincent Davison, Daniel P Davison, W Phillips Dawkins, Peter M Dawson, Horace G., Jr.
Deutch, John M Deutch, Michael J Devine, C Robert Devine, Thomas J DeVries, Henry P De Vries, Rimmer DeWind, Adrian W De Windt, E Mandell Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos F Dickson, R Russell, Jr.
Dillon, Douglas Dilworth, J Richardson Dine, Thomas A Dixon, George H Dobriansky, Paula Doherty, William C., Jr.
Dolin, Arnold Dominguez, Jorge I Dominguez, Virginia R Donahue, Donald J Donahue, Thomas R Donaldson, William H Donnell, Ellsworth Donnelly, Harold C Donovan, Hedley Doty, Paul M., Jr.
Dubow, Arthur M DuBrul, Stephen M Duffey, Joseph Duffy, James H Duke, Angier Biddle Dulany, Margaret Duncan, Charles W., Jr.
Duncan, John C Dutton, Frederick G Raoul-Duval, Michael E Eagleburger, Lawrence S Earle, Ralph, II Easum, Donald B Eaton, Leonard J., Jr.
Edgerton, Wallace B Edwards, Howard L Edwards, Robert H Ehrlich, Thomas Eilts, Hermann F Einaudi, Luigi R Einaudi, Mario Einhorn, Jessica P Eliot, Theodore L., Jr.
E) Koury, Jaime A Elliott, Byron K Elliott, Osborn Elliott, Randle Ellis, James R Ellis, Richard H Ellison, Keith P Ellsberg, Daniel Ellsworth, Robert F Embree, Ainslie T Emerson, Alice F Enders, Thomas Ostrom Eng, Gordon Enthoven, Alain Epstein, Jason Epstein, Joshua M Erb, Guy F Erb, Richard D Erbsen Claude E Erburu, Robert F Estabrook, Robert H Etzioni, Amitai Evans, John C Evans, John K, Ewing, William, Jr.
Foley, Thomas S Foote, Edward T,, II Ford, Gerald R Forrestal, Michael V Foster, William C Fousek, Peter Fowler, Henry H Fox, Donald T Fox, Joseph C Fox, William T, R Franck, Thomas M Francke, Albert, III Frank, Charles R., Jr.
Gardner, Richard N, Garment, Leonard Garment, Suzanne Garrels, Anne Garretson, Albert H Garrison, Lloyd K Garrison, Mark J ~ Gart, Murray J Garten, Jeffrey E Garthoff, Raymond L Garvin, Clifton C., Jr.
Gilbert, S Parker Gillespie, S Hazard Gilmore, Kenneth O Gilpatric, Roswell L Gilpin, Kenneth N., III Gilpin, Robert Ginsburg, David Ginsburg, Ruth Bader Ginsburgh, Robert N Gleysteen, Peter Gleysteen, William H., Jr.
Globerman, Norma Godchaux, Frank A., III Goekjian, Samuel V Goheen, Robert F Goizueta, Roberto C Goldberg, Arthur J Goldberger, Marvin L Golden, James R Golden, William T Goldin, Harrison J Goldman, Guido Goldman, Marshall I Goldman, Merle Goldmark, Peter C., Jr.
Graff, Robert D Graham, Bob Graham, Katharine Graham, William R Grant, James P Grant, Stephen A Granville, Maurice F Graubard, Stephen R Gray, Hanna Holborn Gray, Harry J Green, Carl J Greenberg, Maurice R Greenberg, Sanford D Greene, James C Greene, James R Greene, Joseph N., Jr.
Greene, Margaret L Greenfield, James L Greenfield, Meg Greenhill, Robert F, Greenough, William C Greenspan, Alan Greenwald, Joseph A Greenwood, Ted Gregorian, Vartan Grenier, Richard Griffin, Brian C Griffith, Thomas Griffith, William E Grohman, Robert T Grose, Peter B Gross, Ernest A Gross, Patrick W Groves, Ray J Grunwald, Henry A Guillion, Edmund A Gulliver, Adelaide Cromwell Gunn, Hartford N., Jr.
Gutfreund, John H Guthman, Edwin O Gwertzman, Bernard M Gwin, Catherine H Haas, Peter E Haas, Robert D Haass, Richard N Habib, Philip C Haig, Alexander M., Jr.
Halperin, Morton H Halsted, Thomas A Hamburg, David A Hamilton, Ann O Hamilton, Charles V Hamilton, Edward K Hamilton, Michael P Hancock, Judith L Hansen, Carol Rae Hansen, Roger D Hanson, Robert A Hanson, Thor Harari, Maurice Harding, Harry Hardt, John P Hare, Raymond A Hargrove, John Lawrence Harpel, James W Harper, Conrad K Harper, Paul C,, Jr.
Harriman, W Averell Harris, Irving B Harris, Joseph E Harris, Patricia Roberts Harrison, Selig S Harsch, Joseph C Hart, Augustin S Hart, Parker T Hartley, Fred L Hartman, Arthur A Hartnack, Carl E Harvin, William C Haskell, John H F, Jr.
Haskins, Caryl P Hauser, Rita E Hauser, William L Hauspurg, Arthur Haviland, H Field, Jr.
Hawkins, Ashton Hayes, Alfred Hayes, Samuel P Haynes, Fred Haynes, Ulric St.
Hayward, Thomas B Haywood, Oliver G Hazard, John N, Healy, Harold H., Jr.
Membership Roster Heck, Charles B Heckscher, August Hehir, J Bryan Heifetz, Elaine F Heimann, John G Heintzen, Harry L Heinz, H J., Il Helander, Robert C Heidring, Frederick Hellman, F Warren Heims, Christine M Helms, Richard Henderson, James B Henderson, Lawrence J., Jr.
Henderson, Loy W Henkin, Louis Hennessy, John M Henry, John B., II Herling, John Herskovits, Jean Herter, Christian A., Jr.
Hertzberg, Arthur Herzfeld, Charles M Herzog, Paul M Herzstein, Robert E Hesburgh, Theodore M Hess, John B Hester, James M Hewitt, William A Hewlett, Sylvia Ann Heyns, Roger W Higgins, Robert F Highet, Keith Hillenbrand, Martin J Hilsman, Roger Hinerfeld, Ruth J Hines, Gerald D Hinshaw, Randall Hinton, Deane R Hirschman, Albert O Hoagland, Jim Hoch, Frank W Hodgson, James D Hodin, Michael W Hoeber, Amoretta M Hoehn, William E., Jr.
Hoepli, Nancy L Hoffman, Michael L Hoffmann, Stanley Hoge, James Hoguet, George R Hoguet, Robert L Hohenberg, John Holbrooke, Richard C Holcomb, M Staser Holland, Jerome H Holland, Robert C Hollick, Ann L Holloway, Anne F Holmes, Allen C Holmes, H Allen Holst, Willem Holt, Pat M Hooks, Benjamin L Hoopes, Townsend W Hoover, Herbert W., Jr.
Horan, John J Horelick, Amold L Hormats, Robert D Horn, Garfield H Hom, Karen N Horn, Sally K Horner, Matina S Horowitz, Irving Louis Horton, Alan W Horton, Frank B., III Hosmer, Bradley C Hoston, Germaine A Hottelet, Richard C Houghton, Amory, Jr.
Houghton, James R House, Karen Elliott Hovey, Graham Hovey, J Allan, Jr.
Howard, John B Howard, John R Howell, John I Hoyt, Mont P Hudson, Manley O., Jr.
Huebner, Lee W Huffington, Roy M Hufstedler, Shirley M Huggins, Nathan I Hughes, John Hughes, Thomas L Huglin, Henry C Huizenga, John W Hummel, Arthur W., Jr.
Intriligator, Michael D Ireland, R L., Ul Irwin, John N., II Irwin, John N., III Irwin, Wallace, Jr.
Isaacs, Norman E Isaacson, Walter Iselin, John Jay Isenberg, Steven L Isham, Christopher Issawi, Charles Istel, Yves-André Izlar, William H., Jr.
Janklow, Morton L Jansen, Marius B Jastrow, Robert Javits, Jacob K Jenson, John W Jervis, Robert L Jessup, Alpheus W Jessup, Philip C., Jr.
Johnson, Willard R Jones, David C Jones, Peter T Jones, Sidney R Jones, Thomas V Jordan, Amos A Jordan, Vernon E., Jr.
Katzenstein, Peter J Kaufman, Henry Kaufmann, William W Kaysen, Carol Kearns, David T Keatley, Anne Call It Conspiracy Keenan, Edward L Keeny, Spurgeon M., Jr.
Kelly, George Armstrong Kelman, Herbert C Kemp, Geoffrey Kemoner, Maximilian W Kenen, Peter B Keniston, Kenneth Kennan, Christopher J Kennan, Elizabeth T Kennan, George F Kennedy, David M Kennedy, Donald Kennedy, Randall L Kenney, F Donald Keohane, Nannerl O Keohane, Robert O Keppel, Francis Kern, Harry F Kester, John G Ketelson, James L Keydel, John F Khuni, Nicola N Kieschnick, W F Kilson, Martin King, James E King, John A., Jr.
Landau, George W Landry, Lionel Langer, Paul F Lansner, Kermit LaPalombara, Joseph Lapham, Lewis H Lapidus, Gail Laqueur, Walter Larrabee, F Stephen Lary, Hal B Lauinger, Philip C., Jr.
Laukhuff, Perry Laventhol, David A Lazarus, Ralph Lazarus, Steven Le Blond, Richard K., 11 Leddy, John M Lederberg, Joshua Lederer, Ivo John Lee, Emest S Lee, James E Lee, John M Lee, William L Leebaert, Derek Lefever, Ernest W Leghorn, Richard S Legvold, Robert H Lehman, John R Lehman, Orin Lehrer, Jim Lehrman, Hal Leich, John Foster Leigh, Monroe Leland, Marc E LeMelle, Tilden J LeMelle, Wilbert J Lemnitzer, Lyman L LeMoyne, James G Leonard, James F Leonard, James G Leonhard, William E Leslie, John E Le Sueur, Lawrence E Levine, Irving R Levitas, Mitchel Levy, Marion J., Jr.
Membership Roster Lipson, Leon Lissakers, Karin M Little, David Livingston, Robert Gerald Locke, Edwin A., Jr.
Lockwood, John E Lodal, Jan M Lodge, George C Loeb, Frances Lehman Loeb, John L Loeb, Marshall Loft, George Logan, Francis D Long, Franklin A Long, T Dixon Loomis, Henry Loos, A William Lord, Charles Edwin Lord, Winston Love, Ben F Lovelace, Jon B Lovestone, Jay Low, Stephen Lowenfeld, Andreas F Lowerfeld, David Lowenstein, James G Lowenthal, Abraham F Loy, Frank E Lozano, Ignacio E., Jr.
Lubar, Robert A Lubman, Stanley B Lucas, C Payne Luce, Charles F Luce, Clare Boothe Luckey, E Hugh Ludt, Rudolph E Luers, William H Luke, David L., III Lupfer, Timothy T Lustick, Ian S Luter, Yvonne Luttwak, Edward N Lyford, Joseph P Lyman, Richard W Lynch, Edward S Lynn, James T Lynn, Laurence E., Jr.
McKee, Katharine W McKeever, Porter McKinley, John K McKinney, Robert M McLaughlin, David T McLean, Sheila Avrin McLin, Jon B McNamara, Robert S McNeill, Robert L McPherson, Harry C., Jr.
McQuade, Lawrence C MacArthur, Douglas, I MacCormack, Charles F MacDonald, Gordon J MacEachron, David W MacGregor, Ian K MacLaury, Bruce K Macomber, John D Macomber, William B Macy, Robert M., Jr.
Marmor, Theodore R Marous, John C Marron, Donald B, Marshak, Robert E., Marshall, Anthony D Marshall, C Burton Martin, Edwin M Martin, Malcolm W Martin, William F Martin, William McC., Jr.
Mason, Elvis L Massie, Suzanne Masten, John E Mathews, Jessica Tuchman Mathews, Michael S Mathias, Charles McC., Jr.
Matteson, William B Maw, Carlyle E May, Clifford D May, Ernest R Mayer, Gerald M., Jr.
Mayer, Lawrence A Maynard, Robert C Maynes, Charles William Mead, Dana G, Meadows, Dennis L Meagher, Robert F Mehta, Ved Meister, Irene W Melloan, George R Melville, Richard A Mendlovitz, Saul H Menke, John R Merow, John E Merritt, Jack N Meselson, Matthew Call It Conspiracy Messner, William C.., Jr.
Metcalf, George R Mettler, Ruben F Meyer, Charles Q Meyer, Cord Meyer, Edward C Meyer, John R Meyer, Karl E Meyerson, Adam Meyerson, Martin Mickelson, Sig Middleton, Drew Midgley, Elizabeth Millard, Mark J Miller, Charles D Miller, Franklin C Miller, Frederic A Miller, G William Miller, J Irwin Miller, Judith Miller, Judith A Miller, Paul L Miller, William G Miller, William J Millington, John A Mills, Bradford Mladek, Jan V, Moe, Sherwood G, Moller, John V., Jr.
Mondale, Walter F Montgomery, Parker G Montgomery, Philip O’Bryan, III Moody, William S Moore, John Norton Moore, Jonathan Moore, Maurice T Moore, Paul, Jr.
Moose, Richard M Moran, Theodore H Morgan, Cecil Morgan, Lee L Morgan, Thomas E Morgenthau, Lucinda L Franks Morley, Jmes William Morrell, Gene P Morris, Grinnell Morris, Max K Morrisett, Lloyd N Morse, David A, Morse, Edward L Morse, F Bradford Morse, Kenneth P Moses, Alfred H Moss, Ambler H., Jr.
Moyers, Bill D Moynihan, Daniel P Mroz, John E Mujal-Leon, Eusebio M Mulford, David C Mulholland, William D Muller, Henry Muller, Steven Munger, Edwin S Munroe, George B Munroe, Vernon, Jr.
Munyan, Winthrop R Murphy, Grayson M-P Murray, Allen E, Murray, Douglas P Muse, Martha Twitchell Muskie, Edmund S N Nachmanoff, Arnold Nacht, Michael L Nagorski, Zygmunt, Jr.
Nason, John W Nathan, James A Nathan, Robert R Natt, Ted M Nau, Henry R Neal, Alfred C Negroponte, John D, Nelson, Clifford C Nelson, Jack Nelson, Merlin E Neustadt, Richard E Newberg, Paula R Newburg, André W G Newell, Barbara W Newhouse, John Newman, Richard T Newsom, David D Newton, Quigg, Jr.
Parker, Daniel Parker, Maynard Parris, Mark Robert Parsky, Gerald L Passin, Herbert Patrick, Hugh T Patterson, Ellmore C Patterson, Gardner Patterson, Hugh B., Jr.
Patterson, Torkel L Pauker, Guy J Paul, Roland A Payne, Samuel B Peacock, Philip Dexter.
Peterson, Peter G Peterson, Rudolph A Petree, Richard W Petree, Richard W., Jr.
Pfeiffer, Steven B Phillips, Christopher H Phillips, Edward E Phillips, John G Phillips, Russell A., Jr.
Phlieger, Herman Picker, Harvey Picker, Jean Pickering, Thomas R Piel, Gerard Pierce, Kerry K Pierce, William C Piercy, George T Pierotti, Roland Pierre, Andrew J Pifer, Alan Pigott, Charles M Pilliod, Charles J., Jr.
Plank, John N Platig, E Raymond Platt, Alan A Platt, Jonas M Platt, Nicholas Platten, Donald C Plimpton, Calvin H Podhoretz, Norman Polk, William R Pollack, Gerald A Polsby, Nelson W Poor, J Sheppard Portes, Richard D Posen, Barry R Posner, Michael H Posvar, Wesley W Potter, Robert S Power, Philip H Power, Sarah Goddard Power, Thomas F., Jr.
Powers, Joshua B Powers, Thomas Moore Pranger, Robert J Pratt, Edmund T., Jr.
Price, Robert Puckett, Allen E Pugh, Richard C Pulitzer, Michael E Purcell, Susan Kaufman Pursley, Robert E Pusey, Nathan M Pustay, John S Putignano, Patrick A Putnam, George E., Jr.
Putnam, Robert D Pye, Lucian W, Pyle, Cassandra A | ers Quandt, William B Quester, George H Quigg, Philip W Quigley, Leonard V R Rabb, Maxwell M Rabi, Isidor 1.
Rabinowitch, Victor Radway, Laurence I Ragone, David V Ramo, Simon Ramsey, Douglas K Randolph, R Sean Ranis, Gustav Rashish, Myer Rather, Dan Rathjens, George W Rauch, Rudolph S., III Ravenal, Earl C Ravenholt, Albert Ravitch, Richard Rawson, Merle R Raymond, Jack Read, Benjamin H Reed, J V., Jr.
Renfrew, Charles B Resor, Stanley R Reston, James B Revelle, Roger Rey, Nicholas A Reynolds, Lloyd G Rhinelander, John B Rhinesmith, Stephen H Rhodes, John B., Jr.
Rhodes, William R Ribicoff, Abraham A Rice, Condoleezza Rice, Donald B Rice, Emmett J Rice, Joseph A Rich, John H Jr.
Richard, Eric L Richardson, David B Richardson, Elliot L Richardson, John, Jr.
Richardson, Richard W Richardson, William R Ridgway, Rozanne L Rielly, John E Ries, Hans A Riesel, Victor Ripley, S Dillon, II Rivers, Richard R Rivkin, Donald H Rivlin, Alice M Roberts, Chalmers M Roberts, Walter Orr Robinson, Charles W Robinson, James D., III Robinson, Marshall A Robinson, Michael D Robinson, Randal] Robison, Olin C Roche, John P Rockefeller, David Rockefeller, David, Jr.
Rockefeller, John D., IV Rockefeller, Rodman C Rodman, Peter W Rodriguez, Vincent A Roett, Riordan Roff, J Hugh, Jr.
Rogers, Bernard W Rogers, David E Rogers, Nat S Rogers, William D Rogers, William P Rogovin, Mitchell Rohatyn, Felix G Rohlen, Thomas P Romero-Barcelé, Carlos Roney, John H Roosa, Robert V Roosa, Ruth AmEnde Root, Oren Rosber, Carl G, Rose, Danie] Rose, Elihu Rose, Frederick P Rosecrance, Richard Rosen, Arthur H Rosen, Jane K Rosenblith, Walter A Rosenblum, Mort Rosenfeld, Robert A Rosenfeld, Stephen S Rosengarten, Adolph G., Jr.
Rosenthal, Jack Rosenwald, William Rosenzweig, Robert M Rosin, Axel G, Rosovsky, Henry Ross, Roger Ross, Thomas B Rosso, David J Rostow, Eugene V Rostow, Walt W Rotberg, Robert I Roth, Richard H Roth, William M Roth, William V., Jr.
Rush, Barney Rush, Kenneth Rusk, Dean Russell, Harvey C Russell, T W., Jr.
Rustow, Dankwart A Ruthberg, Miles N Ruttan, Vernon W Ryan, Hewson A Ryan, John T., Jr.
Ryan, John T., III S Sachs, Jeffrey D Safran, Nadav Sage, Mildred D Said, Edward Salisbury, Harrison E Salk, Jonas Salomon, Richard E Salomon, William R Saltzman, Charles E Salzman, Herbert Sample, Steven B Samuel, Howard D Samuels, Michael A Samuels, Nathaniel Sanders, Edward G Sanford, Charles S., Jr.
Sanford, Terry Saul, Ralph S Saunders, Harold H Savage, Frank Sawhill, John C Sawyer, Diane Sawyer, John E Sawyler, Stephen K Scalapino, Robert A Scali, John A Schacht, Henry B Schachter, Oscar Schaetzel, J Robert Schafer, John H Schallert, Edwin G Schaufele, William E., Jr.
Schiff, Frank W Schiff, John M Schilling, Warner R Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr.
R Schwab, Susan C Schwab, William B Schwartz, David N Schwartz, Harry Schwebel, Stephen M Sciolino, Elaine F Scott, Harold B Scott, Stuart N Scoville, Herbert, Jr.
Scowcroft, Brent Scranton, William W Scrimshaw, Nevin S Seaborg, Glenn T Seabury, Paul Seagrave, Norman P Seamans, Robert C., Jr.
Sebenius, James K Segal, Sheldon J Segal, Susan L Seibold, Frederick C., Jr.
Seidman, Herta Lande Seigenthaler, John L Seigle, John W Seitz, Frederick Selin, Ivan Semple, Robert B., Jr.
Sherry, George L Sherwood, Richard E Shipley, Walter V Shirer, William L Shoemaker, Alvin V Shoemaker, Don Shriver, Sargent, Jr.
Shull, Thomas C Shulman, Colette Shulman, Marshall D Shultz, George P Shute, Benjamin R Sick, Gary G Sifton, Elisabeth Sigal, Leon V Sigmund, Paul E Sihler, William W Silberman, Laurence H Silk, Leonard S Silvers, Robert B Simes, Dimitri K Simmons, Adele S Simmons, Richard S Simon, William E Simons, Howard Sims, Albert G Sisco, Joseph J Skidmore, Thomas E Skinner, David E Skinner, Elliott P Skolnikoff, Eugene B Slater, Joseph E Slawson, John Slawson, Paul S Sloane, Anne B Slocombe, Walter B Slocum, John J Sloss, Leon Smart, S Bruce, Jr.
Solomon, Adam Solomon, Anthony M Solomon, Richard H Solomon, Robert Sonne, Christian R Sonnenfeldt, Helmut Sonnenfeldt, Richard W Sorensen, Gillian Martin Sorensen, Theodore C Soubry, Emile E Southard, Frank A., Jr.
Sovern, Michael I Spain, James W Spang, Kenneth M Spector, Phillip L Spencer, Edson W Spencer, John H Spencer, William C Spencer, William I Spero, Joan E, Speth, James Gustave Spiers, Ronald I Spiro, Herbert J Spofford, Charles M Sprague, Robert C Squadron, Howard M Stackpole, Stephen H Staley, Eugene Stalson, Helena Stamas, Stephen Stankard, Francis X Stanley, Peter W Stanley, Timothy W Stanton, Frank Stanton, R John, Jr.
Stevenson, John R Stevenson, Ruth Carter Stewart, Donald M Stewart, Patricia Carry Stewart, Ruth Ann Sticht, J Paul Stifel, Laurence D Stilwell, Richard G Stobaugh, Robert B Stoessel, Walter J., Jr.
Stoessinger, John G Stoga, Alan Stone, Jeremy J Stone, Roger D Stone, Shepard Stookey, John Hoyt Stratton, Julius A Straus, Donald B Staus, Jack I Straus, Oscar S Straus, R Peter Straus, Ralph I Straus, Robert K Strauss, Robert S Strauss, Simon D Strausz-Hupé, Robert Strayer, Joseph R Stremlau, John J Stroud, Joe H Styron, Rose Sullivan, Eugene J Sullivan, William.
H Sunderland, Jack B Surrey, Walter Sterling Suslow, Leo A Sutterlin, James S Sutton, Francis X Swank, Emory C Swanson, David H Swearer, Howard R Sweitzer, Brandon W Swenson, Eric P Swing, John Temple Symington, W Stuart Szanton, Peter L T Taber, George M Taft, William H., IV Talbot, Phillips Talbott, Strobe Tanham, George K Tannenwald, Theodore, Jr.
Tanner, Harold Tanter, Raymond Tarnoff, Peter Taubman, William Tavoulareas, William P Taylor, Arthur R Taylor, George E Taylor, Maxwell D Taylor, T James, Jr.
Teeters, Nancy H Teicher, Howard R Teitelbaum, Michael S Tempelsman, Maurice Tennyson, Leonard B Theobald, Thomas C Thoman, G Richard Thomas, Barbara S Thomas, Evan Thomas, Franklin A Thomas, Lee B., Jr.
Thomas, Lewis Thompson, Edward T Thompson, W Scott Thompson, William Pratt Thomson, James C., Jr.
Tillinghast, David R Tillman, Seth P Timothy, Kristen Todaro, Michael P Todman, Terence A Todman, Terence A., Jr.
Tomlinson, Alexander C Tonelson, Alan Topping, Seymour Townsend, Edward Trager, Frank N Train, Harry D., Il Train, Russell E Trainor, Bernard E Trani, Eugene P Travis, Martis B., Jr.
Trowbridge, Alexander B Truman, Edwin M Tucher, H Anton Tuchman, Barbara Tuck, Edward Hallam Tucker, Robert W Tully, Darrow Turkevich, John Turner, Stansfield Tumer, William C Tuthill, John Wills Tweedy, Gordon B Tyrrell, R Emmett, Jr.
Membership Roster Urfer, Richard P Usher, William R Utley, Garrick Uzielli, Giorgio V Vagliano, Alexander M Vaky, Viron P Valdez, Abelardo Lopez Valenta, Jiri Vance, Cyrus R van den Haag, Emest Van Dusen, Michael H Van Oudenaren, John Van Slyck, DeForest Van Viierden, Constant M van Voorst, L Bruce Veit, Lawrence A Veliotes, Nicholas A Vermilye, Peter H Vernon, Raymond Vershbow, Alexander R Vessey, John W., Jr.
Walker, William N Wall, Christopher R Wallace, Martha R Wallich, Christine Wallich, Henry C Walters, Barbara Waltz, Kenneth N Ward, EF Champion Warner, Edward L., III Warmer, Rawleigh, Jr.
Watts, Glenn E Watts, John H Watts, William Way, Alva O Weaver, George L-P Webster, Bethuel M Wedgewood, Ruth N Glushien Wehrle, Leroy S Weidenbaum, Murray L Weiksner, George B., Jr.
Weil, Frank A Weinberg, John L Weinberg, Steven Weinberger, Caspar W Weiner, Myron Weiss, Edith Brown Weiss, S Ariel Weiss, Seymour Welch, Jasper A., Jr.
Wels, Alena Wender, Ira T Wertheim, Mitzi M Wesley, Edwin J Wessell, Nils Y West, Robert LeRoy West, Togo D., Jr.
Wheat, Francis, M Wheeler, John K Wheeler, John P., III Wheeler, Richard W Whipple, Taggart Whitaker, C S., Jr.
Wilcox, Francis O Wilcox, Robert B Wildavsky, Aaron Wilds, Walter W Wiley, Richard A Wiley, W Bradford Wilhelm, Harry E Wilkins, Roger W Will, George F Willey, Fay Williams, Franklin Hall Williams, Harold M Williams, Haydn Williams, James B Williams, Joseph H Williams, Maurice J Williamson, Thomas S., Jr.
Call It Conspiracy Willrich, Mason Wilson, Donald M Wilson, Ernest James, III Wilson, James Q Wilson, John D Wimpfheimer, Jacques D Winder, R Bayly Windmuller, Thomas S Winks, Robin W Winslow, Richard S Winterer, Philip S Wisner, Frank G., II Witunski, Michael Wofford, Harris L Wohlstetter, Albert Wohlstetter, Roberta Wolf, Charles, Jr.
Yudkin, Richard A Zz Zagoria, Donald S Zakheim, Dov S Zarb, Frank G Zartman, I William Zeidenstein, George Zelnick, C Robert Zilkha, Ezra K Zimmerman, Edwin M Zimmerman, William Zimmermann, Warren Zinberg, Dorothy S Zorthian, Barry Zraket, Charles A Zumwalt, E R., Jr.
It is damning evidence of collusion between multinational corporations, banks, media and the United States government.
I believe that when we study this chart carefully, the power and influence of the C.F.R. and T.C. becomes downright frightening.
CFR George M Keller CFR Caria Hills te David Packard bird Charles M Pigott CFR George Weyerhaeuser TC h Warner, Jr CFR William Tavaularaas CEA ewis Branse CFR HowardL.Clark CFR Alan Greenepan CFR George McGhee CFR Lee L Morgan CFATC HerbertSchmertz CFR Eleanor 8.
Hines CFR Jon V Jemes CFA Andrew A Brimmer CFRIC George Weyerhaeuser CFATC Henry Woodbridge, Jr.
CFATC GEORGE BUSH CFA Te VICE PRESIDENT WILLIAM CLARK (non mamben ROBERT McFARLANE CFA Nat SECURITY ADVISER DAVID ROCKEFELLER CFA Tc T TANNENWALD, Jr.
WITH NO APOLOGIES, Senator Barry Goidu Th ld E ON EXECUTIVE EXCHANGE m David Rockefeller CFATC Willard Butcher, Pree, CFR Thamton Bradshaw, CFA John McKinlay, Pres.
F, Buckley, Jr, CFR Morton Abramowitz (Tha terete Richard Brookniser CFR Willama Hewitt CFATC Robert Anderson(Dominican Michael Armaceat (Philips HOUSE & SENATE CFRITC MEMBERS Se Altred Atherten, Jr.
D) © © James A Jones ve N party provides Rookeleller centinuing am {Cube us.
It may be reprintad, and reproduced in newspapers, Newoletiers, books and magazines.
Sia, conra uote Sef |r porated” SER JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF INTELLIGENCE AGENCY JohnD.Wiison CFR 8 Welnberger CFRTC Geny Wickham CFR nk (eancensvausrco.
SEC. of DEFENSE JOMNT STAFF ] Lawrence Korb FR GEN David Jones CFR VADM Thos Hanson CFA MILITARY FELLOWS LG Paut Gorman CFA Calvin.
DEPUTY DIRECTOR CLA Lewis Preston cm al ei bet _ ADDITIONAL MILITARY Jax.
Some are Invited In for “winwer Gast eigle, Sen gfe tha disastrous reauits af foreign and domestic polley tor.
OF CHICAGO new caren 3 CFR CFA feign Service native) oy J.Fred Bucy, Jr.
CFR nak GOL Wolcott EFA BADM GAH Trost GER Ud "" Si ft) Lil a Thomas Theobaig, SFP ‘AE GOL T Eggers MGu.
Welch CFA leproponta CFA IM. crn 1Palmes ROBERT ANDERSON | William Brock.
OF COMMERCE ¥ * REAGAN and CARTER charts. h Reed, Jr. crn CHRYSLER * Analysia of CFR/TC & members ne Akigway CPA Jerome Hoan CER INTERNATIONAL . leting.
Be abadal polnical parties a (he top. dacretary) crn CFR Glann E Watta (President CFATC ¢ Much, much more.
AFL-CIO) and VFW Rasclution #460 ONSULAR AFFAIRS (Amencan Fed of State, County Jerry Wort (President, 2 Johnny Stewart crn i ang Munxcipal Employees) Amencan Fadsration of Stare.
See Also Hiss Chase Manhattan Bank, 36, 37, 38, 40, 41, 97, 98, 103, 104, 107, III-I12, 117, 121, 1§4, 279, 285.
See also Socialism Democrat, 8, 29, 30, 90, 99, 100, 119, 128, 129, 132, 135, 138, 154, I7I, 175, 190, 191, 204, 206.
MOE DITO GOLD sama, Now that you’ve read Call It Conspiracy, you know who many of the top /nsiders are.
But Insiders from John D Rockefeller and Bernard Baruch to Winston Lord and David Rockefeller have also used their powerful positions for more immediate rewards—to protect, defend, and expand their own wealth.
Few Americans have tracked these Jnsiders as long, or understood them as well, as Call It Conspiracy author Larry Abraham.
And every month in his newsletter, Insider Report, he tells you what these movers and shakers are doing ... which industries and investments they favor . . . and which ones are going straight down the tubes.
Insider Report takes you behind the political scenes in Washington, D.C. and other political capitals . . . into the financial power centers of Europe, Asia, and the Middle East . . . penetrates the very core of Wall Street.
This unique monthly tells you what is being planned... by whom... and why.
And most important of all, how you can profit from this exclusive, “insider” knowledge.
Use the coupon below to start your subscription to Insider Report today —and save $50 on your subscription.
Cardno, CE xpress, Signature Name Address City, State, Zip LARRY ABRAHAM Born in 1937, Larry’s first romance with education came in the study of ancient Greece and Roman history.
This interest served as the spark for a curiosity to know “how the world works,” that ultimately led to his co-authoring of None Dare Call It Conspiracy and the writing of Call It Conspiracy.
Larry’s reputation as a public speaker and as a geopolitical analyst along with his business activities have taken him to every corner of the globe.
During the intervening years | went from a young conservative idealist who thought he knew how the world worked, to an investment banker and “deal-doer” who found out first-hand.
In these past fourteen years I have traveled in most regions of the world, sat in board rooms of some of the very banks and multinational corporations mentioned in the original book, and had opportunities to see “up close and personal” some of the very people and situations that Gary Allen and I previously could only speculate about.
The evidence and arguments for the existance of a Conspiracy are stronger today than they have ever been, especially when we lay them alongside what was said and written before.
Therefore, in chapters one through seven in Call it Conspiracy, every single word is the same as in None Dare Call It Conspiracy, however, the bracketed updates are new and shocking, as are chapters eight through thirteen, plus the various appendices.
It has often been said that the best way to evalute what someone writes or says is to look back at what he said in the past.
So, without apologies I say to you now, gentle reader, check the record and Ill live with your decision.
