Not only does this symbolic moment provoke a mood of public retrospection, but the pace of global change itself demands a greater awareness of “whole world"" history.
More than 20 years have passed since a major new atlas of this kind was published in the English language.
In that period there has been an explosion of new research into the histories of regions outside Europe and North America, and a growing awareness of how parochial our traditional approach to history has been.
In this changed environment, the demand for an un-biased overview of world history has steadily grown in schools and colleges, and among the general reading public* Several developments within the study of academic history promote the seriousness with which histories of the world are now taken.
First the accumulation of knowledge about the past of different nations has engendered excessive specialization.
The sheer volume of publications and data about details of the past stimulates demand from students, scholars and a wider public for guidelines, meaning and “big pictures” that world history, with its unconfined time frame and wider geographical focus, is positioned to meet.
Secondly the broadening of traditional history's central concerns In order to take account of modern concerns with, for example, ecology, evolutionary biology, botany, the health and wealth of populations, human rights, gender, family systems and private life, points the study of history towards comparisons between Western and non-Western cultures and histories.
Thirdly young people now arrive at universities with portfolios of know-ledge and aroused curiosities about a variety of cultures.
They are less likely than their predecessors to study national let alone regional and parochial histories.
Schools and universities need to provide access to the kind of historical understanding that will satisfy their interests.
To nourish the cosmopolitan sensibility required for the next millennium, history needs to he widened and repositioned to bring the subject into fruitful exchange with geography and the social sciences.
Barriers between archaeology, ancient, classical, medieval, early modern, contemporary and other “packages” of traditional but now anachronistic histories are being dismantled* Unsurprisingly, the implications of “globalization’ 1 for hitherto separ-ated communities, disconnected economies and distinctive cultures have been analysed by social scientists.
Historians are being asked for a deeper perspective on the technological, political and economic forces that are now transforming traditional frameworks for human behaviour, and reshaping personal identities around the world* Philip’s Arias of World History has been designed, constructed and written by a team of professional historians not only for the general reader but to help teachers of history in schools and universities to communicate that perspective to their pupils and students.
World histories cannot be taught or read without a clear comprehension of the chronologies and regional parameters within which different empires, states and peoples have evolved through time.
A modern historical atlas is the ideal mode of presentation for ready reference and for the easy acquisition of basic facts upon which courses in world history can be built, delivered and studied* Such atlases unify history with geography.
Historical atlases should be accurate, accessible and display the unfurling chronology of world history in memorable maps and captions.
The team of historians, cartographers and editors who collaborated in the construct ion of Philip’s Atlas of World History set out to produce a popular work of reference that could be adopted for university and school courses in world history.
Iri the United States and Canada such courses arc already commonplace and the subject is now spreading in Britain, Europe, Japan and China.
American journals dealing with world history publish debates of how histories designed to so cover long chronologies and uncon fined geographies might he as rigorous and as intellectually compelling as more orthodox histories dealing with individuals, parishes, towns, regions, countries and single continents.
The editors attempted to become familiar with as many course outlines as possible.
Their plans for the atlas were informed by the ongoing, contemporary debate about the scale, scope and nature of world history.
For example, they were aware that most “model” textbooks in world history are usually constructed around the grand themes of “connections* 1 and “comparisons” across continents and civilizations, and that a scientifically informed appreciation of environmental, evolutionary and biological constraints on all human activity are regarded as basic to any understanding of world history.
Through its carefully designed system of cross-referencing, this atlas promotes the appreciation of “connections”, “contacts” and “encounters” promoted through trade, transportation, conquest, colonization, disease and botanical exchanges and the diffusion of major religious beliefs.
It also aims to facilitate “comparisons” across space and through time of the major forces at work in world history, including warfare, revolutions, state formation, religious conversion, industrial development, scientific and technological discoveries, demographic change, urbanization and migration.
Histories or atlases of the world are potentially limitless in their geographical and chronological coverage.
History in its broadest context As 1 write this foreword conflict escalates in the Middle Fast.
This first section also covers connections and comparisons across the first civilizations in Mesopotamia, the Indus Valley, Egypt, China and Mesoameriea and South America as well as those later and more familiar empires of Greece, India, China and Rome.
Yet the editors have also ensured that small countries , important but often forgotten traders and explorers (such as the Vikings), and the nomadic peoples of Central Asia, the Americas and Africa have found their place in this comprehensive atlas of world history.
Furthermore, coverage of the world wars of the 20th century, the Great Depression, the rise of communism and fascism, decolonization and the end of the Cold War and the events of the 1990s makes the atlas into a distinctive work of first references for courses in current affairs and contemporary history.
Facts, brief analyses and illuminating maps of such seminal events in world history as the transition to settled agriculture, the inventions of writing and printing, the birth of religions, the Roman Empire, Song China, the discovery of the Americas, the Scientific, French and Industrial Revolutions, the foundation of the Soviet Union and of communist China are all carefully chronicled and represented on colourful maps drawn using the latest cartographic technology.
Although any general atlas of world history will, and should, give prominence to such traditional, historical themes as the rise and decline of empires, states and civilizations, a serious effort has been made wherever possible in the atlas to accord proper emphasis to the communal concerns of humankind, including religion, economic welfare, trade, technology, health, the status of women and human rights.
The Philip’s Atlas can he used easily to find out about a significant event , the history of defined places and populations (India under the Mughals I526-J765), religious transitions (The Reformation and Counter Reformation in Europe 1517—1648 ), or social movements on a world scale (World Population Growth and Urbanization 1800-1914 ), Nevertheless the atlas has also been designed in the context of a remarkable revival in world history, which is now underway, and which represents an exciting alternative to histories narrowly focused on the experience of national communities.
World history offers chronologies, perspectives and geographical parameters which aim to attenuate the excesses of ethnicity, chauvinism and condescension.
The length and breadth of an atlas of world history covering all continents, and a chronology going hack twelve millennia, can work to separate tlie provincial from the universal, the episodic from the persistent.
It can expose the decline as well as the rise of societies, nations, cultures and civilizations.
In so far as this atlas succeeds in these goals, and thus contributes to the widespread aspiration for an education in world history, it can also help nurture a cosmopolitan sensibility for the new millennium.
By 9000 BC their descendants had spread to most parts of the globe and in some areas were beginning to practise agriculture.
From around 4000 BC the first civilizations developed, initially in the Near East and India and subsequently in China, Mesoamerica and South America.
In the centuries that followed, to AD 500, many states and empires rose and fell.
Homo sapiens, who reached Australia by 60,000 and the Americas by 14,000 years ago During the whale af this period the migration of humans was greatly affected by a number of ke ages, when sea levels fed la reveal land ""bridges' that in later years become submerged S ome five to eight million years ago, a species of small African primates began walking upright.
While there are many theories about the advantages conferred by moving on two legs rather than four there is general agreement that the success of die hominid line (humans and their ancestors) is due in part to the adoption of this new method of locomotion.
The development by Homo of stone tools and, we may presume, tools that have not survived, made of other materials such as bone and wood was a major advance in human evolution, allowing our ancestors to engage in activities for which they lacked the physical capabilities.
This ability to develop technology to overcome our physical limitations has enabled us to develop from a small and restricted population of African apes to a species that d om i na t es eve ry con tine nt ex cep t Antarctica and has even reached the moon.
BetweenK million and 300,000 years ago, members of our genus colonized much of temperate Europe and Asia as well as tropical areas, aided by their ability to use fire and create shelter By 000(1 Ht; the only parts of the globe which modern humans Homo sapiens had not reached were some remote islands and circumpolar regions.
A Wilh the development of agriculture and settled communities there was a growing need for storage.
Pottery began la be mode an a wide scale in order la meet this need, but il aba served as a vehicle far human artistic odivrty.
Within the succeeding 8,000 years, however, much of the world was transformed , People in many pans of the world began to produce their own food, domesticating and selectively breeding plants and animals.
Farming supported larger and more settled communities, allowing the accumulation of stored food surpluses albeit with the counterpoised risks involved in clearing areas of plants and animals that had formerly been a source of baek-up food in lean years.
Agricultural communities expanded in many regions, for example colonizing Europe and South Asia, and in doing so radically changed the landscape.
They also give some insight into the rich spiritual and mythological life of the people who created them.
FIRST CIVILIZATIONS As the millennia passed there was continuing innovation in agricultural techniques and tools, with the domestication of more plants and animals and the improvement by selective breeding of those already being exploited.
These developments increased productivity and allowed the colonization of new areas.
Specialist pastoral groups moved into previously uninhabited, inhospitable desert regions.
Swamps were drained in Mesoamerica and South America and highly productive raised fields were constructed in their place.
Irrigation techniques allowed the cultivation of river valleys in otherwise arid regions, such as Mesopotamia and Egypt.
High agricultural productivity supported high population densities, and towns and cities grew up, often with monumental public architecture.
However, there were also limitations in these regions, such as an unreliable climate or river regime, or a scarcity of important raw materials , and there was often conflict between neighbouring groups.
Religious or secular leaders who could organize food storage and redistribution, craft production, trade, defence and social order became increasingly powerful.
The development of writing proved a major advance, enabling vast quantities of human knowledge and experience to be recorded, shared and passed on.
Nevertheless, in most societies literacy was confined to an elite priests, rulers and the scribes they employed who used it as a means of religious, political or economic control.
In most parts of the world, the belief that there should be universal access to knowledge recorded in writing is a recent phenomenon.
RITUAL AND RELIGION Although without written records it is impossible to reconstruct details of the belief systems of past societies, evidence of religious beliefs and ritual activities abounds, particularly in works of art, monumental structures and grave offerings. | 6090k IQ 6000k | 7000* □ 5000k I I 4000 k ■ 3000* | PffiHinitets 3000 K I I Hutitorgaihau 3000 * (Jiiriiaijaed regum 3000 K < Farming developed in many parts of ibe world from around 10,000 bc.
Differences in the locally available plants and animals and in local conditions gave rise 1o modi variation between regions.
Domestic animals, far example, ployed an important pari in Old World agriculture, whereas farmers in Mesoomerica and North America relied heavily on wild animals and crops such © beam for protein.
However, in some areas, such os the Pacific coast af North America, on abundant supply of wild resources allowed settled communities to develop without agriculture.
Although such building activity implied the ability to mobilize large numbers of people, this did not necessarily require hierarchical social control; it could be achieved within the framework of a community led by elders or priests.
Concern with the proper disposal of the dead was displayed from Neanderthal times, more than 50,000 years ago.
In the burial or other treatment of the body regarded as appropriate (such as cremation or exposure)* the dead were often accompanied by grave offerings.
Elsewhere, however, formers, herders and hunter-gatherers continued their traditional lifestyle, affected lo varying degrees by their rivilixed neighbours, who regarded them as ""barbarians"", Such ""barbarians"" could torn ihe tide of empires; Central Asian nomads were the periodic scourge of Wesl, South and East Asia for thousands of years, and Germanic confederacies, with Central Asians, brought dawn the Western Roman Empire in the middle of the 1st millennium ad.
M Grave offerings often provide valuable clues about past social organization.
They also point to the important part played bv artisans in the development of civilized communities, in particular producing prestige items for use by the elite and manufactured goods to be traded in exchange for vital raw materials.
In developed agricultural societies, craft production was unlikely to be a fulltime pursuit for more than a handful of individuals, but this did not prevent high standards being reached in many communities.
Unlike pottery, which was made by the majority of settled communities, and stone, used for tools worldwide from very early times, metalworking did not develop in all parts of the globe, due in part to the distribution of ores.
Initially metal artefacts tended to be prestige objects, used to demonstrate individual or community status, but metal was soon used for producing tools as well.
The development of techniques for working iron, in particular, was a major breakthrough, given the abundance and widespread distribution of iron ore.
The formerly fertile lower reaches of the Euphrates, cradle of the Mesopotamian civilization, had suffered salination, and so the focus had shifted north to the competing Assyrian and Babylonian empires.
In India the primary civilization had emerged along the Indus river system; after its fall, tlic focus of power and prosperity shifted to the Ganges Valley, which by the 3rd century nc was the centre of the Mauryan Empire.
Europe svas also developing native states, and by the 1st century AD much of Europe and adjacent regions of Asia and Africa were united through military conquest by the Romans.
Military conquest was not, however, the only means by which large areas were united.
The Andean region, for example, was dominated in the 1st millennium bc by the Chavin culture, seemingly related to a widely shared religious cult centred on a shrine at Chavin de Huantar, A complex interplay of political, economic, religious and social factors determined the pattern of the rise and fall of slates.
On the fringes of the human world, pioneers continued to colonize new areas, developing ways of life to enable them to settle in the circumpolar regions and the deserts of Arabia and to venture huge distances across uncharted waters to settle on the most remote Pacific islands.
The BobAffltans, Indians and Greeks, lor example, developed mathematics and astronomical knowledge la a high level, while ike Chinese pioneered advances in a number of fields, among Ihem metallurgy and mining technology.
The Romans were also skilled innovators, particularly in engineering where in ihe public domain they built magnificent roads and aqueducts, such as ihe Pont du Card in France, pictured here.
T The hurrah of imporianl people were often lavishly furnished with spectacular works of craftsmanship.
The body of Princess fJou Wan of ihe Han kingdom of ZJiangshon In China was buried in the 2nd century St in this suit made of jade plaques bound togelher wilh gald thread.
T races of eke earliest ancestors of humans, the Australopitheeines, have been found in Africa, dating from between five and two million years ago when the forests had given way in places to more open savanna {map 1 ), A line of footprints discovered al Lactoli is vivid evidence that these now extinct early horn in ids (human ancestors belonging to the genera Australopithecus and Homo) walked upright.
Hominid fossils from this remote period are rare, since the creatures themselves were not numerous.
By two million years ago the hominids included Homo kahilis, small creatures whose diet probably included kills scavenged from carnivores, Unlike their AustraJopitheeine cousins.
If. habilis had begun to manufacture stone tools (called “Oldowan 1 * after the key site of Olduvai), roughly chipped to form a sen 1 iceable edge for slicing through hide, digging and other activities which these small hominids could not perform with their inadequate teeth and nails.
These developments, along with physical adaptation, were crucial in the amazing success of humans compared with other animal species.
The move into temperate regions By 1,8 million years ago this success was already becoming apparent in the rapid spread of hominids well outside their original tropical home, into temperate regions as far afield as East Asia , This move was made possible by a number of developments.
Hominids began to make new and more efficient tools, Including the multipurpose hand axe, which extended their physical capabilities, A substantial increase in body size allowed representatives of Homo to compete more successfully with other scavengers, and by 500*000 years ago our ancestors were hunting as well as scavenging, using wooden spears and probably fire.
Fire was also important in providing warmth, light and protection against predators, and for cooking food, thus making it easier to chew and digest.
To cope with the temperate climate, hominids used caves and rock shelters sueh as those found at the famous Chinese site of Zhoukoudian.
There had been a gradual cooling of the global climate, w ith ice sheets developing in the Arctic by 2,4 million years ago.
M) years ago this process had accelerated, giving rise to a pattern of short ice Jigcs approximately every 100,000 years.
These ice ages were interspersed w ith short phases of temperatures similar to or higher than those of today, and much longer periods i>f intermediate temperatures.
The pattern of ice advance and retreat had a major effect not only on the distribution of hominids and other mammals but also on the preservation of their fossils, so the picture that we have today is at best partial.
During w arm periods, hominids penetrated as far north as southern England; in cooler periods, sea levels fell and many coastal areas that are now submerged became habitable.
VktrJrti * o qOldwoiAIipO 'AoatotiAa TANZANIA Aiv,sft A 9 Swarifcmni^ci A C A Iolkxj, f / t ► Hie Iasi al ihe inhabited ronlinenls la be colonized by hominids. was South America, probably between 11000 ond 11,000 yeors ago, A Many hominid species Flourished in sub-Saharan Africa between h re and one million years ago, but most died our.
V T— Triflil Sangiran®^ Tn^pic of Capricorn AUSTRALIA fapicotCanar South China Sea The emergence of modern humans Around 100,000 years ago two hominid species were living in the eastern Mediterranean region.
One was the Asian representative of the Neanderthals descended from H heidelbergensis who inhabited Europe and West Asia from some time after 200,000 BC; the other was an early form of Homo sapiens who had first appeared some 20,000 years earlier in southern Africa.
One school of thought holds that the descendants of the first hominids to colonize these various regions had evolved in parallel ; there was continuous gene flow between adjacent regions, spreading adaptations and changes throughout the hominid world but with regional differences also present, as in the modem races.
From Asia modern humans moved into the Americas, crossing the Bering Strait during an ice age when the land bridge of Beringia was exposed, and migrating southwards later.
The date of this colonization is still hotly debated, but the earliest incontrovertible evidence of humans in the Americas south of the glaciated area comes after the ice sheets began to retreat about 14,000 years ago.
Cultural development Early modern humans and their Neanderthal contemporaries used similar tools and seem to have been culturally related.
However, although Neanderthals and even earlier hominids may have communicated with sounds to some extent, H sapiens was the first hominid to be able to communicate in a fully developed spoken language.
This was a critical development, making possible detailed planning and discussion of group activities and interactions and, more importantly, allowing the knowledge acquired through individual experience to be shared and transmitted from generation to generation.
From about 100,000 years ago many aspects of human consciousness and aesthetic sense began to evolve, as evidenced by the finely shaped and consciously planned stone tools of both Neanderthals and modern humans, and by the beginning of burial.
The emergence of human consciousness becomes ever more apparent in the art that dates from about 35,000 BC, and very probably earlier in Australia.
Archaeologists have found exquisite figurines depicting both humans and animals, as well as magnificent animal and abstract paintings and engravings on the walls of caves and rock shelters.
The most famous of these finds are in southern France and adjacent Spain, but early art has been found all over the world, with fine concentrations in Australia, Africa and Russia.
H ergaster in Africa, H erectus in East Asia and H heidelbergensis in Europe.
The paucity of hominid fossils makes their classification extremely difficult, and there are major and frequent changes in the interpretation of the limited evidence.
This is particularly true of tubers, roots, leafy vegetables and fruits, which must have provided the bulk of the diet in areas such as Southeast Asia.
We have a clearer picture of the development of early agriculture in areas such as China and West Asia, where cereals (rice, millet, wheat and barley) and pubes (beans, peas and the like) were the principal food plants.
It also enabled people to accumulate possessions that today provide valuable evidence of their way of life.
E vidence from many parts of the world indicates that during the final millennia of the last glacial age between around 16,000 and 12,000 years ago the range of foods eaten by humans broadened considerably.
Nuts and other wild foods, particularly gazelle, were also important here.
Around 12,000 BC the global temperature began to rise, causing many changes.
Sea levels rose, flooding many coastal regions; this deprived some areas of vital resources but in others, such as Japan and Southeast Asia, it created new opportunities for fishing and gathering shellfish.
Changes occurred in regional vegetation, with associated changes in fauna.
Throughout Asia, particularly in the southeast, plant foods became increasingly important.
In the Levant wild cereals at first spread to cover a much larger area, increasing the opportunities for sedentary communities to develop.
By 8000 bc, when conditions again became more favourable, these first farming communities had grown in size and number and they began to spread into other suitable areas.
Initially these new economies combined cultivated cereals with wild animals, but around 7000 BC domesticated sheep and goats began to replace gazelle and other wild game as the main source of meat.
They appeared over much of Anatolia and northern Mesopotamia by about 7000 BC, largely confined to areas where rain-fed agriculture was possible.
Agricultural communities also emerged around the southeastern shores of the Caspian Sea, and at Mehrgarh on the western edge of the Indus plains.
Pottery, which began to be made in the Zagros region around this time, came into widespread use in the following centuries, and copper also began to be traded and worked.
Cattle, domesticated from the aurochs in the west and from native Indian cattle in South Asia, were now also important.
Diversification of agriculture By 5000 BC the development of more sophisticated agricultural techniques, such as irrigation and water control, had enabled farming communities to spread into southern Mesopotamia, much of the Iranian Plateau and the IndoIranian borderlands.
It was not until the 4th millennium bc, however, that farmers growing wheat and keeping sheep, goats and cattle moved into the adjacent Indus Valley and thence southward into peninsular India.
The development of rice and millet cultivation by the Indus civilization led to a further spread of agriculture into the Ganges Valley and the south of India.
Eastern India also saw the introduction of rice cultivation from Southeast Asia, while sites in the northeast may owe their development of agriculture to contact with northern China.
PART 1 economies depended on cultivated millet* ti1<jnj4 with fruits and vegetables* chickens and pigs* while further south, in the delta of the Yangtze River, wet rice cultivation began.
Although water buffalo anti pigs were kept in this southern region, both hunted game and fish continued to play an Important role in the economy.
By 3000 rc wet rice agriculture was becoming established in southern China, northern Thailand and Taiwan, and millet cultivation in northern China.
Communities in the northwest also grew wheat and barley, introduced from the agricultural communities of West or Central Asia.
In Southeast Asia miners and fruits had probably been intensively exploited for millennia.
By 3000 iw; wet rice was also grown in this region and buffalo, pigs and chickens were raised, but wild resources remained important.
The inhabitants of Korea anti Japan continued to rely on their abundant wild sources of food, including fish, shellfish, deer* nuts and tubers.
Around 15 crops and metallurgical techniques began spreading from China into these regions, reaching Korea via Manchuria and thence being taken to Japan.
Clear signs of developing social stratification appear at this time for example, elite bus ink containing prestige goods of bronze and imported maleriok such as pde, mode by or emerging doss of specialist (raftsmen Folbwiog the introduction of metallurgy from China during the 1st millennium n r Korea and Japan aha developed a sophislkaled bronze industry.
M By 1000 K farming tommunities established ia many areas af Asia were linked by (rode.
Areas of high agricultural productivity, such as southern Mesopotamia,, were dependent on trade to obtain (be basic raw maleriok lading in the alluvial environment, such as wood and stone.
F5gs and cattle, indigenous to Europe, were kept, and wild plants and animals were aha exploited by these catty farmers.
Farming also spread into neighbouring areas and by 4Q0Q bc was widespread across the continent, although the numbers af fanners were restively small Ihe greater part of Europe was still sparsely Inhabited forest, only gradually being cleared Iw farming settlement over succeeding mfflennia.
B-H Miithoosteffl 7000 —SSCWik rm Iktomamim-m* rn onnlnri 55Q0-45D0 K [~j iMediramnoon 45OO-3S0C tt IB northem 4SOO—3500 K □ «®en' 4500-3500 * • fertytomirc a IMptf termors writing cappp turn 5500 « Stnwtm. ^ tmeted maiBiah. t sw» m fnctwy/lfcii mw O speteylusstefe § DtKHMrT he postglacial conditions of the period 8000-4000 bc offered new opportunities to the hunter-gatherers of Europe* Activity concentrated on coasts, lake margins and rivers, where both aquatic and land plants and animals could be exploited; the ecologically less diverse forest interiors were generally avoided.
Initially groups tended to move around on a seasonal basis, hut later more permanent communities were established, with temporary special-purpose Quotations, Dogs, domesticated from wolves, were kept to aid hunting.
Some groups managed their woodlands by judicious use of fire to encourage hazel and other useful plants.
Early farmers in the southeast built villages of small square houses and made pottery, tools of polished stone and highly prized obsidian, as well as ornaments of spondylus shell obtained by trade.
By 5000 bc some communities were also using simple techniques to work copper.
Between 5500 and 4500 bc pioneering farming groups rapidly spread across central Europe, settling predominantly on the easily worked loess river valley soils.
They kept cattle, raised crops and lived in large timber-framed long houses which often also sheltered their animals.
At first these groups were culturally homogeneous, but after about 4500 BC regional groups developed and farming settlements increased in number, spreading out from the river valleys.
The hunter-gatherers in the central and western Mediterranean came into contact with early farmers colonizing southern parts of Italy.
They acquired pottery-making skills and domestic sheep and goats from these colonists, and later they also began to raise some crops.
Huge megalith ic tombs markers affirming community ties to ancestral lands.
These tombs took many forms over the centuries anti were associated with a variety of rites, generally housing the bones of many iudividuals* usually without grave goods.
The use ok metals By 3500 bo a new economic pattern had developed as innovations emanating from West Asia spread through Europe via farming communities in the southeast and rhe east, on the fringes of the steppe.
These included the use of animals for traction, transport and milk, woolly sheep, wheeled vehicles and the plough.
The need for tin, a rare and sparsely distributed metal, provided a stimulus to the further development of international trade in prestige materials * These were particularly used as grave goods and votive offerings, emphasizing the status achieved by their owners* Chiefs were now' buried under massive barrows with splendid gold and bronze grave offerings, while lesser members of society w + erc interred under barrows in substantial cemeteries.
Command of metal ore sources gave certain communities pre-eminence, while others derived their Importance from a key position at the nodes of trade routes.
Q gold O Stow (kte art olgmwH O copper A Inf A By 3000 Bt copper and gold metallurgy were practised across most of Europe.
These metals were used to make prestige goods that enhanced the status of high-ranking individuals.
Drinking vessels for alcohol were also status symbols Corded Ware in eastern and northern Europe and, later, Beakers in central and western Europe. region enjoyed particular prosperity around this time; Scandinavia, which lacked indigenous metal ores, nevertheless now became involved in international trade, and by the late 2nd millennium developed a major bronze industry based on metal imported in exchange for furs and amber.
Agriculture and livestock also brought wealth to favoured areas, and there was a major expansion of farming onto light soils formerly under forest.
Substantial field systems mark the organization of the agrarian landscape in at least some regions.
By the start of the 1st millennium, however, many of the more marginal areas for agriculture had become scoured or exhausted and were abandoned.
Warfare and religion By the late 2nd millennium warfare was becoming a more serious business.
However, until the late centuries bc armed conflict between individual leaders or raids by small groups remained the established pattern, rather than large-scale fighting.
A greater range of weapons was now in use, especially spears and swords, their forms changing frequently in response to technical improvements and fashion.
Bronze was in abundant supply and made into tools for everyday use by itinerant smiths.
Funerary rites became more varied in the Iron Age and many graves particularly in wealthy areas contained lavish goods, as in the cemetery at Hallstatt in western Austria, which profited from the trade in salt from local mines.
Substantial religious monuments were no longer built, religion now focusing on natural locations such as rivers and lakes.
Celtic Europe During the 1st millennium BG much of France, Germany and the Alpine region came to be dominated by the Celtic peoples , who also settled in parts of Britain, Spain northern Italy and Anatolia.
By the 3rd century BC towns were emerging in many parts of Europe, reflecting both increased prosperity and more complex and larger-scale political organization.
In the west this development was short-lived as Europe west of the Rhine progressively fell to Roman expansion.
In the east and north, however, Germanic and other peoples continued the life of peasant agriculture, trade, localized industry and warfare that had characterized much of the continent for many centuries.
Although generally only their stone tools survive, the majority of their artefacts would have been made of perishable materials such as wood, leather and plant fibres.
At Gwisho in Zambia a large find of organic objects, including wooden bows and arrows, bark containers, and leather bags and clothes, provides us with some insight into what is normally lost.
Further information on the lives of African hunter-gatherers comes from their rich rock art, known in many areas of the continent but particularly in the Sahara and in southern Africa.
This not only depicts aspects of everyday life, such as housing and clothing, but it also gives a picture of archaeologically intangible activities such as dancing and traditional beliefs.
With the retreat of the ice sheets around this time conditions became both warmer and wetter, creating new opportunities for hunter-gatherer communities.
Rising sea levels encouraged the utilization of coastal resources, such as shellfish in southern Africa.
Many groups moved between the coast and inland sites, exploiting seasonally available food resources, and people also began to hunt smaller game in the forests that were spreading into former savanna regions.
In the Sahara belt, largely uninhabited during the arid glacial period, extensive areas of grassland now developed and the existing restricted bodies of water expanded into great lakes, swamps and rivers.
These became favoured areas of occupation, often supporting large permanent settlements whose inhabitants derived much of their livelihood from fish, aquatic mammals , waterfowl and water plants, as well as locally hunted game.
Similar lakeside or riverine communities developed in other parts of the continent, for example around Lake Turkana in East Africa.
With the retreat of the ice sheets in temperate regions by about 10,000 it parts of Africa beta me warmer and welter, offering new erolagiral opportunities to the continent's population.
Postglacial changes were particularly mocked in northern Africa, where increased humidity provided conditions favouring permanent settlements.
T\ '/ % ■■ ( © Sr Lm,it ► A broad bond eastwards ham West Africa was the original home of many of the plant species that were taken into cultivation.
In the Nile Valley, nut-grass tubers had been intensively exploited since glacial times, and by 11,000 bc cereals such as sorghum and probably barley were also managed.
Sheep and goats, and some crop plants such as wheat, were introduced, probably from West Asia.
By about 5000 BC many communities in northern Africa were raising indigenous crop plants such as sorghum and keeping domestic cattle, sheep and goats, though they also continued to hunt and fish and to gather wild plant foods.
Dependence on agriculture intensified, domestic resources grew in importance, and the number of farming communities increased.
From around 4000 BC, however, the Sahara region became increasingly dry; lakes and rivers shrank and the desert expanded, reducing the areas attractive for settlement.
Although harder to document than cereal agriculture, the cultivation of tubers such as yams and of tree crops such as oil palm nuts probably began around this time.
By around 3000 BC farming communities also began to appear in northern parts of East Africa.
They were familiar with the working of bronze, iron and gold and were involved in trade across the Sahara, and this may have been the means by which knowledge of metallurgy reached sub-Saharan Africa.
Sites with early evidence of copperworking, notably Akjoujt, have also yielded objects imported from North Africa.
Egypt, Nubia and Ethiopia were now working metals and may also have been a source of technological expertise.
Although iron tools were very useful for forest clearance, agriculture, woodworking and other everyday activities, the spread of ironworking was at first extremely patchy.
The interrelations of these settlers with the native hunter-gatherer groups were varied.
Some hunter-gatherers in areas suitable for agriculture were totally displaced by the newcomers; others established mutually beneficial relations, adopting aspects of the intrusive culture, such as pottery or domestic animals; some groups raided the new farming communities to lift cattle, sheep or goats.
The southwest was unsuited to the cultivation of the introduced crops, but hunter-gatherers there began to herd domestic sheep.
By the late 1st millennium ad iron tools had largely replaced stone tools throughout most of Africa.
In some areas the Copperbelt in Zambia and Zaire, for example copper was being made into ornaments such as bangles, though gold would not be worked in the southern half of the continent before the close of the millennium.
Paintings of chariots characteristic of the 1st millennium BC have been found in the Sahara.
Although these do not mark the actual routes taken by traders across the desert, they do provide evidence of their presence.
Trans-Saharan trade was facilitated in the late centuries bc by the introduction of camels for transport.
By the 2nd century the eastern settlers had reached northern Tanzania, from where they quickly spread through the coastal lowlands and inland regions of southeastern Africa, reaching Natal by the 3rd century.
Originating in part of southern West Africa (now eastern Nigeria and Cameroon), Bantu languages progressively spread southwards along two main routes, in the east and west.
The areas these farmers penetrated were inhabited by hunter-gatherer communities, speaking Khoisan languages in the south and probably in other areas.
A few sites, such as Meadowcroft in North America and Monte Verde in South America, are sometimes claimed to have been occupied well before 12,000 bc.
However, undisputed evidence of people at these and other sites dates from 12,000 bc onwards, with Fell's Cave in the extreme southern tip of the continent being occupied by 9000 bc.
During glacial periods when sea levels fell, the Bering Strait became dry land , allowing humans living in Siberia to move across into the northernmost part of the Americas.
However, substantial ice sheets would then have prevented further overland penetration of the continent.
Only subsequently, when the ice sheets melted, could further advances occur although it is conceivable that migration into the Americas took place by sea, down the Pacific coast.
Several glacial cycles occurred following the emergence of modern humans , during which, at least hypothetically, such a migration could have taken place.
The colonization of the Americas after 10,000 BC was extremely rapid, taking place within a thousand years.
The first Americans were mainly big-game hunters, although occasional finds of plant material show that they had a varied diet.
Humans probably played some part in these extinctions, although changes in climate and environment are also likely factors.
Hunting was generally an individual activity, but occasionally groups of hunters and their families combined in a great drive to stampede bison over a cliff or into a natural corral, so that huge numbers could be slaughtered at once.
Elsewhere in North America, a great range of regional variations developed on the theme of hunting and gathering, and in many areas these ways of life survived until the appearance of European settlers in recent centuries.
Their inventiveness enabled them to develop equipment such as the igloo and the kayak to withstand the intense cold of winter and of the Arctic seas, and to hunt large blubber-rich sea mammals such as whales and seals.
The inhabitants of the Pacific Coast region grew prosperous on their annual catch of salmon and other marine and riverine resources.
They acquired slaves, constructed spectacular wooden structures and gave magnificent feasts.
Later, many groups also participated in regional trade networks, obtaining valued commodities such as turquoise and obsidian in the southwest.
In areas of abundance, some eastern groups were able to settle in camps for much of the year, burying their dead in large cemeteries.
These woodland folk also developed long-distance trade networks, exchanging such prized commodities as copper, marine shells and fine-quality stone for tool-making.
Later, groups in the Ohio Valley and adjacent areas (the Adena and Hopewell cultures) elaborated their exchange networks and raised substantial mounds over their dead.
By about 2500-2000 BC some groups in the eastern region were cultivating local plants, such as sunflowers and squashes.
By 5000 BC they were also cultivating plants acquired from other regions of Mesoamerica.
Among these was maize, at first an insignificant plant with cobs barely 3 cm long.
However, genetic changes progressively increased the size of the cobs, and by 2000-1500 BC maize had become the staple of Mesoamerican agriculture, supplemented by beans and other vegetables.
Villages in the highlands could now depend entirely on agriculture for their plant foods and were occupied all year round.
Along with local varieties like potatoes, these included plants (such as beans and chillies) native to the jungle lowlands to the east.
It is therefore likely that South American agriculture began in the Amazon Basin, although humid conditions in this area precluded the preservation of ancient plant remains.
By this time village communities were established throughout the Andean region and had developed strategies to exploit a variety of local resources.
The coast provided exceptionally rich fisheries, while inland crops were cultivated using irrigation, with cotton particularly important.
The lower slopes of the Andes were also cultivated, with crops such as potatoes at higher altitudes, while the llamas and alpacas of the high pastures provided meat and wool.
Apart from residential villages, often furnished with substantial cemeteries, early South Americans also built religious centres with monumental structures.
AUSTRALIA AND THE PACIFIC 10,000 bc-ad 1000 3 lAsm Isla m Af Quern/ • Alii pJatfwm/slalufl this early date for a network of drainage channels to allow crops to be grown in swampland.
Farming communities were also developing in Fast and Southeast Asia; around 1500 eg a new wave of colonists began to spread out from this area, moving from the mainland into Taiwan and the Philippines, then into the islands of Southeast Asia and from here into the Pacific.
By 1000 kg they had reached the Marianas in the north and, much further afield, Tonga and Samoa in Polynesia to the east.
The movement of these people can be traced from the distribution of their distinctive pottery, known as Lapita ware, a red-slipped ware decorated with elaborate stamped designs.
They also used obsidian and shell for making tools, and brought with them a range of Southeast Asian domestic animals, including dogs and chickens.
By this time the colonists had become skilled navigators, sailing in double canoes or outriggers large enough to accommodate livestock as well as people, and capable of tacking into the wind.
The uniformity of their artefacts shows that contacts were maintained throughout the area, with return as well as outward journeys.
The Polynesians used the stars, ocean currents, winds and other natural phenomena as navigational guides, and they made ocean charts of palm sticks with the islands marked by cowrie shells.
No Easter Island statues were erected after ad 1600 and by 1863 all existing ones had been deliberately toppled (to be re erected from the 1950s), a development that reflects social upheaval related to deloresfaiion and consequent pressure on resources.
T he Pacific was one of the Iasi regions on Earth to be colonized by people.
A few of the islands adjacent to New Guinea were also settled before 50,000 bc, but expansion into the rest of the Pacific only began around 1500 bc and was not completed until AD 1000 , G NEW ZEALAND XCJtafWi Itinfldi A Among the stones whkh the early Maori settlers af New Zealand become skilled in carving was jade, from whkh this pendant h made.
T The rapid spread af the Asian peoples who colonized the Pacific islands after about 1500 k b something of on enigma. bm motivation cannot have been solely an expanding population s need la find new letrftoriei ta settle, since only small founding papulations remained well below the numbers that the islands could have supported They cartied with them all the plants and animals they required in order tD establish horticultural comm unities, but marine resources also played an important role in their economies.
They gathered a variety of wild resources and hunted the local fauna, which at that time included a number of large species such as a giant kangaroo, Procopttxion.
The harsh desert interior of Australia was colonized by groups who adapted their lifestyle to cope with this challenging environment.
New tools were now in use, including the boomerang (invented by 8000 bc) and small, line stone tools suited to a variety of tasks, of which wood-working was of prime importance.
The dingo, a semi-wild dog, had been introduced into Australia, perhaps brought in by a new wave of immigrants from Southeast Asia.
Dingoes outeompeted the native predators such as the thvlaeine , a carnivorous marsupial which became extinct.
Although they never adopted fanning Australia’s aborigines exercised considerable control over the wild resources at their disposal, clearing the hush by Presetting in order to encourage new growth and attract or drive game, and replanting certain preferred plant species.
Among the items traded were various types of stone used far making tools and weapons, including greenstone Far warcluhs and amulets, and materials such as obsidian , argillite (white clay rwkf and shells.
The best known and most striking of these were the Easter Island statues.
Easter Island and I lawaii were settled in a further colonizing movement by around An 400, Nearly 2,000 kilometres from Pitcairn, its nearest neighbour, Easter Island was probably never revisited after its initial settlement.
New Zealand is unique in the Pacific in enjoying a temperate climate; most of the tropical plants cultivated by Polynesians elsewhere in the Pacific could not grow here, although sweet potatoes (introduced into Polynesia from South America) flourished.
In compensation there were rich marine resources and a wide range of edible plants indigenous to the islands of which one, the root of the bracket fern, became an important cultivated plant on North Island, There was also a large population of huge flightless birds , which had evolved in great diversity due to the absence of mammals and predators.
As South Island was m)suited to agriculture its population declined, and on North Island increased reliance on horticulture went hand in hand with growing ^ warfare between the communities, accompanied by the building of fortified settlements, trophy head-hunting and cannibalism.
MESOPOTAMIA AND THE INDUS REGION 4000-1800 bc ▲ The unstable physical environment of Mesopotamia caused many radical changes in the pattern of settlement.
Sediments from the Tigris and Euphrates filled in the head of the Gulf, isolating ancient ports.
Moreover, the courses of the rivers also changed, taking precious river water away from settlements.
Since rainfall was inadequate to sustain crops, these settlements were usually soon abandoned.
Warka's 9-kilometre city wall enclosed temples, palaces and houses, sometimes grouped into specialized craft quarters, as well as open spaces for gardens, burials and waste disposal.
Indus cities, by contrast, generally comprised a large planned residential area and a raised citadel with public buildings and, probably, accommodation for the rulers.
In the largest, Mohenjo-daro, the lower town contained both spacious private houses and industrial areas hosting the full range of Indus crafts.
In some areas high productivity supported high population densities and the emergence of cities, necessitating more complex social organization and giving rise to more elaborate public architecture.
These developments encouraged trade in essential and luxury goods as well as craft and other occupational specialization.
Such “civilized” communities appeared first in Mesopotamia, around 4000 bc.
Religious complexes became larger and increasingly elaborate throughout the period.
A number of urban centres emerged, of which one in particular stands out ancient Warka , also called Uruk.
The city had at least two very large religious precincts Eanna and Kullaba.
These first texts were economic in nature, comprising lists and amounts of goods and payments.
By 2900 BC there were also other important urban centres in southern Mesopotamia city-states ruled by individual kings who negotiated shifting economic and political alliances among themselves and with polities outside Mesopotamia.
The wealth and power of the Early Dynastic rulers can be seen in the elaborate burials in the Royal Cemetery of Ur, some including human sacrifices as well as objects of gold, silver and lapis lazuli.
Sumer and Akkad were not political entities but regions whose people spoke two different languages while sharing a common material culture.
Around 2350 BC Sargon I, a charismatic and powerful Akkadian ruler, subjugated all Sumer and Akkad, also conquering lands to the northwest as far as Turkey and the Mediterranean, and to the east as far as Susa.
His was perhaps the first empire to outlast the life of its founder, but by 2200 BC it had collapsed and was followed by a period of Sumerian revival.
At the close of the 3rd millennium BC Ur, long an important Sumerian city, came to dominate the region.
The Third Dynasty of Ur ruled the cities of Sumer and Akkad and east beyond the Zagros Mountains, establishing a system of governors and tax collectors that formed the skeleton for the complex bureaucracy needed to control a large population.
International trade The literate Sumerians provide an invaluable source of information on contemporary cultures, from whom they obtained essential raw materials such as metals, wood and minerals, and luxuries including lapis lazuli.
Dilmun acted as an entrepot in this trade, but there were also Meluhhan merchants resident in some Sumerian cities.
Sumer exported textiles, oil and barley to its trading partners, but the Indus people were probably most interested in receiving silver obtained by Sumer from further west.
It is likely that Magan was an intermediary for trade along the Arabian coast with Africa, the source of several types of millet introduced into India at this time.
The Indus people also had writing, but the surviving texts brief inscriptions on seals and copper tablets have yet to be deciphered, and probably contain little beyond names and titles.
By the later 3rd millennium bc, however, they were trading directly with the Indus region by sea, and trade in lapis lazuli had become an Indus monopoly.
The area at the mouth of these rivers was important in both local and international trade.
Within their overall similarity of plan there was considerable local variation, particularly in the layout of the citadel, probably reflecting heterogeneity in religious and cultural practices.
In contrast, those of Kalibangan and Lothal had pits where sacrificial material was burnt.
Despite some regional variation, uniformity was a keynote of the Indus civilization.
Throughout the Indus realms high-quality goods such as pottery, flint blades and copper objects, shell and stone beads and bangles, and steatite seals were manufactured from the best materials available, such as flint from the Rohri Hills.
Although the Indus people owed much of their prosperity to the rich agricultural potential of their river valleys, a significant proportion of the population were mobile pastoralists, their flocks and herds grazing in the adjacent forests and grassy uplands; it is probable they acted as carriers in the internal trade networks that ensured the distribution of goods.
Outside the heartland of the civilization, mobile huntergatherers provided the means by which the Indus people obtained goods and materials (such as ivory, carnelian and gold) from other regions of the subcontinent, in exchange for cultivated grain, domestic animals and manufactured goods such as copper fish-hooks.
The fishers of the Arawalli Hills also participated in this network, trading their locally mined copper.
It was headed by a divine king who was known as the son of Ra, the sun god.
According to some experts, pyramids represented the staircase along which the pharaoh would return to the heavens after his death.
Close by is Khafre's Sphinx, 73 metres in length and carved from a limestone outcrop.
Originally it was plastered and brightly painted, the bearded face wearing a spectacular headdress sporting a cobra motif.
While the Nile Valley provided fertile soils, the surrounding deserts yielded the precious metals and building stone used in ambitious artistic and architectural endeavours such os the pyramids.
T he first civilizations emerged in areas where high agricultural productivity was possible, supporting dense populations.
In the Old World they appeared along the rivers in Mesopotamia, northern India, Egypt and northern China.
Craft specialization developed, trade flourished, writing began and rulers were often given elaborate burials.
However, each civilization also had unique features rooted in its own cultural background and environment.
Life in Ancient Egypt evolved around the Nile, which provided a regular water supply and fertile soils and thus, by contrast with the surrounding desert regions, made agricultural production possible.
Navigation on the river was easy, as boats could travel northwards with the current or sail southwards on the northerly winds.
From the 5th millennium bc farming communities along the Nile gradually began to merge into a cultural, political and economic unit.
This process of unification was encouraged by trading contacts and the need to control the floodwaters of the Nile.
To reap the benefits of the yearly inundation of the river, communities had to work together to build dams, flood basins and irrigation channels over large areas.
The Early Dynastic and Old Kingdom periods The period of the first Egyptian dynasties was one of great cultural and economic significance, when hieroglyphic script was developed and administrative centres established.
Eventually the rule of the Old Kingdom dynasties collapsed, possibly because of the expanding power of the provincial governors, or perhaps because scarce rainfall led to famine and unrest.
The growth of Egyptian trade In search of building materials, gold and luxury items, the pharaohs established a wide trade network.
During the Old Kingdom period links were forged with many areas of West Asia, including Byblos on the Lebanese coast, predominantly in a search for timber, and expeditions were sent to mine turquoise, copper and malachite in the Sinai Desert.
The Eastern Desert yielded copper and stone and gave access to the harbours on the Red Sea, from where trade with East Africa and Arabia was conducted.
While these trading missions were mainly peaceful, the area to the south of the First Cataract along the Nile became a prime target for expansion.
This land, called Nubia or Kush, offered large quantities of gold as well as connections with the African hinterland, which was an important source of spices, ebony, ivory and other luxury goods.
During the Old Kingdom period, a mining settlement was established at Buhen the first step in a process of southward expansion which would peak in the 15th century bc.
Arts and crafts flourished in Ancient Egypt, particularly in the service of religion and in providing for the dead.
Religion also played a major role in northern China, where ancestors were given the greatest respect and were consulted by divination using oracle bones prior to important events such as hunting trips, childbirth and military campaigns.
The rise of the Shang civilization Around 1700 bc the Shang civilization emerged as a powerful new state in the northern plains of China.
It is known from later historical sources, from magnificent archaeological remains of cities and great tombs, and from written inscriptions carved on oracle bones and cast on splendid ritual bronze vessels.
The first Shang king, Tang, achieved dominance by defeating 11 other peoples and then winning over 36 more by his fair rule and moral leadership.
Shang rule reached its greatest extent under Wu Ding, one of Tang’s successors, who was renowned for his wisdom and led a series of successful military campaigns.
Wu Ding was supported in his campaigns by his consort Fu Hao, who herself led armies into battle against the hostile Fang people.
PART The secret of Shang military success was the use of war chariots, which were so prized that they were sometimes included in burials.
We know most about the last capital, Yin (near modern Anyang), which was founded by Pan Geng in about 1400 bc.
Yin was Located on the marshy plains of the Huang lie River, at that time a warmer and moister environment than now exists.
The coast was considerably closer and the region was fertile, supporting two crops a year of rice and millet.
Water buffalo and wild boar roamed the Luxuriant forests which have long since disapjxjared.
Yin spraw led over a large area in which residential compounds for the ruling elite and clusters of commoners' dwellings were interspersed with bronze foundries and workshops producing jade and lacquer ware and pottery.
At its centre lay the royal palaces and ancestor temples set atop platforms of pounded earth, and a royal cemetery where kings lay in magnificent shaft graves.
We know little about the later Shang rulers, except for the debaucheries of the last king, the tyrannical Chou.
Cast brume vessels, used la serve food and drink in ceremonies honouring antestors. followed the traditional shapes previously made in pottery, often intricately decorated and featuring ihe face of a monster known as krofie.
The discovery of nwny fine bronzes nl Saningdw in Serhuon proves the existente ol exidlent bronze working traditions outside ihe Shang area.
Working in bronze probably began earlier in Southeast Asia and soulh China. -4 Fie Shang stale was the most important of China s early states and the only one that was literate.
From Ihe orade banes the Shang employed to foretell the outcome of military tompaigns, we know the names of many fijag with whom they were in confhl at various times.
Shang kings maintained a small personal bodyguard bat toufd raise armies of up to 5.000 men from their provinces in wartime.
These were mainly foot soldiers armed with halberds, supporting an elite force of choriotry.
T Many bronze vessels produced in Shring Own were decorated with animal motifs.
B y 1200 DC much of Mesoam erica was inhabited by agricultural communities, which were linked through trade in both essential everyday commodities and exotic materials.
The most prosperous area at this time was the Gulf Coast, where annual river flooding supported rich agriculture, and it was in this region that the Olmec culture emerged , Wliile some scholars believe that the Olmec dominated Mesoamerica, controlling the settlements in which their distinctive artefacts have been found, others see the Olmec as the religious leaders of the time, with their successive ceremonial centres acting as places of pilgrimage.
Another school of thought views the Olmec as the most visible and most easily identified of a number of contemporary regional cultures that were mutually influential.
Much that is characteristic of later Mesoameriean civilization is already evident in the Olmec culture.
The concern with the movements of sun, moon and stars that underlies much Mesoamerieati religion is apparent in the astronomically aligned layout of the Olmec ceremonial centres, where the first temple pyramids and plazas, as well as caches of precious offerings to the gods, have been found.
The characteristic colossal carved heads, which may be portraits of Olmec rulers, wear helmets for the ritual ballgame, a dangerous sport with religious significance that was part of most Mesoameriean cultures and often involved the sacrifice of members of the losing team.
Personal blood sacrifice, practised in later Mesoameriean religions, also appears to have been a feature of Olmec life, as stingray spines and other objects used to draw blood have been found at Olmec sites.
These items were widely traded as were both jade, which had great ritual importance, and obsidian , used to make exceptionally sharp tools but also fine ritual or status objects.
The widespread distribution of these materials reflects not only their religious significance throughout Mesoamerica but also their role as indicators of status in communities where social hierarchies w ere beginning to emergePrestigious Olmec pottery’ and figurines (including the characteristic “were-jaguar” babies) served the same purpose.
PART 1 what is known as the Classic Period, which lasted until around AD 900.
Agricultural productivity now greatly increased in this region as irrigation techniques using wells and canals were developed to supplement rain-fed farming.
Like the Olmec, all these civilizations were heavily involved in trade.
Like Teotihuacan, it was the ceremonial and political centre of its state, but in contrast it was not the centre for regional craft production.
Ballcourts and depictions of sacrificial victims at Monte Alban show the continuation in the highland zone of the religious practices of Olmec times.
Also continued was the use of written symbols to record dates and related information.
The Early Maya civilization The Maya writing system was extremely complex, with many variations in the form of individual glyphs and in the way in which a word could be expressed.
It was also used to record an extremely elaborate calendric system, involving interlocking and independent cycles of time, including the 52-year repeating cycle used throughout Mesoamerica and the Maya Long Count, a cycle beginning in 3114 BC according to our present-day dating system.
These depended both on a detailed knowledge of astronomical patterns and on sophisticated mathematics, including the concept of zero.
Although the Maya script is still not fully deciphered, scholars are now able to read many inscriptions on carved stelae , temple stairs and lintels and have pieced together the dynastic history of many of the Maya kingdoms.
Maya inscriptions record the descent of each ruler from a founding ancestor, his performance of appropriate ritual activities on dates of significance in the astronomical religious calendar, and his victories over neighbouring rulers.
Blood sacrifice was of central importance in Maya and other Mesoamerican religions, based on the belief that human blood both nourished divine beings and opened a pathway through which humans could communicate with the spirit world.
While personal sacrifices could be made by any member of Maya society, it was largely the responsibility of each king to ensure the well-being of his state through the provision of sacrificial victims and by letting his own blood.
Members of the king’s family were appointed as provincial governors of lesser centres within the kingdom, and they also acted in other official capacities including that of scribe.
The pattern of existence that had emerged in Olmec times continued, however, as the template for the Mesoamerican way of life up to the time of the European conquest in the 16th century.
House compounds in Maya cities were interspersed with doorstep gardens and raised fields in swamp areas, and a great variety of crops were grown in both.
By contrast the agricultural lands supporting Teotihuacan lay outside the city, in the Basin of Mexico.
Highland and lowland cities alike, however, focused on a ceremonial centre containing temples and the residences and burial places of the elite.
Highly productive raised fields were constructed between grids of canals although the known extent of these fields is likely to represent only a fraction of what once existed.
As in other Mesoamerican civilizations, trade played an important role in Maya life, providing materials for daily living, religious rituals and status symbols.
Imported from the coast of Ecuador, they were an important commodity in the exchange networks that ensured the distribution of foodstuffs and other raw materials (such as obsidian, or volcanic glass) and manufactured goods (notably pottery and textiles) between the different regions of the Andean zone during the Chavin period.
Chavin de Huantar probably owed its pre-eminent position to its location at the centre of trade routes running both north-south and east-west.
In some areas roads were built to facilitate trade and communications, and these networks changed little in later periods.
B y the late 2nd millennium BC a patchwork of interrelated farming settlements existed throughout the Andean region, from coasts and lowland valleys to high pastures.
Those in coastal regions were characteristically built in the shape of a U, with terraced mounds laid out along three sides of a rectangular plaza, and a pyramid often stood on the central mound.
Some of these temple complexes notably Gerro Sechin, where graphic carvings of victims survive give evidence of human sacrifice as a part of the rites performed.
Housing the shrine of an oracular fanged deity set within labyrinthine passages, Chavin de Huantar became a place of pilgrimage, the centre of a cult that was widespread in its influence, as demonstrated by the distribution of artefacts in the characteristic Chavin style.
Carvings decorating the temple mounds focused on religious themes, as did designs on pottery, jewellery and other objects.
Chief among these was the Chavin deity, which continued to be worshipped down the ages in various forms, such as the Staff God of Tiwanaku.
Other supernatural creatures included jaguars, caymans and composite beasts; shamans were also depicted and they were believed to be able to transform themselves into exotic birds and animals.
Traded objects, such as goldwork, were included as grave goods in the elaborate burials of the Chavin elite.
These burials were often placed in shaft tombs within the platforms of the Chavin ceremonial centres, another practice that endured down the ages for example in the magnificent burials found in the few unlooted Moche huacas such as that at Sipan.
Their craftsmanship survived in an extensive cemetery containing numerous mummies of elite individuals wrapped in beautifully embroidered cotton textiles and accompanied by fine pottery, goldwork and other offerings.
Some vessels were designed in the form of trophy heads, and real heads pierced for suspension on a rope have been recovered from Nazca cemeteries, in particular that at the chief Nazca ceremonial centre of Cahuachi.
Unlike Chavin de Huantar and the ceremonial centres of other Andean civilizations, Cahuachi seems not to have functioned as a town, though it was probably a place occupied briefly by thousands of pilgrims during religious ceremonies and festivals.
In its neighbourhood are the enigmatic Nazca Lines, designs on a gigantic scale which were created by removing stones to expose the light desert soil beneath and depict animals, birds and geometric shapes familiar from the Nazca pottery.
Their form can only be appreciated from the air, so they are thought to have been intended for the gods to view and to have been used in the performance of religious activities.
T The Moche culture was centred on the site of Moche, in northwest Peru.
Its adobe pyramids, among the largest in the New World, contained temples and rich tombs later desecrated by other Andean peoples and the Spanish.
Through time, the Moche spread to most of the northern coast of Peru, from the Huarmey Valley in the south, and, in the latest phase, to the Lambayeque Valley in the north.
Further south, the Nazca culture is well represented by large cemeteries and substantial religious structures of mudbrick.
PART 1 T Irrigation ployed on importoni role in South American agriculture, and water canirol was well developed during the dim period , when a series of canals was skilfully used la •provide awe-inspiring sound effects in the great ceremonial centre of (bavin de Hoantar. laier civilizations in ihe Andean region employed a variety of different techniques appropriate to local conditions.
Some of these irrigation systems (such os the Huzca underground aqueducts} hove survived into modern limes; others have recently been revived and are proving far more successful than modern methods.
OQUidiCl Sue 0 2 milw 2 3Mwmstm ■'Saas.Sg^. • -—' 5^an* ■ Ofo-nde f r*Vl Y""~V'^ 0 Wynrefc r 10 km V n B Moche Sipan-Pampa C Pamfa Kg an i near Orange area Tiwanaku (nri Perennial rtw Cnml — toad Swsoftol mar _j Settlement mound ► In the period ad 600—1000 Andean South America contained at least three expansive political entities embracing distinct ecological zones and ethnic groups.
The recent discovery of an unlooted pyramid at Sipan, containing the burials of two Moche lords, has given us a vivid picture of Moche burial practices.
Accompanied by a number of sacrificed men, women and dogs, these lords were lavishly robed in garments decorated with gold and silver, copper and feathers; they were provided with rich grave goods in the same materials, along with spondylus and strombus shells.
Details of these burials are familiar from decoration on the painted or moulded pottery.
Moche ceramics also included some of the first portrait effigies in the Americas, all cast from moulds and often into the stirruphandled vessels common to Peru.
Although heavy in religious imagery, these ceramics are unusually narrative for South American art, leading some scholars to postulate influence from other areas such as Mesoamerica.
More distant still lay a city of comparable complexity, Tiwanaku, near Lake Titicaca.
Although both cities had emerged 400, the connection between them remains enigmatic.
Most archaeologists believe that they were not so much dual capitals of one empire as antagonistic polities, one Huari oriented to the north, the other Tiwanaku to the high timberless plains known as the altiplano.
Whether the fields around Lake Titicaca were systematically organized and harvested by the Tiwanaku state continues to be controversial.
Field research in the Moquegua Valley indicates late Tiwanaku expansion into a number of enclaves, with maize in particular being cultivated.
Also subject to Huari influence, this valley was important as the source of many prized materials which included lapis lazuli, turquoise, obsidian and copper.
The container with a funerary effigy is characteristic of the Chavin style.
Ascending the throne os Amentnlep IV, the king changed fw name when he nlroduced the mwiQlbetstk warship of Aten, (he sun god.
He founded a new capfid, Akhafalan , but this, like his religion, wo; abandoned after his death.
In return Asiatic products such as copper and tin and, before 1450, pottery from Crete were imparled into Egypt.
While the Egyptian and Hitlile empires pfoyad key rales in the extensive Mediterranean trade networks of the 2nd midermium w, behind the coast there were other powerful states those of the Assyrians, Babylonians (the ftassite kingdom), Humous (the kingdom of Mtaroi} and Elamites.
T he eastern Mediterranean became extremely affluent during the Bronze Age.
Egypt experienced stability under a central government led by dynasties from Thebes.
Dominion over Nubia, which had been lost during the political disintegration of the First Intermediate Period , was restored, guaranteeing access to products from the African heartland.
Royal missions were sent to re-establish diplomatic contacts with Syria and Palestine, a move that further encouraged trade in the eastern Mediterranean.
In southern Mesopotamia foreign trade was increasingly in the hands of private individuals, in contrast to earlier periods when trade was controlled by temples or the government* Luxury' items such as gold, lapis lazuli, ivory and pearls were exchanged for Mesopotamian textiles, sesame oil and resin.
At the beginning of the 2nd millennium there was a struggle for ascendancy and control among the southern cities, in which Isin and Larsa were early players.
Later the city of Babylon under King Hammurabi (r.92-50 bc:} conquered most of the cities of southern Mesopotamia and up the Euphrates to Mari.
Although this empire was relatively shortlived* it transformed southern Mesopotamia into a single state.
Hammurabi is most famous for his Law ('ode which, although not the earliest known in Mesopotamia p is the first for which w r e have the complete text.
While these changes w'ere occurring in the south, in northern Mesopotamia the inhabitants of the core Assyrian city of Asbur were creating trading networks with cities in Anatolia up to 8tX> kilometres away, where they established trading outposts to exchange Assyrian textiles and ""annakum"" for silver and gold.
HrmTE expansion and contraction To the north and east of Mesopotamia there w r ere, by the mid-2nd millennium He, numerous small Human (sometimes called Mi ran iiian) principalities, while the Uittites controlled much of Anaudia.
Texts written in the wedgeshaped characters of the cuneiform script tell us there were other kingdoms in Anatolia such as Arzawa, Assnwa, Ahhiyawa and Lnkka. but their exact Location is uncertain.
Soon afterwards, however, the Hittites were beset by internal dissension and revolts, and lost much of their extended territory until they were left controlling only central Anatolia.
For about a century very little is known about events in Mesopotamia and Anatolia.
In 1480 B c the llurrian kingdoms were united by King Parrattama as the kingdom of Mi tan ni, and by 1415 bc the Kassitcs, a people w ho had been slowly moving into Babylonia, had established dominance in tile area.
The [(itlitcs once again controlled much of the Anatolian plateau and were heavily involved in Mediterranean tratio, receiving commodities such as copper, goid and grain as tribute from the cities under their influence or control.
At the same time they were spreading southwards into the Levant, an area where the Egyptians under the Xew' Kingdom dynasties w r ere also expanding.
This was also the time of the greatest Egyptian expansion, predominantly geared towards securing resources from Nubia and West Asia.
Thutmose 1 campaigned as far as the Euphrates River, and Thutmose HI reclaimed Syria, thus extending the empire to Carchemish.
He also established Egyptian control over Nubia up to the Fourth Cataract, Egyptian domination over Palestine and Syria once again lapsed until Sety l recovered Palestine.
He initiated a period of fierce competition with the I Nukes for control of the Levant, which came to a head at the Battle of Qadesh in 1275 BC, Although the Egyptians claimed victory the Nitrites probably gained the upper hand, as the area around and south of Damascus came under Hittite influence.
Soon after this battle the resurgent Assyrians under King Adad-nirari I captured the Mitanniavt capital ofWashukanni and, with the collapse of the Mitarmi kingdom, established themselves as a power equal to Egypt, In response the llittites formed a pact of non-aggression with the Egyptians that led to a period of stability in the region.
The Assyrians were not directly affected by these upheavals and continued to expand.
They invaded Babylon as well as the Levant, where they took advantage of the collapse of the Hittite Empire.
However, by the close of the 2nd millennium Assyrian dominance was also fading and the kingdom of Elam to the east now became the most powerful player in the region. c 1 Empires and trade in mt 2nd millennium bc o ftD| 0 j Mmoon ffitfcmenr 2000—14S0 Bt frodad pofr Ml Hirtiit Empire 1400 K _J tflvplian Empire HOD £ □ Human kingdom of Mitonni r 14D0 Bf 1 I KosatB kingdom MOO bc MW Assyrian Empbe-e.
His grave was the only one which archaeologists found largely inlad and it contained, besides hb mommy, an osiounding weollh of grave goods including dismantled chociofs r beds, masks, games and musical instruments.
T Die movements of the ""Sea Peoples"" bonds who roamed the Mediterranean during the 13th century er have been reconstructed an the basis of few written sources and little archaeological evidence.
In Egypt two attacks by these tribes have been documented Merenpfah withstood on attack an the Nile dello by o united force of Libyans and the Sea Peoples.
Any returned during the reign of Rameses III {11§4~S3 IC| r attacking by land and sea.
They were defeated, bat later some settled peacefully in Egypt, others in Palestine Egyptian pharaohs triumphantly retarded their victories over the Sea Peoples, exaggerating the threat posed by groups whom at other times they often employed as mercenaries.
In addition lt> tedar from iheir mountains and purple dye made from local shellfish. they traded topper from Cyprus and other raw maleriak plained from htir colonies in ihe western Mediterranean and further □field.
Their line craft products including glassware and arnomanls carved from Ihe ivory of Syrian elephants were also highly sought after.
To the south Ihe Phoeniciaa homeland bordered on the newly founded slates ol the Israelites and Ihe Philistines ihe latter descended from one group of the "" Sea Peoples"" whu had caused such upheaval in the Mediterranean during the late 2nd millennium If.
Both the archaeological and textual evidence indicates that there was no longer the vast wealth that had supported the lavish royal lifestyles and military campaigns of the Late Bronze Age.
Although major cities remained occupied, the empires of the Egyptians, Humans, Hittltes, Elamites and Assyrians no longer held sway over the region.
If the client state subsequently failed to provide “gifts* , the Assyrians treated this as an act of rebellion and conquered the state, A local ruler was then appointed, or the country was annexed and ruled by a provincial governor.
This method of domination and control channelled all the tributes of clients and booty of conquered countries into the heartland of Assyria.
Thus the Assyrians not only acquired an extensive empire but also great Wealth, enabling their rulers to build fabulous palaces, establish several new capitals and commission works of art ranging from exquisite ivory carvings to monumental stone reliefs.
ISRAEL AND JlJDAH The Levant was one of the main areas to suffer the effects of Assyrian expansion.
The Israelites had settled in Palestine, their traditional ' promised land"", around 1250 ejc (map 2L A little later, around 1200 BC, the Philistines occupied the adjacent area of Phi list in.
From the lale 9lh century onwards I hey sometimes enslaved and resettled thousands af conquered people in areas lor from their homelands. (r.06-966 BC| expanded the kingdom and chose Jerusalem as its religious and political centre.
Under David and his son Solomon the kingdom prospered, becoming an international power and a centre of culture and trade.
PART 1 QTnp*> Yclnyo Indian Oeea* 1 4 Assyrian, Nm-Bmyloniah and Widian Empires 7S0-550 K k$ftr\ fmfire t HO K fciyricfl S 80 K taQ&bytacn fmprtt.
Egypt and Assyria After the central government of the Egyptian New Kingdom collapsed around 1069 BC, the country was ruled by two competing dynasties based in the Nile delta and Thebes.
A family of local lords established itself as a powerful dynasty, governing from Napata.
When the rulers based in the delta threatened Thebes, the priest of the state god Amun sought the protection of the Nubian king Piy , granting him the title Pharaoh of Egypt.
Piy conquered Thebes and went northwards to put down opposition by the delta rulers.
His successor completed the conquest of Egypt, reversing centuries of Egyptian domination of Nubia.
Thus Babylon was ruled by a member of the Assyrian royal family as co-king rather than as governor.
However, they never completely controlled it and, after a number of additional campaigns, they withdrew to leave friendly “client kings” in place.
During this period Egyptian culture flourished, with Greek Classical and Hellenistic influences becoming increasingly prominent.
Soon afterwards Nabopolassar was succeeded by his son, the biblical conqueror Nebuchadnezzar, and the Medes began their extensive conquest of the Iranian Plateau.
They hod adopted a number of ideas from the Assyrians including the use of cuneiform writing but they had their own distinctive culture and were skilled in working both bronze and iron.
Hie languishing Gulf trade revived under their auspices, and the resulting wealth and stability enabled Babylonian cultural life to continue, assuring the survival of Mesopotamian literary and scientific traditions.
Assyrian power grew once again in the late 8th century bc, and after gaining control of Babylonia and the Levant the empire was soon in conflict with Egypt.
This ftomon marble copy of Athena, goddess of wot end wisdom, was based on o stalue by (he Greek sculptor Myron in (he 5th century it.
The original would have been mode of bronze using the lsKt-wa.se"" technique, o method that enoUed the Greeks to portray the most lifelike ef figures, ▼ Outing the Bth and 7th centuries it the Greeks tome to ploy o pivotal rale in the growing Mediterranean trade.
However, their ambitions oho led to confrontation* with rival meccbont force*, notably the Phoenicians.
The cultural and political life of Greece, and particularly of Athens, in the 5th century bc was to have a profound impact on Western civ ilization, in Athens the principles of democracy were established and scientific and philosophical reasoning taken to unprecedented heights.
The Athenian literary tradition exemplified by the tragedies of Sophocles and the comedies of Aristophanes formed a central part of its legacy.
Also in Athens* architecture and forms of art such as sculpture and vase painting took on the Classical styles that still influence the Western sense of aesthetics.
Modem botanical and geological studies reveal a remarkable stability in the Greek countryside during the last 3-4/HX) years* until the recent industrialization of agriculture.
Today's farmers grow labour-intensive crops such as apricots and grapes in the valleys along the coast, cultivate cereals and olives on the less fertile mountain slopes, and use the mountain pastures as grazing land.
It is likely that the ancient rural population of Greece practised a similar mixed agriculture* supplemented with marine resources.
The Greek city-states Whereas the many islands in the Aegean Sea provide secure points for navigation and promote maritime traffic* crosscountry communication is hindered by the mountains* which leave many areas isolated.
This functioned as the political t administrative and religious centre for the surrounding countryside.
Some city-states expanded their influence and came to dominate; others remained on a more equal footing with neighbouring cities, with whom they acted as a federal unit in matters such as foreign policy.
During the 8th century bc a sense of a Greek identity emerged, primarily based on language and religion and expressed in the panHellenic festivals such as the Olympic Gaines and the shared oracles at Delphi and Dodona.
Often high-quality agricultural land further separated from each other by mountain*, encouraged expansion overseas. establish new city-states well away from home (map 2 J These colonies retained the culture and religion of the mother oitic*s, yet in a political sense functioned independently.
The earliest colonics in Syria and Italy , founded by Erctria and Chalcis, were primarily trading posts, hut the quest for arable land probably played a key role in the colonization of Sicily and the Black Sea area, mostly by Chalcis, Corinth and Miletus.
Darius then demanded the submission of all the mainland Greek cities, but Athens and Sparta refused.
PART 1 after most of the Persian fleet was lost in storms around Mount Athos.
Infuriated, Darius’s successor Xerxes prepared an even larger invasion, to which many of the Greek city-states responded by mounting their first united force, led by Sparta.
They knew they could not defeat the Persians on land and so left their city to the enemy, who burned Athens to the ground.
The small and independent Greek city-states had managed to defeat the greatest empire at that time.
Athens and Sparta Athens gained tremendous prestige through its contributions to the victory over the Persians and, when Sparta declined, seemed the obvious leader of an anti-Persian pact.
Although the main aims of this confederacy, the Delian League, were protection against the Persians and seeking compensation for the incurred losses, the Athenians soon used the alliance to build an empire.
They imposed heavy tributes on their allies and punished revolts mercilessly.
Sparta and other Greek cities watched the growth of Athens with suspicion.
Not only did they fear Athens’s military power, but they were also wary of democracy, Athens’s radical contribution to political innovation.
Attica’s countryside was sacked annually and the population, withdrawn within the city’s walls, suffered famine and plague that killed a quarter of its number, including Pericles.
The remains of this late 5th-century temple are at Segesta in Sicily a focal point for Greek trade.
Its columns are in the simple Doric style, first of the three major orders of Classical architecture; the progressively more complex and ornate Ionic and Corinthian styles followed later.
Athenian imperialist policy led to war with Sparta and its Peloponnesian allies described by the historian Thucydides as the most appalling of all the Greek wars in losses and suffering.
His son Alexander, charismatic leader and military genius, inherited Philip's ambitions as well as his army, and he conquered not only the Persian Empire but also lands well beyond.
However, his attempts to weld his vast conquests into a unified empire under combined Macedonian and local rulers ended with his early death in Babylon at the age of 32.
Learning of this, King Croesus of Lydia (a country rich in goldmines) saw an opportunity to enlarge his empire to the east.
He consulted the Delphic oracle, which prophesied that he would destroy a great kingdom and, confident of his success, Croesus faced Gyrus at Hattusas.
He was said to have been a just ruler who allowed his subjects religious freedom and did not impose excessively harsh taxes.
Rather than accepting the existing administrative structures as his predecessors had done, Darius organized the empire into 20 provinces or “satrapies”, each ruled by one of his relatives.
To ensure efficient government he created a road network and installed a regular system of taxation based on the gold Daric coin.
Trade prospered under the Achaemenids, facilitated by the efficient use of coinage.
Sophisticated irrigation works using underground watercourses and canals increased agricultural productivity.
Pasorgadae i inapohs DRANGIANA XIV PARIKANIA XVII GANDARA VII INDIA XX Arabian Sea and the Greek city-states on the coast of Asia Minor revolted.
The rest of the empire remained intact until it was conquered by Alexander the Great.
Philip forged a professional army, unified Macedonia and, having gained control of Thessaly, expanded into Illyria and Thrace, bringing important harbours and goldmines into the empire.
His expansion met with hostility from Athens and Thebes, whose military power had greatly diminished during the Peloponnesian War.
His 20-year-old son Alexander III succeeded him, and after crushing opposition to his reign in Macedonia he joined the remainder of his father’s army in Persian territory.
On a narrow coastal plain he dealt the Persians a devastating defeat and captured Darius’s family.
In the east, Alexander’s self-proclaimed status as King of Asia was threatened by rebel satraps.
Alexander the Great had forged an empire which stretched from Greece to the River Indus and which merged Greek and Oriental cultures.
Greek became the common language, and Greek gods were venerated side by side with local deities.
Both Macedonians and Persians ruled as satraps, and Alexander encouraged his generals to marry Persian women, as he himself had done.
He founded 70 new cities, many called Alexandria, which acted as military but also cultural centres of the new cosmopolitan society.
Alexander’s success was rooted in his prowess as a military leader, a role in which he displayed great personal courage, and in clever propaganda, such as the construction of a myth proclaiming his divinity a belief which he himself seemed to share.
The main contenders were Antigonus of Phrygia, Seleucus of Babylonia, Ptolemy of Egypt, and Antipatros, in charge of Macedonia and Greece.
Macedonia, generally regarded as the seat of legitimate rule, became the centre of continuous conflict.
This graphic detail, modelled on a 4thcentury bc Hellenistic painting commissioned by Alexander's own generals is taken from the mosaic at the House of the Faun in Pompeii.
It was created in the late 2nd or early 1st century bc clear evidence of Alexander's enduring reputation among the Romans.
T Throughout the lands of Alexander's short-lived empire, Greek culture blossomed under Hellenistic rule, usually enriched by indigenous cultures; even in India, at the very limit of Alexander's conquests, it had a lasting effect.
Developments in astronomy, medicine, mathematics and engineering took place alongside patronage of the arts, the building of libraries and the encouragement of education.
With the Roman Empire acting as intermediary, these achievements laid the basis for a later European civilization.
Central to Hinduism are a belief in the transmigration of souls, the worship of many deities (who eventually came to be seen as aspects of one god), the religious sanction of strict social stratification, the caste system, and the ability to assimilate rather than exclude different religious beliefs.
Distinguished from other, more local beliefs by a focus on holy vvritings, or scriptures, most of them continue to flourish today.
Its sacred writings, the Vedas, were first compiled by seers and priests, or riahis, and were based on myths, legends and hymns passed down from antiquity.
Gautama lived at a time of great religions ferment in India, and Buddhism was one of a number of sects that aimed to reform Hinduism.
Another, more extreme, reform movement was Jainism, whose asceticism was a reaction to the rigid ritualism of Hinduism.
Buddhism shared with Hinduism the belief in the cycle of rebirth, but differed in the way in which escape from the cycle could he achieved.
Indeed the appearance of Buddhism stimulated a resurgence in Hinduism, which may be why Buddhism failed to take a permanent hold in India, ¥ Several founders of world rdigiorts immediately oiler ii.
PART I Zoroaster believed that the end of the world was imminent, and that only the righteous would survive the great conflagration to share in the new creation.
The teachings of Judaism form the Old Testament of the Bible; in addition, Jewish law is recorded in the Talmud , the first codification being the Mishnah , written down about ad 200.
The rise of Christianity Named after its founding figure, Jesus Christ , Christianity developed from Judaic roots.
Christians believe in one God and that Jesus, born in Bethlehem, is the Son of God the Messiah whose arrival on Earth had long been promised in the Jewish tradition.
Jesus’s radical teachings and disregard for the establishment led to his death by crucifixion, an event Christians believe he overcame in the Resurrection.
In the first few centuries ad, Christianity flourished in many parts of the Roman world, and Christ’s teachings (written down in the New Testament) spread by apostolic figures such as Paul of Tarsus.
Confucianism and Daoism Two philosophical traditions were dominant in China when Buddhist monks arrived there in the 4th century ad.
Confucianism, named after the author of the Classics, Kongzi, or Confucius , propounded a set of morals encouraging a way of life ruled by the principles of order, hierarchy and respect.
Confucius worked for much of his career as an administrator in one of the Warring States , and his ideas subsequently greatly influenced political philosophy in China and many other parts of East Asia.
The other tradition, Daoism, or “the Way”, called for people to find ways of being in harmony with the world.
In its combination of cosmology and the sanctification of nature, certain mountains were considered especially sacred and became the focus of worship.
Zoroastrianism, the religion named after him, had a major impact on the development on many other religious traditions, including Judaism and Christianity.
Its scriptures, the Avesta , set out the Zoroastrian belief that life is a constant struggle between good and evil.
Zoroaster rejected the pantheism of the Indolranian religions and proclaimed one of the ancient deities, Ahura Mazda as the one supreme god.
By ad 64 Nero used Christians as victims in the imperial arenas, and in the early 4th century Diocletian organized campaigns against them.
However, Diocletian's successor Constantine legalized Christianity, and at the first ""Ecumenical Council"" (held at Nicaea in 325) he brought church and state together.
Constantine had converted to Christianity after a key victory over his rivals in 312, a victory he ascribed to the power invested in him as the servant of the Highest Divinity, which he equated with the Christian god.
Many sects emerged during this early spread of Christianity, and councils were periodically held to discuss the doctrinal disagreements raised with some sects declared heretical as a result.
Between ad 66 and 73 rebellion against Roman rule broke out, but the empire reconquered Jerusalem in 70, destroying the Jewish temple.
Strong rulers such as the earty Mouryas and the Guptas succeeded in uniting large areas to form empires, but weak successors were unable to bold them together.
Most of them readily adopted Indian culture, settling in towns such as Toksosik [Taxila j or Mathura, converting ta Buddhism or other Indian religions., palroniiing on and archilefture, profiling from South Asia 's nourishing inter national trade, and on the whole beaming socially assimilated.
Ambjun Sett t ndian Ocean PALtA m D uring the 2nd millennium BC Indo-Aryan nomads were the first of many groups from Iran or Central Asia to invade the Indian subcontinent.
However, neither Persians nor Greeks ever penetrated deeper into the subcontinent, due to the strength of native dynasties.
Chief among these was Magadha, favourably located for control both of riverbome trade and of the sources of raw materials such as iron.
From the 5th century ad onwards, the north was prey to attacks by the ferocious Hunas who swept in from the east.
By the time they reached the Ganges Valley or the Deccan, the force of foreign invasions was spent, and Sri Lanka and the south were generally spared.
Instead they suffered periodic attacks by native groups such as the Mauryans, Tamils and Guptas.
In the 4th century AD the Guptas, who ruled a small kingdom in the Ganges region, began to expand, gaining control of adjacent regions through military conquest, diplomacy and dynastic marriages.
Unlike the earlier Mauryan Empire, however, they established only indirect political authority over much of this area, local rulers usually acting under their suzerainty.
Rural and urban development Much of the subcontinent, such as the jungle regions, was unsuited to agriculture and was inhabited by huntergatherers.
In addition to the wild produce they collected for their own needs they obtained materials for settled farmers, such as honey, venison and lac , exchanging these for cultivated foodstuffs and manufactured goods.
Rice was the main staple in the east and Sri Lanka, millet in the south and wheat in the north; animals, particularly cattle, were kept.
Rulers particularly the Mauryas, who exercised strong centralized control over their realms also encouraged the cultivation of wasteland, often by the forced resettlement of groups of low-caste cultivators.
Land taxes and levies on produce provided the main income for states throughout the period, although trade also yielded considerable revenues.
Small era ft enterprises developed info major industries, generally under the control of caste-based guilds.
Jtppgnto &HwmviidhQno Gnyo Nondriwdhorw^ ^imonpvro Vohqgulmci Jo$di Supparotga Prafiuhana.
In additii>n , Sc>u i hcast Asia acted as an entrepot between Chinn and India.
China also traded overland along the Silk Road, which skirted the deserts of Central Asia From north India Chinese goods, particularly sil were carried through Persia or hy sea to Alexar Rome's principal port for trade using the Indian Ocean.
These land and sea routes also carried Indian religious to the lands of the east.
They rejected Brahminieai Hindu orthodoxy, including the caste system, and were enthusiastically adopted hy the lower castes, merchants and craftsmen.
Buddhism rapidly became the dominant religion in north India, later spreading into the south, Ashoka sent a Buddhist mission to Sri Lanka, where King Devanampiya Tissa became an ardent convert, establishing a Buddhist realm which has endured until today.
Simple complexes of monastic cells grew hy the early centuries ,\t> into substantial monasteries, usually richly endowed hy royalty, merchants and guilds.
Buddhism gradually withered away in the country' of its hirth hut remained vigorous In Sri Lanka, China.
Asio by iMufeafe. fly rh* 5th century ju> Chinese pilgrims were visiting the Indian vjbtontinent to jidy or igioal duununK and to worship ad offer gifa al shrines such m that of ibe Buddha's loath an the bland af Sri Lanka.
By the late 5th century power was concentrated in seven principal states Han, Wei, Zhao, Qin, Chu, Yan and Qi.
They all built enormous walls to protect their borders, fortified their cities and even their villages, and constructed roads and canals to expedite the movement of troops and supplies.
T The conquests in Central Asia of the Hon emperor Wu Di and his embassies to the west opened up a major trade route linking East and West.
Merchant caravans took Chinese goods as far as the Roman Empire in exchange for Western luxury goods.
Well-preserved documents from northwestern China and along this ""Silk Rood"" record the everyday life in garrison towns.
The first Chinese dynasties The Zhou, possibly descended from nomads, established their royal capital at Hao in their ancestral heartland in the Wei River valley.
Despite the continued claim of Zhou kings to the Mandate of Heaven, real power slipped away to a multitude of regional states.
Zheng had reformed Qin, replacing the old kinship-based government with an efficient bureaucratic state.
Proclaiming himself Shi Huang Di, “the First Emperor”, he established his new capital at Xianyang.
Famed for its towers, it boasted wide boulevards, immense walls and gates, religious buildings, palaces and royal pleasure gardens.
Movements of population By ad 2, the date of the first national census, China had a recorded population of 57 million.
This huge number was often mobilized for warfare or vast public works, and in the reign of Wu Di , the “Martial Emperor” who greatly expanded the territories of the empire, some two million people were resettled in colonies in the north and northwest.
However, the later part of the Han dynasty saw a major movement of population southwards a process that was precipitated by a major shift in the course of the Huang He River between ad 2 and 11 that left much of north China, traditionally the centre of power, depopulated.
The art of war in early China These mass population movements occurred in a country unified through major developments in the art of war.
Under the warlords of the Warring States, both individual gallantry and mass brutality were displayed, and armies became professional.
From the 6th century BC new weapons, notably iron swords and armour, had replaced the traditional bronze halberds.
Cavalry outmanoeuvred chariots on the battlefield and the new cities became targets for siege warfare.
The Zhao stronghold of Jinyang was besieged for a year before the attackers turned on each other in a classic piece of Warring States treachery.
From the 5th century BC the states built pounded-earth walls along their frontiers.
While earlier rulers either mounted expeditions against the nomadic “barbarian non-Chinese” or were harassed by them, the Qin and Han were aggressively expansionist.
To keep the nomads out of his new empire, Shi Huang Di joined the sections of walled defences earlier states had built, thus creating the Great Wall.
The nomads often had to be bought off as much as driven away by force, as shown by the Chinese treasures from the tomb of the Xiongnu chief at Noin Ula.
Under the Han, military expansion was backed up by a programme of colonization, and commanderies were set up in areas as farflung as modern Korea and Vietnam.
Many modern Chinese cities are built on foundations laid in the Zhou period, and the earliest Chinese coins, miniature bronze knives and spades come from Zhou cities.
Agricultural productivity was increased by government reforms and the use of more efficient tools, especially new ploughs made of iron.
Politics and the end of the Han Empire In the period of the Warring States, a political philosophy developed that recognized the uplifting nature of public life, but also viewed politics as ultimately corrupting.
Clashes resonate throughout the history of the early Chinese empires between, on the one hand, the authoritarian politics of many of the rulers and, on the other, the high ideals of Confucius perhaps the most influential of all Chinese philosophers and his Reformist successors, which placed emphasis on virtue and fair government.
Unlike their Shang predecessors, rulers were bound more by codes of human conduct than the demands of the spirits.
It was, however, peasant revolts inspired by messianic beliefs, often drawing on Daoism, that disrupted and weakened the Han Empire towards the end of its life.
A The massive mausoleum of Shi Huang Di, ""the First Emperor"", located at the Qin capital of Xianyong (later Chang'an under the Han dynasty), took 700,000 conscripted labourers 35 years to build.
The life-size terracotta soldiers pictured here were among the 7,500 that guarded the vast burial pits surrounding the elaborate tomb.
T While rice, millet and wheat were the staples of Han agriculture, supplemented by vegetables, many areas also produced other commodities such as timber or fruit.
Hemp was grown to make clothing for the majority, while silk supplied the elite.
Iron was produced from the 6th century bc and was used for the majority of tools and weapons.
Salt production was another major industry, obtained from the sea in coastal regions but elsewhere mined from brine deposits often found deep underground.
Horses and wheeled transport allowed people to exploit areas where pasture was too sparse to support herds in one place all the year round.
Encouraged partly by changes in climate and vegetation, people took up a nomadic existence, moving with their herds.
These animals, formerly kept for meat, were now mainly reared for milk which was made into a variety of foods, including cheese, yoghurt and fermented drinks.
They probably included Tocharian speakers in the Tarim Basin, where there have been finds of desiccated mummies of individuals with a strongly European appearance which date from this period.
In West Asia, texts that include Indo-European terms identify other Indo-European-speaking groups, including the leaders of the non-Indo-Europeanspeaking Mitanni.
C entral Asia is a vast arid zone of steppe grasslands, looming mountains and inhospitable deserts.
However, later inhabitants such as the Persians (later 1st millennium bc) and Sasanians devised more complex underground irrigation canals which again brought prosperity to the region.
Up to the 5th millennium BC settlements were scattered along the rivers of Central Asia.
These often consisted of partially subterranean houses and were home to small groups of hunter-gatherers who caught fish and a variety of game and collected plant foods.
Settlement and pastoralism By 4500 BC small permanent communities had appeared in favoured regions of Central Asia on the margins of Europe and West Asia, growing crops and, more particularly, herding livestock.
Some of these were among the first to domesticate the horse, initially for meat.
A Oiiiwse bronze minors • Chinese silk southern Russia in the 4th millennium BC, and by 2000 BC the chariot dominated battlefields from Mesopotamia to China.
The introduction of the spoked wheel (replacing the heavy solid wheel) made these vehicles much more manoeuvrable.
Horse-riding was first adopted around 2000 BC by peoples dwelling north of the Caspian Sea.
By 1000 BC full nomadic pastoralism had developed, from which emerged the horse-riding warriors who were to become the scourge of the Classical world.
While the origins of Indo-European speakers are still a matter of heated debate, many scholars would now place them among the groups dwelling between the Black Sea and Caspian Sea in the 4th and 3rd millennia bc.
These are archaeologically identifed as the Srubnaya and Andronovo cultures and their predecessors.
By the beginning of the 1st millennium ad Indo-European languages were spoken in Europe as well as much of West Asia, Iran, South Asia and parts of Central Asia.
By the 1st millennium bc a fusion of nomadic and sedentary cultures gave rise to several kingdoms in southwestern Central Asia, which by the mid-6th century bc were largely under Persian control.
The Achaemenid kings of the Persian Empire built roads, fortified cities and developed irrigation systems, and the influence of Persian culture was felt deep into Central Asia.
The Graeco-Bactrian kings were the first to establish links across Central Asia with China.
The nomad confederacies In the later centuries bc a series of powerful confederacies emerged among the nomad peoples.
These nomad groups buried their elite in great mounds such as those at Noin Ula, Pazyryk and Kul Oba.
Horses, central to the nomadic way of life, often played a major role in burial rituals, sacrificed to accompany their owners, along with much gold and silver and lavishly decorated textiles, some of which have been marvellously preserved in the frozen conditions of the tundra.
Such rich burials are described by the Greek historian Herodotus, whose accounts closely match the archaeological finds.
These nomads wore highly decorated clothes and ornamented their bodies with tattoos.
Hemp was not only used for textiles but was also smoked, as evidenced by remains of smoking paraphernalia.
Stringed instruments also found in the tombs attest a love of music and song.
Originating on the Mongolian plateau, they conquered and ruled the oasis cities of the Turfan Basin in the 2nd century bc.
Xiongnu expansion drove other nomad groups further west, including the Yuezhi, who settled on the Oxus River.
The Xiongnu and other nomad peoples developed a distinctive culture, marked particularly by a splendid tradition of zoomorphic art.
Other shared practices included binding children’s heads in infancy to produce an elongated shape.
They also developed major innovations in equestrian and military equipment, such as the composite bow or the scalearmour which made Sarmatian cavalry such formidable opponents of the Romans.
A From the 1st millennium bc substantial population movements took place in the steppe region.
Groups often spilled over into adjacent settled lands, in some cases laying waste settled communities before being driven off, as with the 8th-century incursions of the Cimmerians into West Asia.
Sometimes the invaders settled and became incorporated into the civilization of the lands they overran the Sakas and Kushans in South Asia, for example.
China successfully resisted many nomad incursions partly by erecting massive defences that culminated in the Great Wall though its western provinces fell for a period to the might of the Xiongnu nomads.
One branch entered Europe in the 5th century, briefly wreaking havoc under the charismatic leadership of Attila, while the Hephtalites overran the Sasanian Empire and laid waste the cities of northern India, where they established a short-lived empire.
The drums were placed in elite burials and probably had a ritual significance.
Made using a lost wax"" casting technique, they were widely distributed and reached the islands of Southeast Asia, where metallurgy was also being practised.
By the 2nd century bc the area was linked to both India and China by sea routes which were used by Hindu Brahmin priests and Buddhist missionaries as well as merchants.
As a result, new ideas of astronomy, art, science, medicine, government and religion were spread, and Buddhist and Hindu states were established in the region.
The remains of a major Funan trading city have been excavated at Oc Eo.
I n the early 2nd century bc the Xiongnu nomads drove their Yuezhi neighbours westwards, in the process making the Yuezhi king’s skull into a drinking cup.
After enormous difficulties and numerous adventures, Zhang Qian reached the Yuezhi in the Oxus Valley and although he failed to persuade them to renew their conflict with the Xiongnu, he took back to China detailed accounts of the lands he visited and the new opportunities for trade that they offered.
For a time the Chinese controlled this “Silk Road” through Central Asia, establishing the Western Regions Protectorate with garrisons in the caravan towns, but the area was always menaced and often controlled by barbarian groups such as the Wusun and, especially, the Xiongnu.
Dependent largely on the hardy Bactrian camel, the Silk Road trade took Chinese silks (a prized commodity in the Roman Empire) and other luxuries to India and thence to the markets of the West.
In exchange, many Roman manufactured goods found their way to China, along with the highly valued “heavenly horses” of Ferghana, gems from India, and grapes, saffron, beans and pomegranates from Central Asia.
A number of possible routes linked China and the West, their course channelled by lofty mountains and freezing deserts, but political and military factors were also important in determining which routes were in use at any time.
The oasis towns along the Silk Road rose and fell in prosperity with the fluctuating importance of the various routes.
Southeast Asia By the 2nd century bc sea routes linking India with China via Southeast Asia were also in common use.
While Indian literature makes only vague references to trade with Southeast Asia, finds of Indian beads and Western objects in the region such as Roman coins and cut gems and of Southeast Asian tin in south Indian sites, attest to the region’s contacts with India.
Riverborne trade linked China and mainland Southeast Asia during the 1st millennium BC, and sea traffic developed during the period of the Han Empire.
At this time the area to its south was probably home to a number of small independent chiefdoms united in opposition to Chinese territorial aggression.
Regular seaborne trade took place in the Gulf, Sumerians trading directly with the Indus civilization, along with the coastal inhabitants of Oman and Makran and the seafaring traders of Bahrain.
Egypt was economically and politically involved with Nubia to its south along the River Nile , and seaborne expeditions through the Red Sea were mounted by Egypt to bring back exotic materials from the Land of Punt, probably situated in Ethiopia.
In subsequent centuries the rise and fall of Mediterranean, western Asiatic and Indian Ocean states and cultures brought a variety of participants into this network, including Persians, Phoenicians and Greeks.
By the 1st millennium BC both Arabians and Indians were familiar with, and exploiting, the monsoon winds to cross the Indian Ocean instead of laboriously following the coast.
These winds carried them east in the summer, down the Red Sea and across to India, while the northeast monsoon in the autumn carried vessels westward from India and down the African coast.
It was not until the final centuries BC, however, that the Greeks and Romans also became acquainted with the monsoon winds.
A Greek sailing manual of around 60 AD, The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea , has provided a wealth of information on trade in this area.
Some expeditions travelled south as far as Rhapta on the coast of East Africa, obtaining ivory, tortoise-shell and incense a round trip of two years because of the timing of the winds.
Others made the more dangerous ocean crossing to India, where they exchanged gold, wine, manufactured goods and raw materials for gems, fine Indian cotton textiles and garments, Chinese silks, spices, aromatics and drugs.
On the return journey they would stop at Kane and Muza to obtain frankincense and myrrh, reaching Alexandria within a year of departure.
Unlike the Romans (whose trade was in low-bulk, high-value commodities, carried directly between their source and the Roman world), other Indian Ocean traders dealt in everyday commodities such as grain, foodstuffs and ordinary textiles and might trade in any port.
A A variety of routes linked the countries of Asia, East Africa and the Mediterranean.
Long-established routes through the Gulf and across the Iranian Plateau flourished during the 1st millennium bc under the Achaemenids and their Hellenistic successors.
From the 2nd century bc the newly established Chinese trade route across Central Asia linked with these existing routes, while Arabs and Indians operated sea trade across the Indian Ocean, and desert caravans carried incense from southern Arabia via the Nabataean state to Rome.
Chinese goods reached India via the Silk Road and indirectly by sea via Southeast Asia; from here they were taken by Roman shipping across the Indian Ocean, along with Indian goods.
The Axumite kingdom benefited from this shift, becoming a major producer of incense, while the Arab states that had operated the overland caravans declined.
MGE5IA V SUPtR^y -^edqnia Vlart*> A Skilful political manoeuvring helped Octavian to secure victory over his rivals in the struggle to succeed his uncle Julius Caesar.
Augustus used his position of supreme power well, enacting a raft of important legal, economic, social and administrative reforms, reviving traditional religious beliefs, encouraging the arts, and constructing and restoring many public buildings in Rome.
Roman culture also spread to lands beyond the imperial frontier, influencing among others the Germanic barbarians who later overran the empire but who would eventually perpetuate many of its traditions and institutions, notably ihr ou gh the medium of the Christian Church.
Throughout Rome’s mighty empire, science was applied for utilitarian ends, from underfloor heating to watermills, aqueducts and an impressive road network.
Rome bequeathed to posterity its efficient administration, codified laws, widespread literacy and a universally understood language.
It also adopted and spread Christianity, for which it provided the institutional base.
The city of Rome developed in the 7th and 6th centuries bc from a number of settlements spread over seven low, flattopped hills.
To strengthen its grip on the conquered territory, colonies were founded and settled by both Roman citizens and Latin allies.
Swift access to these colonies was provided by an extensive road network, created from the late 4th century bc and greatly extended during the 2nd century bc.
Expansion beyond Italy The first confrontation outside Italy was against the Carthaginians, who saw their commercial interests in Sicily threatened by Rome’s expansion.
During the three Punic Wars Rome seized territory formerly held by the Carthaginians (Sardinia, Corsica, Spain and the tip of northern Africa), but also suffered its worst defeats.
As a result, Greek culture began to exert a powerful influence on Roman life and art.
The newly acquired provinces (map 1 \ created the opportunity for individuals to make a fortune and forge a loyal army.
One of these new powerful commanders, Pompey , conquered Syria, Cilicia, llithynia and Pontus, while Julius Caesar annexed Gaul and expanded the African province.
Caesar’s influence had grown to such an extent that the Senate saw its position threatened and ordered him to disband his army in 49 bc.
Caesar’s adoptive son Octavian officially restored the Senate’s powers, nominally taking up the position of princeps while gradually increasing his authority.
In 27 bc he was awarded the title “Augustus” , and this date is usually taken as the start of the imperial period.
Augustus’s reign brought a period of peace and stability, the so-called Pax Romana, which would last until ad 180.
Augustus conquered the entire area up to the River Danube, which, together with the River Rhine, formed his northern border.
In the east the frontier was less well defined and was controlled more by political means, such as alliances with neighbouring kingdoms.
Augustus also annexed Egypt, Judaea and Galatia and reorganized the legions left by his predecessors, keeping a firm grip on those provinces that required a military presence by awarding them the status of imperial province.
The emperor himself appointed the governors for these provinces, while the Senate selected the governors for the others.
Whereas Tiberius refrained from any expansion, Claudius annexed Mauretania, Thrace, Lyciaand parts of Britain, w hile Vespasian conquered the “Agri Deeuntates"" region.
Under Trajan the empire reached its maximum extent, ineluding Arabia and Dacia by 106.
Under Diocletian the empire was divided into Eastern and Western parts, each ruled by an "" Augustus' 1 , while the provinces were replaced by a massive new bureaucracy and the army was greatly extended.
T During the reign of Augustus trade become Rome's lifeline, To feed its ropidly expanding urban population, ii depended on the import af com fat from Sicily, later from Africa and Egypt and lo suh the teles of Rome's ""nouveau* rides' luxury goods were imported from even further afield silk (ram China, hair for wigs from Germany, ivory from Africa.
By the 350s, however, long-term processes of social and economic chonge (largely the product of extensive contacts with the Roman Empire) had created a smaller number of much more powerful groupings.
Of these the Gotones , then based in Poland, would have the biggest impact on Rome and its European dominions.
T hroughout its history the Roman Empire suffered frequent small-scale raids along its European frontier, but major invasions were rare.
However, the first large-scale invasion of the Roman Empire did not occur until the 160s, when the movement of Gothic and other Germanic groups from northern Poland towards the Black Sea led to the Marcomannic War.
Another time of turmoil followed in the mid-3rd century, associated with Goths, Herules and others in the east and Franks and Alemanni in the west.
Archaeologically, the eastward moves are mirrored in the creation and spread of the Goth-dominated Gernjachov Culture in the later 3rd century.
None of this, however, amounts to a picture of constant pressure on the Roman Empire.
Relations between the empire and the peoples beyond its borders, whom the Romans regarded as uncivilized “barbarians”, were not all confined to skirmishing and warfare.
Numerous individual Germans served in Roman armies, while Roman diplomatic subsidies supported favoured Germanic rulers.
Some important trading routes also operated, such as the famous amber route to the Baltic , and there was a steady flow of materials and labour across the border.
These new sources of wealth and in particular the struggle to control them resulted in the social, economic and political transformation of the Germanic world.
By the 4th century the many small-scale political units, which had relatively egalitarian social structures, had evolved into fewer, larger and more powerful associations that were dominated by a social elite increasingly based on inherited wealth.
None had the power to stand up to the empire on their own, but neither was Roman domination of them total, the Alemanni even seeking to annex Roman territory in the 350s and dictate diplomatic terms.
Goodwill was lacking on both sides, however, and the two admitted groups became embroiled in six years of warfare with the Roman Empire.
In the meantime the Goths under the leadership of Athanaric had in turn forced Sarmatians onto Roman soil, Taifali barbarians had crossed the Danube to be defeated in 377, and numerous groups of Alans had begun to move west, some being recruited into the Roman army in the early 380s.
Here they were reinforced by the former followers of Radagaisus to create the Visigoths.
During this period the Vandals and Alans, now united under Geiseric, seized the rich lands of North Africa, while eastern Britain fell decisively under the sway of AngloSaxon invaders.
The losses in Britain, Aquitaine, Spain and North Africa fundamentally eroded the power of the Western Empire.
Essentially, it maintained itself by taxing agricultural production, so that losses of land meant losses of revenue.
Tax-raising in northern Gaul was periodically disrupted by Franks and others.
The collapse of Hunnic power in the 450s, however, heralded Roman imperial collapse.
New kingdoms quickly emerged around the Visigoths in southwestern Gaul and Spain, and the Burgundians in the Rhone Valley, where they had been resettled by the Romans in the 430s after being mauled by the Huns.
Lombards and Gepids took territories in the middle Danube, and Theoderic the Amal united Gothic renegades from the Hunnic Empire with other Goths serving in the Eastern Roman army.
This new force, the Ostrogoths, had conquered the whole of Italy by 493.
To protect their estates, the basis of their wealth, many local Roman landowners decided to come to terms with the invaders, with the result that the successor kingdoms all acquired some important vestiges of Roman institutions and culture.
For example, in the 6th century the Frankish kingdom grew apace, the Ostrogoths were destroyed by the Byzantine emperor Justinian, and the rise of the Avars prompted the Lombards to invade northern Italy in 568.
Over the next thousand years the spread of intensive food production enabled their numbers to continue rising and a growing area to become more densely occupied.
As a result, states and empires and other complex forms of socioeconomic organization developed in almost every continent.
Foremost in terms of wealth, population and technological achievement was China.
Riding eastwards end westwards from Central Asia, they frequently raided the lands af permanently settled peoples who increasingly used the plough la cultivate their fields.
A nuni her of intensive methods of cultivation had been developed before 500.
At the same time new intensive farming regimes were developed which tackled the problem of sustaini tig soi 1 terti 1 ity i n the face of coniinuous use.
In medieval Europe an unprecedented level of central planning evolved, based on the manor.
This made possible economies of scale in the use of expensive items (such as draught animals and iron tools) and the implementation of a new strategy for raising production while maintaining fertility the three-year rotation system.
Wheat was grown in one year, beans and other legumes to restore nitrogen to the soil were grown in the next, and the land was allowed to lie fallow in the third.
Where a figure seems to have reached its optimum under a precise set of environmental conditions, a period of depletion often followed.
In Mesoamerica, for example, the “Maya Collapse” of the 9th century, when the population dropped dramatically from almost five million in the Yucatan Peninsula alone, can at least partly be attributed to degradation of the land caused by intensive agriculture coupled with a reduction in rainfall.
In western Europe it is possible that the impact of the Black Death which reduced the population by between a quarter and a half may have been intensified because numbers had in places already passed the point of sustainability for the agriculture of the time.
THE SPREAD OF WORLD RELIGIONS The Black Death was seen by the Christian population of Europe as God’s punishment for their sins.
Christianity won an increasing number of adherents in Europe during the medieval period, while Buddhism spread to East and Southeast Asia.
In India, the land of Buddhism’s birth, Hinduism revived, particularly in the south.
In the 630s the new religion of Islam emerged in the Arabian Peninsula and through military conquest rapidly took hold of the Middle East, North Africa and parts of Europe.
It reached the limits of its westward expansion in 732, when a Muslim army was defeated at Poitiers in central France.
However, over the following centuries the states and empires of Islam frequently inflicted defeats on Christendom.
At the end of the 13th century the Mamluks of Egypt and Syria completed their recapture of the Holy Land from the Latin Church and in 1453 the Ottoman Turks finally succeeded in capturing Constantinople capital of the Orthodox Church.
Islam also eclipsed Zoroastrianism in southwest Asia, pushed Hinduism back in India from the 1190s, and spread into Central Asia through the conversion of the Mongols from the late 13th century.
By 1500 only a tiny proportion of the worlds population lived in large cities.
In Europe, for example, just three million out of an estimated total of 80 million lived in cities with over 10,000 inhabitants.
The characteristic form of medieval urbanism everywhere was the modest market town, evolved as a service centre for the local agricultural economy.
It was a place where surplus crops could be exchanged for other foodstuffs and goods, making it possible to grow a wider range of crops suited to local soils.
It was also home to a variety of specialist craftsmen, whose various wares (tools, leather goods, ceramics, and so on) were made for sale to the rural population.
From the 10th century it win made more productive in Europe partly by the introduction af the three-year rotolion system and improvements in the design of the plough.
However, ihe pattern of life continued much os it always had, dictated by the seasons.
With its estimated population af one and a half million, Hangzhou became a symbol of a golden age In China's history.
TOWNS AND TRADE In the ancient world much effort was devoted to building and adorning cultural and ceremonial capitals such as Babylon, Athens, Rome and Constantinople.
The medieval period too saw the construction and expansion of such cities.
In China, Chang’an was adopted by the Tang dynasty as their capital and was developed to cover an area of 77 square kilometres , with a population of about one million in the 7th century.
The Muslims also oversaw the development of some of Europe’s largest cities at this time notably Cordoba and Seville in Spain and Palermo in Sicily.
It was not until the 12th century that the towns of Latin Christendom really began to grow, the larger among them such as Paris and Cologne building magnificent churches, town halls and palaces.
Ocen n NAHVf AMfftJCANS Trople of Cflpo»rn A Steles ortd empire toatfnyed te rise mi fait in the medieval period.
Many of tha# Ip Eurcsra in 1200 were lo be overwhelmed by the destructive conquests of the Mongols in thel3lh century.
T The Byionline Emperor Justinian I attempted to recreate the Roman Empire of the dth (eatery, before it was divided into Eastern aad Western parts.
Among his conquests were Italy, where he adopted the city of Ravenna os the imperial capital and did much to adorn il.
This 6th century mosaic In the Church of Son Vitale shows the Empress Theodora with her attendants.
The development of market towns was a dear sign of growing sophistication in rural economies, where specialization and exchange (developed in many pans of Asia, Europe, Mcsoamerica and South America well hefore 500) replaced selfsufficiency as the basis of agricultural production.
During the medieval period they spread across Europe and came to play an important role in the economies of both West and East Africa.
Some towns also serviced regional and longdistance trade based largely on linking contrasting ecological zones and dealing in items that were perceived as luxuries notably metals, clothing materials and spices.
From the later 8th century 7 the Viking merchants of Scandinavia linked the fur-producing forests of subarctic regions with the wealthy cities of the Middle East, while from the 9th century a growing tfans-Saharan trade moved gold, ivory and slaves between West Africa and the Muslim north African coast.
Trade in a variety of items, including metalwork, stones and cacao, continued to flourish in Mesoamerica, as did the movement of silks and spices along the highways of Central Asia until the nomadic Mongol hordes created havoc there in the 13th century.
STATES AND EMPIRES Much of the new food surplus was now used to support people performing a range of specialist functions, many of which were not directly concerned with traditional forms of economic activity.
The number of religious specialists grew as Christianity joined Buddhism in generating numerous monastic communities.
Most specialists, however, were associated with the spread of states and empires , A class of literate bureaucrats devising and administering laws and gathering taxes became a feature of the majority of medieval states.
Long established in parts of Asia, such people became central to the functioning of many European states from the 12th century.
Another specialist, even more widespread, was the warrior The Chinese Song Empire was sustained by huge armies, supported by taxes raised from a dependent rural populace, while in Japan the samurai became a socially dominant military aristocracy in the first half of the 2nd millennium.
The great empires of Mesoamericn and South America were similarly built around large bodies of specialist warriors.
In Europe an elite knightly class developed from the late 11th century, eclipsing the more widely spread military obligations of earlier centuries.
Some were extremely loose associations, such as the merchant communities of Viking Russia.
While these did support a king, his rights were very limited and he and his fellow merchant oligarchs did little more than exact relatively small amounts of tribute from largely autonomous Slav subjects.
The feudal states of western Europe, hv contrast, supported an oligarchic landowning elite who exercised tight controls over their peasantry.
The kings, however, again had restricted powers; it was only the development of royal bureaucracies after about 1200 that allowed them to exploit their kingdoms’ taxable resources more effectively.
The vast Chinese empires were organized on yet another basis, with an oligarchy of bureaucratic families competing for power and influence through a governmental system which they entered via civil service examinations.
Some Mesoameriean states, such as those of the Maya, also had literate bureaucracies, while in the 15th century even the non-literate Incas in South America used their quipus for the record-keeping vital to any dominant imperial power.
The history of medieval empires and states was never confined to armies, bureaucracies and dominant elites.
Nearly all displayed progress in art, music, architecture, literature and education.
Elites everywhere patronized the arts and sponsored entertainments, as surviving examples from imperial China, Moorish Spain, early Renaissance Italy and many other places testify.
In the Rfh century*, for example, the monasteries of Carollngjan Europe produced a cursive form of writing that accelerated manuscript production for the remainder of the medieval period, and in early 15th-cenuirY Korea the world’s first system of moveable metal type for Ixjok printing was introduced.
BROADENING HORIZONS During the prehistoric period humans had become widely dispersed as they had colonized the globe.
Nevertheless, many groups had maintained contacts with their neighbours, exchanging ideas and materials.
The development of civilizations from the 4 th mi I Leu ni um bc saw the establishment of direct political and trade links between geographically distant regions.
Such links increased very noticeably during the medieval period, in line with advances in nautical technology.
At the turn of the millennium Viking adventurers combined the sail power and hull strength of their ships to forge the first tenuous links across the Atlantic to America.
More substantial connections were developed by Muslim traders who in their dhows exploited cyclical winds and currents to expand the triangular trade that had existed since the 1st century ai> between the Red Sea, East Africa and India.
Beyond India the trade network extended as far east as China, from where in the early 15th century expeditions sailed to Southeast Asia and Africa.
Their ships were five times tile size of the Portuguese caravels in which the northwest coast of Africa was explored from 1415.
While ocean travel would produce maritime empires outside the Mediterranean only after 1500, land empires continued to ebb and flow' in the medieval period, with some covering vast areas.
Successive Chinese dynasties controlled states often larger than modem China.
In the 7th century the power of the Western Turks ran from the borders of China to the fringes of eastern Europe, and in the 15th century the nomadic Mongols conquered a vast area of Eurasia to create the largest land empire the world has ever seen.
Political, economic and cultural tics between states all burgeoned in the medieval period, accelerating the process of making the world a ■'smaller” place.
However, as well as generating new wealth and cultural stimulation, interaction across Eurasia brought the plague to Europe to particularly devastating effect in the 14th century.
T The rise of Islam from the 630s cut a swathe across the Christian Mediterranean world.
By way of compensation, missionary Christianity spread ever further into northern and eastern Europe, while minority Christian regions survived in Central Asia, the Middle East and northeast Africa.
Meanwhile Buddhism, marginalized in the subcontinent of its birth, extended ever further north and east, into Tibet, China, Southeast Asia, Korea and, finally, Japan.
In Southeast Asia it faced in turn a challenge from Hinduism and then from Islam.
Buddhism, Christianity and Islam were ultimately the most successful , but the older tenets of Judaism and Brahmanical Hinduism still found converts.
Hellenism, the sophisticated neo-Classical philosophy of the Mediterranean world, survived only in a subordinate role, while localized “pagan” traditions and preliterate belief systems often disappeared when challenged persistently by a missionary religion such as Buddhism or Christianity particularly if it enjoyed the backing of a government.
The impact of Islam Islam emerged in the 7th century as a mass movement of devout converts to the Koranic revelation , men who employed warfare to help win adherents from Christianity, Judaism, Hinduism, Buddhism and the older localized faiths.
It fractured the cultural unity of the Christianized Roman Mediterranean and totally eclipsed Zoroastrianism in Persia.
Islamic secular culture absorbed Classical, Zoroastrian and Hindu traditions as well as those of the Arabian Desert.
However, the global expansion of the Islamic world brought subdivision and even schism.
The Islamic sunna was variously interpreted, often regionally, by four separate law schools.
Shiite partisans of dynastic leadership split right away from the consensual Sunni tradition and developed their own conventions.
By the time Islam reached the Danube in Europe, the Niger in West Africa and the Moluccas in Southeast Asia in the 15th century, it was far from cohesive.
The changing face of Christianity Although Christian minorities held on in Egypt, the Middle East and Central Asia , “Christendom” became increasingly identified with Europe, where both the Western and the Eastern traditions compensated for their losses to Islam by vigorous and sometimes competitive missionary activity.
Latin Christianity won over Germanic-speaking peoples and their central European neighbours, while large areas of the Balkans and eastern Europe were converted to Orthodoxy.
After centuries of intermittent disagreement between the Latin and Greek Churches, the Great Schism of 1054 finally brought about the divide between Catholicism and Orthodoxy.
They put Muslims forever on their guard against Latin Christendom and may have added to the pressure on communities of oriental Christians to convert to Islam.
Militant Latin Christendom was more successful in the Baltic region and the Iberian Peninsula, where the later medieval period saw the political reconquest of all Moorish territory.
By 1500 Spain had become a launchpad for transatlantic ventures and the transmission of Christianity to the New World.
The spread of Buddhism outside India Buddhism lost its western lands to Islam and it never regained any large-scale presence in India, the subcontinent of its birth, where the mainstream Hindu tradition predominated alongside what remained of the Jain faith.
In China the secular philosophy of Confucianism was revitalized during the Tang dynasty of the 7th to 9th centuries, retaining its classical status and control of the education system.
It offered moral and intellectual guidelines for a life of public service, virtuous prosperity and happiness to members of the scholar gentry, including the “mandarins” of the Chinese civil service.
It became remarkably pervasive and was intellectually and spiritually creative, bringing literacy to the whole country but it never ousted Kami , a traditionalist compendium of reverence for nature, land and state which remained intrinsic to Japanese cultural identity.
Organizational and cultural parallels Despite profound divergences in creed and world outlook, the major medieval faiths had organizational and cultural parallels.
All had “professional” adherents who adopted a consciously devout, disciplined or even ascetic way of life.
While the reclusive tradition of withdrawal to the wilderness pervaded a range of religious cultures, hermits and wandering “holy men” were never as influential as members of disciplined religious orders and brotherhoods.
The Sangha was central to the life of the Buddhist world and included nuns; the Persian Sufi movement was vital to the spread of Islam among the ordinary people; the great Benedictine houses of western Europe preserved a cultural and political inheritance through centuries of feudal disorder as did, in a similar political context, the great Buddhist houses of medieval Japan.
However, when mendicancy appeared in the West, with the establishment in the 13th century of wealthy orders of friars, it was very different from the contemplative and ascetic mendicancy of the East.
In many countries the educated clergy were the only people able to write and therefore worked as official scribes.
Churches, mosques and temples operated a broadcasting system and communications network, and pilgrims and travellers could expect hospitality from religious foundations.
Members of many religious communities were adept at acquiring communal or institutional (as distinct from personal) wealth.
They could operate as financiers and at the same time expand their sphere of influence; thus Hindu temples were the banks of South India and 15th-century Portuguese overseas enterprise was funded by the crusading Order of Christ.
Much of the ritual year was defined by medieval religion and, where communal prayer was an obligation, the hours of the day.
The spires, domes and towers of religious architecture dominated the skylines of major cities.
The Buddhist world, for example, saw the development of eccentric and magical practices on the margins of the Tan trie tradition, while early Islam experienced a succession of breakaway movements from the mainstream Sunni community Kharijite, Ibadhi and a range of Shiite alternatives.
In the Christian world many “heresies” countered established orthodoxy.
For example, in the 13th century, at the height of the Christian reconquest of Moorish territory in Spain, Santa Maria La Blanca in Toledo functioned peaceably as the mosque on Fridays, the synagogue on Saturdays and the church on Sundays.
Wherever it took root in Southeast Asia, such as Annan , the Mahayana tradition was widely regarded as ""Chinese"" Buddhism, while recognition of the Theravada tradition was associated with independence from the influence of Chinese culture.
Both lost both lands and devotees to Islam in the Near East and North Africa, but resilient Christian communities continued to survive in these areas under Muslim rule.
While the Angkhorean monc/o/o dominated the mainland of Southeast Asia for four centuries, the empire of Srivijaya gradually gained control of many of the ports and polities scattered along the coasts of the archipelago.
Although not the closest of these polities to the sources of major trade commodities such as camphor, sandalwood, pepper, cloves and nutmeg Srivijaya did have the advantage of possessing a rich agricultural hinterland.
I n the 6th century Southeast Asia was a region in which warfare was endemic and the borders of political entities, known as mandalas , expanded and contracted with the power of their overlords.
To the south of Nam Viet was Champa, where fishing, trade and piracy were more important economic activities than agriculture.
O' Borneo S an t h C h i n a Sea A By the 6th century Champa included kingdom of Funan to the south.
His new capital at Hariharalaya was on the great inland sea of Tonle Sap the key to the floodwaters of the Mekong that were essential for the intensive rice irrigation schemes on which Angkor depended.
Thai and Burmese kingdoms The hold of the Khmers over central mainland Southeast Asia was to be broken by the Thais.
In the middle of the 7th century the Thais had formed the kingdom of Nanzhao in southwestern China.
Perhaps partly due to pressure from the Chinese, they had moved south along the river valleys into Southeast Asia, conquering the Buddhist kingdom of Pyu in the middle of the 8th century.
It was the first of three Thai kingdoms to emerge on the Chao Phraya River, displacing earlier Hindu kingdoms such as Dvaravati.
Pegu fostered trading links with India and maritime Southeast Asia through its seaports, which included Martaban.
It was also often in conflict with the inland agricultural state of Ava, which craved access to the pons controlled by Pegu, Despite occasional support from Ming China, the rulers of Ava were constantly harassed bv the Shan hill peoples, culminating in the assassination of the king in 1426, and as a result Ava eventually gave up its ambitions regarding Pegu.
The empire of Srivijaya Throughout the Malaysian Peninsula and much of island Southeast Asia, maritime empires flourished.
The empire of Srivijaya , with its centre near the modern port of Palemhang in Sumatra, was based on control of the resources of the forests and seas of the Indonesian archipelago.
They kept control of Chcn-la of Water until it was taken over by the Khmer Empire, They also held sway over large areas of Sumatra.
In the 11 th century a new power emerged in east Java, and control of the international trade routes began to slip away from Srivijaya.
In 1025 this process was hastened when the Srivijayan capital was sacked by Ghola invaders from south India.
Airlangga was one of the most important of the rulers of this east Javanese realm, which came to dominate and grow wealthy on the burgeoning international trade in spices.
In the mid13th century the rulers of Singhasari took over Kediri to lay the foundations of the great maritime empire of Majapahit, which controlled the region until the 15th century.
A Fie Irade routes that had facifaated Ihe spread of Hinduism and Buddhism to Soulheaif Asia aka encouraged I he spread ol Ham, ll readied the northern tip of Sumatra in the 13th century; by the 1 5lh century it had reached Malaya and Java.
A number of Muslim states were created at the expense of the faltering Mappahit kingdom, including one based an Melaka., a thriving commercial part which by the end of the 15lh century controlled the Strait of Malacca In 1511 Melaka fell to the Portuguese, thus ushering in an era during which Europeans wreaked great change an the Muslim, Buddhist and Hindu kingdoms and empires of Southeast Asia.
This was the first step to ending a system in which the expansion and defence of the empire depended on the deployment of mercenary armies and the imposition of high levels of taxation on the peasantry.
T hroughout their history the Byzantines described themselves as Romans, and saw their empire as the continuation, without break, of the Roman Empire.
Consequently, to give a starting date for the Byzantine Empire is a matter of debate among historians.
The date of 527, when Justinian became emperor and launched a farreaching campaign of conquest, is one of several options.
Others include 330, when the Roman emperor Constantine the Great moved his capital to the city of Byzantium, naming it Constantinople, and 410, when Rome was sacked.
Yet another is 476, when the Western Empire virtually ceased to exist, leaving Constantinople and the Eastern Empire as the last bastion of Christian civilization.
Justinian looked to the west to regain the old empire of Rome, and he and his general Belisarius conquered North Africa and Italy, while struggling to hold the eastern frontier.
However, the resources of the empire were not sufficient to retain this ground, and during the 7th century most of these territorial gains were lost.
In the four centuries between the reigns of Justinian and Basil, emperors never ceased both to fight and to negotiate for territory.
However, it was in the 11th century that Byzantium made its greatest gains to the west, with Basil “the Bulgar-Slayer” bringing the entire Balkan peninsula under Byzantine control after defeating the Bulgarians.
Basil also forged links with the Rus and Vikings to the north, employing them as troops in his wars of conquest.
Administrative structure Totalitarian in ambition and ideology, absolute in his power to intervene directly in every aspect of both government and life itself, the emperor was the beginning and end of the political and administrative structure.
In the 7th century, however, the traditional Roman provinces were reorganized into large units called “themes” {map 2), where the military commander also functioned as civil administrator and judge.
The population of each theme provided the basis of recruitment for the army, which took the form of a peasant militia.
Ordinary soldiers were given land in frontier regions and exempted from taxation in exchange for military service.
By the 8th century the themes were the centres of revolts, with theme generals becoming pretenders to the imperial throne.
Consequently, throughout the 8th and 9th centuries the central government worked to diminish the power of large themes, and by the 11th century the military commanders had been replaced by civil governors.
Church and state Byzantium saw itself as the Christian empire under God f its mission to reduce the world to one empire.
Five patriarchates, based at Constantinople, Rome, Jerusalem, Alexandria and Antioch, marked out the centres of Christian worship in the Late Roman period and fought for supremacy in the Church.
By the 11th century, however, the three oriental sees were no longer part of the empire, and in the ensuing centuries it was the struggle between Rome and Constantinople that affected the course of Byzantine history.
Beneath the patriarchs was a system of bishoprics, within which the bishops derived considerable influence from their control of all ecclesiastical properties and charitable institutions.
From the mid-Alh century, however, defensive warfare became endemic, and in the early 7th century ollocks by (he Avars and Arabs led to (he virtual extinction ol (he empire.
A prolonged period of determined defence followed before Basil II succeeded in expanding the boundaries once more in the 1 1th century.
There is evidence that by the middle of the 4th century there were 14 palaces, 14 churches, 8 aqueducts, 2 theatres and a circus, as well as homes for the inhabitants who were forced to move to the city from nearby settlements.
Comparatively little now survives of Byzantine Constantinople in present-day Istanbul, but Hagia Sophia, the great church built by Justinian as a centre of worship for all Christendom, can still be seen, along with a host of lesser churches.
A handful of imperial monuments exist, the most obvious of which ore the 5th-century city walls in the shape of an arc almost 6 kilometres long.
The importance of religion in the empire is reflected in its surviving artistic achievements.
Churches and monasteries, often beautifully decorated with mosaics and wall paintings, are to be found throughout the empire’s territories, along with portable works of art, such as enamels, books, metalwork and, above all, icons.
The few secular buildings and objects that remain are often in Late Roman cities such as Ephesus gradually abandoned in the 7th century but most notably in Constantinople.
Simply called “the City” , Constantinople was the most important city in the empire.
It was the emperor’s base, and thus the centre of all civil, military and ecclesiastical administration.
T The main trade routes were sea or riverbased and the chief centres of trade were on the coast.
Dominant among them was Constantinople, which not only served as the emperor's capital but also as the heart of Christendom for many centuries.
Thereafter he sent missionaries to spread his message throughout Arabia, and shortly before his death (probably in 632) he led his triumphant army back to reclaim Mecca.
The victory of Islam Within a decade of Muhammad’s death the Muslim armies inspired by zeal for their new faith and a desire for plunder had inflicted defeat on both regional superpowers, I he Byzantines ami the Sasaniam, already weakened by decades of conflict with each other.
After overrunning the whole of the North African coastal region and taking root in much of the Iberian Peninsula, the Muslim state reached the limits of its westward expansion into Europe at the Battle of Poitiers in central France in 732.
Internal conflict The euphoria generated by these successes was tempered from the start by disagreements between Muslims concerning several matters including, most crucially, the question of who was to lead the community.
The Prophet had combined both religious and political authority in his own person and this model was followed for the first three centuries by the caliphs who led the community after him. 1 lowcvcr, Muhammad had made no arrangement for the succession, and more than once in the century after his I n the second quarter of the 7th century AI> the map of the world was abruptly and irreversibly changed by a series of events that astonished contemporary observers.
From the 630s the tribes of the Arabian Peninsula, previously accorded little attention by the “civilized” world, burst out of their homelands and attacked the fertile regions to the north in a series of campaigns that resulted in the complete destruction of the Sasanian Empire and the end of Byzantine control of the Near East.
They then set about forging a new r social and cultural order in the conquered territories, based on the principles of the religion they brought with them a force which has continued to exert a profound influence over the region to the present day.
This community was largely the creation of a single man, Muhammad, a trader from Mecca, the main commercial town of western Arabia.
Following divine revelations in which he identified himself as the “Seal of the Prophets” (after whom no others would come), Muhammad preached a new moral system that demanded the replacement of idol worship with submission to a common code of law and the unity of Muslims against unbelievers.
PART 2 death the Islamic world was thrown into turmoil by fiercely contested civil wars fought over this issue.
Although much maligned by later Muslim writers, this caliphal dynasty succeeded in giving an Arab Muslim identity to the state.
The caliph Abd al-malik Marwan decreed that Arabic should be the language of administration, began a programme of religious building, and instituted a uniform Islamic coinage.
Trade flourished in the region, with Syria in particular benefiting from the revenues flowing into the caliph’s coffers.
It is no coincidence that Abbasid courtly culture borrowed heavily from that of the Persian royalty, for the focus of Muslim culture now swung eastwards from Syria.
At the same time as Islam was expanding internally, Muslim eyes and minds began to be opened to a wider world, both through growing trade in particular with the Far East and through a burgeoning interest in ancient knowledge, primarily Greek, which was furthered by the translation into Arabic of foreign books.
Like their predecessors, however, the Abbasids failed to gain universal acceptance for their claim to be the legitimate leaders of the Muslim world.
Although the caliphs continued to rule in Baghdad until they were deposed by the Mongols in the mid-13th century, they gradually lost their wakr an territories to local warlords, rulers who governed independently while still proclaiming formal subservience to the caliph.
In the 11th century these kingdoms were swept away by the steppe Turks who invaded the Muslim world and changed the ethnic and cultural map as decisively as the Arabs had done four centuries earlier.
This painting of Medina, with the mosque of Muhammad at its centre, comes from an illustrated Persian text written in Arabic.
A Rapid urbanization followed the rise of the Abbasids, particularly in Iraq and Persia, as would-be converts flocked to the cities from the countryside.
It has been estimated that while only 10 per cent of the population of these regions was Muslim when the Abbasids came to power, within a century this figure hod grown to 50 per cent and had reached 90 per cent by the beginning of the 10th century.
The Samanid kings who ruled from their capital in Bukhara encouraged the composition of Persian poetry at their court, while their western rivals, the Buyid rulers of Iraq and Persia , held the caliph captive in his palace and styled themselves Shahanshahs like the Persian kings of old.
Polish and Bohemian rulers used fortified administrative centres to dominate previously independent tribes.
In the early 5th century, however, the nomadic I luits conquered and drove out Germanic peoples to the west of this area , allowing the Slavs to move as far as the Daniils frontier of the Byzantine Empire by around 500.
At the same time Slavs also moved north and west as Avars encroached on their territory.
As a result, most of central Europe as far west as the Elbe was settled by Slavs Moravia and Bohemia had been settled by 550, and much of the Elbe region by 600.
The process can be traced a re Ideologically in the emergence and distribution of various Slavic cultures, which are mainly distinguished by the pottery they produced.
In the 6th century the Slavs operated in numerous small and independent social units of a few thousand.
Some had kings, but there were no established social hierarchies and no hereditary nobility merely freemen and slaves.
Slavs were particularly ready to adopt captured outsiders as full members of their groups, and this partly explains why they were able to Slavieizc central and eastern Europe in such a relatively short period of time.
They lived in small unfortified villages, grew crops and raised animals.
However, from the 7th century, hillforts each serving as a local centre of refuge for a small social unit became the characteristic form of Slavic settlement, and several thousand have been found in central and eastern Europe.
Much of the Slavs' new wealth derived from contacts with economically more developed neighbours.
Western Slavic groups and the Rus captured slaves from eastern Slavs living in the area between their respective territories.
These intermediaries bought slaves at the trading centres of the south Baltic coast (such as Elbing, Wiskiauten and Grobin) and subsequently transported them down the river routes of eastern Europe, particularly the Volga, which gave direel access to the Caspian Sea and Muslim Mesopotamia.
Tiie formation of states The slave trade played an important role in generating new* political structures.
Traders had to organize to procure slaves, and this, together with the new silver wealth, made possible new ambitions.
In the first half of the 10th century, for example, Miesco 1 established the first Polish state with the help of his own armoured cavalry, which his wealth enabled him to maintain.
Perhaps this force was first employed to capture slaves, but it soon took on the role of establishing and maintaining territorial control with the aid of a series of hillforts.
Over the following century the dynasty extended its influence much further afield and in its newly acquired territories it replaced existing hillforts, which had served for local self-defence, with fortified administrative centres in order to maintain its control.
Each of these trading groups consisted of a relatively small number of originally Scandinavian traders and a much larger number of Slavs who produced the goods, shared in the profits and quickly absorbed the Scandinavians.
US' VOlHYNtA ' C '""""‘V • .«e* ^ % y&l HUNGARY While Slavic state formation generally involved asserting aggressive dominion, this was not always the ease.
During the 10 th century the El he Slavs comprising the previously independent Ahod rites, H eve Ilians and Sorbs increasingly acted together to throw off the domination being exerted on them by Ottoman Saxony, which in the middle of the century had carved up their territories into a series of lordships or marches.
However, the Elbe Slavs reasserted their independence in a great uprising of 983, The adoption of Christianity State formation also had a religious dimension, Franks and then Ottomans, the Papacy and Byzantium were all interested in sending missionaries to the Slavic lands, most There the brothers generated a written Slavic language to translate the Bible and Christian service materials.
In the 10th century Bus, Polish and Bohemian leaders all adopted Christianity, Kiev, Gniezno and Prague, capitals of their respective states, all became archbishoprics, Kiev and Gniczno with their own episcopal networks.
Christianization allowed ambitious Slavic dynasts to sweep away not only die old Slavic gods but also the cults that were unique to each independent group and so reflected the old political order.
The establishment of strong Christian churches thus contributed significantly to the process whereby the small, independent Slavic communities of the 6th century evolved into the new Slavic states of central Europe in the 9th and 10th centuries.
Poland and Russia each centred on their respective copitok of Prague, Growo and Kiev, While dosely controlling their rare areas, these new stales also fought each alter for control of the fond* in between (Moravia, Volhynia, Silesia, Byelorussia], wbith repeatedly changed hands over several centuries.
At the same time German expansion ai firsi demographic, iten political was to undermine ite independence of ihe western Slavic states.
Throughout the empire Buddhism flourished, and Chinese pilgrims travelled along the trade routes of the Silk Road firmly under Tang control between the mid-7th and mid-8th centuries to visit stupas and shrines in India.
This last battle resulted in the Abbasid Empire gaining control of the area west of the Pamirs and established the boundary between the civilizations of Islam and China.
A network of canals linked the Yangtze Valley with areas to the north, supplying the huge army that defended the long imperial borders.
The influence of Tang China was to be felt throughout Asia in the three centuries that followed.
Its political stability and economic expansion led to the unprecedented development of links with many peoples throughout East and Central Asia, and these fostered a cultural renaissance and cosmopolitanism in China itself.
Tang armies brought the trade routes of the Silk Road under Chinese control, with protectorates established as far west as Ferghana and Samarqand.
In the middle of the 7th century, the Chinese Empire reached its maximum extent prior to the Manchu conquests a thousand years later.
For a hundred years Tang armies were not seriously challenged, and Tang models of government were taken up by many neighbouring peoples who in turn expanded their own spheres of influence.
These included the kingdom of Nanzhao in the southwest, Bohai in the northeast, Silla in Korea and the early Japanese state centred on Heijo.
The Tang system of centralized government was introduced by the second Tang emperor, Tai Zong , and was supported by a professional bureaucracy of civil servants.
The cities were linked to the countryside through a well-developed infrastructure of canals and roads.
New agricultural land was opened up, especially in the south, and in the first part of the Tang period peasants owned their own land, paying for it in taxes and labour.
Later on, however, as central power waned, wealthy and powerful landowners extended their area of control.
Rural prosperity supported the growth of new industries, notably the production of fine pottery and luxury goods that were often inspired by fashionable foreign items.
Among the grave offerings were exquisite gold crowns and other jewellery made of gold foil and wire.
Rne stoneware pottery made in the kingdom of Kaya was exported to Japan.
The Korean Peninsula In the Korean Peninsula, Tang armies assisted the kingdom of Silla , which in its campaign of expansion had crushed Paekche in 660.
Korean scholars, courtiers and Buddhist monks made frequent journeys to China, and Korean trading communities were established in eastern China.
The role of Buddhism Not only the Chinese and Koreans, but also the Japanese, were brought together by the spread of Buddhism from India throughout East Asia.
Buddhism often received official support and many of the most spectacular Buddhist monuments in Asia were built at this time, from the cave temples at Dunhuang in China to the Horyuji and Todaiji temples in Nara in Japan.
Developments in Japan On the Japanese archipelago a centralized bureaucratic government developed from a series of successive capitals in the Kinai region.
In the later part of the Heian period the samurai culture, which placed great value on military prowess, also evolved.
The faltering of the Tang dynasty was symbolized by the rebellion of An Lushan, the commander of the northeastern armies, who gained great influence over Emperor Xuan Zong through the imperial concubine Yang Yuhuan.
Although the rebellion was eventually put down, the empire was greatly weakened and became vulnerable to external attacks.
As central control weakened and provinces became more powerful, China once again moved towards disintegration.
China’s relations with surrounding countries changed as these countries themselves changed.
In the Korean Peninsula serious rebellions broke out in Silla in 889, and out of these rebellions was born the kingdom of Koryo, centred in the north, which was to control all of Korea from 936.
A Buddhism rapidly gained popularity in Japan following its introduction from Korea in the 6th century, but traditional Japanese Shinto religion was actively encouraged by 7thand 8th-century rulers.
The two creeds were brought together in the Tendai teachings of Saicho after the capital was moved from Heijo to Heian in 794, and the strong links between religion and government were subsequently severed.
A The long-established East Asian tradition of erecting lifesize stone terracotta guardian figures on and around tombs reached its apogee in the three-coloured glazed statues of the Tang period.
As a younger man, Charlemagne averaged 29 kilometres a day and stayed regularly in all parts of his kingdom, thus enabling him to keep his local representatives in line.
Also performing this function were teams of inspectors {missi), each usually comprising a layman and a prominent ecclesiastic.
Charlemagne's grandson, Charles the Bald , later evolved clearly designated areas of inspection in the north.
T he Franks were created by the reorganization of a number of Germanic groups on the northern Rhine frontier of the Roman Empire in the 3rd century ad.
They comprised several subgroups, most prominently the Salians and Ripuarians, which were further divided into warbands, each with their own king.
The two men belonged to a prominent Salian family called the Merovingians after a legendary founder Merovech but their careers turned the family into a royal dynasty for all Frankish peoples.
Childeric started by taking over the Roman province of Belgica II, to which Clovis added the region around Paris , Alemannia and Aquitaine.
The Franks did not, however, evolve governmental structures of sufficient strength to hold this large new state together.
The conquests had generated renewable wealth for kings to reward local landowners and hence attract their support, but when the conquests petered out kings had to buy support using their own landed resources, so that great men became wealthier at the expense of kings.
In the 8th century the rulers of Austrasia in the northeast called the Carolingian dynasty reunited the whole Frankish world.
The Romans had kept the tribes divided and weak, but Merovingian leaders Childeric and Clovis eliminated rival Frankish warlords to create a new dominant force in post-Roman western Europe.
PART 2 were on campaign for all but five years, taking advantage of an open frontier to the east.
As a result, Austrasia’s rulers could offer ongoing rewards to would-be supporters and thus outbid noble rivals from the other regions.
It was thus much easier to create continuous territories when the kingdom was divided, as between Charlemagne’s grandsons in the Treaty of Verdun in 843.
Powerful landowners were essential to a king’s rule, but they had to be prevented from becoming too independent; continual royal travel was a central part of the strategy.
Once expansion petered out after the conquest of Saxony , and especially when Louis the Pious was succeeded by a great number of quarrelling sons, Merovingian patterns reasserted themselves.
Financial resources, above all land, were transferred by rival members of the dynasty in a bid to buy supporters.
The Carolingian Renaissance Under Charlemagne determined efforts were made to revive Classical learning.
This Carolingian Renaissance was generated by the work of a relatively small number of institutions, and its central thrust was religious.
Carolingian monks copied Classical texts because their language and contents were considered necessary for a full understanding of the Bible.
His bishops attempted to enforce this programme through a sequence of reforming councils designed to harmonize standards throughout the empire.
The Papacy likewise received strong royal support, and was endowed with the lands which would form the basis of the papal state through to the 19th century.
There were also associated declines in population and agricultural production.
Monetary-based exchange also increased using, from the later 7th century, a lower value silver currency.
The quantity and quality of silver coins grew dramatically with the new coinage introduced by Charlemagne in the 790s a coinage that Charles the Bald later managed to his own profit; a dense network of mints allowed him periodically to change coin types, demand that people use new coins, and charge them fees for reminting.
Carolingian achievements Politically the Carolingian period ended in failure.
In economic and cultural terms, however, the Carolingian period was deeply formative.
Carolingian scholars also set new standards in Christian belief, practice and intellectual development, with Latin Christendom growing from the seeds planted by Charlemagne.
They also revived Classical Latin from Classical texts, making it the language of medieval learning.
Sea trading links flourished to the north and new centres of trade were established.
Louis the Pious , Charlemagne's only surviving son, ordered that there should be a market in every county, and they feature widely in the charters of Charles the Bald.
The Carolingian period thus witnessed substantial moves away from locally focused subsistence agricultural economies towards greater specialization and exchange.
The military surress of the empire is evident from the large number pf rich burials that have been found, particularly in the middle Danube region, which date horn the Huraik period.
Among the most important of these west ward-moving peoples were the Huns , whose ethnic affiliation is unknown, and the Turkic-speaking Avars (from around 560)* In the latter half of the 6th century they were followed by further groups from the confederation of the so-called Western Turks (the Bulgars, Kliazars and the Fmno-Ugrian-speaking Magyars), and in the 9th century by independent Turkic-speaking groups, the Pechenegs and the Oguz.
As more nomads moved onto the steppe, they drove the earlier arrivals further west and towards the lands around the Mediterranean lands whose relative wealth could he tapped through raids and more sustained military campaigns, or through the extraction of annual tributes.
The Avars later mourned a series of campaigns against the Byzantines, particularly in the 580s, and extracted a steadily increasing tribute.
In the 10th century the Magyars terrorized Europe with raids from the Baltic Sea to the Mediterranean coast of France.
The building empires The steppe peoples not only raided the empires of other peoples but also built empires of their own, either on the steppe or within Europe.
All these shifting empires were based on the conquest and exploitation of subject tribes, who were usually a mixture of nomadic peoples and more settled agricultural groups.
Attila’s Hunnic Empire of the 440s consisted of a dominant Hunnic core but with numerous, particularly Germanic, groups such as Goths, Gepids, Herules, Rugians, Sueves and Lombards.
The Avar Empire of the later 6th century incorporated Gepids, Bulgars and numerous Slavic groups, and the Bulgar state in the Dobrudja and surrounding territories also incorporated many Slavic tribes.
The Khazars on the Volga steppe exercised dominion over the nomadic Magyars before they established their own empire in the Ukraine, as well as over large Slavic and later Scandinavian Rus groups to the north.
Once they had achieved some degree of dominance, peoples of the steppe tended to cease being simple nomads and profound social evolution sometimes followed.
For example, when the Huns first reached the Ukrainian steppe around 375, they were led in their continual search for new pastures by a multiplicity of chiefs.
By the 430s, however, one dominant dynasty, that of Attila, had emerged, suppressing all rivals.
With warfare dominating their lives, the Huns were able to use the wealth of the Roman Empire to create a new, more stratified social hierarchy under a single ruler.
The impact of the nomads on Europe The nature of these nomad empires explains much of their impact on Europe.
Built on military dominance, they required continued military success to survive.
In their campaigns they used soldiers and leaders recruited from the peoples they dominated, and their successes were to some extent shared with these peoples.
A successful campaign both maintained a leader’s prestige and provided booty to be distributed not only among the nomad core but also to selected leaders among subject groups, whose loyalty was thus maintained.
The campaigns led to a substantial degree of instability in Europe, as groups escaping from the intruders sought new homes.
The collapse of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century was brought about by Germanic groups escaping the Huns, and Avar pressure later led to a great migration of Slavs into central and eastern Europe and Lombards into Italy.
The Europeans eventually learned how to contain the steppe peoples, for whom the logistic problems of continuous warfare increased as closer targets were conquered.
Within 16 years of Attila’s death in 453, the Huns had ceased to exist as an independent force in Europe.
Without booty to distribute or prestige to inspire fear, Attila’s sons lost control of the subject peoples.
Similarly, when defeat by Constantinople had curbed the power of the Avars in the 7th century, numerous Slavs and Bulgars escaped from the Avar Empire.
A In the 9th century the Khazars played a dominant role in trade throughout the Ukrainian steppe with both the Bulgars and Magyars.
Directly or indirectly, their hegemony also extended to the Slavic and Rus groups of the neighbouring forested zone to the north.
So, too, did Viking trodcfs. exchanging goods oT towns in western Europe and following the river routes of western Russia 1o sell tuts and staves os far way os Baghdad.
Both Coders and raiders used the new ship technology to create new ways ol malting money out of the woallh of the great Carolinpn and Abfaasid empires.
His discoveries along the coasts of Newfoundland and Labrador were fallowed up by Led firiltswri, who in about 1003 sailed ham Greenland in order to follow Herjolfsson's route in reverse.
A Ibis Viking silver dragon hooded amulet comes bom Icekid, which wos cotanhed by the Vikings in the kite 9th century.
I hiring these years the term “Viking” was applied only to those who undertook expeditions of plunder, but it has since come to be used more widely to refer to all the inhabitants of Norway, Denmark and Sweden at that time.
Voyages of exploration In the late 8th century Norwegians sailed to the Shetland^ and Orkneys, drawn across the North Sea by the prevailing winds and currents.
The Norwegians then ranged further afield and reached the Faroes in the early 9th century and Iceland, another 1,600 kilometres northwest, in the 860s and 870s.
Greenland was first visited in about 900, when the Norwegian Gunnbjdrn was blown off course.
Settlement there began in the late 10th century, bringing further explorers, such as Eirik the Red, who surveyed much of the new land.
Trading and raiding Most Vikings sailed in search of profit, whether as traders or raiders.
Exploiting many of the established trading routes, Norwegians raided northern Britain from 796, and Danes quickly followed suit, moving along the Channel to attack southern England and northern France.
Nigfam GkenJ CourtraL a 1 ' r —Cords jr Afnieni® J* » ' -r V t 1 H Pon# ®CK<rzy V Conquest and settlement A totally new level of activity unfolded in western Europe from the 860s with the arrival of the “Great Armies”, independent groups led by their own kings but often totalling several thousand men and now enabling Vikings to settle in previously inpenetrable areas south of Scotland.
The next seven years saw a series of assaults on the one surviving kingdom, Wessex, which under Alfred the Great successfully resisted and defeated the Viking Guthrum at Edington in 878.
Dissatisfied with this arrangement, some Vikings turned to continental Europe, and for 13 years battles raged along the rivers of northern France, even reaching Paris.
Following a serious defeat on the River Dyle the remaining Vikings returned to England in 892, but this time Alfred fended them off with ease . local autonomy and created new political neighbouring islands.
However, the main forum of Viking state formation was Scandinavia itself.
Similar processes began in Norway in the 99t)s, when Olaf Tryggvasson, returning from extensive raiding in England as a rich man and a convert to Christianity, founded the Norwegian monarchy.
The entity he created was far from stable, howev er, and Sweden also remained politically fragmented.
Thus w hen Svein and Cunt gathered forces for the conquest of England they were joined not only by Danes but also by numerous independent groups from across Scandinavia.
Gnut became a strong ruler of England, but his hold on Denmark and Norway was weak, and on his death in 1035 his empire disintegrated, Within 50 years the Vikings had been driven out of England by the Normans, and by the 12th century t hey were no longer a force to lx j feared outside the shores of Scandinavia.
Mainly Danish, they were large enough to conquer and settle whole Anglo-Saxon kingdoms and when checked by Alfred the Greal ol Wessex in &78 to couse similar disruption on the Continent by exploiting the major river systems of Frnnte and the Low Countries.
The 9th century. 16-sealer Gokstod s% recovered by a Norwegian excavation, is 23. metres (just over 76 feel) long, clinker plonked wilh thin oak attached by a combination ol lashings and small iron plates to 19 frames buih up from u huge keel.
An Alkmlir crossing ol 1893 in a replica of this ship made in just 28 days kom Bergen to Newfoundland demonstrated ihe timeless efficiency ol ihe design.
This diversity hi turn helped slimuiote the development of interregional trade.
Among the lgbo in the Niger delta, for example, there was no king and loyalty to the state was maintained through religious ties, ceremonies and clans.
Trade and the formation of status Trade was intimately linked with the growth of states in West Africa, initially local and interregional in focus but later developing into Itmg-distance trade across the Sahara.
Prosperity generated through trade, coupled with the grow th of settlements at important trade centres, gradually led to urbanization and the foundation of states.
Although Jenne-jeno never grew into a state, it served as a centre of trade where savanna commodities such as gold, iron and various foodstuffs were traded for Saharan salt and possibly though this is less certain for copper.
Another town founded in Mali by the 7th century was Gao, later to become the capital of the Songhay Empire.
To the west, in Mauritania, the capital of the empire of Ghana also appears to have been in existence by this time, though only pan of the settlement the merchants* town of Koumbi Saleh has so far been found.
While Ghana w as in all probability the first of the states founded in West Africa, events were also proceeding rapidly to the east of this area on the margins of Lake Chad.
Later, apparently in the 14th century, this state shifted west of Lake Chad to Bonio and became known as Kanem-Borno.
The forest regions, with their higher density of population than the savanna or Sahel regions, were a source of slaves, and states began to emerge in this area around the 12th century.
Trade appears to have been linked with the growth of the Akan states in modern Ghana, an area rich in gold where trade centres such as Begho were founded perhaps as early as the 12th century.
To the northeast the seven Hausa city-states, the Hausa Bakwai, were established during the 13th century.
Together with a further seven related but non-Hausa states to the south, these formed a link in the 15th century between Kanem-Borno to the east and the Songhay Empire and the Akan states to the west.
The forest kingdoms also emerged comparatively early, with Benin (now famous on account of its bronze sculptures), occupied by the 13th century.
Similar castings, predating those of Benin, were produced in Ife, birthplace of the Yoruba nation a state with a well-developed tradition of forest farming, town living, crafts and government.
Contacts with the Muslim world Indirect trans-Saharan trade is known to have occurred during the 1st millennium BC, but it is unlikely that caravans travelled right across the desert until the introduction of camels towards the end of that period.
Archaeological evidence indicates that trans-Saharan trade became far more important with the consolidation of Islam in North Africa from the early 9th century ad, and from this time it had a major economic and social impact on the developing states of sub-Saharan Africa.
There was a great demand in the Muslim world for West African products, particularly gold, slaves and ivory.
Transport was by camel caravans, which travelled from well to well to the Sahelian trade centres of Koumbi Saleh, Tegdaoust and Gao.
From there some of the goods were traded on further into West Africa indicated, for example, by the discovery of many thousands of 9th-century coloured glass beads at the site of Igbo-Ukwu in the southern forest zone.
Through contacts with Muslim merchants, the Sahelian trade centres were exposed to Islam from the very beginnings of trans-Saharan trade with Muslim North Africa.
Various local rulers of the empires of Ghana, Kanem-Borno, Mali and Songhay converted to Islam, which spread right across the region through the activities of local merchant groups such as the Mande or Wangara, who were responsible for much of the trade in gold and kola nuts from the Akan states.
Hausa was also gradually Islamized but further south, in the forest states such as Ife or Benin, the traditional beliefs of animism were maintained, with religious and secular authority often intermixed.
The arrival of the Portuguese Major events in the second half of the 15th century were to have far-reaching effects on the states, societies and trade systems of West Africa.
Paramount among these was the arrival of the Portuguese on the west coast in the 1440s, followed by the establishment in 1482 of a Portuguese trading post at Elmina on the coast of modern Ghana.
This meant that imported manufactured goods such as cloth could now be obtained directly from the coast and that another outlet for West African commodities was established.
The slave trade across the Atlantic also began, starting with the first cargo of slaves from West Africa to the West Indies in 1518 a momentous event with tragic consequences.
A Located on the inland Niger delta, the town of Jenne-jeno owed its prosperity to its great agricultural wealth, exporting rice, cereals, dried fish and fish oil to neighbouring regions by using the Niger as a transport highway.
It was the first of many such towns that emerged in West Africa, all of them trading local raw materials and produce for everyday commodities and luxuries from other regions as far away as Muslim North Africa.
T Like the people of Benin, the Yoruba produced fine bronze heads and figurines.
However, they are particularly renowned for their terracotta heads, such as this one of a 12th-13th century queen from Ife.
Both cotta-herding and command of raw material* including gold, copper and ivory were by now of major importance.
In the north, Fallowing a mission of 543, Christianity had become established in the Axumito kingdom, while Muslim traders who settled on the toast from the 9th century were responsible not only for The introduction of Islam but abo the development of Islamic slates.
Further inland elites emerged, marked by rich burials such us those at Sanga and by substantial centres such os Great Zimbabwe I n tht; 6th century East Africa was a mosaic of very different cultural groups employing a variety of subsistence strategies.
Though in many areas foraging was still the primary means of providing food, agriculture and stockkeeping had already spread throughout the length of the comment.
However, by the 8th century more settled communities had also begun to he established, which frequently controlled resources such as copper and ivory or acted as trading settlements.
Some of these settled communities later developed into kingdoms and became integrated into extensive trading networks.
In Ethiopia the Christian Axumite kingdom had hegun to decline in the 7th century after losing control of its ports to the Arabs, and was finally destroyed in the l Oth century.
While the Axumite kingdom had been urban in character, the empire which replaced it was largely feudal, its rulers shifting their court when local resources had been exhausted.
Rock-cut churches, created between the 10th and the 15th centuries, are the main legacy of the t Christian Ethiopian Empire.
The Imamizvi ion of East Africa To the east and southeast of the Christian empire, Islamic trading settlements were established along the coast and along the trade routes leading into the interior from the major ports, of which Zella was perhaps the most important.
As the Muslim population increased, the creation of a number of Islamic sultanates led to conflict with the Christian Ethiopian Empire.
During this period the Honuili slowly expanded from around the Gulf of Aden along the coast north to Zella and south to Mogadishu, and into the interior to occupy much of the Horn of Africa.
By the 12th century 1 si a mi nation of this area had become well advanced.
During the ( >th century a series of trading settlements, united bv a common religion, language and style of living, emerged along the East African coast.
These Swahilispeaking Islamic communities, though African, lay on a branch of the great trade routes connecting the Red Sea, southern Arabia and India, and they adopted various aspects of the cultures with svhieh they came in contact.
By the 14th century Swahili towns and settlements had greatly expanded from the early sites of Manda and Shanga and stretched from Mogadishu south to Ghibuene, with communities on the Comores and Madagascar, Towns such as Kilwa contained fine, multi-storied houses built of coral, anti their inhabitants ate a diet containing rice, spices and coconut — cosmopolitan Indian Ocean tastes.
State formation in the interior Political developments also occurred in interior East Africa.
It is thought that these enclosures were used for corralling cattle and that this kingdom, which later came to be known as Bunyoro, based its wealth and power on its control of cattle.
Further south, control of the copper and goldfields may have been a factor in the rise of other powerful elites.
On the Zimbabwe Plateau, with its highland and lowland grazing areas and its gold, iron, copper and tin resources, a powerful elite emerged at the beginning of the present millennium.
Its capital was located at Great Zimbabwe , a substantial complex of stone towers and enclosures surrounded by daga , which may have had a population of some 18.000 people.
Similar stone structures are found across the plateau, indicating the extent of the authority exercised by the Zimbabwe elite.
East African trade The control and exploitation of particular resources or of trade routes played a role in the development of virtually every state and kingdom in East Africa.
The area was rich in resources in metals such as gold, copper and iron, arid in exotic materials such as ivory.
The main export from the Horn of Africa was slaves, shipped up the Red Sea and to the Arabian Peninsula.
In return various manufactured goods were imported, including arms from the Arab world and ceramics from Arabia, Persia and China.
Ceramics were also a major import along the length of the East African coast, where Swahili houses were built with rows of wall niches to display their collections of porcelain.
Great Zimbabwe grew wealthy from the trading of copper, gold and iron ore, and the coastal trading towns controlled the export of various produces metals, ivory and slaves from the interior, to which they transported heads.
The trading communities of the East African coast reached their height at the end of the 15th century.
In 1497 a Portuguese expedition led by Vasco da Gama landed at So fa I a, beginning a new chapter in the history of East Africa, Initially the Portuguese established forts at KMwa and Sofala to safeguard their trade routes to India, hut the rich coastal trade here soon became an equal attraction.
The nature of these coastal settlements, and their relationship with the interior, would now alter irrevocably.
I Ion A Trade mules across I be Indian Ocean, which had existed al least from the 1st century AD, flourished during ihe period from SCO to 1500.
Taking advantage of Ihe monsoon winds in both directions, dhows soiled between the parts af East Africa, the Red Sea, Indio, Sri Lanka, Southeast Asia and China hearing row materials, spices and luxury goods among them Persian and Chinese porcelain.
Great Zimbabwe was the capital of ihe rulers af a satiety that drew its wealth from bath cattle-keeping and trading with the coastal slates af East Africa.
In the mid15th century the settlement like Kilwo on ihe coost began to dedine.
Most began in a heartland under tight dynastic control but then spread to more distant areas which were governed only indirectly, often through local rulers.
In three phases of expansion the Chimu lords extended control over and beyond the valleys once controlled by the Moche, with the same tendency of avoiding highland zones.
Evidence of Chimu control in the south is patchy as local polities were incorporated by the Chimu without any substantial change to local government By contrast, areas to the north may have been subjected to territorial conquest.
Around 135(1 the Chimu conquered the Lambayeque Valley, where the Bican culture with its rich burials and prosperous. irrigated settlements bad succeeded the Moche.
Chau Chan wielded heavy control until 1475, when the Chimu emperor was seized by the Incas and taken hack to their highland capital of Cuzco.
Sketchy historical evidence helps identify the the lords of Chimu and of its capital Chan Chon, who presided aver an expansion that emanated ham the Moche Valley, fly 12M this dynasty held sway aver five valleys and by 1475, led by Emperor Minchancaman, H hod vaulted aver the Sechura Desert into a region formerly linked to the Amazonian cultural am.
Great canals connecting river valleys facilitated irrigation agriculture and the growth of urban civilization in the heartland of the Chimu.
The so-called ""Maya tlollapse"" was more pronounced in the centre of the peninsula than elsewhere, partly due to a lower birth rate and a higher mortality rate here than elsewhere, but also because of large-scale movements of people into more peaceful zones.
Thus while the reduced population of the central area settled on defended islands in lakes, some Maya groups undoubtedly moved to cities in the northwest which had only just overcome a severe water shortage by developing a new means of collecting and storing rainwater in underground cisterns.
In the late 13th century the smaller city of May apart took over, its ride lasting until around 1450.
PART 2 The Toltecs The emperor of the Aztecs was one of the 15th-century rulers in Mesoamerica who claimed descent from the Toltecs, a legendary people who had inhabited the semimythical paradise city of Tula.
Its inhabitants, the Toltecs, included groups from the Gulf coast as well as Nahuatl speakers originally from the “barbarian” lands to the north.
Monumental sculptures and other artwork at Tula show the Toltecs as warriors and practising the Mesoamerican rituals of captive sacrifice and the ballgame.
The Toltecs remaining at Tula then came to dominate a large area of central Mexico, playing a major role in trading networks which stretched as far north as the Pueblo area of southwestern North America , the source of highly-prized turquoise.
After the collapse of Tula there was probably a major dispersal of its inhabitants, introducing Toltec elements into the Valley of Mexico, Gholula and the Maya area.
The Teuchitlan, Tarascan, Zapotec and Mixtec CIVILIZATIONS Western Mexico has often been described as the land of “enduring villages”, each with deep-shaft tombs containing sculptures of everyday life.
The concentration of such features in the Teuchitlan Valley, together with raised field agriculture and fortified control points along valleys leading into this area, suggest a unitary state.
By the late pre-Gonquest period a local people, speaking an isolated language known as Tarascan, controlled a large area of western Mexico around Lake Patzcuaro, from where they successfully harried the Aztecs.
The Tarascans were exceptional craftsmen, particularly in their working of gold and silver.
Their emperor, the kasonsi , commissioned stepped platforms known as yacatas, probably the funerary monuments of his ancestors.
In a dualistic pattern also common in central Mexico the kasonsi shared power with a powerful priest.
To the southeast of the Tarascan kingdom, in the Oaxaca Valley, were the Mixtecs.
Here the Zapotecs constructed a fortified stronghold with fine palaces and continued to practise sacrificial rites until the arrival of the Spanish.
By 1350 they controlled the Oaxaca Valley and influenced neighbouring regions as far as Gholula.
Both the Mixtecs and Zapotecs suffered at the hands of the Aztecs, but neither people was ever completely conquered; like the Tarascan Empire, both these cultures would soon be destroyed by powerful European invaders.
Trading communities prospered both along the coast, particularly behind the protection of the barrier reef on the east coast of the Yucatan Peninsula, and in the southwest, home of the Putun Mayo, who operated a major Post Classic maritime network.
The threat from the north farted the Song to mountain n massive professional army, which by 1040 contained over 1,250,000 men.
Military expenditure exploded and the production el arms and armour rearhed unprecedented rotes.
The reunified Chinese Empire was rather different in character from its Tang predecessor.
It was much smaller; Central Asia had been lost, and the Liao state in the northeast was controlled by the Khitan people, the Xixia state in the northwest by the Tan gut people.
The Khitan and the Tangut were non-Chinese, and the north presented a constant military threat to the Song.
Initially the Song emperors established the northern city of Kaifeng as their capital.
However, after the loss of much of northern China to Jurchen invaders, who created the .fin suite, the Song established a second capital further south in Hangzhou.
Culture and economy of the Song period T he Song period saw a great revival in Confucianism, regarded as the native Chinese philosophy, at the expense of Buddhism, which had been imported from India during the Tang period.
The class of scholar-officials burgeoned as great emphasis was placed on civil service examination, which began during die Han period and continued under the Tang rulers, as the method of recruiting the governing elite.
By the end of the era some 400,OfK3 candidates sat exams each year, sometimes with hundreds of aspirants chasing :i single post.
Scholarly families fuelled a demand for the many new books of all sorts that the improvements in printing, such as woodblock printing and the use of moveable type, allowed to be produced.
The Song era also witnessed new artistic forms, notably the rise of landscape painting and indeed the Emperor Huizong was blamed for the loss of the north because he allowed his interests in art to distract him from government.
This demographic growth was accompanied by great economic growth and an expansion in mercantile activity, notably in waterborne trade, facilitated by the world’s first paper money.
Vast new tracts of land were opened up for agriculture, and the development of an unregulated property market led to the appearance of huge estates.
All across China new cities flourished, often starting out as bustling markets hut with tea houses and shops soon added to attract traders and customers.
In the 13th century the Italian traveller Marco Polo was to describe the later Song capital of Hangzhou as the finest and most splendid city in the world.
PART 2 Events in the northeast The Liao state in the northeast was a union of a number of Khitan tribes originally from the margins of the Manchurian steppe brought together by the ruler Abaoji in the early 10th century.
Their state comprised a solidly Khitan northern part and a southern part divided into 16 provinces and occupied mostly by the three million Chinese ruled over by the Khitan.
From the late 10th century the Khitan repeatedly attacked the Koryo kingdom in Korea, capturing the capital Kaegyong in 1011.
By the 12th century a new power had emerged in the northeast a confederation of Jurchen tribes from the mountains of eastern Manchuria.
The Song dynasty survived in the south until 1279, when the whole country fell to the Mongols ; they were, in their turn, to be replaced in 1368 by the Ming dynasty.
Korea and Japan On the Korean Peninsula the Koryo kingdom lasted until 1392.
The later years of the dynasty were marked by repeated debilitating incursions by northern nomads and, from 1231, a series of invasions by Mongol armies.
In 1232 the court was forced to flee the capital to Kanghwa Island and by 1259 the government had accepted Mongol domination.
Hanyong, modern Seoul, replaced Kaegyong as the capital and in October 1446 Hangul, the new Korean script, was promulgated.
Employing a phonetic alphabet, which can be learnt much more quickly than Chinese ideographs, this script brought literacy to the peasants and enabled the gradual appearance of a vernacular literature.
In Japan the seat of government shifted from Kyoto to Kamakura in 1185 as military overlords, or shoguns , took power from the emperor in Kyoto.
The Kamakura period saw the development of the militaristic samurai culture.
Cultural achievements included the publication af the first Korean histories. while among technical innovations was the use of moveable type, leading to the world's first casting of metal type in HO 3.
South China Sea expeditions were launched against Japan from Korea by the Mongols.
Power returned to the imperial capital of Kyoto in the Ashikaga or Muromachi period , but during the Onin Wars, which began in 1467 and continued for over a century, the country was wracked by bloody civil conflict.
Christianity arrived in 1543, accompanied by new tools of war, including castle architecture and flintlock guns.
After winning control of most of Japan in 1590, Hideyoshi failed in his first invasion of Korea in 1592 when his force of 160,000 men aiming to conquer China after subduing Korea were thwarted after the Korean admiral Yi Sun-Sin famously cut his enemy’s nautical supply lines.
Japanese incursions into Korea were met with counterattacks by combined Ming Chinese and Korean forces, and indeed Hideyoshi died in his second attempt at conquering Korea in 1597.
Power passed to Tokugawa Ieyasu, who established the Tokugawa Shogunate and closed the doors of Japan to the outside world.
T The 16th century in Japan is known as the era of the Warring States, or Sengoku period, during which regional warlords fought each other to win control of the country.
When it ended, the Japanese rulers set their sights on conquering Korea.
The Abbasid caliph., previously dominant From Ihe Atlantic la India, were replaced by a series of regional dynasties, and the caliph in Baghdad was reduced to little more than o religious figurehead.
Yet the political and religious unity provided for most of the Muslim world by the Abbasid Caliphate with the notable exception of Umayyad Spain had been lost by the luth century.
The Abbasid Empire luid fragmented and ihe central lands of Egypt and Iraq were occupied by the Fat 1m ids and the Liny ids, both Shiite states that rejected the Sunni caliph's religious authority.
O/MAN* Jctwne* BUY1D SULTAN WE FAT1MID CAUPHATE ► Under Malik Shah., the Sejuk-Id war bonds of ihe Oguz Turin reunited much of the old Abbasid Empire.
His authority was based loosely on o combination of personal prestige ond the ability, furnished by his mfttory successes, to distribute material reward to more ar less autonomous subordinate rulers, each with his own warrior following.
In the far west the Umayyad Caliphate was close to collapse and partition between a number of successor states the ta\fa kingdoms and the Maghreb was dis ided between several Berber dynasties.
The major power in the east was the Ghaznavids, a Turkish dynasty of former slave soldiers whose only rivals w r ere the recently converted Turkish Qarakhanids and the still largely non-Muslim Turkish nomads, especially the Oguz, on the steppe to the north, Muslim political weakness had already allow ed the Byzantines to expand into Syria and Armenia, and it would soon open the way for Christian conquests in Spain and Sicily.
In the central and eastern lands the situation was transformed first by the conversion of the Oguz Turks to Sunni {rather than Shiite) Islam, and then in 1038 by the Oguz invasion of Iran, led by the Seljuk dynasty.
Victory over the Ghaznavids at Dan dan kail In 1040, the conquest of Baghdad from the Buyids in 1055 and the defeat of the Byzantines at Manzikert In 1071 enabled the Seljuks to create a loose Sunni empire that stretched from the edge uf the steppe to Anatolia and Palestine* The religious* if not the political, authority of the Abbasid caliph was restored, and the next target was Shiite Egypt.
The Seljuks continued to rule in parts of western Iran as late as 1194, but the Seljuk era was over in Syria by 1117, and in most of eastern Iran by 1156.
Only in Anatolia did an independent branch of the Seljuk dynasty flourish into the 13th century.
One beneficiary of Seljuk decline were the Abbasid caliphs, who enjoyed a new-found political independence in southern Iraq, but otherwise the central and eastern lands ► The unify fostered by the Sdfula in the 11 fh century was Illusory.
Reliant on continued military expansion to provide the rewords coveted by local leaders, il was not sustainable In the long term.
Instead, in the 12th century the Muslim world fragmented into a series of regional authorities a localization of power which made possible gains by the Byzantines, crusaders, nomads and others at ihe expense of particular Muslim communities.
Several of these lineages, including the Zengids, the Ildegizids and the Salghurids, had their origins as atahegs, holders of delegated Seljuk authority {map J) T but there were two important exceptions the Avyubids and the Ghurids.
The Ayyuhids were a Kurdish dynasty who began as soldiers serving the Zougids.
The Ghurids were an Iranian dynasty from a tribal background in eastern Iran.
The Mongol invasions The late 12th century, the age of Saladin and the Ghurids, was a period of calm before a storm which threatened the complete destruction of Islam.
Baghdad was sacked in 1258, and the last generally recognized Abbasid caliph put to death.
In the West, Christian armies were conquering most of w hat remained of Muslim Spain and in 1217-21, and again in 1249-50, they threatened to seize Cairo and end Muslim rule In Egypt.
Islam as a religion and a culture also proved capable of converting some of Its conquerors.
A1 though the Spanish Christians proved resistant, both the Golden Horde and the 11 khan Empire had converted to Islam by the early 14th century.
Muslim survival was also due to fierce resistance In India from the sultans of Delhi, in Syria and Palestine from the Mam Ink rulers of Egypt.
In 1250, after the French crusader invasion landed, the leaders of one of the main mamluk regiments murdered the last Ayyubid sultan in Egypt and seized power.
By the beginning of the 14th century the Mamluk regime had permanently halted the Mongol advance and expelled the crusaders from their last coveted territories on the Levantine mainland.
T Mongol military power conquered much of the Muslim world in ihe 13fh (Hilary.
This empire was passed on with relatively minor geographical alteration thereafter to his son and grandson and then to his Sal km, Staufeti, Well 1 , I uxe m ho li rg an d 11 absl >u rg s uccesso rs.
By taking the imperial title, Otto was deliberately presenting himself as the successor of Charlemagne restorer of the Christian empire in the west in order to enhance his prestige. l\vo centuries later, when Frederick Barbarossa succeeded to the same kingship and imperial status, he reaffirmed the continuing tradition by instigating Charlemagne^ canonization and by adding the word “holy"" to the name of the empire.
The emperor-elect, chosen by German princes, travelled south across the Alps to secure recognition in northern Italy and coronation by the Pope in Koine, but there was little governmental substance to his position in Italy.
Between the tnid-lOth and mid11th centuries the Liudolfing and Kalian emperors spent lengthy periods south of the Alps.
His son successfully took over Sicily and southern Italy in 1194, but his grandson's renewed attempt in 1236-50 to master Lombardy was thwarted by the alliance of communes and Papacy.
The pattern of northern intervention in Italy survived the Staufens* loss of the Sicilian as well as the German kingship in 1254-68.
However, after the expeditions of Henry of Luxembourg in 1310-13 and Ludwig of Witte I shach in 1328, imperial jurisdiction south of the Alps was merely theoretical.
In practice, government and politics evolved as an autonomous system of local regimes and the flowering of both Italian economic enterprise and Renaissance culture developed independently of the Empire (pages J02-JL The northern Empire In Germany the kings position was stronger than in Italy, yet here too the force of localism was of primary importance.
PART 2 NORWAY SWEDEN Wmtkiu Katmor DENMARK vucint # Vilrtiui BOHEM'I AVARLAjto«hau MOLDAVIA / Ginvm] PROVENCE/ PAPAL 3 German expansion to c 1 3q0 Bairajnty d the Hc£y Uointin Empire 1354 Aim flf Germgn saMfemanr Atad where German lawn taw used Tavflu aid hade: * inwcipaJ member of rtie HenssalK Lengiie o eEtia member of the Hanseatic League ■ principal fareirpi depm □ elliei foreign depe' —principd trade route SCOTLAND iV art h S e a KHANATE OF THE GOLDEN HORDE Black S e it remained the necessary framework of government.
It was impossible for any single authority to exert control over so large and diverse an area and even when in Germany as elsewhere in the 12th and 13th centuries more bureaucratic governmental techniques were developed, they benefited local rulers rather than the emperor.
These local rulers might be noble dynasts, communal associations in individual “free towns”, or more varied groupings.
Eastward expansion Both the diversity and the extent of German society were enhanced between the 10th and 14th centuries by largescale expansion eastwards.
In the 10th century the Saxon Liudolfings gained acceptance as kings through their successful military leadership in warfare against the Slavs east of the Elbe — and above all against the Magyars who, from 900, were raiding along the Danube Valley.
After the 11th century, kings and emperors had little to do with such expansion.
Instead, local dynasties such as the Babenbergs in Austria or the Wettins in Meissen recruited the necessary human resources of peasant farmers and urban traders and provided the local structure of military and juridical organization.
This movement of eastward expansion far exceeded even the expanded limits of the Empire , whose princes attended the Reichstag and engaged in the politics of elective kingship.
Throughout east-central Europe, with the active encouragement of local rulers, German communities, equipped with German customary law, were induced to settle alongside Slav and Magyar populations.
The Wendish Crusade from 1147 to 1185, waged by German princes and Danish kings, brought forcible Christianization to Holstein, Mecklenburg and Pomerania.
A further series of crusades developed after 1200 in the east Baltic area of Livonia, extending into Finland by the 1240s under the impetus of Swedish conquest.
Most notably, from the 1220s the Teutonic Order (an organization of soldier-monks, founded in Palestine in the 1190s, whose members were recruited from the Rhineland and other parts of the Empire) acquired independent rule in Prussia and from there waged the “Perpetual Crusade” against the pagan Lithuanians.
The Hanseatic League The 12th and 13th centuries also saw the creation of a network of German maritime enterprise in the Baltic, from Novgorod to Flanders and England through the North Sea.
The timber, furs and grain of Scandinavia, northern Russia, and the southern hinterland of the Baltic were shipped westwards, with return cargoes of cloth and other manufactured commodities.
The League linked the newly founded German towns on the southern Baltic coast between Liibeck and Riga, both southwards to the German hinterland and the newly exploited lands to the east, and northwards to Scandinavia.
Throughout t is area local rulers awarded grants of privilege in reti n for profit-sharing arrangements, thus contributing tj German economic and cultural expansion within Europe.
In the 1220s the Teutonic Order contributed to the defence of Hungary and Poland against their pagan neighbours in Transylvania and Prussia, and in the following decades it established control over Prussia and Livonia.
Then authority wis no more stable than had been that of the Cwdingionv V Hie kings ol Afogan were united in 11.37 with the already powerful counts of Barcelona, and they used the growing commercial wealth of the port of Barcelona la extend their control to saulhern France through the imposition of feudal lies.
Having held out against the Almohads and Almorovkh, they overran much of the Muslim territory in the 13th century B etween the 10th and 13th centuries much political control in Franco, Spain, England anti other areas of western Europe was devolved to local landowning aristocracies who built castles and employed armoured knights to assert their power over the peasants* Depending on circumstances, these local magnates came more or less under the control of kings or regional lords.
The kingdom of France During the 8th and early 9th centuries the French Carolingian kings had been immensely successful in harnessing the aristocracy in a common enterprise.
However, by the end of the 10th century royal power and the political structure of West Franeia were undergoing a fundamental transformation.
At the same time the Carolingian lands in West Franeia had been given away or sold off in an attempt to buy support and lacking any obvious foreign enemy either lo plunder or unite against, the French kings hail soon been reduced to comparative impotence.
The extent to which power had devolved varied from area to area, and authority by no means remained stable, fn the county of Macon, for example, the counts had largely thrown off the authority of the dukes of Burgundy bv 980, only to then find their own authority steadily undermined.
As a result, by about 1030 the local castle-holders (castellans) and great churches were in effect independent, with their own courts exercising private justice “banal lordship"" over a large subject population.
The consolidation of power By the 12th century three factors tended to favour larger and more coherent political units.
First, the growing profits arising from customs, tolls and urban expansion were more easily exploited by regional powers than by independent castellans.
As trade across Europe increased, the taxation of its profits at regional level made kings and other greater lords a dominating social force.
Third, the spread of feudal relations enabled kings, on the basis of their growing wealth, to impose greater obligations on their castle-holding subjects.
Controlling and directing the re con quest of Muslim Spain was a further lever of power in the hands of Christian Spanish monarchs.
During this period, the Christian kingdoms first terrorized the successor states to the once-powerful Muslim Umayyads , and then held out against the counterattack of the Berber Almoravids and Almohads before overrunning must of what was left of Muslim territory in the 13th century.
England; a process he centralization During the 10th and early 11th centuries the Anglo-Saxon kings faced the threat of Viking conquest, and in the process forged a sophisticated and centrally controlled administrative machine.
A network of shires was created, and royal mints enabled the Crown to enforce a standardized coinage and gain a considerable income through regular rernm tings.
Its advance into Scotland came to □ boll in 1314 at the Sank of Bannockburn, The Norman Conquest in 1066 paradoxically reinforced the English state, sweeping away aristocratic rivals to the crown and leaving William l and his successors with the most centralized and best administered state in western Europe.
As in Spain, royal power in England benefited from controlled expansion and the distribution of any profits arising from it.
Capetian dominance In France, luck and political skill favoured the Capetiam.
The death of Henry IPs son Richard l in 1199 opened the way for the French king, Philip Augustus , to deprive Riehards brother John of French lands, including Normandy and Anjou, in a series of campaigns between 1203 and 1206.
Paris became the uncontested political and administrative hub of the kingdom, and an intellectual centre for the whole of Latin Christendom.
For the Pope the expedition was a response to Byzantine appeals for help in the wake of the Turkish conquest of Anatolia, offering the ► Despite many appeals, ihe Owhlwo rulers of ihe Crusader Stoles were unable la attract wffodenl military manpower i® ensure the survival of (heir Eerrilories.
Many western Europeorts did senle in ihe East, but mast regarded crusading activity as an extended ptniieniiol 1 pilgrimage rathe# than the starl af a new life as a colonial elite.
Tut; Cm sad eh States By the time the expedition reached Jerusalem there were harelv 14,000 crusaders.
Their initial success owed a great deal to the temporary political divisions in the Muslim world.
The death of the powerful Seljuk sultan Malik Shah in 1092 had plunged the sultanate into a complex civil war.
Ultimately Malik Shah s son Borkyaruk prevailed, keeping control of the area of present-day Iraq and Iran, hut Kid wan and Dukak, the sons of his uncle and chief opponent, Tutush , still ruled in Aleppo and Damascus respectively.
The brothers were loath to co-operate with each other, with Kerbogha (the Seljuk governor of Mosul whom Berkyaruk sent to bring help against the crusaders), or with the Shiite Fatimid Caliphate in Egypt, The Fathn ids had ruled most of Syria and Palestine through the 11th century up to the 1070s, anti had themselves recaptured Jerusalem from the Seljjuks only a year before the crusaders entered the city in 1099.
The Second Crusade (1146-48} failed to take Damascus, and after 1154 the situation changed significantly.
In that year Mosul, Aleppo and Damascus were united under the aggressive leadership of Nur al-Din, who deliberately underpinned his authority with an ideology of holy war against the crusaders.
The decline of the Shiite Fa Li m id Caliphate also altered the balance of power The agricultural and commercial riches of Egypt were potentially the key to domination of the Levant.
However, attempts led by King Amalrie of Jerusalem between 116A and 1169 to conqueror control Egypt merely encouraged Nur al-Din to send one of his generals, a Kurd called Saladin, to keep the crusaders out.
After Nur al-Din s death in I 174, Saladin gradually dispossessed his former master's heirs, and by 1186 they had been forced to recognize It is overlordship.
Saladin was now able to wage war with the combined resources of Egypt anil Syria, and in July 1187 he inflicted a crushing defeat on the Crusaders at the Battle of I hit tin, near the Sea of Cali lee.
OF W 1 * *** Med Ut S'1 1 ▲ The crusaders' hold on the Holy Land was threatened by the rise of Saladin and the unification of Egypt and Syria.
However, during the Third Crusade, Richard I of England came close to reversing Saladin's 1187 conquest of Jerusalem.
At the same time Western enthusiasm for crusading only continued to grow, and in fact Latin territories in the eastern Mediterranean reached their greatest extent in the early 13th century.
The Fifth Crusade , with contingents from Germany, Italy, Austria, Hungary, England and France, appeared close to success in Egypt before its final defeat in 1221.
The French king Louis IX invested enormous resources on crusading in the east, but his Egyptian expedition of 1249-50 ended in disaster.
The powerful Mamluk state which replaced the Ayyubids after 1250 was initially more concerned with the imminent threat from the Mongols, but as that receded the Mamluk advance proved relentless, culminating in 1291 in the fall of Acre, last of the major crusader strongholds in the Near East.
The establishment of military orders The crusading movement between 1095 and 1291 is striking evidence of the militaristic nature of Western aristocratic culture.
It also reflects the importance of European sea power, especially that of Venice and Genoa, whose ships carried many of the crusaders to Palestine.
During this period European maritime power grew to dominate the Mediterranean, creating a base of experience for later expansion to the Americas and the East.
The failure to maintain crusader settlement in the Levant reflects the strength of Muslim opposition, but also the inadequacy of crusader manpower and resources.
Even at their greatest extent in the 1140s the Crusader States amounted to little more than an embattled coastal strip.
One solution was the establishment by 1139 of the military orders of the Hospital of St John and the Knights Templar.
Effectively knights living by monastic rule, both the Hospitallers and the Templars soon acquired extensive properties in the West which gave them the financial strength the settlers lacked.
From the 1140s onwards many crusader lords found it necessary to hand over their more exposed strongholds to the military orders, who alone had the means to maintain and defend them.
Soon after its inception the crusading idea was transferred to other contexts.
Also treated as crusades were expeditions to crush heresy, such as the Albigensian Crusade in southern France and those against the Hussites in Bohemia (1420-21, 1427, 1431), as well as those against political opponents of the Papacy.
One such opponent was the Emperor Frederick II, who had actually taken part in a crusade in 1228-29, but himself became the target of a papal crusade in 1240-50.
Even after 1291 crusading remained deeply rooted in Western chivalric and popular culture through to the Reformation of the 16th century, and resistance to the Muslim Ottomans could still be seen in crusading terms in the 17th century.
The Templars were suppressed in 1312 in the wake of heresy charges brought by Philip IV of France, but the Hospitallers survived (on Rhodes until 1522, on Malta until 1798), and do so still with their headquarters in Rome.
In the modern Islamic world the crusading movement has come to be seen as evidence of the long and bloody past of Western Christian imperialism.
Ironically, more was achieved by the excommunicate crusader, Emperor Frederick II, who in 1229 recovered Jerusalem by negotiation.
The principality it served one of the four Crusader States remained a Christian outpost for nearly two centuries.
In the east their defeat in the Battle of Manzikert in 1071 enabled the Seljuk Turks to establish themselves in Anatolia, while the Normans took over Byzantine territory in southern Italy.
Territory in Europe came under the control of a Frankish emperor, who tried unsuccessfully to convert the populace to Catholicism, while the centre of Orthodox power shifted to Nicaea in northern Anatolia.
Y Y Then the Byzantine warrior emperor Basil II died in % \ J 1025 he left an empire that had doubled in size t T during his reign and presented a serious challenge to its Muslim neighbours.
Unfortunately for the Byzantines, subsequent emperors could not maintain the impetus achieved under Basil.
They became embroiled in the ecclesiastical politics that provoked the “Great Schism” of 1054 a theological split between the Orthodox and Western churches that has effectively lasted ever since.
The schism invited hostility from the West at a time when Muslim power was regrouping.
The crusades temporarily transformed the politics of the Near East by taking Muslim pressure away from Constantinople only to bring the city under increasing Western or Frankish influence.
In the 12th century Constantinople enjoyed a brief economic boom as a major staging post for western Europeans on the road to Jerusalem.
However, the empire’s finances were fundamentally weak and the Byzantines could meet their commitments only by granting commercial concessions to their erstwhile dependency, Venice.
As a result the Byzantine economy became increasingly dominated by Venetian merchants in Constantinople to the extent that from 1171 onwards Byzantine rulers attempted to cut back Venetian interests.
This promoted tension and led ultimately to anti-Venetian riots in Constantinople at a time when the empire was increasingly threatened in the Balkans and Anatolia.
In 1204 the old blind Venetian doge, Enrico Dandolo, successfully engineered the diversion of the Fourth Crusade away from Jerusalem and towards Constantinople.
The sea walls were breached for the first time and the city was captured and systematically looted over a period of three days.
This event was to mark the beginning of the Byzantine Empire’s fragmentation.
Venice dominated the Greek islands and made a particularly lasting mark in and around Naxos (where there was a Venetian duchy until 1566), although it proved impossible to graft Catholicism and an alien feudalism onto rural Greek society.
Greek rule survived in Western Anatolia, based at Nicaea, and also in Epirus and in Trebizond on the Black Sea.
It was the Greek Emperor of Nicaea, Michael VIII Palaeologus, who recaptured Constantinople for Orthodoxy in 1261.
Furthermore, it was hedged in by quarrelling rivals threatened to the north by Balkan Slavic peoples and in Anatolia by the Turks.
By the mid-14th century Greece had fallen to the Serbs , who were countered not by Byzantine forces but by advancing Muslim power.
Thereafter the Byzantine polity dwindled into a diplomatic entity based on what was effectively the citystate of Constantinople.
Ottoman rulers claimed descent from Osman , the most prominent of the Muslim “ghazis” who, in the 13th century, established independent fiefdoms amid the political ruins of what had formerly been Byzantine and Seljuk Anatolia.
Ottoman society and culture were profoundly Islamic, but with a distinctive ethos derived from Central Asian nomadic antecedents.
Osman’s son, Orhan Ghazi, was able to move his capital as far west as Bursa and marry a daughter of the Byzantine Emperor John VI Gantacuzene.
This marriage epitomized the steady increase of Turkish influence in medieval Anatolia a process which led to Byzantine culture gradually losing, or abandoning, its long struggle with Islam in the interior of Asia Minor.
Advances into Serbia, culminating in the Battle of Kosovo Polje in 1389, put an end to Serbian expansion.
At the same time the Ottomans consolidated their control of Asia Minor, and an Ottoman navy came into being, plying the waters of the Mediterranean, Aegean and Adriatic.
The defeat of Constantinople It was now obvious that Byzantine Constantinople was living on borrowed time.
The Classical and Post-Classical heritage of Constantinople was still impressive, despite the ravages of 1204.
However, its latter-day scholars were slipping away towards Renaissance Italy, taking their manuscripts with them.
Since the 14th century Ottoman victories had been won with the aid of Balkan and other mercenaries.
Constantinople, as a Christian bastion, continued to receive the political sympathy of western Europe, although this was bedevilled by a mutual suspicion which the token reunion of the Greek and Latin churches in 1439 could not dispel.
The Greeks feared papal aggrandisement and they had long seen unruly Western mercenaries and ambitious Italian merchants as more threatening than the Ottoman Turks.
Powerfully armed with artillery, some of which was of Western manufacture, the Ottomans broke through the walls of the city on 29 May 1453 the last day of the Roman Empire and the first day of a mature Ottoman Empire that would continue to expand until well into the 17th century.
H MW ■I 1 »M9 [ | 1359-U S I I I MSM1 mmm Wjutovslote 1385 Dote ocQutf&d fry (hTomcrii A Bfitrte tefti itote podolia % % MOLDAVIA V JED15AN MESOP 07A4 1/> tRWtNVA Congo ◄ In 1361 an Orthodox ruler was restored in Constantinople in the form of the Emperor of Nicaea, but by the mid-14th century the Ottomans had taken control of northwest Anatolia and were making inroads into Europe.
From the northwest the Serbs were also expanding, and the restored Byzantine Empire was powerless to resist.
A In their siege of Constantinople in 1453 the Ottomans successfully used cannon to break down the city's outer walls.
They also gained access to the harbour (the Golden Horn), despite a Byzantine blockade, by the feat of dragging their ships out of the Bosporus and across a stretch of land.
The Ottoman pillage of Constantinople depicted here in a Romanian wall painting lasted for three days and nights before Sultan Mehmet II restored order.
In 1453 they captured Constantinople and, strengthened by this success, they expanded westwards to control the Balkans as far north as Belgrade.
However, il did not survive as a united empire beyond 1260 when it splil into a number of khanates whose rulers went on to conquer further territories ntosl noiably China in 1279.
This may have been bemuse of the news of the death of the Great Khan Ogodei. but ako perhaps due la a lark of sufficient pasture loads in this area 2 Mongol campaigns in eastern Europe X Mongol -—*■ Mongol atarce 3S^f, fjjfyf* 2.
PART 2 A After bringing the Turkic nomadic populations inhabiting the steppe north of the Caspian and Black seas under control, Mongol forces launched a devastating campaign in the winter of 1237-38 against the cities of the Russian principalities.
In 1240 the Battle of Kozelsk depicted in this illustration from a 16th-century Russian chronicle resulted in the city of Kiev being razed to the ground. of the kingdom of the Khwarazm-shah.
Great destruction was wrought on the cities of Bukhara and Samarqand and in the area south of the Oxus.
A rudimentary Mongol administrative apparatus was set up in Iran, which grew into the bureaucracy that ruled the country into the 14th century.
There were several reasons for Chinggis Khan's success in establishing a widespread tribal empire which long outlived him.
He built a large army of top-quality soldiers the traditional horse-archers of the Eurasian steppe, experts in the tactics of concerted mass assault, whom he infused with iron discipline.
An effective military leader himself, he had the foresight and talent to cultivate a cadre of extremely capable and loyal generals.
He introduced several changes that laid the groundwork for a long-term Mongol administration the adoption of an alphabet for the Mongolian language, the basic tenets of a financial system, and a system of law known as the Yasa.
Finally, he propagated an imperialist ideology, premised on the assumption that the Mongols had a heavengiven “mandate” to conquer the world.
All those who resisted this mandate were rebels against the heavenly order and could be dealt with accordingly.
Chinggis Khan died in 1227, on campaign in China, lie was followed as Great Khan by his second son, Ogodei , under whose rule the empire continued to expand.
In China the Jin Empire was eliminated in 1234, and war began with the southern Song.
In the Middle East all of Iran and the Caucasus were subjugated in the 1230s, and most of Anatolia followed in 1243.
The successor khanates In the aftermath of the death of the fourth Great Khan Mongke, a grandson of Chinggis Khan the Mongol Empire effectively split up into a number of successor states.
In China and the Mongolian heartland, Qubilai a brother of Mongke established the Yuan dynasty, and had conquered all of China by 1279.
This conquest was accompanied by much destruction, particularly in the north, but not all aspects of Mongol rule were negative.
Trade appears to have flourished and the country was united for the first time in centuries.
From West Asia there was an influx of cultural influences in such areas as medicine, mathematics and astronomy.
Mongol rule lasted in China until a series of popular uprisings in the 1360s, from which emerged the first Ming emperor at which point large numbers of Mongols left China for the steppe.
In Central Asia the Khanate of Chaghatai Chinggis Khan’s third son gradually coalesced under his descendants, while further to the west the so-called Golden Horde, ruled by the descendants of Jochi, Chinggis’s fourth son, evolved.
Around 1260 there arose in Iran an additional Mongol state known as the Ilkhanate, from the title Ilkhan by which the rulers were known.
Ilulegu s troops were stopped at Avn Jalut in northern Palestine in 1260 by the Mamluks of Egypt , and the border between the two states was stabilized along the Euphrates though the war between them, at times intense, lasted until 1320.
The Ilkhans, along with their subjects, converted to Islam around the beginning of the 14th century, leading to large-scale patronage of Islamic institutions.
In Iran, as on the steppe to the north, the Mongols appear to have been absorbed by a larger nomadic Turkish population, whose size greatly increased during the period of Mongol domination.
The empire did not survive his death in 1405 as he had failed to set up an efficient administration and made no serious provision for his succession.
This legacy was to continue long after the demise of the united Mongol state in 1260.
The relatively small number of Mongols, both elite and commoners, were gradually absorbed by the much larger Turkish tribal population, adopting Turkic languages while maintaining aspects of Mongol identity and culture.
Around the same time they converted to Islam, although there were those who resisted the abandonment of traditional Mongol shamanism.
In its place a number of smaller hordes arose, which were gradually absorbed by the growing Russian state of Muscovy.
The Tatar, Uzbek and Kazakh peoples were to emerge from the nomadic populations controlled by the Horde, the last two moving eastwards around 1500 to their current locations.
Trade was no longer limited to transporting relatively small quantities of high-value luxury items destined for consumption by a rich and privileged elite, but came instead to encompass a wide range of agricultural and manufactured goods.
The motors of economic growth were a growing population, a developing market structure, increasing regional and subregional specialization and growing monetarization, based partly on the discovery of major new silver mines and partly on the development of commercial instruments (such as bills of exchange and letters of credit) that allowed monetary transactions to extend beyond the immediate availability of coin.
Rural and urban growth The clearest evidence that the European population increased comes from the growing number of settlements of all types throughout the continent.
In France, Germany, Italy and England local secular and ecclesiastical lords played decisive roles in the creation of a hierarchy of new market towns.
Founding a market town not only opened the prospect of a new source of revenue; it also made it possible for the lord either to take payments in kind and sell them on the market for cash, or to demand the payment of rents and dues in coin, which peasant producers could now obtain by entering the market themselves.
Markets encouraged specialization at all levels, and urban craftsmen produced a growing volume of goods for the market, confident that they could obtain food and clothing from the same source.
Similarly, farmers aimed less at self-sufficiency and more at the production of cash crops such as grain, grapes or wool.
By the beginning of the 12th century Flanders had become a cloth economy, its towns dependent on wool from England, grain and wine from the fie de France and the Rhineland, and on access to customers.
Indeed the cloth industry had made Flanders the richest, most densely populated and urbanized region of northern Europe.
Mediterranean commerce Italian merchants reached Flanders as early as the beginning of the 12th century, but at this date links between northern Europe and the Mediterranean were still fairly limited and it is more realistic to think in terms of European economies rather than an integrated whole.
The documents of the Cairo Geniza , an extraordinary Jewish archive amassed from the 11th century onwards, vividly illustrate the growing involvement of Latin merchants, especially Italians, in Mediterranean commerce.
From the mid-llth century their activities were increasingly backed by force, and during the 12th century Muslim, Jewish and Greek shipping and much of their trade were all ▼ More intensive agricultural regimes formed the backbone of economic expansion in Europe, providing sufficient surpluses in basic foodstuffs to feed the growing number of specialist producers offering their goods in exchange for the food produced by the peasantry.
When the Spanish Muslim scholar Ibn Jubayr went on a pilgrimage to Mecca in 1183-85 he travelled entirely on Genoese ships, apart from the small coaster which took him across the Strait of Gibraltar and the boat in which lie crossed the Red Sea.
As a result the Latin states had complete control of the Mediterranean trunk routes by the mid-13th century.
Trading networks were established that would continue to flourish for centuries to come.
Italian, French and Spanish merchants not only cook European goods to North Africa, Egypt and the Byzantine world, hut also played an increasingly dominant role in the internal trade of these societies.
Profits from this involvement brought enough Islamic gold to Italy to enable Genoa and Florence in 1252, and then Venice in 1284, to strike a regular gold coinage for the first time in Latin Europe since the 8th century.
However, the big profits of Mediterranean trade were to he made in the luxuries for which the West was offering a rapidly expanding market the spices, silks dyestuffs and perfumes of the East and here the balance was heavily in favour of Muslim sellers.
Interregional trade in northern Europe brought large quantities of German silver into the hands of Flemish, French, Rhenish and English merchants who then paid silver to southern merchants, mostly Italians, in exchange for goods from the East.
The linchpin of the new trans-Alpine economy was the Champagne fairs, held at Troyes, Bar-sur-Aube, Lagny and Provlns, w here the powerful counts of Champagne could guarantee security.
These new ties brought a large amount of silver to the south so large in fact that during the second half of the 12th century the Provins denier (the coinage of Champagne) became the standard coin for commercial payments in northern and central Italy.
They also brought Mediterranean commercial techniques and firms of Italian bankers to the north.
With the introduction of transferable hills of exchange, the European economy was no longer limited by the availability of precious metal.
Bankers were willing to offer enormous credit facilities to reliable clients, so that the rulers of the major European states were now given the means to operate on an entirely new scale.
A Expansion in sectors of the European economy not g«rd 1 q load production is strikingly demonstrated in the phenomenon ol urban growth.
Towns ad cities provided nranufacluriaig centres and markets for long-distance trade, whether interregicnol or international.
They obo serviced their local agricultural economies, providing the markets and goads thal made possible local specialization and exchange T The era ol the crusades was also one of growing Mediterranean commerce.
A fter the collapse of the Roman Empire at the end of the 4th century, towns in Europe had tended to decrease in size, complexity and autonomy, particularly within Latin Christendom.
In 1000 Europe’s five largest towns Constantinople, Cordoba, Seville, Palermo and Kiev were outside this area.
Constantinople was still one of the five largest towns, but the other four were now Paris, Milan, Venice and Naples.
At this time around 70 per cent of the estimated 80 million inhabitants of Europe lived in the countryside, with a further 20 per cent in small market towns.
Just three million people lived in the hundred or so towns of at least 10,000 inhabitants, but they represented a social, economic, cultural and political force of far greater importance than their number might suggest.
During the Middle Ages urban enterprise came to set the pace of social and cultural development in western Europe.
The Italian communes Between 1050 and 1150 Italian towns from the Alps as far south as Rome were controlled by communal regimes made up of local men of property and high status.
The communes achieved power partly by violent assertion but also by the formation of “peace associations”, which had the declared aim of bringing peace and order to a locality.
Once in charge, the communes directed their energies towards mastering the immediately surrounding territory vital for maintaining food supplies and communications.
The communes ultimately emerged victorious, but the strain of warfare, together with increasing social tensions generated by large-scale immigration from the countryside, frequently fuelled recurrent factional conflicts.
Towns in northwest Europe In northwest Europe the forms of town government varied.
Here too, from around 1100, communes were set up by local revolt, or by local lords granting jurisdictional privilege.
Paris and London, however, developed as royal residences and capitals of kingdoms, while the towns of the Low Countries, although prone to turbulence, remained within the framework of territorial principalities.
The county of Flanders was divided into four territorial-jurisdictional sectors known as the “Four Members”, three of which were dominated by the towns of Ghent, Bruges and Ypres.
Much of the business of government was transacted not by the count’s officials, but in the regular meetings of representatives of the Four Members.
PART 2 ► From the early 14th century only a few communes in Italy escaped princely control notably Venice, intermittently Genoa and Lucca, and Florence before the Medici coup of 1434.
This demographic pattern was even more pronounced in Holland, where 45 per cent lived in towns but no single town exceeded 16,000 inhabitants.
The growth of urban autonomy in Germany By the 15th century urban development in Germany although gathering force later than in some other regions had produced some 35 communities with over 2,000 inhabitants and around 3,000 with some sort of recognized town status.
Also unlike their Italian counterparts, they rarely engaged in warfare.
Even after trade guilds had occasionally asserted themselves forcefully in the 14th and 15th centuries, the towns remained under the control of a small number of noble families 42 in Nuremberg, for example, and 76 in Frankfurt in around 1500.
By this date the German towns were enjoying a golden age of economic growth and cultural vitality a vitality that had been a feature of European urban society since the 12th century.
The Early Renaissance The great town halls of communal Italy were built mainly between 1260 and 1330 around the lifetime of the civicminded vernacular poet Dante , and of his fellow Florentine, Giotto , whose painting came to be seen as marking the beginning of a new sense of space and form.
Over the following century Florence continued to loom especially large in the visual arts, with architecture and sculpture as well as painting coming to express a “classical” ideal inspired by the Graeco-Roman past.
Florence also produced writers such as Boccaccio , whose vernacular poems and prose rapidly influenced French and English writing, and Petrarch , whose humanist Latin writings became formative in the education of the elite throughout Latin Christendom in the course of the 15th century.
The “new art” of the painters and musicians of the towns of the Low Countries was much in demand in 15th-century Italy, and in 1500 artists and writers were, literally, citizens of a world of Renaissance culture.
The career of the artist Diirer moved between his native Nuremberg, Venice and Antwerp, while the humanist writer Erasmus travelled constantly between Gouda, Deventer, Paris, London, Bologna, Rome, Leuven, Freiburg and Basel.
Despite the protection of local interests by the occupational guilds, there was considerable economic and cultural exchange between towns so much so that Antwerp had become the leading commercial and cultural centre of western Europe.
They also dealt extensively in the bales of cloth which so often harboured fleaborne infection.
The danse macabre entered court entertainment, and artists and sculptors experimented with the grisly themes of the cadaver and the skull.
This 15th-century fresco from the Italian School, entitled The Triumph of Death, is a direct descendant of the genre spawned by the terrifying disease a century earlier. hah* TURKESfc 1 EURASIAN TRADE ROUTES IN THE 14TH CENTURY I n the 14th century the “Old World” may have lost between a quarter and half of its population as a result of pandemic plague.
The infective agent or plague bacillus was, and is, endemic to the ecology of certain remote areas of Asia.
At times environmental factors or simple mutation can promote a dramatic rise in the numbers of the rodent fleas which are the plague’s usual carriers.
Facilities for transport and travel can then promote widespread personto-person infection and turn an isolated outbreak of bubonic plague into an epidemic and ultimately a pandemic without the intervention of rat or flea.
The “Black Death” of the 14th-century was not the first visitation of plague to the Middle East or to Europe.
The Byzantine historian Procopius gave a chillingly precise account of the symptoms and progress of the disease as it struck the Persian and Byzantine empires in the 540s.
The second scourge of the plague reached East Asia in the early 1330s and West Asia less than a decade later.
A run of rainy years and poor harvests in much of mid-1340s Europe had lowered resistance and led to the widespread consumption of suspect food supplies.
Typically the plague was at its most virulent in congested urban areas, and dedicated professionals such as doctors and priests suffered disproportionately.
While much plague history is anecdotal and local, such details can be just as telling as the massive mortality estimates.
Pestilence halted work on the cathedral of Siena in Italy, and the building is still truncated today.
The population of the Oxfordshire village of Tusmore in England was wiped out in 1348 and never restored.
Effects of the Black Death The questions whether or to what extent the 14th century pandemic changed the course of world history can only be the subject of conjecture.
The Yuan were ousted in 1368 in favour of an indigenous Chinese dynasty, the Ming.
West Asia certainly saw a dramatic reduction in the population of its big Islamic cities and a reversion to nomadism outside them.
However, no western European states or societies collapsed in the wake of the plague.
Great cities like Venice experienced short-lived administrative dislocation and then recovered.
Social tensions were exacerbated as surviving craftsmen, labourers and servants now had the advantage of scarcity and might resist the demands of lords, masters or officialdom.
There was an increase in the Mediterranean slave trade as one solution to the labour shortage.
Thousands of settlements in agricultural western Europe were abandoned in the two centuries that followed the population peak of the early 14th century.
Very few of these “lost villages” were specifically eliminated by the plague or its accompanying panic, but in the aftermath of the plague, survivors from the fens and moorlands of the agricultural margins could move (with the encouragement of landowners who needed their labour) into the best of the farming land.
Survivors dutifully buried their dead and coped with the paperwork of mortality, probate and the ricocheting finances of societies which had lost, on average, a third of their taxpayers.
The 14th century had none of the universal expectation of population growth and longevity which characterizes the modern era.
Life expectancy was less than half that of today and even those who survived the plague years had a very limited chance of reaching 70.
Eyewitness accounts of the plague years describe a society whose preachers used memento mori as a watchword and regularly portrayed earthly existence as a vale of tears.
Meanwhile, mainstream Western culture took refuge in the incorporation of mortality into art and personified death as a figure in popular stories and morality plays.
Modern communicators still draw on this plague-time imagery of mortality to convey an apocalyptic warning.
The Crimean port of Kaffa was an important flashpoint for the transmission of the plague to Anatolia, the Levant and Europe.
Kaffa was a Genoese trading base which in 1347 was under attack from the Kipchak Turks, in whose ranks the plague was raging.
Genoa's commercial rivals Pisa and Venice succumbed shortly afterwards, and the pestilence went on to devastate most of Europe until it had reached Scandinavia via the Hanseatic seaways by 1350.
Constant warfare reshaped the boundaries of kingdoms and other political entities , while the loss of over a third of the population as a result of the Black Death of 1347-52 generated economic, social and political change.
It was also a period of crisis in the Church, as papal schism let loose challenges to the old order of Latin Christendom. 1 iu&opfc 1400 Souraddry di ihs Holy flmrmn (irpu [— \ Crown aF Aragon 1 1 Union at Kalmar 1397 OHumui fliSvance ■ Rnbsburg temtorw.
Union al Krswo 13SS/A Wain papula rctafon 1 1 Umafaig «errilQriH 1 Otlcron Emprra wirti fkiro A In the wake of the Black Death there was an outbreak of popular revolts across Europe.
The sudden, dramatic fall in the population resulted in the contraction of the labour force and a rise in wages.
However, while living standards improved, there was an increase in the incidence of warfare leading to higher taxation and social unrest.
The resulting war, an intermittent series of conflicts, was as much a French civil war as an Anglo-French contest.
By 1453 the English had been expelled from all of France except Calais, and the Valois were in the process of achieving effective authority in France.
The resulting Hundred Years War gave rise to a network of alliances linking the Valois to Scotland and Castile, the Plantagenets to Portugal, and both at different times to the Wittelsbach and Luxembourg dynasties of the Holy Roman Empire.
They also stimulated the emergence of a more powerful Burgundy which brought together the territorial principalities of the Low Countries first, in the 1360s, as a Valois satellite, then as a Plantagenet ally , and finally as a Habsburg inheritance.
The Hundred Years War network of alliances figured significantly in the warfare in the Iberian Peninsula which resulted in the establishment of the Trastamara dynasty in Castile in 1369 and the Aviz dynasty in Portugal in 1385.
Italy developed as an essentially self-contained political complex, with Milan, Venice and Florence expanding into regional territorial states by the mid-15th century.
In the south, the Trastamaran Alfonso V of Aragon added the kingdom of Naples to his existing possession of Sicily in 1442, after conflict with a Valois claimant.
In the meantime, Naples along with Milan, Venice, Florence and the Papacy sought intermittently after 1455 to function as a league to secure “the concert of Italy” from outside intervention.
Germany and the Holy Roman Empire , which were far less affected by large-scale warfare than other areas, came to function as a network of princely and urban local regimes, with relatively few moments of widespread disruption after the 1340s.
The institution of elective kingship proved largely cohesive and peaceful, and the imperial title passed in virtually hereditary succession from the House of Luxembourg to the Habsburgs in 1438.
Eastern and northern Europe In east central Europe the position of the Luxembourgs and Habsburgs as rulers of Bohemia and Hungary was intermittently challenged by the rise of the Lithuanian Jagiellon dynasty.
In the Baltic, attempts to unite the three kingships of Denmark, Norway and Sweden were briefly successful with the creation in 1397 of the Union of Kalmar.
Nonetheless, from 1448 the Oldenburg dynasty maintained its control in Denmark and most of the western Norse world from Norway to Iceland.
Flanking Latin Christendom, the Muslim Ottoman Empire and the Orthodox Christian Russian Empire emerged.
Religious developments In 1309 the French Pope Clement V had taken up residence in Avignon.
This remained the situation until 1417, when the General Council at Constance secured the election of Pope Martin V At the same time parts of Europe were marked by dissent from established theological doctrine and by anticlerical criticism.
In England the Lollards, influenced by John Wycliffe, made no effective headway.
PART 2 developed into a revolutionary challenge to the established order.
In 1415 IIus was burned at the stake lor heresy, an event that provoked the Hussite Wars against the Holy Roman Emperor.
The Hussites achieved dramatic military victories in the 1420s, but their theological and political impact was contained alter peace was agreed in 1434-36.
This developed into a constitutional struggle between reformist clergy seeking to use the church councils to reduce the authority of the Pope, and the bid by the Papacy to reassert the pre-1378 order of church government.
The Conciliarists eventually had to acknowledge defeat in 1449, the preference of lay rulers for a monarchical papal ideology proving decisive.
The levy of war taxation, often the trigger of such unrest, was of fundamental importance in the development of representative institutions, which in the form of parliaments or “Estates” became the vehicle for a heightened sense of the political community throughout Europe.
It lasted for almost 40 years because lay political groups exploited the situation, rapidly aligning themselves behind the rival claimants to papal office.
Thus Valois France and its allies in Scotland and Castile recognized the Pope resident in Avignon, while England and Portugal as well as most parts of the Holy Roman Empire and northern and eastern Europe recognized the Pope resident in Rome.
T Between about 1370 and 1500 the rural world was marked by depressed grain prices, partly offset by increasing diversification from arable into pasture farming and horticulture.
With the contraction of the labour force, wages rose and sustained the demand for a wide range of manufactured and other commodities, both staples and luxuries.
These may have housed members of the elite, or been craft and redistribution centres, or communal religious centres occupied only on ceremonial occasions.
Trade was well developed, linking the early pueblo peoples with the north, the Pacific coast and Mesoamerica, from where they obtained copper bells and live scarlet macaws prized for their feathers.
In exchange they provided the Mexicans with turquoise mined in the region immediately to the south of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains.
N orth America in the 6th century was home to many different cultural traditions.
Farming communities, growing native or introduced crops, were established in some parts of the south.
Elsewhere, richly diverse ways of life were based on natural resources.
These communities also began to make pottery to supplement their traditional basket containers.
Plazas, mounds and ballcourts reminiscent of those of Mesoamerica appeared in the Hohokam area by 600, at settlements such as Snaketown; these public spaces were probably the focus of ceremonial and ritual activities.
Smaller villages clustered around the main centres, which are thought to have been the homes of chiefs controlling the networks of irrigation canals that made two annual crops possible in this arid region.
Irrigation was also vitally important to the Anasazi and Mogollon peoples in the similarly arid areas to the north and east of Hohokam.
G Iqc.00 • Sate Htuentuy • tiom Hill (giltyrf -togaflon ctfUrui rep/n c, 1300 fipbta urea after 13 W iuFto at peaptec.
These developed into larger and more elaborate complexes of adjoining rooms, called pueblos by the Spanish in the 16th century.
Further north the pueblos of the Mesa Verde region had developed along different architectural lines.
At first situated on plateaus, by 1150 most were constructed on natural or artificial platforms on the face of canyon cliffs, such as Cliff Palace.
These cliff-side villages, many dominated by watchtowers, were probably designed for defence and reflect deteriorating environmental conditions at the time.
It grew into a town and became a trade and craft production centre, surrounded by a network of roads and forts, directly controlling the turquoise sources.
Mexican architecture now appeared and sophisticated irrigation systems were constructed.
In other areas favourable climatic and environmental conditions had promoted the spread of farming into marginal regions in preceding centuries, but by the later 13th century conditions were deteriorating.
There was widespread drought and many sites were abandoned, their inhabitants moving into more fertile areas, particularly along the banks of rivers.
In the 1450s Apache and Navajo hunters began to make raids on the fringes of the area, and in 1528 a Spanish expedition signalled future domination by Europeans.
Many were autonomous small chiefdoms but in some areas a hierarchy developed, with subordinate chiefdoms answerable to a centralized authority operating from a major centre.
The largest town in this emerging mosaic of Mississippian chiefdoms was Gahokia, a powerful and prosperous centre 1050-1250, which housed perhaps 30,000 people in dwellings clustered around the palisaded centre with its plaza and huge mounds.
Although hunting continued to be important, the increased reliance on agriculture encouraged settlement in semi-permanent villages.
By the time the Europeans arrived in North America in the 16th century, the northeast was a patchwork of nations settled in small territories, constantly at war but also trading with one another.
Later some settled their differences, uniting into the Iroquois Confederacy which became involved in the wars between rival European powers in the region.
The Great Plains had been home for thousands of years to small groups of buffalo hunters and small-scale horticulturalists.
The introduction of the bow and arrow may have increased hunting efficiency and, possibly for this reason, several peoples moved onto the Great Plains from the surrounding areas.
After about 900, colonists from the Mississippian cultures brought maize cultivation to the Missouri region of the Great Plains.
The stockades and moats surrounding their settlements, along with evidence of massacres and scalpings, indicate that these groups were constantly at war.
Further west, in the Great Basin, hunter-gatherer groups continued their long-standing nomadic way of life until it was destroyed by white settlers.
PART 2 T Mtssittippian lawns were the ceremonial centres br their surroundi ng communities, participating al This time in the religious irodrtion known os the 'Southern Cdr.
Symbolic artefacts characteristic af this cull * such as toppef pendents, seoshelFs and figurines bearing distinctive designs were bund al centres throughout the Mississippkm cull area.
Mounds in the heart af these centres were crowned by temples and sometimes the houses af the elite.
Around 1450 Apache and Navajo from the far northwest reached the area and, after contact with the Spanish, took up horse-breeding and hunting on the western Great Plains, The Pacific coast, with its wealth of game, wild plants and fish, enabled communities to live in villages all year round.
Shells were used by some groups as a medium of exchange, and slave-raiding was also widespread.
Expert woodearvers, these coastal groups fashioned totem poles and extravagantly decorated houses and artefacts.
The rulers established their authority over the peoples they conquered by relocating large numbers, either sending them to work temporarily at nearby way-stations, or moving them permanently to more distant provinces.
They also ensured that provincial heirs to power were educated in Cuzco and brought provincial cult objects to the capital.
In the provinces sacred mountains such as Cerro El Plomo in Chile became the sites of state-dedicated child sacrifices, and oracular centres and ancient ruined cities were appropriated for Inca ceremonies.
Decorated with inlaid pigments, it represents the trophy head of an Anti, an uncivilized enemy from the Antisuyu tropical forest ""quarter"" of the empire.
Made by Inca descendants in the colonial period and influenced by European art, it juxtaposes pre-Hispanic characters and activities with the abstract motifs of traditional Inca art.
Four avenues emanating from the centre of the city were linked to the empire's road system and led to the symbolic four ""quarters"" of the empire.
Two of these avenues also divided the city into ritually complementary northwest and southeast halves, Hanan and Hurin.
The stone walls of Cuzco later served as the bases for Spanish colonial buildings.
Both mobilized labour for state projects and extracted valued materials and objects from their subjects, but while the Aztecs undertook most of their building and manufacturing projects in the imperial core particularly in their capital city, Tenochtitlan, under present-day Mexico City the Incas had broader control over their subjects and directed projects in distant territories.
In Tenochtitlan the Aztecs created a remarkable assembly of large, finely carved stone sculptures in a mere 70-vear period before the fall of their empire to the Spanish in 1521, but little can now be seen of these.
In comparison, distinctive Inca architecture, ceramics and other remains have been found throughout their empire, the largest in pre-Spanish America.
The Inca Empire Unlike the inhabitants of Mesoamerica, who recorded history in manuscripts with hieroglyphic dates and pictographic representations of rulers and their activities, the ancient Andeans used knotted strings for recordkeeping.
The reconstruction of the history of the Inca Empire is therefore problematic.
The Incas were great builders, and the extent of their empire is still visible in an advanced road system of highland and lowland routes along which armies and caravans of llamas moved.
At intervals there were settlements or wavstations built of distinctive Inca stonework, such as the well-studied site of Huanuco Pampa.
These architectural complexes included accommodation for local artisans and labourers working for the state, feasting halls and ceremonial plazas for the wooing of the local elite, facilities for storage, and lodgings for imperial representatives.
All aspects of production, from the acquisition of materials to the manufacture and distribution of finished items, were controlled by the state.
The Inca capital of Cuzco Cuzco was the political, cultural and ritual focal point of the empire.
It was surrounded by settlements of Inca commoners and members of the elite and their retainers, relocated from sometimes distant areas of the empire.
Cuzco proper was relatively small, containing only the residences of the living ruler and royal clans reputedly descended from previous kings , plus the temples, plazas, platforms and halls for imperial ritual.
Palaces and temples consisted of rows of simple adobe or stone rooms with gabled straw roofs; where they differed from homes of commoners was in the quality of workmanship and materials, such as finely worked ashlar masonry, gold and silver sheets attached to walls, and elaborately dyed and plaited thatch.
The Aztecs Because the Aztecs kept written records, we have a better idea of their imperial history.
The empire was founded in 1431, after the Aztec war of independence from the Tepanecs who had previously dominated the Valley of Mexico.
It was formed by an alliance of three cities Texcoco, Tlacopan and Tenochtitlan the last of which quickly became the dominant city.
KINGDOMS -— PrtNintid boufxfar> ® Flnmtiri ctjprtol I Independent paliFy Q tetany siha • {Ipta temple site • (Aflya city • PprL^frade under iKtaall <1427—40), Mimlwurtio I N0tauiNi*8*-ISfl2:end towitouma II modern Guatemala.
Early expansion by Montezuma I and two other kings consolidated the highlands on all sides of the capital, while later thrusts by Ahuitzotl and Montezuma II went into tropical coastal areas and temperate highlands to the south and east.
At the time of the Spanish arrival in 1519, Aztec armies were reportedly poised to invade the northern Maya kingdoms on the Yucatan Peninsula from the port of Xicalango.
The structure of the Aztec Empire The Aztec Empire extended from the Pacific to the Gulf coast, but imperial provinces were bordered by blocks of unconquered territories, keeping the people of Mesoamerica in a constant state of warfare.
The region had well-developed market and long-distance trading systems centuries before the rise of the Aztecs, who tried to control these where they could; however, many networks continued to operate independently.
The Aztecs did not put their energies into administrative structures, and their empire lacked the monumental road system of the Incas’ polity.
However, Aztec artisans were accomplished stone carvers, as evidenced by surviving temples at mountain sites like Malinalco to the southwest of the capital.
After conquest of a province, numerous captives of war were brought to the capital for sacrifice.
As in Peru, captured deity images were put in Aztec temples, sacred mountain sites were appropriated for ceremonies and temples, and tribute was demanded.
However, conquered groups were not relocated; instead, loyal subjects from Tenochtitlan and nearby areas were sent to strategically located colonies, while members of the foreign elite and traders spent time in the cities of the imperial centre.
At its height Tenochtitlan, which occupied an island in the shallow lake that dominated the Valley of Mexico, had a population of perhaps 200,000, four times that of its nearest rival.
According to contemporary descriptions, it had a huge central precinct in which four great causeways met.
The precinct contained many temples and was immediately surrounded by the palaces of rulers and the elite.
Beyond were the neighbourhoods of commoners, where enclosed compounds and house gardens were organized in a grid of streets and canals.
Texcoco and Tlacopan on the east and west shores, along with numerous other towns as old as or older than Tenochtitlan, remained uneasy allies and potential enemies of the capital.
Thus when the Spanish arrived in 1519 they found thousands of Indian allies both in the valley and throughout the empire ready to revolt against the Aztecs.
There were substantial unconquered areas next to and surrounded by imperial provinces.
The empire's capital, Tenochtitlan, and its two uneasy allies Tlacopan and Texcoco were just three of some 50 cities with surrounding territories and satellite towns in the lake zone of the Valley of Mexico.
Among them is the Codex Mendoza, which includes pictures of the pre-Conquest tributes that were demanded from individual provinces among them warriors' clothing, bags of feathers and dried chillies.
The export of both products from China ensured 1 hoi tr ade with the West continued to flourish throughout the 16lh, 17lh and lBlh centuries, although Chinese merchants did not themselv&s venture outside Asia.
In 1700 they still covered vast areas, but in the following century the three Muslim empires the Mughal, Solovki and Ottoman decKned as the commercial and military power af the Europeans expanded.
T hu Europeans"" exploration anti discovery of the world began in earnest in the second half of the 15th century when the desire to find a sea route to the East led to a series of Portuguese voyages down the west coast of Africa.
The Gape of (Jood 11 ope was fi 11 al 1 y reaeIxud in 1488, just fou r years before Christopher Columbus set sail across the Atlantic, on behalf of Spain* in search of a westward route to China, liis discovery of the West Indies was quickly followed by Spanish expeditions to the American mainland and the creation of Spanish and Portuguese colonies in the Caribbean and South America.
New trade routes across the Atlantic and Indian oceans were pioneered by the Spanish and Portuguese, to be taken over in the 17tli century by the Dutch, English and French.
Africa was both a survivor and a victim of this transoceanic transport revolution* The economies of its states and the extensive trade network linking the north* east and west of the continent were little affected by contact with the Europeans* However, from 1450 over 12 million Africans were forced to embark on a journey across the Atlantic as slaves destined to work in the plantations and gold and silver mines of Europe’s colonies in the Americas and the Caribbean.
EUROPEAN TRADE WITH ASIA The Europeans were to have a greater effect on the economies of Asia.
In 1600 and 1602 the English and Dutch East India Companies were created, and within a few years the Dutch company had weakened Portuguese power in the Indian Ocean.
However, local politics and rivalries between Hindu and Muslim entrepreneurs and courtier-traders continued to influence the patterns of European commerce and imperialism.
In the first half of the 17th century a struggle between Crown and Parliament in England, and a war of liberation in the Netherlands (from which the independent Dutch Republic emerged), placed merchant capitalists in both countries in more powerful positions.
A century later trade outside Europe accounted for 20 to 25 per cent of the Dutch Republic’s total trade, while the figure for England was as high as 50 per cent.
However, the technological superiority of India and China was not matched by an urge towards overseas expansion and conquest.
Under the Ming dynasty Chinese voyages of exploration in the early 15th century had reached as far as the east coast of Africa.
Yet while these voyages helped to consolidate China’s sphere of influence in Asia, they did not lead to the creation of a far-reaching overseas trading network.
Instead, trade with the rest of Asia and with Europe continued to flourish with the aid of overland routes, short-distance sea routes and foreign merchants, resulting in an outflow of ceramics and silk, and an inflow of silver.
China relied on intensive agriculture to support its ever-growing population, but in the 16th century it was stricken by harvest failures, droughts and famine, which in turn led to frequent rebellions.
Insufficient resources were devoted to defence, and in 1644 the Ming dynasty gave way to Manchu conquerors from the north.
In India the Mughal Empire established in 1526 by Muslim warrior descendants of the Mongols was centred on cities in the country’s heartland.
Its rulers financed their administration, and the architectural achievements for which they are renowned, by taxing local agriculture and commerce.
However, they had little interest in overseas trade beyond the existing involvement of the artisanal industries in the Muslim trading networks that stretched from Arabia to Indonesia.
The Portuguese, who were intent on seizing control of these networks, used their ships’ guns to overcome opposition and established trading posts around the coast.
The Mughal Empire was just one of three powerful Muslim empires in the 16th century.
Another was that of the Ottoman Turks, who after their capture of Constantinople in 1453 had embarked on a process of territorial expansion in Africa, Asia and Europe.
This was to continue until 1683 when their last major expedition was driven back from Vienna, the Austrian Ilahshurg capital.
Among the other great powers with which the Ottomans came into conflict in the 16th century was the third representative of the political and cultural achievements of Islam at this time the Safavid Empire in Iran.
Despite a resounding Ottoman victory in 1514, it was not until 1639 that the border between the two empires the present-day frontier between Iran and Iraq vvas fi rmly cstablished.
Ruling between 1556 and 160S, Akbcr was responsible far the considerable expansion af the Mughal Empire's territory and for creating a centralised and efficient administration.
During the Mughal period the Europeans established trading posts around the coast.
They brought gold and silver from the Americas, and so in the short term they stimulated the Indian economy.
However, in the 18th century their activities were to contribute to the decline of the Mughals and the beginning of British rale in India.
T Hie shahs of the Safavid Empire were great patrons af architecture and art of which this picture made up of tiles b a fine example.
After his death the empire went into decline and finally collapsed in 1736.
It also heralded o raw capacity for observation of the natural world which eventually surpassed even that of the Chinese.
The sophisticated depiction of spatial relationships which evolved in art is exemplified in Jha Artist's Studio by The Dutch painter Jon Vermeer.
THE MAJOR LAND EMPIRES OF EUROPE The conflict with the Safavids temporarily diverted Ottoman attention away from Europe, where the power with which it most frequently came into direct confrontation in the 16th and 17th centuries was the Habsburg Empire.
In the 1520s this empire was little more than the largest conglomeration of territories and rights in Europe among them Spain, Austria, Hungary and the former lands of the Duchy of Burgundy since the 9th century.
It was not welded into a more coherent empire until the Thirty Years War of 1618—48, from which time the ] lahshurgs began the reconquest of 1 iungartan territory lost to the Ottomans and thus became the major dynastic power of central Europe.
To the northeast of the Habsburg Empire lay Poland a kingdom which through much of the 17th and 18th centuries was in conflict with Russia.
Under Muscovy's Grand Duke Ivan III , Russia began a process of exploration and expansion on land comparable with that undertaken overseas by the western European maritime powers.
By the end of the 18th century its empire stretched from the Baltic to the Pacific Ocean* and formed a world economy in miniature.
A In 1607 an English colony was established in Virginia, where John While had painted this view of a Native American village in the 1580s.
Further north the colony of Plymouth was established in 1620 by the Pilgrim Fathers, a Puritan group who had broken away from the Church af England.
Many such separatist groups were la settle in North America COLONIZATION OF THE AMERICAS Following the European discovery of the Americas and the highly valued commodities to be found there world demand for gold and silver ensured the gradual integration of the New World into the emerging European world economy.
The Spanish conquest of Central and South America from the end of the 15th century was accompanied by the decimation of the native Indian population not as a deliberate act of genocide but mainly as a result of diseases imported from Europe and a regime of forced labour The estimated pre-conquest population of about 57 million was reduced to less than six million by the late 16th century.
A similar fate awaited the smaller North American population when European colonists began to arrive in the 17th century* In order to replace native forced labour, slavery was introduced by the Spanish conquistadores and their successors.
Between 1500 and 1650 about 500,000 African slaves were imported by the Spanish and Portuguese.
Far greater numbers were subsequently imported when the slave system was extended to the Dutch, English and French colonies.
In the short term the Europeans' discovery of t he New World drained resources away from Spain and Portugal, who pursued their expansionist strategies through conquest.
Expansion in the Americas did not become profitable for the European powers until the later 17th century, when a thriving colonial economy began to develop, based on the plantation crops of sugar in the West Indies; tobacco, rice and indigo in the central and southern mainland colonies; and family farms, IN 3 World trading empires 1770 Europe^ www ewfliw.
British -fofiuguese -Outth -Bfllw Spoiish *— Msftnvmai — faith < Al she beginning of the I6lh century European trading routes did net reach beyond West Africa.
By ihe end of the 18lb century itr&y crossed the Allnnfic, Pacific and Indian ocean \ inextricably linking Europe, Asia and the Americas in the growing exchange of row materials, foodstuffs, manufactured goods and silver.
Profits from trade with the colonies at first went principally to the Dutch Republic, followed closely by England and then France.
EUROPEAN DOMINATION OF TRADE The domination of the evolving global economy by Europe, rather than by China or the Islamie powers, was due to a number of convergent forces, including the development of maritime enterprise and, later, of scientific and technological innovations.
The division of the Church during the 16th-oemury Reformation, between Catholic and Protestant believers, encouraged international rivalry and emigration to the New World.
However, above all else, it was the existence of a competitive state system in Europe, and the willingness and capacity of European governments to mobilize military and naval power in support of trade, which secured European hegemony.
The growing European appetite for colonial and Asian goods including tea, sugar, tobacco, spices, and silks as well as luxury items produced within Europe, was to play a significant role in the industrialization of western Europe, and of Britain in particular.
The spread of consumerism and the desire for market-bought products encouraged rural households to specialize in both food production and various types of cottage industry in order to enhance their purchasing power with the result that an early “industrious revolution"" operating at the level of the household economy took place.
At the same time the commercial revolution provided new overseas markets for manufactured goods, especially in North America after around 1750, as well as essential raw materials such as dyestuffs, raw cotton and silk, and iron ore.
The struggle to protect ov erseas markets and colonial sources of supply stimulated war industries such as shipbuilding, armaments and metal-smelting, all of which saw major technological improvements in the 18th century.
The expansion of the Europecentred world economy thus paved the way for the Industrial Revolution which was to take place first in Britain, and then in Europe and the United States, with enormous repercussions for the world in the 19th century.
SOUTH \ 4^ AMERICA So ij f /i Af ta M tic '/ Ocdan 2 Routes across the Pacific CMre Home doll oFvoiiaga —► EieAkk an behalf of Spar. [ ur | J"".i >r j«jr kwika jJ f ii ■ f mi J ^ cspopcfs. on uefioir of ingana T Ferdirwod Magellan's voyage oaois the Pacific in 1:520—21 began with the perilous journey around Cape Horn, through the straits thoi now bear his name.
However, the insularity of the Chinese court in the late 15th century leading to the destruction of most of the official records of Zheng He’s pioneering voyages of 1405-33 in the Pacific and Indian oceans undermined any sustained contact with the wider world.
The discoveries by European explorers were new and momentous in the sense that expanding geographical horizons were matched by new mental horizons.
The geographical discoveries of the late 15th century were neither isolated nor accidental historical events.
Rather, they were part of a European expansionist phase, and were to some degree a response to the disruption of Eurasian commerce brought about by plague, the closure of the Silk Road and the caravan routes during the 1360s, and the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Turks in 1453.
The need to find a direct route to the Far East, principally for trading silks and spices, provided a powerful impetus to exploration.
In 1445 the westernmost tip of the continent was rounded, and by 1460 they had travelled 3,200 kilometres (2,000 miles) south as far as Sierra Leone, bringing back spices, gold and slaves.
By 1474 the equator had been crossed, and in 1488 Bartholomew Dias reached the Cape of Good Hope an important step towards the establishment of a sea route to India, which was achieved by Vasco da Gama in 1497-98.
After Dias’s voyage, mapmakers were able to show the sea encompassing southern Africa, but the globe was still envisaged as a much smaller and younger planet than is actually the case, and was thought to be dominated by the Eurasian landmass.
PART 3 Southern Ocean ▲ When Christopher Columbus set sail across the Atlantic in 1492 he was guided by the assertion of the Greek geographer Ptolemy that the circumference of the Earth is about 11,000 kilometres shorter than it actually is and that, going west, there is no land between Europe and Asia.
His belief that the West Indies were islands off the coast of China was quickly discredited when further Spanish expeditions began to explore the Americas and, beyond them, the Pacific Ocean.
The Spanish and the New World While Portuguese explorers searched for a passage to the East by a southeasterly route, the Spanish searched in a westerly and southwesterly direction.
Although they were unsuccessful in reaching their immediate goal, the result was the discovery of the West Indies and the Venezuelan coast by Christopher Columbus between 1492 and 1502.
Columbus, as his Spanish patrons realized, had greatly underestimated the distances involved in reaching Asia by a southwesterly route, but he nevertheless pressed on.
The New World was Spain’s unexpected prize, confirmed in the Treaty of Tordesillas of 1494, and first described by the explorer and writer Amerigo Vespucci in travel accounts published from 1507.
By the 1520s the Old World recognized the Americas as an enormous “new” continent between Europe and Asia.
Spanish exploitation of the Caribbean islands began with the settlement of Hispaniola in 1493, followed by that of Cuba and Puerto Rico.
These islands provided a base for the exploration of Central America, and the failure of the Spanish to find a sea route to Asia encouraged further colonization and plunder.
The conquest of Mexico and Peru provided new opportunities for transpacific exploration , and in 1527 Saavedra travelled across the Pacific from the coast of Mexico to the Moluccas.
A viable return route, from the Philippines to Acapulco, was first navigated by Urdaneta in 1565 and was followed thereafter by Spanish galleons.
In 1567 Mendana and Sarmiento led an expedition in search of a great southern continent and found the Solomon Islands.
Mendana attempted to return there to establish a Christian colony in 1595, accompanied by the Portuguese navigator Quiros.
They were unable to find the Solomons but instead stumbled on the Marquesas and Santa Cruz islands.
However, it was not until the more scientific voyages of the 18th century that the full extent of the Pacific, from Alaska to New Zealand and the east coast of Australia, was to be explored.
The English, French and Dutch in North America For much of the 16th century the Spanish and Portuguese attempted to exclude northern Europeans from their expanding colonial empires and the new sea routes across the southern hemisphere.
As a result, the opening up of the north Atlantic world was mainly an English, French and Dutch enterprise, although it was more than a by-product of the quest for a northwestern route to the East.
The first initiatives were probably undertaken as early as the 1420s by Bristol merchants involved in trade with Iceland.
These traders were certainly exploring the coast of Newfoundland in 1481, some time before John Cabot made his historic voyage of 1497.
In 1510 the English knew more about North America than any other European country did, but during the next half century the French moved into the lead.
In 1524 Verrazano, in the service of France, sailed along the coast from Cape Fear to Newfoundland, thereby proving that the earlier discoveries of Columbus and Cabot were part of a single landmass.
The first steps in exploring North America’s interior were taken ten years later by Jacques Cartier, who travelled along the St Lawrence River as far as Montreal.
The years 1577-80 also saw an important breakthrough in English efforts when Francis Drake circumnavigated the world in the search for a new transpacific route.
The northern maritime countries were fortunate to inherit the more sophisticated seamanship and navigational skills of the Portuguese and Spanish.
The art of celestial navigation, using the quadrant and astrolabe, was improved by the Portuguese during the 1480s, when manuscript copies of the first navigational manual, the Regimento , became available prior to its publication in 1509.
Sebastian Cabot, an expert cartographer, helped to spread knowledge of Spanish navigational techniques in England.
Although ships gradually increased in size during the 16th century, improvements in ship design were not, of themselves, sufficient to stimulate the long-distance exploration which took place during this period.
The Dutch introduced top masts and sails, as well as the fluytschip , and these advances certainly facilitated commercial exploitation and colonization of a type that was markedly different from the plundering of the conquistadores and the privateering expeditions of Drake.
However, the idea of European settlement in the Americas in order to exploit fully the land’s natural resources was surprisingly slow to win acceptance and, when it did, was invariably difficult to sustain.
L>‘ tdfHQwtf' miippi™ £ lilacs Smidi -Stu Spjce Idund* jMbltKeasJ 7SJJ-ld3I 1 The PoriikjUfse in Asia c 1580 ■ fatagnsi fmskig potfi aid ±smed fttuatiffi f&higuese Mt route JJfg □ fatON A The Portuguese seoborne empire was hosed on a series of forts linking together fradirrg entrepots from rite coast of Africa to South and Southeast Asia, and on la China and Japan.
This system secured Portuguese It ode with the Eost for nearly o century.
Although the Portuguese were to lose most of their eastern possessions Id the Dutch in the 17th century, they managed la hold on to Goa f surviving Dutch bJcwkades of the city in 1603 and 1639.
A lthough European explorers had ventured into Asia in the 1st century ad, significant European contact with the continent only began on 27 May 1498 when the Portuguese fleet of Vasco da Gama landed at i ’alicut on the west coast of India.
Da Gama had rounded the Gape oI Good Hope in search of the valuable spices and silks which had long reached Europe only via expensive overland routes.
Japan was reached in 1542 and a settlement established in China, at Macau, in 1555, PORTUGUESE TRADING EMPIRE The motives of the Portuguese were both economic and religious.
In the pursuit of wealth, they attempted to establish a monopoly over the spice trade to Europe and to force entry into an already extensive trading network within Asia.
Previously, this commerce had been conducted by indigenous merchants along free-trade principles, but the Portuguese coerced local merchants into paying them licence fees and seized the most lucrative trade routes for themselves.
Rivalry with Spain was intense and after the crowns of the two Iberian countries were united in 1580 internecine strife became hitter.
A further problem was caused by the revival of Asian empires, whose tempo ran' weaknesses had I teen exploited by the Portuguese.
In Japan, for example, once the Tokugawa had achieved victory in the civil wars, they expelled the Iberians and in 1639 outlawed Christianity as a danger to the stability of their new state.
Jttn0f tS2Q Di tch trade in Asia For the most part, however, Portuguese influence was eclipsed by the rise of another European power.
Following the establishment of their East India Company in 1602, the Dutch progressively displaced the Portuguese in Asian trade and developed their own trading empire further east , They also expanded Asian trade with Europe, Africa and the Americas, hringitig Chinese porcelain into Western markets and Indian cotton textiles to the slave coasts of Africa and plantations of the New World, The success of the Dutch was based on superior mercantile and maritime skills, which enabled them to enforce trade monopolies with greater mthlessness.
It also owed something to religion since, as Protestants, they were less interested in making converts than their Catholic rivals and were thus perceived as less of a threat by the indigenous societies.
Following the expulsion of the Iberians from Japan, for example, the Tokugawa invited the Dutch to conduct Japans external trade at Nagasaki.
I Hitch maritime influence grew during the 17th century and remained strong east of Ceylon throughout the iNth century.
One reason for this was that the Dutch were drawn into the politics of the hinterlands behind their port settlements and spent scarce resources on local wars at great cost to their trade.
However, the principal reason for their demise was the belated entry into Asian trade of the much stronger European states of England and France, The English and the French in India English merchants had initially tried to break into the spice trade of the Indonesian archipelago hut after the Massacre of Amboina in 1623, when Dutch forces bad destroyed their principal trading settlement, they were effectively excluded.
India was originally regarded as of limited mercantile importance because its spices were thought to he of lower quality than those found elsewhere.
Philippine It Si * **£ VJUle A “A Suur/i Chin a Sira Borneo Coi&bet Baiovia Java Jtpctt SlM Mohxcai New 4 Guinea Arnboirw /Ambon J 1 Timor English gained secondary' access to markets from the Gulf to the China seas.
There was also a growing demand in Europe for Indian textiles, and from the 1650® onwards the cloth trade became the main source of European profits in Asia.
This, in turn, caught the attention of the French, whose first Asian settlement was established in India in l(rti4 T and the two newcomers steadily reduced the Dutch presence around the shores of India, The English also used India as a staging post for ventures further east, forging a broad triangular trade with China, from which tea, raw silk and porcelain were exported to the West in return for Indian silver and opium.
From the second quarter of the 18th century trade relations between England, France and India began to change.
Many European states put up tariff harriers against Indian textile imports in order to protect their own domestic industries.
This increased the importance to the English of trade with China and, in turn, placed greater emphasis on their ability to gain access to Indian silver and opium.
In addition the Mughal Empire, which had previously confined European activities to the coasts, began to break up.
Its successor states were soon at war with one another, making demands for finance and armaments which the Europeans found too lucrative to ignore.
Spanish Mlaniiafori were the four voyage in which Col umbers discovered the printipd Caribbean islan ds and expiated major sertwm of the mainland coosl.
These were fallowed by lurther naval eipedrfioffi mounlwl from Spain involving many of (dumbus's former companions, C olumbus discovered America in the name of Spain in 1492, but this famous voyage was merely the initial step in the Spanish colonization of a large part of the continent s a process that took place in three stages.
However, Spanish attempts to exploit their new territories by establishing trading posts in the Caribbean were unsuccessful, because the simple agrarian societies of the islands could not sustain a trading economy.
Instead, the Spanish established colonies of exploitation in Hispaniola, Cuba and Puerto ilico, using forced Indian labour in agriculture and goldmining, Prom 1510, however, tile economy was undermined by the collapse uf the indigenous workforce, caused by Spanish mistreatment and by the spread of European diseases to which the islanders had little natural resistance.
I n 151S I Icman < k>rt&> was sent by the governor of Cuba on a commercial and exploring expedition to the Yucatan Peninsula.
Once ashore, Cortes repudiated the governor's mandate and henceforth acted on his own initiative, acknowledging only the authority of the King of Spain.
Here they overcame initial resistance to form an alliance with the Tlaxcala ns, themselves resentful of Aztec overlordship Cortes and his Tlaxcalan allies entered the Aztec capital, Tenochtitlan, in 1519, but early in 1520 Cortes was forced to return to the coast to meet and win over to his side a hostile Spanish army dispatched from Cuba under Narvaez.
Unfortunately the greed of the Spanish left behind in Tenochtitlan had alienated the Aztecs and, on Cones' return, the Spanish were driven from the city in a series of events which led to the death of the At zee emperor Montezuma, Cortes' army retreated to Tlaxcala, and in 1521 they and their Tlaxcalan allies launched a successful campaign against Tenochtitlan.
This victory brought under Spanish control the millions of central Mexicans who had formerly been Aztec tributaries.
Meanwhile, from Hispaniola, the Spanish had organized colonies in Darien and on the Pacific coast of the Panama isthmus, first crossed by Balboa in 1513.
Panama was used as a base for expeditions into Nicaragua and beyond and.
PART 3 ' Qttibbcm Sea ► Pi zona's conquest ol riie empire of the Inca* was ihe first sta^e of rite Spanish colonization of South America.
Amalgro and all five Pizarro brothers were killed in these wars, and Peru was not brought under Spain s control until around 1560.
T Atahuolpa, Ihe Into ruler, was capiured by Francisco Pizarro offer being enticed la a meeting in the main square of Cajomorra.
His unarmed retinue was qukkly overcome and slaughtered by the Spanish artillery.
In the Spanish Caribbean colonies of Cuba, Santa Domingo and Puerto Rica, however, African slave labour was used to work the sugar and coffee plantations.
In other regions there were less stratified, semi-sedentary and nomadic societies in which people produced little beyond their own consumption needs.
What is certain is that until around 1650 all American Indian societies suffered massive population kisses reducing the original totals by 90 per cent.
These losses, once thought to be caused hv Spanish brutality, arc now largely attributed to the Indians' Lack of resistance to European and African diseases.
Here the Spanish introduced a system known as the encorrzienda, under which groups of American Indians were allotted to a Spanish overlord, or cnconvendero y to whom they supplied labour and tribute and from whom, supposedly, they received protection.
These were state-regulated labour systems under which the Indian communities were required to supply labour to private employers in three main activities; mining, agriculture and textiles.
DO ( ooo □ Jfeto [ _i b™i H Csii&nl Amend | 1 MCrita 1 1 sector also expanded as the Spanish set about producing commodities previously unknown to the Indians, principally wheat, cattle, sheep, wine and sugar.
Economic development outside Mexico and Peru was slow or even non-ex is tent, and here the Spanish continued to use the encojmvmtu system to appropriate the small surpluses of foodstuffs and cash erops, such as cochineal, which the depleted Indian populations could produce.
In the middle decades of the 1 7th century the decline in the number of Indians and in the international price of silver caused an economic recession in Spanish America.
However, recovery began around 1670 and in the 18th century there was rapid economic growth In Mexico and Peru this was based on the revival of the silver export industry and the expansion of agriculture and textile manufacturing.
These activities used mainly wage labour However, the reluctance of Indians to work outside their communities led to the practice whereby Spanish employers advanced wages and credit to Indians and used the resulting debts, which the labourers could not repay, to bring them into the workforce, In the peripheral areas, expansion was driven by goldmining in Ecuador and Colombia and by the plantation production of sugar, coffee and indigo in Mexico, the Central American isthmus, Cuba, Venezuela, Colombia and Ecuador all activities which depended on imported slave labour and external markets.
These areas were integrated into the mainstream economy in the 18th century.
The Portuguese in Brazil In Brazil, which was developed much more slowly than Spanish America, the Portuguese began by bartering tools and trinkets for Indian-supplied dye woods However, the indigenous market for manufactures was soon saturated, and from e, 1 55 ij the colonists turned to sugar production, the basis of the New World's first great plantation system.
The sugar industry depended entirely upon foreign markets and dominated Brazils economic and social development until 1700.
The early sugar plantations were worked by Indian labourers, most of them enslaved.
However, their productivity was low because they came from cultures with little experience of settled agriculture, and their numbers were drastically reduced by exposure to European diseases, particularly during the 1550s and 1560s.
Consequently, by the early 17th century the colonists had substituted imported African slaves.
Prom around 1670 the sugar industry was cheeked by competition from English and French Caribbean producers, and thenceforth the main impetus to Brazilian economic growth came from the opening up of gold and diamond mines in the interior regions of Minas Gerais and Goins, which were also worked by imported slaves , Spanish aiT mmrn in the colonies The economic and social development of the Spanish colonies did not take place in a political vacuum.
In the early colonial period the Spanish crown had little authority in America.
Santo < In Ih* 18th century khe strudure of colonial gavernmtial in Spanish America wm reformed.
They largely ignored their chief critics, the friars, who came to the Americas to christianize the Indians iu the ""spiritual conquest”, and most of whom deplored the Spanish mistreatment of the indigenous population.
The Spanish crown, fearful that the coriquisradores the adventurers who had conquered Mexico, Central and South America would form an autonomous and hereditary aristocracy, began from around 1550 to impose its authority on its American acquisitions.
The government's main concern was to curb the colonists' virtually unlimited powers over the Indians, so it whittled away the quantities of tribute and labour extracted by the encomcnduros and transferred numerous encomtendas from private to Crown jurisdiction.
Spanish America was divided into viceroyalties {map 2), each subdivided into a small number of audiencias substantial areas administered by a legal council and a larger number of corregimientosrural districts with urban centres governed by carreguiorea.
From around 1640 Spain’s authority in the Americas weakened as important royal powers over the colonists were commuted in exchange for fiscal payments, and a*s the practice of selling official posts to American-born Spaniards became widespread.
These posts were used to benefit their holders, and their extended family networks, rather than to enhance royal authority.
Weak government led to a stagnation in Spain’s revenues from the New World and a decline in the empire’s capacity to defend itself.
This experience stimulated the li Bourbon Re forms”, a programme of economic and political reorganization through which the Spanish crown attempted the bureaucratic reconquest of its American empire.
O rtied ogicitor* « filing Ihd**'"" f Q c 0 ,^"" ■4 Ik Spanish Empire in Korth America was vost, but (I ottroeied few Spanish seiibrs and ihere was virtually na eccmomtc development oulside Florkh.
However, this Iberian monopoly was not accepted by the other European powers and in the second half of the 16th century it was pierced by hundreds of voyages dispatched from northern Europe, Ships were sent to trade or pillage and even.
In a few instances, to found colonies, although none of the latter survived.
From these beginnings Britain, France and Holland founded empires in America and the (Caribbean in the 17th century.
In the British mainland colonies the slave population increased rapidly, b-ui in the Caribbean harsh irwirwit and Iropkol diseases prevented iis natoial growth and eocau raged the slave irode with Afiko.
The northern colonies Outside the southeast and southwest regions, the indigenous people of North America lived mainly in semisedentary or nomadic societies, and the North American colonists never seriously attempted to live from their labour as the Spanish colonists did in parts of South America.
Some Native Americans were enslaved as in South Carolina but the main contacts between Europeans and Native Americans were through the fur trade, where furs were supplied by native trappers, and through warfare.
In general the Native Americans responded to the arrival and settlement of the Europeans on the east coast by moving west, leaving depopulated regions to be settled by migrants from Europe.
These migrants were mostly people seeking economic betterment or freedom from religious persecution.
Taking advantage of the region’s rich natural resources, they created prosperous farming communities specializing in the production of grain, livestock and timber, and benefiting from the relatively disease-free environment of the region.
The plantation colonies Conditions in the plantation colonies of the southern mainland and the Caribbean were very different.
Here disease was rife, discouraging free migration and killing many of those who did take the risks of settlement mainly white indentured servants who had little choice over their destinations and provided several years of unpaid labour in exchange for their passage and a plot of land at the end of their service.
Some 200,000 of these servants migrated to British plantation colonies, fewer to the French Caribbean, and they were employed in the production of tobacco and other plantation staples for export to Europe.
From around 1650, however, there was a fundamental change in the labour system of the plantation colonies.
The shift from tobacco to sugar caused an explosive increase in the demand for labour which could not be met by Britain and France.
In the northern colonies this pushed agricultural settlement into the interior.
In the southern colonies the coastal regions intensified the slave-plantation production of tobacco, to which was added rice and indigo in South Carolina and Georgia.
Settlement also spread into the southern “backcountries” temperate mixed farming zones whose economic and social development was akin to that of the northern colonies.
The French mainland colonies in Canada and Louisiana achieved a massive territorial expansion to 1763, but their demographic and economic development was very slow.
In the Caribbean, both the British and French slave-plantation economies grew rapidly.
Colonial government Neither Britain nor France exercised much political influence over their colonies until the 1660s, when France established an authoritarian system with military governors and powerful colonial officials accountable to the king.
Britain also created royal bureaucracies but their power was shared with elected legislative assemblies.
Both governments subjected imperial trade to strict mercantilist controls, requiring the colonies to trade exclusively with their mother countries.
The benefits reaped by Britain and France were enormous because colonial trade was the fastest growing sector of international commerce in the period.
Ik'1 :.2 Colonization wiw Caiosbean 1625-1263 Colcne* of norfh Euupon powers.
The British northern colonies exported relatively little to Britain, but they imported vast quantities of manufactured goods from Britain, covering their trade deficits by exporting foodstuffs, raw materials and shipping services to the Caribbean and southern Europe.
The strengthening of government in North America also had diplomatic consequences.
Between 1689 and 1763 Britain and France fought four major wars conflicts that became increasingly focused on colonial disputes.
However, post-war British attempts to make their colonists share the burden of the huge military costs of these endeavours also preciptated the American Revolution and, with that, the collapse of British imperial power on the mainland.
A During the 17th century the British ond the French made significant inroads into Spanish territory in the Caribbean, establishing colonies in Jamaica and St Domingue as well as on the islands of the Lesser Antilles.
The economies of these colonies were based heavily on sugar plantations worked by African slaves.
Under the Treaty of Paris in 1763, Britain took Canada and all territory east of the Mississippi, while Spain acquired the vast territory of French Louisiana.
CulrVU^’ 3 The Seven Years War 1756-43 | Brtisi possessions 1756 | Frwdi possessors 1756 L_Spcmitfi prcwswiis 1756 —■ Bnttih ArquBifom 1763 Spatiisli uquBifons 1743 French possessara 1743 VICE ROYALTY NEW SPAIN fan.
Fewer slaves were imparted la British North America because hatter conditions there allowed slave populations to increase nnlurnlly.
In the economies of four of these empires the Portuguese, Dutch, British and French African slavery was the most important form of labour.
In the fifth the Spanish African slaves played a significant and, in the 18th century, an increasing role.
Slavery' was an important element of European imperialism in the Americas because of the scarcity of labour in relation to the regions abundant natural resources.
Exploitation of the indigenous population was a strategy used in Spanish Mexico and Peru, where the sedentary and economically advanced American Indian societies provided labour and tribute payments to the Spanish as they had to their former Aztec and Inca overlords.
However, the semisedentary 1 and nomadic Native American peoples who occupied much of Spanish North America and overwhelmingly predominated in the other empires, could not satisfy the white colonists’ demands for labour and commodities. tJutf of Mexico IWriih wbsr Intim branch Yfnitneiiei TOTAL SLAVE IMPORTS, BY REGION 1S00-WQ | in rhcHJ5crn<k] 4l> Attempts to enslave these peoples proved unsuccessful in the long run* partly because they exhibited fearful mortality rates in captivity and partly because colonial governments generally opposed such enslavement.
A second source of labour was the large numher of European migrants to the more temperate zones, such as the mainland colonies of British America, but white migrants preferred to become independent farmers rather than wage labourers* The shortage of such labour was even more acute in the tropical colonies, where the hot and humid climate and the constant threat of disease discouraged free migrants from settling.
Since the late 15th century African slaves had heen used on plantations on Europeaneolonized Atlantic islands such as Madeira and Sao Tome.
First, they and their offspring, who were treated as chattels, could be coerced into almost any form of work; second, their supply was infinitely more elastic than the availability of labour from indigenous or European sources.
The growth of the slave economies The first major slave economies were created in the Spanish and Portuguese empires, which imported about 500,000 slaves between around 1500 and 1650.
The Portuguese concentrated their slaves in the sugar plantations of coastal Brazil, while the Spanish used theirs in a number of regional economies, the most important of which were the sugar and wine estates of the semi-tropical coastal lowlands of Pern and Mexico and the silver mines of northern Mexico.
The Portuguese expanded their sugar plantation system in Brazil and, alter 1700, imported hundreds of thousands of slaves to work the diamond and gold mines in the interior of the country in the Minas Gerais and Goias regions.
The vast majority of the Spanishowned slaves were employed not in Mexico and Peru but on the sugar and cocoa plantations of Cuba and Venezuela and in the gold-mines of Colombia.
These formerly peripheral regions of the Spanish Empire became increasingly important, entering the mainstream of the HpanishAmerican economy in ihe 18th century.
Dutch and French poured slaves into their Caribbean and Guyanese colonies, where they produced sugar, coffee and other plantation staples.
On the northern mainland the British and French colonists imported smaller numbers of slaves into the tobacco-producing colonies of Virginia and Maryland, the rice and indigo economies of South Carolina and Georgia and the sugar colony of Louisiana, The demographics of slavery The conditions of life for slaves in the Americas, and in particular their relative ability to produce new generations of slaves, were determined by the labour requirements of the plantation crops that they cultivated and the disease environments in which they lived.
Most were employed on large-scale sugar and coffee plantations in the tropical and semi-tropical zones, where their masters underfed and overworked them, and where they were ravaged by diseases such as dysentery and yellow fever.
The extent of the natural decline of slave populations can he gauged from the example of the British Caribbean colonies, which imported some 1. million slaves during this period, but by 1800 had an African-Caribbean population of just over 500,000.
PART 3 of the slave populations for example, those in the tobacco colonies of Virginia and Maryland who benefited from adequate food supplies, an environment less conducive to disease than was to he found in the tropical colonies, and a less demanding labour regime.
Abolition ani> the slave trade The period from 1810 to 1880 represented the final era of slavery in the Americas.
Although a number of countries abolished their transatlantic slave trades (Britain in 1807 and the United States in 1810, for example), American slavery continued to expand.
The plantations of Brazil and of the Spanish and French colonies in the Caribbean Imported nearly two million slaves between 1810 and 1800.
In Cuba the slave population more than doubled in these years, while in the same period the slave population of the southern United States, mainly engaged in cotton production, increased by natural means from 0. to 3*7 million.
The abolition of the institution of slavery, as opposed to that of the slave trade* was a long process which extended from the 1820s up to the 1880s.
The number of slave revolts increased in the late 18th and early 19th centuries , but with the exception of the revolt in 179] in French St Domingue (which was to become the independent state of Haiti in 1804)* none succeeded in achieving local abolition.
Instead, the end of slavery was brought about partly by the economic decline of the slave economies but largely by political events in particular, war and revolution.
Several of the newly independent Spanish-American republics outlawed slavery between 1824 and 1829; slavery in the British West Indies was abolished by a reforming British government in 1834; and in the United States slavery was ended in 1865 by the victory of the Union states over the Confederate states in the American Civil War.
Stave populations in the vast area of Spanish mainland America were quite modest by comparison.
The brutal conditions ol slavery throughout the Americas caused frequent slave revolts which were suppressed with great ferocity.
However, while other English cities such as Bristol, Newcastle and Exeter lagged far behind London both in size and rates of growth, Amsterdam was merely first among equals in the densely urbanized Netherlands.
A fter more than a century of economic growth, 1620 saw the beginning of a period of economic crisis and stagnation in many parts of Europe.
The economic decline of Spain and Italy was accompanied by the migration of skilled labour and capital to the north.
The Dutch retained and expanded their share of Baltic commerce to achieve a near-monopoly of the region’s trade by 1650, while English trade with the Baltic grew significantly from the 1670s.
The rise of Holland The 17th century, often described as Holland’s “golden age”, was also the period of England’s “apprenticeship” to the Dutch Republic.
In the wake of the Dutch revolt against Spain in 1572 and also after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes by the French crown in 1685 , Protestant refugees were welcomed in the towns of southern England and the northern Netherlands.
Bringing with them their expertise in new industries and industrial processes, including brewing, papermaking, the manufacture of glass and ceramics, and silk weaving, they made a significant impact on the English economy.
By the early 18th century an international division of labour was emerging, shaped as much by government policy as by market forces.
In France and England especially, new forms of economic nationalism had emerged during the 1 Population trends in Europe 1600-1790 Papulation ti milbom 30 -■ Frame Gwraary Wr ■ England and Wales ► Portugal —I— 1500 I— 1550 1600 1650 —r 1700 “I— 1750 r IBDC ▲ While the populations of Spain and the Italian and German states declined sharply during the period 1600-50, those of England and the Dutch Republic continued to grow.
From around 1650 populations in southern Europe and Germany began to increase, while overall numbers in England and the Netherlands stagnated. 1660s and 1670s, embodied in policies designed to promote overseas and colonial trade, and industrial diversification, at the expense of competitors.
Anglo-Dutch and AngloFrench rivalry was sharpened by the imposition of protectionist import duties and restrictions on the export of raw materials, and above all by the English Navigation Acts of 1651 and 1660 which sought to wrest the colonial carrying trade from the Dutch.
Anglo-Dutch competition Anglo-Dutch competition was evident in many fields, including the North Sea herring fisheries, woollen textile manufacture, textile dyeing and finishing, and by the 18th century, sugar refining, tobacco processing and linen bleaching.
These activities all involved processing and as such were fields in which the Dutch excelled by virtue of their success in controlling the markets for finished products.
English industry, on the other hand, was more deeply embedded in the domestic manufacturing economy, and relied on the labour of rural households.
Trade rivalry and industrial competition created an international climate in which warfare became endemic, from the Anglo-Dutch wars of 1652, 1665-67 and 1672-74, to the intermittent Anglo-French struggles of 1689-1815.
Military expenditure by the British state multiplied fivefold between the 1690s and the Napoleonic Wars, and provided a huge stimulus to the industrial and construction sectors.
Shipbuilding, the metallurgical and arms industries, civil engineering and the building and supply of naval dockyards stimulated employment, investment and innovation through increased public spending.
As the Scottish political economist Adam Smith realized, the Anglo-French wars of the 18th century represented a struggle for economic supremacy as much as for political power in Europe, India and North America.
On the eve of the American War of Independence British imports from the West Indies and the American mainland colonies far exceeded those from either the North Sea or Mediterranean zones, and the lion’s share of British manufactured exports went across the Atlantic.
PART 3 In the last resort, however, the European economies were dependent on their natural resources and the legacy of political history.
This was especially true in the case of agricultural and primary production, and the extent to which nations and regions were able to commercialize these sectors.
Whereas the Dutch chose to develop a compact and specialized agricultural sector and to depend on large-scale food imports, the English chose agricultural self-sufficiency, protectionism and, after 1689, the manipulation of food prices in the interests of producers by means of subsidized exports.
French peasant agriculture, on the other hand, constrained by labour-intensive farming methods and a host of geographical, political and institutional limitations, was strongly resistant to commercialization.
Above all, it was on the basis of plentiful energy sources that Britain was able to surge forward towards industrialization.
The availability of coal released British producers from dependence on organic materials such as timber and charcoal at a time when Dutch peat supplies were becoming exhausted.
In short, the Dutch Republic faced the limitations of a city-state underpinned by merchant capital just as Britain was emerging as a strong nation-state, with a developing industrial base.
France's overseas trade accelerated more rapidly than England's in the 18th century, showing a fivefold increase during the period from 1716 to 1788 double the increase registered for England at this time.
Woollen cloth, linens, fustians and silk were the main textiles produced.
Coalmining was concentrated in England and Scotland, from where coal was exported to nearby Europe.
A During Holland's ""golden age"" in the 17th century, Dutch merchants -such as the one on the right in this painting were to be found throughout the world, from the Baltic to the Americas and Asia.
However, from the 1650s their dominant role in European and world trade was increasingly threatened by the English.
In many of the colonized parts of the Americas and Asia the production of a narrow range of primary products for export markets was encouraged, thus planting the seeds of future economic dependency and backwardness.
However, in the rush to exploit all these, the rivalry between the European states produced a world divided into commercial empires.
In the short term the discoveries probably acted as a drain on European commercial and financial resources, particularly those of Spain and Portugal.
The profits from the silver mines of Spanish America and the Portuguese spice trade were substantial for those directly involved, but while the outflow of precious metals from the Americas may have quickened economic activity in Europe, it also intensified the inflationary pressures that were already present.
Overall, the growth of transoceanic trade made little impact on the European economy before the 1550s, and it has been suggested that it was not until the late 17th century that commercial and industrial profits from European trade with Asia and the Americas became visible and significant, initiating a commercial revolution.
By this time the benefits resulting from Iberian overseas trade and investment had become more widely diffused across Europe, accruing principally to the Dutch Republic, followed closely by England and, later, France.
New commercial organizations Whereas Spain and Portugal relied on the formation of government agencies to promote colonial and commercial enterprise, the newer colonial states adapted existing forms of corporate organization to serve new purposes.
In this respect, the English and Dutch East India Companies can be seen as forerunners of the modern multinational corporations.
Owned by shareholders, managed by boards of directors and employing accountants and other salaried workers, these independent companies wielded great political power at home and abroad.
Their efficiency and the impact of their monopoly powers have been questioned, but they undoubtedly played an important role in the expansion and integration of the global economy.
Trade in the Far East was enmeshed with politics and diplomacy, and required powerful trading bodies to act on behalf of states.
However, this was not the case in the colonies of North America and the Caribbean where, with the exception of the Dutch West India Company , trade was conducted mainly by private, unincorporated merchants.
Such merchants operated through social networks that were formed on the basis of religious, family and other personal ties.
PART 3 transatlantic commerce was conducted by British merchants operating through colonial agents, but local merchants increased their share of trade from the early years of the 18th century, especially in the northern colonies.
Although institutionalized monopoly powers were not necessary for the development of trade with North America, the English Navigation Act of 1651 (prohibiting imports to England from outside Europe unless carried in English ships) effectively established a national monopoly which played an important role in undermining Dutch competition during the following century.
As the world economy expanded the Americas, Europe and the Far East became inextricably linked through trade, shipping and bullion flows.
Imports from the Baltic region, such as timber for shipbuilding, iron ore and naval stores, contributed to the further expansion of long-distance trade, while the flow of Asian imports silk, calico, spices and drugs brought consumer goods to Europe and North America.
It was not until the second half of the 18th century that the amount of silver bullion exported to Asia fell sharply, compensated for by rising exports of British manufactured goods.
The stimulus to commercial expansion A major stimulus behind the commercial revolution of the 17th century was an increase in consumer demand.
In spite of demographic stagnation in Europe, towns and cities continued to expand , and as they did so new patterns of consumption and social behaviour evolved.
Contributing to the diversification of consumption habits was the arrival of new and exotic commodities such as spices, tobacco, tea, coffee, sugar, tropical fruit, dyestuffs and Asian textiles.
Such commodities resulted in, for example, the development of coffee houses, more fashionable clothing and household furnishings, and new domestic rituals such as tea-drinking.
Maize and potatoes helped to feed Europe’s growing population in the 18th century, without competing with home-produced foodstuffs.
New industries such as sugar refining, tobacco processing, cotton manufacture and textile printing developed as a result of long-distance trade and colonial development.
However, despite the benefits of trade with Asia and the Americas, economic growth in Europe depended mainly on trade within Europe itself, and on improvements in domestic agriculture and manufacturing.
Long-distance trade was expensive, not always profitable, and did not contribute a great deal to capital formation within those countries which were at the core of the world economy.
Competition between the European states and the consequent need to defend, administer and control colonial territories involved increased public expenditure and more complex government administration.
Government involvement in commerce The countries that gained most from this economic expansion were nation-states such as France and England, which were capable of developing the machinery of strong central government alongside aggressive mercantilist policies.
Mercantilism aimed to increase employment through the encouragement of overseas trade, especially the import of essential raw materials, while protecting home industry by the imposition of high import duties.
In comparison with the English and French variants, Dutch mercantilism remained weak and incidental, particularly in the colonial field.
The decentralized federal structure of the United Provinces, together with the deeply entrenched interests of its merchants overseas, inhibited the kind of aggressive unity that was partly behind the increasing power of its larger neighbours France and England.
T Silver from the mines of Central and South America reached Europe via Spain and Portugal, where it entered the arteries of world trade.
In the first of these, from 1500 to around 1650, there was general growth of towns ond cities of all sizes.
In the second phase, between 1650 and 1750, a few large cities most notably London, Paris and Amsterdam expanded rapidly, while in the third phase there was an increase in the size and number of smaller cities and a relative levelling off in the growth of larger cities.
In the 16th century the most urbanized regions in Europe defined by the percentage of the total population resident in towns and cities were the northern and southern Netherlands, and Italy.
From the early 17th century, however, urban growth subsided in the last two regions while cities in the northern Netherlands expanded rapidly, in common with those of England and Scotland.
There were, however, many features of London that continued to pose a threat to the health ond safety of its citizens, including the streets that were often rutted dirt tracks strewn with mounds of rubbish.
The standard of sanitation was very poor and was to be the cause of many outbreaks of cholera and typhus throughout the 18th and 19th centuries.
B y the early 16th century a European-centred world economy was emerging, characterized not only by the rise of transoceanic trade but also by new and distinctive patterns of urban growth in Europe itself.
Between 1500 and 1800 the towns and cities of Europe came to form a single urban system, involving the integration of regional trading networks and the commercialization of predominantly rural economies.
The Dutch Republic approached a ceiling in the mid-17th century because in the preceding century there had been no increase in the number of smaller centres from which cities could develop.
England, by contrast, contained hundreds of market towns and industrial villages capable of expansion.
By the early 19th century the rate of urban growth in Britain had reached that attained by the Dutch a century earlier, but at a much higher level of population.
In both countries, however, a single dominating commercial centre had emerged by 1700.
In 1600 about 5 per cent of the English population lived in London; by 1700 this proportion had reached 10 per cent, much higher than in other European capital cities apart from Amsterdam, which contained 8 per cent of the Dutch population.
The exceptional position of London may account for the rapid development of the English economy in the late 17th and 18th centuries, at a time when London was absorbing half the natural increase of the entire population.
This rapid expansion led to problems of overcrowding and insanitary conditions, bringing disease and high death rates.
It was therefore only through substantial migration from the countryside that London and other large cities could continue to grow.
A more healthy environment for Londoners only began to evolve with the replacement of timber by brick as a building material, and the introduction of building regulations after the Great Fire of London in 1666.
In Amsterdam, efforts to create a more carefully planned city intensified after 1613, when construction of the spacious outer girdle of canals began.
However, these cities were gradually overtaken by nation states in the deployment of commercial wealth, capital and military power.
In Germany towns and cities lost their autonomy as princes absorbed them into petty feudal states, while in Italy the towns themselves became city states.
The Dutch Republic, forged in the struggle against Spanish centralization in the late 16th century, emerged as something of a hybrid, a federation of city states dominated by Amsterdam as first among equals.
In the advanced pre-industrial economies of Europe, dominant cities acted as centres of innovation in many fields, especially in the luxury trades, textile finishing, scientific instrument making, printing, and the fine and decorative arts.
Since the 12th century, when universities had begun to take over the educational role of the monasteries, European cities had played a key role in the dissemination of knowledge.
The notable exception to this rule was London, whose meteoric growth continued unabated.
The growth of European cities 1500-1800 Population 1,000,000 ---— Parrs -Lisbon — Naples — Madid Vienna Vsrwe ▼ The population of London expanded from about 120,000 in 1550 to 575,000 by 1700.
This latter figure represented 10 per cent of the English population, a uniquely high proportion in comparison with other European capital cities at the time. public sphere of political debate, scientific discourse, and literary and aesthetic criticism.
Newspapers first made their appearance in London in the 1620s, and by the 1690s they were carrying regular advertisements for a wide range of goods and commercial ventures, including books, medicines, lotteries, real estate and auction sales.
Amsterdam led the way in the circulation and analysis of commercial information, as informal business correspondence was transformed into printed lists of commodity prices from 1613 onwards.
New urban centres As population levels rose in Europe after 1750 a new pattern of urban growth began to unfold.
Expansion was no longer confined to the larger cities; indeed, it was the growth of small cities and the emergence of new urban centres which lay behind an overall increase in the pace of urbanization.
There are two possible explanations for this, both arising from the overall growth in population.
First, there was an increased demand for food, which in turn stimulated the rural sector and the expansion of regional marketing and administrative centres.
Second, the clustering of rural producers in and around industrial villages during the preceding century had created the basis for several new manufacturing centres that were now able to emerge in response to growing markets.
Ge^oaa 0Tpnou 1^35 > Prftjiborg *iu£l • Funfkirchcn \ ' Av> g^ •APprrcro f 1 bflWiM Af ^/7 l | 9nD f^S7v AfKjp P ^A # # tUffejne J564 ^p 00 q O Camt'f rru> ^Aig»a"" 1727 •■■Ram* $1603 □ p ofpiG NDpInjjjg | Salerno •S****, ■ f $4Q © Cogfja/i 1626 ^6 • Medina 7S4P ©Catania ▲ From the mid-16th century botanical gardens were established in many university towns, and in the following century academies of science added a new dimension to the range of institutions which promoted learning.
B etween the early 16th and mid-18th centuries there was a remarkable growth both in the understanding of the natural world and in the capacity to exploit it.
In 1500 the study of mathematics was well established in major universities across Europe and by the end of the 16th century it was a central discipline in both Protestant and Catholic centres of learning.
The idea that the world should be represented geometrically formed a central strand of the Renaissance and was especially influential in the development of perspective representation by Italian painters and architects.
The research of a number of people including Nicolaus Copernicus , Johannes Kepler , Galileo Galilei and Isaac Newton suggested that God’s Creation had been made according to a mathematical blueprint.
England was briefly predominant in the field of natural philosophy following the publication of Newton’s Principia Mathematica in 1687, but in the 18th century cities as far apart as Basel, St Petersburg, and Paris became centres of European scientific creativity.
Centres of learning The works of Aristotle formed the basis of the university curriculum until the end of the 17th century, when Cartesian and then Newtonian doctrines began to take hold in most of Europe.
Moreover, with the exception of Newton’s research at Cambridge, innovation in the exact sciences ceased to be universitybased after the late 16th century.
PART 3 of correspondence which connected individuals in all the major European cities, the most significant being those organized in the 17th century by Marin Mersenne, Samuel Hartlib and Henry Oldenburg.
Many of these letters were printed in philosophical journals the Journal des Savants and the Philosophical Transactions which were established in the 1660s.
The development of botany From the late 15th century European voyages to the Americas, Africa and Asia provided novel and extraordinary facts which greatly supplemented and even contradicted the existing Classical texts.
Botany was galvanized by information and samples pouring in from places outside Europe.
From the Americas came maize, potatoes, runner beans, pineapples and sunflowers, and by 1585 peppers from South America were being cultivated in Italy, Castile and Moravia.
Scientific instruments Throughout the 17th and early 18th centuries systematic observation and the use of experimentation and the microscope accelerated the development of botanical and zoological knowledge across Europe.
At the same time the development of the telescope revolutionized the study of astronomy, with major new astronomical discoveries made by scholars in London, Danzig, The Hague and Rome.
Research into the existence and nature of a vacuum linked developments in natural philosophy to those in technology.
A vacuum was impossible in the Aristotelian system, but in the 1640s experimenters in France argued that the space at the top of a tube inverted in a bowl of mercury was void of matter.
At about the same time Otto von Guericke of Magdeburg began trials with the evacuation of air from a copper surrounding.
His ideas were taken up by Robert Boyle and Robert Hooke in Oxford, who constructed an air-pump with a glass receiver in 1659.
The Dutchman Christiaan Huygens supervised the construction of a pump at the Academie Royale in Paris in 1665, and a number of instrument makers sold different sorts of pumps in Paris in the 1670s.
Industrial technology There were also momentous developments in the area of industrial technology.
As pits were dug deeper and deeper to extract coal and minerals such as tin and lead, steam engines emerged as a response to the need to rid mines of water.
At the start of the 17th century a number of people considered the possibility of using steam to raise water, either for clearing mines or for producing fountains and cascades for aristocratic gardens.
It is no coincidence that a pioneer of air-pump design, Denis Papin, was also extremely influential in the early history of the steam engine.
Having worked on air-pumps with Boyle and Huygens in the 1670s, he wrote an article in 1690 describing how steam could raise a piston which would then be allowed to fall due to atmospheric pressure.
Papin’s article may well have influenced Thomas Savery, who produced the first workable apparatus for raising water by fire at the end of the 1690s.
Savery was the latest in a line of engine constructors based around London, and although his machine was practical in limited situations, it was of no help in deep mines and suffered repeatedly from boiler explosions.
It was the Englishman Thomas Newcomen’s pistondriven atmospheric engine which would transform industry in the period before James Watt’s innovations revolutionized the design of steam engines towards the end of the 18th century.
The design of Newcomen’s engine was a closely guarded secret, and for the first 15 years no machine outside Britain was made to work without the support and maintenance of a British engineer.
The success of the Newtonian system and the domination enjoyed by the British in the art of engine design throughout the 18th century are indicative of the geographical shift in innovative science and technology which had drifted northwards from Italy at the end of the 16th century.
Steam created in the cylinder forced the piston up; cold water was then used to condense the steam, creating a vacuum in the cylinder.
Atmospheric pressure subsequently caused the piston to move down, so raising the other end of the rocking beam and lifting the pumping rod.
T From the 1650s the air-pump was developed in a number of European cities and by the 1670s air-pumps were on sale in Paris.
The Musschenbroek brothers then developed another centre of production in Leiden, which became the most important supplier of air-pumps, telescopes and microscopes in Europe.
The first Newcomen engine was installed in 1712 at Dudley Castle in Staffordshire and the design was quickly taken up by coalfields and other mining operations across the north of England, although the engine's appetite for fuel was colossal.
Its running costs were, however, a major obstacle to its diffusion across Europe.
A city-stale such as Kano, a markel empire such os Asante and a shrine town such os He might retain o fisted central location but the ruling courts of the Arnhora ol Ethiopia,, or the Monde of Mali, or ihe Lundo of Congo regularly moved from place to place in the manner of medieval European royalty.
Specialists in animal husbandry such os the Fukmi of West Afrka. the Somdi ol Eosi Africa or the Tsmona of South Africa become even mare mobile lhan the rulers ol farming communities os they sought out the hest ecological opportunities for gracing their cornels and collie.
In conlrost to ihiv fishermen and miners had fixed settlements and defended their economic assets.
T he three centuries after 1500 were marked by an increase in Interaction between Africans peoples and those of the outside world, though this increase should not be exaggerated.
Foreigners also exploited opportunities to recruit voluntary, and more especially involuntary, migrant labour to serve as ships' crews and pearl divers, as household slaves and concubines, or as field hands in the coconut groves and date plantations of the Middle East.
The central interior of Africa was only indirectly affected by the globalization of Africa’s external relations before 1800, Local merchants and kingdoms fought over salt quarries, iron mines and fishing lakes.
Africa's ongoing agricultural revolution took a new leap forward when traditional grains such as millet and sorghum were supplemented by the slow diffusion of tropical grains from the Americas such SOTHQ % NQONl Sq/ KHOt *""<** 1 /'»JP as flour maiz e and flint maize, while the traditional crops of root yam and vegetable banana were augmented by new carbohydrates processed from cassava.
Perambulating scholars settled in Timbuktu and Kano, where local holy men synthesized their own customs with those of Mediterranean Islam.
Islamic art and architecture spread too as seen in the great minarets of the Niger Valley, regularly coated in river clay, and the palaces of the Swahili east coast, which were built of carved coral.
PART 3 In western Africa, Christianity was the vehicle for religious change and adaptation.
In the Kongo kingdom, one faction seized power in 1506 with the help of foreign priests who subsequently built chapels and schools, created a small bureaucracy and archive, and developed powerful Christian rituals to match local ones.
A hundred years later the Papacy sent Capuchin friars to Kongo and the surrounding principalities with a view to spreading the new religion into the provincial and rural areas.
Rustic traditionalists proved more resistant to religious change than ambitious townsmen, however, and Christianity created factionalism, discord and eventually a civil war.
Trade and colonization The impact of European merchants on the Atlantic seaboard of Africa was older, and initially more pervasive, than that of Christianity.
On the Gold Coast the pattern of trade was different, with around 40 gold-trading fortresses being built by European trading nations.
Among the greatest of these castle-warehouses was Cape Coast Castle, the headquarters of the English.
Its installations were matched by the fortifications and slave-trading houses of the French on the island of Goree and, in the south, the Portuguese fortress at Luanda, which was to become Africa’s largest slave-exporting harbour on the Atlantic Ocean.
During the 16th and 17th centuries three attempts at colonization of parts of Africa were made by foreigners.
The Ottomans spread through North Africa during the early 16th century, capturing cities from Cairo to Algiers and creating an empire which only began to break up when Napoleon attacked Egypt in 1798.
The next great colonizing episode was the Portuguese attempt to gain and retain commercial dominance on both the western and eastern flanks of Africa after 1570.
Unlike the Ottomans, the Portuguese were unable to conquer significant parts of the mainland, though they attempted to do so in both Morocco and Ethiopia.
They did, however, create creole communities on the islands and in a few fortress towns, notably along the Zambezi River.
The part of Africa most vulnerable to foreign attack proved to be Angola, where Portuguese merchants became conquistadores in the Spanish-American style.
The third episode of early colonization was carried out by the Dutch, who between 1637 and 1652 captured three strategic points the gold-trading castle of Elmina, the slave harbour of Luanda and the prospective military base at Gape Town.
Although the Portuguese were able to recover Luanda in 1648 and resume their conquest of Angola, the Dutch influence there proved pervasive.
At Gape Town the creolized Dutch remained a distinctive segment of the population after the British captured the city in 1806.
The African response to the European opening of the Atlantic to long-distance shipping was to build their markets, their cities and their royal capitals away from the coast and beyond the range of direct foreign interference.
The Asante Empire was able to absorb several older kingdoms which had been brokers between the coast and the interior.
The empire of Oyo partially eclipsed the ancient trading city of Benin and absorbed the powerful shrine city of Ife; a brash new trading state was created in Dahomey and attracted Latin American and European merchants anxious to buy prisoners of war in exchange for firearms and gunpowder as well as textiles and luxuries.
Consequences of the slave trade The period 1500-1800 saw an enormous increase in the scale of the American, Mediterranean and Asian purchase of slaves.
In some areas, such as Angola, the consequence was a demographic haemorrhage as thousands of people were sold abroad each year, thereby undermining the capacity of communities to renew themselves.
In Guinea the slave trade caused such acute social malaise that small communities became dominated by secret societies which manipulated a rising fear of witchcraft.
In the Niger Basin whole communities were devastated by raids which caused death, famine and disease on a spiralling scale.
In contrast to this, some successful broker kingdoms built up their agrarian economies with new crops and preserved their population by refusing to sell young women captives abroad.
In the long term, however, the effects of the slave trade were to entrench violence as a way of life and create a damaging intellectual climate which presumed that white people were superior to black people.
The decolonizing of the minds of both the perpetrators and the victims of the slave trade was to be a slow process, further delayed by the colonial interlude which affected Africa during the first half of the 20th century.
DAGOMBA BORGU N U P E OYO v ^«, Old Oyo fcondutuQ BONO ASANTE KumoMi l DENKYIRA ^ ^ AKIM Q AccfQ J Winrwbo^i •OOiriitinnibQrg Commsfida ^ ^Capa Coast Coslifl Sknma• Bmno tA E Y Y O R U B A oN* WKytkih Bight of Benin BENIN Ben m City V T 0 IGBQ Shoma^ G° A* C° 0* Slave Co Bran • LB<xwy 2 T0Wm AND TRADE CENTRES OF THE GOLD ANO SlAVE COASTS 15DD -1800 fWttiffis in IflDO • Bnmh * Frendi • Bulrii ® Danish * Portuguese AKI PMpio or kingdom QW Calabar Fernando Poo A When the Portuguese first arrived in Benin City in 1486 they found a sophisticated and wealthy kingdom.
Royal patronage was the basis for the production of elaborate sculptures and artefacts, and the demand for copper and brass for this work formed the basis for early trade with the Portuguese.
This 16th-century ivory carving, probably intended for the European market, shows a Portuguese soldier engaged in the slave trade.
Here Europeans built fortified castle-warehouses to protect their chests of gold and stocks of textiles from plunder and to serve as warehouses, cantonments, slave-pens and well-appointed residences for European governors.
This pattern changed in the 18th century when China responded to international demand and began to supply large quantities of silk, tea and porcelain to the West.
Having only small deposits of precious metals, it relied largely on imported silver and gold to support its increasingly sophisticated market economy.
I n 1368 the Mongols, who had ruled China since 1271, were ousted by a peasants’ revolt, the leader of which crowned himself Emperor Taizu and founded the Ming dynasty.
The Ming period marked a renaissance in China’s cultural, political and economic strength.
It was to remain popular throughout the Ming and subsequent Qjng period.
Developments in agriculture An agricultural system based on small freeholds was rebuilt, and initially attempts were made by Emperor Taizu to control the tax burden on the poorer farmers.
During the second half of the Ming period, however, ownership of land became increasingly concentrated in the hands of a few.
This led to the introduction of dual ownership, under which a freeholder could offer land for permanent lease.
Sharecropping a system by which a proportion of the crops produced by the leaseholder is handed over in rent was also common.
There were significant technological improvements in Chinese agriculture.
From the second half of the 16th century new crops were adopted from the outside world, including the potato and sweet potato, maize, sugar beet, tomato, kidney bean, mango, papaya, agave, pineapple, chilli and tobacco; several improved species, such as the American peanut and cotton, were also introduced.
This resulted in an agricultural revolution, with an increase in the use of marginal land and, as a consequence, in agricultural production.
The publication of the Complete Treatise on Agricultural Administration in around 1625 also had a major impact.
Its author, Xu Guangqi, was the de facto Prime Minister, and he enthusiastically promoted the new crops and Western technology for water control.
As a result, the Chinese economy was able to survive the increasingly frequent natural disasters of the second half of the Ming period.
Trade and expansion of influence Ming China was active in domestic and foreign trade.
China was essentially open to foreign trade, as is evident from the outflow of ceramics and silk, and the inflow of silver that enabled China to adopt its first silver standard.
A large number of Chinese settled in Southeast Asia, along the maritime trading routes.
In addition, European Christian missionaries in China introduced Western technology.
PART 3 16th century, were appointed to high positions in the Imperial Court.
Chinese influence was extended by the state-sponsored voyages of the early 15th century, led by Admiral Zheng He.
Its voyages, which represent the most spectacular episode in Chinese maritime history, helped to consolidate China’s sphere of influence in Asia.
The real danger to the empire came from the Tatar and Manchu invasions on the northern and northwestern frontiers, and in 1449 Emperor Zhu Qizhen was captured while fighting the invaders.
The decline of the Ming dynasty The military strength of the empire gradually faded, and internal rebellions broke out every year from 1522.
There was a decline in the efficiency of the Ming government, partly due to interference in the process of government by court eunuchs, but also because rampant tax evasion threw the government into financial difficulties.
In response, around 1573 a “one-whip method” of taxation was introduced, intended to lower administrative costs by reducing the number of different taxes levied, and to spread the tax burden more fairly.
This reform was short-lived, however, and financial and socio-economic crises were to haunt the Ming dynasty until its downfall.
The Ming dynasty ended in 1644 with the suicide of Emperor Zhu Yiujian following the fall of Beijing to rebels.
Officials of the Ming government enlisted the aid of the Manchus a hitherto nomadic people from beyond the Great Wall who had adopted the Chinese culture to help them drive the rebels from Beijing.
However, once in control of the capital the Manchus refused to leave, and the rule of the Manchu Qing dynasty began.
ZUNGHAPI/' (military admiration 17571 o JASTJUmsm± (military administration 1759} Chi* 11 3 Ming and Manchu Qing imperial borders ■ Afffl Ming Erfubng of the tod Wol it 1 1 AdifHjnol wra undei Wandvi Httuentmv dyrmstyin 1760 --Hth-lttfi£Bnfiinfts 1 1 Manrha wssol slate ****** Ifilhcenlury U it** 1 Early Manchu Qing rule The legitimacy of the Manchu Qing dynasty was always in question, and perhaps as a consequence it made few innovations; its language, state machinery, legal framework and economic policies were all inherited from the Ming.
From 1800 onwards, however, the Qing dynasty was increasingly under threat from internal uprisings caused by famine and a corrupt government and from aggressive Western powers.
However, with the exception of Manchuria, the territory gained was neither highly populated nor particularly fertile.
Although the vassal states of Korea and Annam provided the empire with only a small income, they did form buffer zones against potential invaders.
I 1 Major domains and regions in the late Tokugawa period ~\ Kyushu region 'HZr\ Knnha region 11 S&Mii region 1 bhakjj legion IMM CbugcAu regon (Son'll Sorrel r 1 Hokiiwto rapcm | fiinfci region Y//Q Mofflr ro/wrardormw Lirai region Hill Majof s^in^/Mwdfflnoin Chuhu region KUM iJme of domom f | Hohiiure** /Has/ fcing fanJy AKiTA / tfatet*/ f ( MORIOKA I ifNaflibuJ ▲ Throughout the Tokugawa period Japan remained divided into a largely stable number of domains, with the Tokugawa and related families together controlling over 25 per cent of the land.
However, people generally identified themselves with a particular region rather than a domain, and economic and social developments occurred on a regional basis.
The shogunate achieved peace throughout the islands of Japan for two and a half centuries but only through the imposition of strict controls on all classes of society and a policy of isolation from the rest of the world.
I n 1603, after many decades of civil war, Japan came under a new structure of military government headed by the Tokugawa family.
The emperor, resident in Kyoto, no longer had any real political power, although the Tokugawa administration, called the Shogunate or Bakufu , ruled in his name.
Former enemies of the regime became tozama lords, while those deemed friendly were denoted fudai and were given important government posts.
The shogunate had no power to tax within any of the domains, or, in general, to intervene in the political control of these private fiefdoms.
Its only income came from lands directly owned by the Tokugawa and related families, including, for example, the Ii and Matsudaira.
In an attempt to ensure their continued dominance, the Tokugawa implemented controls over individual lords and the population in general.
All daimyo had to visit the shogunal capital, Edo, regularly, and leave their families there as hostages.
They were compelled to engage in public works to restrict their finances, and public disorder within domains could incur heavy penalties.
A strict hereditary caste system headed by the ruling samurai caste, followed in descending order by farmers, artisans and merchants, was enforced.
The economy was based on rice, with the size and wealth of the various domains measured in terms of the rice crop.
The daimyo paid their warrior retainers stipends measured in rice, and the warrior caste as a whole marketed any surplus not required for consumption to purchase other necessities and luxuries.
Urbanization and economic growth Although the influence of the Tokugawa over the daimyo progressively weakened, the ruling structure remained broadly unchanged until the fall of the shogunate in 1867.
However, the very success of the regime in achieving political and social stability stimulated changes which were ultimately to contribute to its downfall.
The need for the ruling caste to transform their rice income into cash stimulated the rise of powerful merchant families, many based in the city of Osaka.
These merchant houses accumulated great wealth, despite their low social status, and a growing proportion of the population engaged in educational and cultural pursuits.
Agricultural output increased with the aid of improved techniques and land reclamation, and the majority of peasants ceased to be simple subsistence rice producers, becoming involved, along with artisans, in the supply of handicrafts and other goods.
The population, after growing in the first half of the Tokugawa period, stabilized.
It is generally agreed that these economic developments were a significant factor in supporting Japan’s subsequent process of industrialization.
Social change and unrest The scale of economic growth and change in the 17th and 18th centuries put pressure on the old system, with the authorities becoming powerless to control the expanding commercial interests and networks.
Social status and wealth no longer went hand in hand, and the daimyo and their followers found themselves in debt to rich merchants who were nominally at the bottom of the social hierarchy.
The distinctions between castes became blurred as individuals ceased to confine themselves to their prescribed occupations; the samurai, in particular, now had little reason to demonstrate their military role, instead becoming bureaucrats, scholars and, increasingly, anything that would make ends meet.
Peasant uprisings peaked in tfie 1830s an era of famine wfien ufiresl nal only invoked greater numbers ion ever before bui also spread to embrace whole regions.
Rioii ng occurred both in lawns and in the countryside, culminaiing in a major uprising in Osaka in 1837, HOKKAIDO Sodo hfond 2 Wajor transport routes in THE LATE TOKUGAWA PERIOD NM' ttome d rouse IVkjh IotkJ mule Other bnd route j —tomflc 0 Moiof port A Transport routes used by the ruling doss were increasingly supplemented, both art land and by sea by routes for the transport of goods around Ihe country.
These roules were also used by the common people, and ihis was a contributory factor in the inc reasing mobility of the papulation in the later years of ihe Tokugawo regime, ▼ The shogunale policy of bringing members of the samurai warrior doss into the capital of each domain , ond the concentration of dotmyo families ond retainer in Edo a nd other towns. urbanization, which in turn promoted conspicuous consumption. threatened to undermine the traditional tribute relationship between peasant and warrior Above all, the benefits of growth were not evenly spread.
Not only did the ruling caste lose out through their dependence on relatively fixed riee prices at a time of inflation, but the lower strata of agricultural workers and urban residents proved highly vulnerable to crop failures, market manipulation and arbitrary exactions by some of their rulers.
The ultimate failure of the ruling caste in many areas particularly those controlled by the shogunale and its closest followers to cope adequately with the effects of all these pressures fundamentally weakened the system, rendering it vulnerable to political and military opposition from within, and Western threats from without.
When, after 1853, Western countries managed to breach Japans seclusiomst policy, their presence further weakened the integrity of an already shaky system, and contributed to growing internal conflicts.
In 1867 these resulted in the downfall of the Tokugawa and the establishment by its enemies of a newregime, nominally headed by the emperor, the following year.
Sutentni fte Mognlxavl 1520-6* X Bottle wtb dare Y The area east af the Euphrates was the subject of mutb dispute between ihe Ottomans and Safavids in the 16ih and early 17lh centuries, until a boundary between the two empires was finally agreed with the Peace of Zohab ini 639.
T he Ottoman and Safavid states represented twin peaks of Islamic political and cultural achievement, and each handed down a powerful and complex legacy to the modem Islamic world.
From the mid-15th century to 1683 the Ottoman Empire was also one of the most successful and militarily effective states of all time.
Its sultan, whom Western contemporaries called “The Grand Signlor”, was regarded with immense respect throughout Christendom.
J_L_ Black S40 OTTOMAN EMPIRE gunnery, the maintenance of a navy and an effective system of military recruitment and training.
Originally, the Ottoman Janissary regiments were maintained by the devshinw the “gathering"" of child slave recruits from the margins of the empire, who eventually were able to leave military service as free Muslims.
However, by the 17th century local, Muslim-born recruits were beginning to dominate the army.
The Ottoman state displayed a high level of religious tolerance for the substantial proportion of the empire's subjects who were not Ottoman Turks fir even Muslims.
Members of minority communities became senior Ottoman commanders and administrators; indeed, the Orthodox Greek community was probably richer and more numerous than that of the ruling Ottoman Turks.
The Ottoman economy was based on an agricultural society which supported a system of military and religious fiefdoms.
A vital adjunct to this peasant world was provided by the empire's most notable and outward-looking communities the Greeks, Armenians, Syrians and Sephardi Jews who dominated many of the empire’s cities and towns.
As late as the 17th century there was no sign that policy-makers in Constantinople believed that Ottoman territorial authority had reached saturation point or achieved natural frontiers.
The Ottoman threat to Italy faded and Vienna the Hud Apple of tlie West"" in < )ttoman military folklore remained a prize that eluded the sultans.
The defeat of the last great Ottoman expedition to Vienna in 1683 marked the beginning of the empire’s long decline.
The Safavid state The Safavids made their mark by nurturing the culture that defines modern Iran.
The founder of the Safavid dynasty was Shah Ismail I it.01-24), who re-established a central government amid the political chaos into which Persia had fallen in the aftermath of the age of Tiniur-leng.
Ismail's partisans were the Qizilbash red-capped Turcoman devotees of the Safawi religious brotherhood.
UR^TAN i ' ^ ^so RUSS linking his and their ambitions to the establishment of “Twelver Shiism w as the religion of the Persian state.
In the wider Islamic world, this nostalgic Shiite tradition was increasingly a marginal or sectarian faith, regarded by the Sunni majority as heretical.
In Safavid Persia, Shiism became the defining national creed, providing the Safavids with an ideological focus.
Safavid shahs most notably Abbas 1 were deliberate propagandists of Shiite culture.
They were patrons of representational art, usually in miniature, and undertook a magnificent building programme of religious architecture, palaces and public works.
The greatest splendours survive in Abbas Is capital, Estahau The forging of a frontier The Ottoman Turks inherited from their Byzantine predecessors a determination to keep the Black Sea dependent on Constantinople, free from control by Central Asian rulers.
When Shah Ismail and his Qizilhash forces began to infiltrate eastern Anatolia from Tabriz in the early 16th century, they provoked a massive Ottoman military response.
The armies of Sultan Selim the Grim were in the forefront of contemporary military capacity, and the Ottoman artillery gained a dramatic victory over the lightly-armed Persians at Chaldiran in 1514.
The Battle of Chaldiran appears to have shifted the centre of gravity of the Persian Empire to the cast, but it was not a final encounter.
The standard pattern in this long conflict was one of an Ottoman offensive countered by Persian “scorched earth"" and guerrilla tactics.
Shah Abbas I was briefly able to set the Safavid forces on the offensive and reconstitute most of the empire once ruled by his predecessor Ismail, but the eventual settlement, enshrined in the lasting Peace of Zuhab in 1639, favoured the Ottomans.
It divided rather than defined communities, splitting Sunni from Sunni and Shiite from Shiite, but it formed the basis for the frontier between the Ottoman and Persian empires and surviv ed as the Iran—Iran border.
The Safavid Empire continued until the invasion of its lands by the Ghilzai Afghans in 1722 heralded the demise of the dynasty in 1736.
The world of merchants and caravans The Ottoman and Safavid states governed lands that had been in contact with a wider world since antiquity.
Many Ottoman and Safavid traders were also Muslim pilgrims undertaking journeys to Mecca.
Safavid contacts with the Western world were tenuous and bedevilled by the difficulties of the Persian terrain, hut during the 16th century European adventurers did make their way to Esfahan and hack.
At the same time, the powers of western Europe beg^n to establish their own sea routes to the East , thus threatening to wrest control of Eurasian trade from the Muslims.
However, although in 1515 the Portuguese captured Ormuz, a Gulf market for horses and spices, they lost it again to the Safavids in 1622.
Thereafter, the old trade in spices and silk and a new trade m tea continued to he serviced by caravan routes into the 18th century.
A The territory ruled by the Ottomans and Safavids was criss crossed by land and sea routes used by merchants and pilgrims alike.
Sea travel was risky but could be relatively straightforward on Mediterranean short baps or in regions governed by the alternating monsoon winds.
Overland traffic was arduous and slaw but continued to play an important role io trade with Asia until well into the 18th century.
During the reign of Akbar, between 1556 and 1605, it was much expanded and became a centrally governed state.
As a result, India became the workshop of the world known to Europeans.
Babur was of Turkic origin and traced his ancestry back to Timur-leng and to Ghinggis Khan, the Mongol Emperor of China.
His advance from Kabul was at the expense of Afghan warlords who themselves had spread into the plains of India, conquering the Sultanate of Delhi and establishing the Lodi dynasty.
Consolidation under Akbar Babur’s successor, Humayan , faced a resurgence of Afghan power and, between 1540 and 1555, was driven into exile while the empire was ruled by Sher Shah and his sons.
Having driven the Mughals’ enemies from Delhi, Akbar used his long reign both to expand the empire and, even more significantly, to consolidate and transform it, converting a rulership founded on warrior nomadism into one based on centralized government.
At the top he built a “service” nobility of mansabdars who provided administration across the empire.
Many mansabdars were immigrants from elsewhere in the Islamic world, whose loyalty was owed exclusively to the emperor himself.
Beneath them, Akbar incorporated the Hindu Rajput chieftains who ruled over lower castes and commoners.
These chieftains possessed local power bases which were notionally independent of Mughal authority, but their status and security were enhanced by membership of an imperial aristocracy.
To facilitate their incorporation, Akbar who was fascinated by all religions also promoted a cultural style which crossed strict religious boundaries.
Beneath the mansabdari -Rajput elite, the empire rested on the labour of millions of peasants and artisans from whom large revenues were extracted.
Frequently the regional states depended on European commercial agencies such as the British East India Company which, as a result, moved more directly into the political foreground during the 18th century.
Frarwh >1* 5tol«Ji O Dutifi Hriihiruipittru AHMADABAD AhmadaboaQ &}6I2 Surer WO 8.
They were based on the mobilization of great wealth through a system of cashtaxation, which itself was made possible by the high productivity and commercial development of the economy, India's fertile river valleys yielded substantial agricultural surpluses, which in turn supported extensive artisan industries , From at least the 10th century these industries had been drawn into trading networks stretching from Arabia to Indonesia.
They brought with them huge quantities of gold and silver taken from the Americas, further stimulating the Indian economy.
However, the European presence also spelled dangeralthough its character did not become fully apparent until the 18th century.
The empire was unable to respond to invasions from abroad or to rebellions at home Even the munsabdari elite turned against it, as governors declared themselves independent and sought to establish their own kingdoms.
Although the emperorship retained a symbolic significance throughout the rest of the century (and was not formally abolished until 1857), the real substance of Mughal power was weakening even by 1730.
Jaffna t J 60 ffbrtwwM.f The empire's collapse Many different explanations have been put forward for the sudden collapse of so mighty and established an empire.
Nearly all of these have rooted the problem in Aurangzeb’s reign He sought to expand Mughal power southwards, taking virtually the whole of the subcontinent under imperial rule.
However, in doing so he became involved in protracted conflict against opponents whom he could neither defeat nor incorporate, Aurangzeb’s long wars in the south proved extremely costly; They stretched the finances of the empire and promoted changes in its internal structures.
He increased the weight of taxation, which fomented revolt in other provinces.
Frustrated by the Hindu Marat has, he became increasingly intolerant in his religious practices threatening the Hindu-Muslim accord which had marked Akbar’s empire.
To cope with the rising pressures, Aurangzeb also expanded the manstthdttri elite in ways which reduced the representation of Muslim immigrants and thus increased that of local Indian powers.
The empire which he bequeathed to his successors in 17<I7 was already deeply strained.
Yet there may have heen other causes of Mughal decline f which point to the growing influence of a wider world.
Rapid commercial expansion in the 17th century, when an ever-growing number of trading posts was established, both altered the political geography of India and changed the social balance between military anti economic power.
Commerce was based on overseas trade and most enriched the maritime provinces.
It also strengthened the position of mercantile groups and the gentry classes.
The Mughal Empire, founded by warrior descendants of the “Mongol Hordc 1T and centred on cities in India’s heartland, was singularly ill-equipped to manage such developments.
However, in doing so ho tame up against loos in particular, the Marathos whom be mu Id da little to contain.
Ihe Moralhas introduced new forms of wot fare, based on guerrilla lottks, which defied Mughal armed might Aka, as chiefloins risen from the peasantry rather than imposed an lop af il ttaratha leaders spumed the hinds of inducements which hod mode the Rajputs susceptible la imperial inRuenre.
From the 1680s Maraiha armies brake through the Mughal cordon meant to contain them, and ravaged far and wide.
The Europeans, who had established trading posts around the coast, were mere observers of events at this time, A The Mug ha k are renowned far their architectural achievements, the most famous of which is the Io| Mobtg bulk between 1632 and 1648 by Shah Johan, Fainting aka flourished, particularly during the reign of Jahangir, shown here looking at a portrait of Ate bar, his father.
In 1500 the border between Prance and the Holy Roman Empire, for example, was that defined by the Treaty of Verdun in 843, with the addition to France of Dauphine in 1349 and Provence in 1481.
The treaties of Madrid and Cambrai fundamentally modified the border in the north by transferring Flanders and Artois from France to the Empire.
In fact, all the European states were highly decentralized and regionalized in 1500.
Spain consisted largely of a union of the kingdoms of Castile and Aragon, with Castile itself made up of a number of component kingdoms.
In 1512 Ferdinand of Aragon added to this by annexing the kingdom of Navarre, though not the portion of it north of the Pyrenees.
Stability in Spain rested on the willingness of the government (centred at Madrid from the 1560s) not to touch the immunities and privileges of these kingdoms, another of which was added to the Spanish Habsburg realm in 1580 when King Philip II of Spain also became King of Portugal.
Poland was divided up into counties and governorships dominated by the nobility, and was formally made up of two realms, the kingdom of Poland and the vast Grand Duchy of Lithuania.
Agreements reached between 1569 and 1572 turned the kingdom into an elective monarchy in which the power of the king was limited by a diet made up of senators and delegates.
The Russian Empire came into being as a multi-ethnic empire only after the coronation of Ivan IV in 1547.
Though often ruled brutally, it hardly consisted of a centralized realm and, indeed, for a decade of Ivan’s reign it was deliberately divided by the tsar into a personal domain, in which his word was law, and the rest of the country, in which the boyars ruled.
The Holy Roman Empire By the 16th century the jurisdiction of the Holy Roman Empire was, in reality, confined to the territory north of the Alps.
The Italian section continued formally as part of the Empire, with its rulers nominally invested as Imperial Vassals, but as time went on this had less and less meaning.
The Swiss Confederation gained exemption from imperial duties in 1499 and was formally released from imperial jurisdiction in 1648.
In 1500 and 1512 the rest of the Empire was organized in Imperial Circles for purposes of raising taxes and administering justice.
The Netherlands was formed as the Burgundian Circle, the northern provinces of which were formally recognized as independent of the Empire in 1648.
As a result of the Lutheran Reformation , many of the ecclesiastical territories were secularized after 1520.
The basic constitution of the Empire (the Golden poland-uthuania ^ VQLHYNIA \ _XV -GALICIA tyV’tagw % BOHEMIA MOLDAVIA TURKISH HUNGARY wauachia ,_O 1 Europe 1.1560 — Houndo^ of Pile Hoiv Homan.
Law differed widely between regions, the main distinction being between the Roman-based law of the south and the customary law of the north.
Bull of 1356, which defined the princes who had the right to elect the Emperor), was modified by the Treaty of Augsburg of 1555 to accommodate these changes, granting princes and cities the right to be Lutheran and recognizing the secularization of church property up to 1552.
European dynasties Most European states were to some extent dynastic they were regarded as a family inheritance.
In the British Isles, King Henry VIII of England claimed the throne of Ireland in 1541, and in 1603 King James VI of Scotland inherited the English throne, thus uniting all three kingdoms under one monarch.
In central Europe at the beginning of the 16th century, one branch of the Jagiellon dynasty of Poland ruled over Poland-Lithuania while another ruled over Bohemia and Hungary.
Hungary, one of the largest kingdoms of the late Middle Ages, was a union of Hungary itself (with power devolved to powerful regional magnates), Croatia and parts of Bosnia.
Hungarian Transylvania , Moldavia and Wallachia were ruled by local princes as tributaries of the sultan, whose direct rule extended to Buda and the central region of Hungary.
Dynastic wars The ruling dynasties of Europe were all closely related to each other, though this did not prevent the fighting of wars.
Often described as “Wars of Magnificence”, these were pursued for glory and the vindication of dynastic title, and were considered more admirable than “common wars” fought for the annexation of territory or other forms of gain.
An example of this occurred in Italy where the House of France and the Spanish House of Aragon whose rights were inherited by the Habsburg Charles V both laid claim to Naples in the south and to Lombardy and the duchy of Milan in the north.
In the latter, the richest part of Italy, the struggle was more than one of inheritance.
Francis I of France gained control of Milan in 1500, lost it in 1512 and reconquered it in 1515, but Charles V had to oppose this if his power in Italy were not to crumble.
War began in 1521 (the French evacuated Milan in 1522), and lasted intermittently in the peninsula until the Treaty of Cateau-Cambresis in 1559.
This established a new international order which was to survive with modifications until the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648.
Despite the disaster of the sack of Rome in 1527 by troops of Charles V, papal authority over Romagna was strengthened, with the Venetians agreeing to evacuate Ravenna in 1530.
Parma was acquired from Milan by Pope Julius II in 1512 and granted out as a duchy by Pope Paul III to his son Pierluigi Farnese in 1545.
Ivan's son, Vasili III, con timid wilH this policy of aggressive expansion.
An asteag was founded at Tomsk in I and by 1607 Turuchonsk an the Yenisei River bod been reached.
The river become the frontier of the empire in 1619, with another string of mop being established along it.
Ivan IV became the next grand duke in 1533 at the age of three, and during his minority the boyar a vied with each other for control of the state.
No further territorial expansion took place until after he was formally crowned as the first '""tsar” in 1547.
However, in 1552 a successful campaign was launched against the Tatar stronghold of Kazan, and this was followed by the seizure of Astrakhan on the Caspian Sea in 1556.
Russian territory now extended the entire length of the Volga, bisecting Tatar domains and dominating the peoples of the northern Caucasus and eastern Caspian.
Expansion into Asia In the east the foundation in 1560 of a fortified post at Perm on the River Kama brought the Muscovites to within easy reach of the Urals, where trading in furs promised to he a great source of w ealth.
From 1578 the Stroganovs, a family of merchants who had been granted a vast tract of unexplored land by the tsar, took the lead itt exploration and settlement beyond the Urals.
The Lena River was reached in 1632. the Indigirka in 1639 and the Kolyma in 1644.
The explorer Dhezhnev reached the lie ring Strait in 1648 and Khabarov got to the Amur River in 1649.
The Khamchatkn Peninsula was entered by Russian explorers in 1679, These territorial advances took place largely at the expense of the indigenous, often nomadic, peoples who were powerless in the face of Russian imperialism.
Any resistance was effectively suppressed by punitive expeditions from the ostrogs.
Kl SSI AN AMBITIONS IN THE WEST In the west, Russian ambitions were more circumscribed.
In 1558, in an attempt to take land around the Baltic, Ivan IV became embroiled in a devastating war of 25 years which ruined both Livonia and Estonia and left the Russian armies prostrate.
By the end of his reign all Ivan's western conquests T he expansion of Russian rule into Europe and Asia was a process of exploration and discovery comparable with the contemporaneous exploration of the oceanic w f orld by western European peoples.
In the mid-15th century the Russian state of Muscovy was just one of many small principalities in northern Europe which paid tribute to the Tatars; by the end of the 18th century it was at the heart of an empire that stretched from the Baltic Sea to the Bering Strait.
His death in 1584 unleashed a generation of instability culminating in the “Time of Troubles”, a period of political and social upheaval and foreign occupation that was not settled until a national revolt led to the installation of a new dynasty, the Romanovs, in 1613.
At this time Russia’s main western enemy was Poland, which took advantage of Russia’s internal problems to take back Smolensk and Chernigov in 1618.
Another threat was the growing power of Sweden , which acquired Ingria and Carelia from Russia in 1617.
Russia, however, was able to take advantage of the Swedish invasion of Poland in the 1650s to conclude a treaty with the Ukrainian Cossacks and detach them from Poland.
Between 1667 and 1689 Russia also regained Smolensk and Chernigov from Poland.
Peter the Great By the beginning of Peter the Great’s reign , Russia had tripled its territory in a century.
Sweden was defeated by Russia in the Battle of Poltava in 1709 , and the outcome, formalized in 1721, was the acquisition from Sweden of Estonia and Livonia, and the return to Russia of Ingria and Carelia.
Acquiring a port on the Baltic was one element of Peter’s ambitious plans to overhaul the state and “Europeanize” Russia.
So, too, was the construction of a navy and the acquisition of a port on the Black Sea.
He achieved the latter when he captured Azov in 1696, but he lost it again in 1711 during the Great Northern War.
Westernization and the economy In order to compete with other western powers, Russia needed to industrialize.
A few ironworks had been set up by foreigners in the 1630s in the Tula and Moscow regions, but Russia remained an overwhelmingly peasant society and lagged far behind western Europe.
Peter the Great operated an essentially mercantilist policy, patronizing certain commercial interests in order to encourage export trade.
As a result there was rapid growth of both mining and the armaments industry , but this “forced industrialization”, impressive as it seemed at the time, had little impact on the living standards of the peasants.
Many of these produced armaments, while others were mining and metallurgical plants in the Urals.
However, conditions for the vast majority of Russian people oppressed by both landlords and the state continued to deteriorate, leading to mossive peasant rebellions which periodically convulsed Russia in the 17th and 18th centuries.
As well os modernizing I be amy, Gwtav introduced o number of tonslilulionoL legal and educational reforms before being killed in battle during the Thirty Years War.
Russia and Denmark at different times, finally exhausted Swedish military strength.
Treaties in 1719-70 handed firemen and Yerden to Hanover and Stettin to Prussia, and in 1721 the Treaty oT Nystadt conceded the loss of tmmia, Estonia and Ingr hr to Russia The overseas bases for Sweden's Baltic empire were thus cut away.
A t the beginning of the 16th century the Baltic region was still dominated by power blocks which had been in place for over a hundred years, In Scandinavia the Union of Kalmar, dating from 1397, joined together Denmark, Norway and Sweden-Finland in a loosely governed monarchy centred at Copenhagen.
All round the southern Baltic the alliance of free Hanseatic cities, such as Danzig and Luheek, controlled trade.
The largest country was Pdand-Lithuania, created in 1386 when the ruler of the vast Grand Duchy of Lithuania came to the Polish throne.
Economically, it was already in the process of becoming a major supplier of raw materials to the increasingly urban capitalist society of northwestern Europe.
Poland was becoming a major supplier of grain, while furs and hemp from Novgorod and Muscovy, and timber and ores from Sweden, were already major elements in European trade and production.
Consequently control of the ports, tolls and waterways to western Europe was an increasingly important factor in tile politics of the Baltic region.
A NEW «llil>Klt IN THE BALTIC In 1521 a Swedish nobleman, Gustav Vasa, led a successful revolution in Stockholm against the Danish king, thus ending the Kalmar Union.
Gustav Vasa became king in 1523, beginning a new period of Swedish independence and nationhood.
The civil wars which followed in Denmark and Sweden re-established the power of the aristocracy and limited that of the monarchy, in tlie 1520s the Reformation hastened the disintegration of the lands of the Teutonic Order, while major determinant of Swedish policy though Denmark, the most powerful state in the region, opposed Swedish pretensions, in 1582 a treaty between Poland and Russia left most of Livonia in Polish hands, and in 1595 Sweden made good its hold on Estonia by signing the Treaty of Teusino with Russia.
At the beginning of the 17th century Denmark was still the leading Baltic power, with control of the Sound the only deep-water access to the Baltic.
As a result of a war with Sweden in 1611-13, it succeeded in expelling the Swedes from their only port on the North Sea and gaining trading access to Livonia.
However, military intervention in northern Germany in 1625-29 was a disastrous failure and a severe blow to Danish power.
The rise and decline of Sweden From 1603 Poland and Sweden fought for control of the great Baltic trading centres sueh as Riga, Dorpat and Reval.
King Gustav li Adolf of Sweden succeeded in capturing Riga in 1621 and the whole of Livonia by 1625, and the following year he occupied most of the ports along the Prussian coast.
The war was only ended by the Truce of Alt mark in 1629, allowing Sweden to continue to milk the revenues of the Prussian ports.
Sweden's growing ascendancy over Denmark was recognized in 1645 by the Treaty of Brdmscbm, which gave ► la lb I 4th century Sweden was a {mail rounlry of just am a million people.
The Livonian lands now became a prime object of competition between Poland, Muscovy , Sweden and Denmark.
Gistev Adolf 1631 32 —► ImDskHidfPobidliSS-SB —► Campaign against Pdanrt 17025 —► Cainpoiyn against Russia 17 OS X Bette wirli dote S Siege North Sea ^NGtANJD Sweden Jamtland and Harjedalen as well as a 20-year lease on Halland and freedom of passage through the Sound.
Denmark also conceded Bremen and Verden, confirmed in the Treaty of Westphalia which also transferred western Pomerania to Sweden.
These treaties, however, did not entirely settle the issue of predominance.
Sweden still needed to assure its control of the Prussian ports, and in 1655 King Charles X mounted an invasion of Poland that led to its virtual collapse.
The year 1660 marks in some ways the summit of Swedish imperial power based on a military system, both at land and sea, that made Sweden the envy of Europe.
There were, however, a number of factors that threatened to weaken Sweden.
The population was only a little over a million, and the constitution was liable to sudden fluctuations between limited and absolute monarchy.
The possessions in northern Germany were extremely vulnerable and often lost during wars, only to be retained by diplomatic manoeuvres.
Poland never recovered from the Swedish occupation of 1655-58, and in 1667 it lost the eastern Ukraine and Smolensk to Russia.
Thereafter, Poland became increasingly a plaything of surrounding powers.
It was a major theatre of the Great Northern War of 1700-21, and by 1717 Peter the Great of Russia had turned it into a Russian protectorate.
A Swedish military power was based on a national standing army established after 1544 by Gustav I This was supplemented by mercenaries when a larger force was needed for foreign conquest.
In the early 17th century the army was further reformed by Gustav II Adolf, paving the way for Swedish success in the Thirty Years War and beyond.
T After a brief period as a Russian protectorate, Poland was carved up in the course of three partitions in 1773,1793 and 1795 between Russia, Austria and Prussia.
Poland gained crmlral of ihe tourland lerritDry of the Livonian Order and in 1618 regained port of the Smolensk region.
Following Swedish invasions in the 165CH and renewed war with Russia, this lerritory was last again in 1667.
The Hamburg Emperor Otaris Y presided over a vast cnllectia n of territories □nd faced formidable enemies Valoij Frame, the Ottoman Empire and various alliances of German princes.
In 1556 r after Charles's abdication, the empire was divided in two, with Ferdinand I ruling the Austrian domains and Philip II inheriting his father's Spanish lands.
I n 1490 the Habshurg dynasty was just one of a number of ancient dynastiesamong them the Valois of France, the Trastamaras of Castile and Aragon and the Jagiellons of Poland, Bohemia and Hungary-that were in the process of creating major princely states.
The military' and diplomatic system needed to rule and defend them in the emperor’s name was formidable by the standards of the age.
Vet in some ways it is a misnomer to talk about a Habshurg ‘'empire” at this time, for Charles ruled his many territories largely through rights of inheritance and they all maintained their separate constitutions.
The extent of II vrsbi rc territories Charles was the grandson of Maximilian I of the House of Habsburg, which had ruled over domains centred on Austria since the 13th century.
Holy Roman Emperor from 1493 to 1519, Maximilian gained control, through marriage, of what was left of the territories of the extremely wealthy Valois dukes of Burgundy.
An alliance was formed with tile Genoese Republic in 1528; the defeat of French expeditions to Milan and Naples and the overthrow of the French-backed Florentine Republic in 1530 sealed Hahsburg predominance in Italy.
In 1519 Charles was elected Holy Roman Emperor, a role which brought formal prestige as the first prince of Christendom but little more.
The King of France, in any case, regarded himself as the equivalent of the emperor in his own kingdom and recognized no superior.
Charles ruled more directly as Archduke of the Netherlands and of Austria, Control of the eastern llabsburg lands centred on Vienna was devolved to his brother Ferdinand, who was elected heir to the imperial throne in 1531.
In both the Mediterranean and central Europe Charles directly confronted the power of the Ottoman Empire.
The Ottomans had occupied Rhodes in 1522 and went on to defeat the Hungarian army in 1526.
PART 3 were therefore In the front line, and Vienna withstood a major siege in 1529 and a threat of one in 1532, The Ottoman threat was only held at bay by the combined dynastic and imperial power of the llabsburgs, In the western Mediterranean Charles sought, throvrgh the conquest rtf Tunis in 1535 and the disastrous expedition against Algiers in 1541, to build on the footholds already acquired in coastal North Africa.
Division of thk empire Charles reached the height of liis power at the Battle of Muhlberg in 1547. when he managed to crush the forces of the Protestant rulers of liesse and Saxony (yxtges 154— 55h lie then tried to reverse many of the religious and political developments in Germany since the 1520s, hut his position quickly began to crumble.
In 1552 the rebellion of the League of Princes in Germany allied to Henry |] of France forced him to accept that the inheritance was too large to be ruled by one man and that, as a family and dynastic concern, it had to be shared, Consequently, on his abdication in 1556 the empire was divided between his son, Philip II T who inherited the Spanish possessions, and his brother, Ferdinand, who inherited the Austrian domains* The empire in central Europe As Charles's deputy in Germany, Ferdinand I had consolidated the Mabsburg family’s position as central European dynasts.
When King Louis 11 of Hungary was killed at Mohacs in 1526 , Ferdinand was elected to the Bohemian and Hungarian thrones by the magnates, w ho saw him as the best guarantor of their safety against the Ottoman Turks.
With the weakening of the Ottoman Turks in the 17th century', the dynasty was able to begin the piecemeal reconquest of Hungary , Largely complete by the end of the century, this established the Habsburgs as the major dynastic power of central Europe.
Power was transmitted along a series of military routes leading from Spain to the Low Countries known collectively as the “Spanish Road"" , and was challenged in the late 16th century by rebels in the Low Countries ami by England.
Ultimately, Spain proved unable to maintain its control of the northern provinces of the Netherlands and agreed a temporary truce in 1609.
The axis of power between Madrid and Vienna remained vital to the Spanish system and was reinforced as the Habsburgs in central Europe came under pressure from rebellious nobles and Protestants.
The last phase of the Spanish military system in western Europe showed that it was remarkably resilient in the face of massive setbacks such as the rebelj lions in Portugal and Catalonia in 1640 and the defeats in the Low Countries by France at Lens in 1643 and Roeroi in 1648 , Nevertheless, the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648 forced the recognition of the independence of the United Provinces, and the Peace of tile Pyrenees with France in 1659 registered a serious shift in the balance of power towards France.
For the rest of the 17th century', 8pain and its dependencies were constantly on the defensive.
Philip II, fated serious opposition from (he nobility from 1565 wA a EH scute revolt in Holfortd from 1572.
Thb led lo the formal repudiation ol Philip in E581 by whot were to become the seven United Provinces of Ihe N elherlandi < Outing ihe 16lh ond 17 lb con furies the Austrian Habsburgs extended lhair territory arms Hungary and along the Danube as far east as Troitsyfvanio, However, in 1682 ihe Ottomans claimed Hungary os a vassal slate and seni an army of 200,000 men to advance an Vienna.
The subsequent twomonth siege of the tity hi 1683 was only lifted when a Polish army attacked (he Ottoman forces and sent them into retreat.
Hie Habsburgs eventually regained Hungary from the Ottomans under the Treaty of Cortewit; in 1692.
Calvinism became pal in rally predominonl during ihe later 16th century, while in England the Anglican Church under Elizabeth I was Cohinisl with aa episcopal government.
Further oral, Colvinisin was adopted in Transylvania (in Hungary] and in Poland so mony nobles became Praleslanl that special provisions for iheir toleralion had to be agreed in 1569-71.
T he Reformation is commonly associated with an outraged response to the corruption of the Church in the late 15th and early 16th centuries, In fact* the corruption of the Church had come under attack before.
What was new at this time was the emergence of a powerful force of religious revivalism which swept across Europe and sought an increased rule for the laity in religious life.
The impact ok Li thehamsm The Protestant Reformation is traditionally dated from 31 October 1517 when Martin Luther's Ninety-Five Theses against indulgences (documents sold by the Church which were widely thought to remit the punishments of purgatory) wore pasted on the door of the castle church at Wit ten burg in Saxony.
Luther’s Theses provoked a hostile reaction from the upper hierarchy of the Church, Moreover, the circulation of printed copies of the Theses and other writings meant that they received the attention of a wider publie than might otherwise have been the ease.
His attack on financial abuses within the Church, and Ins emphasis on the spiritual nature of Christianity and the teachings of the gospel, found support among a broad range of the laity.
Before 1517 reform of the Church had been seen as a legitimate objective; now Luther’s call for 14 reformation*' was regarded as a fundamental threat to both the Church and the Holy Roman Empire.
Luther was excommunicated in 1521 after denying the primacy of the Pope, and later that year he was placed under an imperial ban.
PART 3 A number of German princes broke with Rome and adopted Lutheranism, gaining stronger political control over the Church in their own territories as a result.
This was met with fierce opposition from Charles V at the Augsburg Reichstag in 1530, and in response a League of Protestant estates including Hesse, Saxony, Wurttemberg, the Palatinate and several imperial cities was formed at Schmalkalden, thus splitting the Empire into two warring camps.
It was not until 1555 that Charles V was finally forced to concede the Peace of Augsburg, granting full rights to the secular estates of the Empire to adopt Lutheran reform.
Radical reformation The reform movement spread rapidly but for many it was the ideas of local reformers that mattered most.
By the end of the 1520s a split between the Lutheran Reformation and the radical churches was clear.
Thomas Miintzer encouraged a more radical view that was to culminate in the “Kingdom of Zion” of the Anabaptists at Munster, while in Zurich Huldreich Zwingli led a reformation which differed from Lutheranism over, among other things, the sacrament of Communion.
Protestantism in Switzerland received a blow with the death of Zwingli in battle in 1531, but it was ultimately revived by Calvin, a humanist and lawyer born in northern France.
Calvin, who controlled the Genevan church by 1541 , gave the French-speaking world a coherent and incisive doctrine as well as an effective organization.
He proved to be the most significant influence on the emergence of the Reformation in France from the 1540s onwards, when he sent out a network of preachers to the main French cities.
By 1557 an underground church was in existence and in 1559 it declared itself openly.
The Counter Reformation In Spain and Italy, where Spanish power posed a significant block to Protestantism, the internal reform of the Catholic Church was pushed forward by the foundation of many new religious orders devoted to charitable and evangelical work in the lay world, as well as by the militant Society of Jesus founded by Ignatius Loyola in 1534.
Within the Catholic Church as whole, the establishment of the means to resist Protestantism was a priority.
The three sessions of the General Council of Trent held between 1545 and 1563 restated theological doctrine in a way which precluded reunion with Protestants, and a series of decrees aimed at reforming the clergy and church organization was issued.
Although the pronouncements of the Council of Trent were not immediately translated into action, the Council signalled that the Catholic Church was to become an evangelical movement, seeking to win converts both among heretics in Europe and the “pagans” of the overseas world.
Crucial in this process was the growing identification between the Catholic Church and absolute monarchs, who had the power, through patronage, to win back disaffected nobles to the Roman Catholic faith.
In France, although the Jesuits were at first not allowed to preach, a resurgence of Catholic piety and fundamentalism eventually put a limit to any further expansion of Protestantism.
The ensuing factional chaos enabled Protestants to extract from the French crown a lasting guarantee of religious toleration in the Edict of Nantes , but this in effect confirmed their minority status.
When their guaranteed strongholds were removed by the Crown in the 1620s, they were reduced to a position of sufferance.
In 1685 the Edict was revoked and around 200,000 Protestants were forced to convert to Catholicism or flee the country.
In the Netherlands a Calvinist minority seized power in Holland and Zeeland in 1572 but had to fight a bitter and prolonged war with Spain which was to last until 1648.
By the end of the war in 1648, when the Treaty of Westphalia recognized a new order in Europe, Roman Catholicism had been re-established in France, Poland, Hungary and Bohemia.
However, there was no return to religious war and, to some extent, religious pluralism was reluctantly accepted between, if not within, states.
The inner ""forest"" cantons were hostile to Zwingli and feared the power of Zurich where he was based.
After his death in 1531 Bern took up the military leadership of Protestantism, giving its protection to Geneva which, although not technically part of the Swiss Confederation, was to become the centre of Swiss Protestant doctrine.
Crucial to its survival, however, was the support of a very large minority of the nobility.
Its greatest concentration was eventually in a ""crescent"" stretching from Dauphine in the east to Poitou in the west.
This was largely a result of the course of the French Wars of Religion which rendered life precarious for Protestants north of the Loire, especially after the St Bartholomew's Day Massacre in August 1572.
Oliver Cromwell came to prominence as a military leader during the Civil War of 1642-48 between supporters of the king and of Parliament.
It is in fort the case that there were plague epidemics in Europe and China in (be 1640s as well as parallel political upheavals.
The growth of armies and of military technology in this period {pagvs 158—59) could only be achieved through an increase in taxation that was so large as to challenge the basis on which states had been governed since the late 15th century.
Rebellion an n am war When Spain intervened in Germany on behalf of the Austrian Habsburg emperor in 161*), and then renewed its conflict with the Dutch in Ib21, it became committed to massive military expenditure which devastated its finances.
In Castile, which had undergone a loss of population since the 1590s, the monarchy found the burden increasingly difficult to bear.
Unable to solve the problem by concluding peace, the government restructured the tax system so that the hitherto privileged regions of Portugal, Aragon, Catalonia and Naples bore a greater share of the tax burden.
In France -governed by Cardinal Kiel id tcu from 1624 the steadily increasing tax burden was accompanied by an increase in royal tax officialdom at the expense of the local machinery of voting taxes through representative assemblies.
In addition to the massive increases in direet (axes from 1633 (when France formally entered the war against Spain and the Habs burgs) and the spread of a whole range of indirect revenues such as those on salt , the direct costs of billeting and supplying the army were borne by the civil population with increasing reluctance.
From around 1630 numerous local revolts broke out, often supported by regional notables resentful at the infringements of their privileges by the Crown, In 1636-37 the Crown was faced by a large-scale rebellion in the southwest which brought together under the name of Croquanr# many peasant communities outraged by army taxes.
In lower Normandy in 1639 the Nn-Pied$ rebelled against the extension of the full salt tax regime to that area.
Cardinal Mazarin succeeded Richelieu as Chief Minister in 1643 and continued the same policies of high taxes and prolonged war against Spain, even after the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648.
By then the Grown faced not only a discontented peasantry but also opposition from within the roval bureaucracy over the suspension of salaries, and a nobility unhappy with the exercise of power by the Chief Minister The result was a confused period of civil war known as the Frond vs, which paralysed French policy until 1653, Crisis across Europe In Britain the attempts of Charles l to impose his religious policies on the Scots exposed the weakness at the core of the Stuart monarchy.
Charles attempted to govern and raise revenues without Parliament throughout the 1630s, but he was confronted by a tax-payers' revolt and by the fact that he could not raise an army without some form of parliamentary gram.
The summoning of Parliament in 1640 triggered a sequence of events that imposed shackles on the king’s powers and then provoked him to try a military solution.
The resulting civil war led to the king’s execution and the proclamation of a republic in 1649.
Opposition in Ireland and Scotland was crushed in 1649-50 by the New Model Army under Oliver Cromwell.
There were also struggles for power in Sweden, and in the 1620s and 1630s large-scale peasant revolts broke out in the Alpine territories of the Austrian HabsburgsFurther east, Cossack rebellions Hared up in the Polish Commonwealth in the 1640s and 1650s and in Russia in the 1670s, Not surprisingly, some contemporaries saw a pattern in all this.
Some modem historians have discerned a systematic ""general crisis” in which the political upheavals of the in id-17 th century were a symptom of profound economic transformation.
In contrast, the trend throughout Europe after 1660 was towards political stability.
PART 3 The establishment of stability Peasant revolts continued in France until the 1670s.
However, despite the continuation of severe economic problems and the massive growth of armed forces to enable the annexation of territory , these revolts did not seriously threaten the state.
After Mazarin’s death in 1661 Louis XIV assumed personal rule, which deflected the discontent of the nobility and assuaged the conflicts between government, officialdom and the courts.
Thereafter he ruled as absolute monarch with the aid of a centralized bureaucratic government a pattern which was to continue until 1789.
Without any significant opposition, Louis was able to impose religious uniformity in 1685.
The doctrine of “absolute power”, though not new, became the keynote for many rulers eager to imitate the splendours of Louis’ court at Versailles.
In east-central Europe the Hohenzollerns rulers of Brandenburg and Prussia gradually increased their power after the Elector Frederick William I came to an agreement with the nobility, under which his military powers were extended in return for the reinforcement of their controls over their tenantry.
Concert of Europe Elsewhere in Europe the defeat of the monarchy led to the emergence of oligarchic parliamentary systems Britain from 1689, the United Provinces from 1702, Sweden from 1721.
In Spain, the regime of the Bourbon dynasty, confirmed by the Treaty of Utrecht of 1713, imposed a centralized government on the French model.
Thus, although major wars continued to be endemic and commercial rivalry both in Europe and overseas was fierce, governments were far more securely anchored than in the earlier 17th century.
Religious uniformity, while still formally insisted on, was in practice no longer so vital.
A Europe in which one or other dynastic state (Spain in the 16th century, France in the 17th century) threatened to dominate the rest had been replaced by a “concert of Europe” of roughly balanced powers that was to last until the revolutionary period in the 1790s.
The high point of his achievements came in 1684 when his acquisition of Luxembourg during a war with Spain and the Empire was confirmed by the Treaty of Regensburg.
From 1685 the threat he posed to other powers led to a series of alliances being formed against him.
T The duchy of Prussia, founded in 1525 out of the remaining lands of the Teutonic Knights, passed to the Hohenzollern electors of Brandenburg in 1618.
Under Elector Frederick William I , Brandenburg—Prussia did well out of the Peace of Westphalia in 1648 and the Northern War to extend its territories.
B etween the 15th and l Si It centuries European warfare was massively transformed in scale and complexity, and this had a powerful impact on both state and society, It has been argued that the transformation amounted to a “military revolution"" led by the Swedes and the Dutch in the decades around 1600.
However, this view underestimates the role of France and Spain, and the process of military change is now seen as one that was evolutionary rat iter than revolutionary* ARMIES \M» THE STATE The driving force behind military change was the development of a highly competitive state structure, both regionally and across Europe.
Countries which had not invested in major military reorganization by the 17th century such as Poland were seriously disadvantaged. but in those countries where military expenditure was high the impact was felt at all levels of society.
In addition there were several civil wars involving a degree of ideological or religious dispute, such as the French Wars of Religion I1562-98) and the English Civil War 11642-48), Art illery amt siege warfare Changes in warfare were made possible by a number of crucial technical innovations.
First, the growing sophistication of artillery in the 15th century altered the terms of war tn favour of attack In mid-15th-century France, more effective, snialler-calibre bronze cannons replaced the existing, unreliable wrought-iron version.
One of the most widely noted features of Charles VIIIs invasion of Italy in 1494 was his deployment of the formidable French royal artillery.
Bronze, however, was expensive, and the next important development was the manufacture of reliable cast-iron guns in England during the 1540s.
Cast-iron guns were three or four times cheaper than their bronze equivalents. and the traditional cannon foundries of Europe were unable to compete until the next century.
The major powers Italy, France and 8 pa in therefore embarked on highly expensive programmes of refnrtification to render fortresses and cities impregnable to artillery bombardment.
As a consequence of these developments in siege warfare, wars of rapid movement of the kind embarked upon by the English in 14th-century France became unthinkable.
Changes on the battlefield Artillery had its place on the battlefield, but because of difficulties in using it tactically, it was slow to gain dominance.
At Ravenna , Marignano and Bicocca , field artillery and handguns inflicted severe casualties on pike squares.
To combat this, large mixed infantry formations were used, armed partly with pikes and partly with muskets.
Despite these developments, the heavy cavalry did not disappear; in fact cavalry in general was overhauled to make use of firearms, most notably among the German reiters.
Commanders now sought to organize infantry and cavalry more effectively.
However, it was still difficult to manoeuvre large groups of men on the battlefield, especially since the main battles consisted of vast squares of infantrymen.
The necessity of increasing the rate of fire of handguns led to the development by the Dutch armies in the 1590s of “volley fire”, in which the infantry was laid out in long lines, firing rank after rank.
All these changes meant that battles took place over larger areas and involved greater numbers of soldiers.
In 1525, at Pavia, the French king’s army of 28,000 men was defeated by a Habsburg army of 20,000; at Breitenfeld Gustav Adolf had 41,000 against 31,000 Habsburg troops; in 1709, at Malplaquet, a French army of 76,000 faced an Allied army of 105,000.
While the maximum number sustainable for a whole campaign in the mid-16th century seems to have been about 50,000, by 1700 the number was around 200,000 and by 1710 France, for example, could sustain a total military establishment of 310,000 men.
Germany became a battleground in which all the military powers developed and tested their strength; the armies frequently plundered towns, villages and farms for supplies, adding to the devastation.
The Holy Roman Emperor's power was at its height in 1629 but thereafter began to collapse.
The composition of armies SfMhisli Army at Fhnfen 1575 Spsid Amy si Flawier* IMO ] Cw*y I 1 Unions si tow I I DtigmSms Frrad RoydAmy 1552 Fraud Royd Amy 1562-69 L I t*flTKJ 15 □ tar ▲ During the 16th century foreign mercenaries frequently outnumbered national subjects in the armies of the kings of France and Spain.
Gradually the Italians, who had been the great soldiers of fortune in the 15th century, were supplanted first by the Swiss and then by Germans from the Rhineland and Westphalia.
English mercenaries served in the Netherlands in the later 16th century, and Scots were particularly active in Germany during the Thirty Years War.
These developments were international in character although their global impact was unevenly distributed.
They had a common origin in the unparalleled expansion of European influence economic, political, demographic and cultural throughout the world.
This process, which slowly hut surely transformed the character of global civilization and forged the modern world* was based largely on Europe’s economic and technological ascendancy.
By the mid-18th century European commercial primacy was already established, hut its lead in manufacturing was apparent only in some areas, such as armaments, ships and books, and it lagged behind Asia in a few fields, such as porcelain and textile manufacture.
In the later 18th and early 19th centuries there was a new wave of economic growth and development, first in Britain and then in northwest Europe.
Later known as the “Industrial Revolution"", the changes led to such a rapid increase in manufacturing that by the middle of the 19th century Britain was described as “the workshop of the world"", THE SPREAD OF INDUSTRIALIZATION During the 19th century, industrialization spread first to northwestern Europe and the eastern states of the United States, and then further afield.
This led to an enormous increase in world trade (which trehled between 1870 and 1914) and in mass manufacturing.
By 1900 both the United States and Germany surpassed Britain in some areas of production, such as that of iron and steel Despite this, Britain remained the leading International trader and investor, with London the centre of the world capital market and of the international gold standard, Britain was also the most urbanized society in the world, with only a tiny minority of its population directly working in agriculture.
Elsewhere, the majority of the population even in developed countries such as the United States and France still lived and worked in rural areas, much as their forebears had done.
Global trade, industrialization and urbanization were still relatively undeveloped in 1914, yet Western innovations had already transformed many aspects of life throughout the world.
Steam power provided energy not only for factories but also for railways and ocean-going ships, which, along with the telegraph and later the telephone, dramatically reduced the time and cost of long-distance transport and communications.
His optimism was premature, however, for the French Revolution failed in both its Jacobin and Napoleonic forms and was followed, after 1815, by a period of reaction in Europe, led by the autocratic rulers of Russia, Austria and Prussia.
This did not, however, prevent the growth of Liberalism in Europe, which led to revolutions in France and Belgium in 1830 and to reforms in other countries such as Britain.
In 1848 there were further revolutions in France and Germany which, although not entirely successful, led to the democratization of political institutions in western Europe.
By the early 20th century all European states, including Russia, had representative assemblies, most of which were elected by a w ide adult male suffrage.
Women were still generally excluded from the franchise, but this restriction was being challenged and undermined by campaigners in Europe and North America, In the United States and the British dominions most white men and some women could vote, but not the nonEuropean ethnic groups.
In most of the world non-democratic forms of government prevailed , In both the Middle and the Far East, dynastic rulers with autocratic powers flourished until the second decade of the 20th century.
In the Asian, African and Caribbean colonics of the European powers, the native inhabitants were generally not allowed any direct voice in government.
France was the only major European power to become a republic before 1917, Bismarck the dominant political figure in late 19th-century Europe remained Chancellor of Germany only as long as he retained the support of the kaiser.
The importance of hereditary dynasties in the European state system was illustrated when the murder of the Austrian archduke, Franz Ferdinand, at Sarajevo in 1914 precipitated the First World War, A The European revolutions of 1048, sparked off by ibe overthrow of King Louis Philippe in Frame and the seizure of the Chamber of Deputies (shown here), largely failed in their short-term socialist aims.
In the long lerm they encouraged ihe liberalization and democratization af many European constitutions -4 All independent countries in the Americas embraced republicanism during the 19th century, although the franchise was usually extremely limited and elections were often suspended.
By 1914 much of Europe was ruled by elected governments, although outside France and Portugal monarchs still acted os heads of state.
Ihe extent to which they actually exercised power varied from country to country, as did the proportion af rifaens entitled to vote.
Those areas of Ask» and Africa not under European control or influence were ruled by autocratic monarchs.
Smaller cnnflich arose os Belgium, Greece, Hungary Italy and, cl ihe very end of ihe period, the Balkan slates, fought off colonial rule and established their independence, ▼ The American Civil War wets ihe bloodiest conflict in American history.
The unsuccessful attempt by ihe ouinumbered Confederate to storm ifie Unionisls during the Battle of Gettysburg in July 1863 is generally considered to he the turning point of the war.
MILITARY CONFLICTS In the 19th century Europe was the most powerful region in the world both in economic and military terms, but it was seldom united cither at the national or the international level.
The growth of nationalist sentiment encouraged the emergence of “nation-states” such as Germany and Italy, but several great powers Russia, Austria and the United Kingdom — were composed of different ethnic groups whose antipathies to each other were increased by the growth of nationalist feeling.
Nationalism and territorial ambition led many European countries to attack one another.
The Franco-Prussian war of 1870-71 generated not only hundreds of thousands of casualties but also the Paris Commune, in which socialists briefly seized power The late 19th century saw the emergence of new ideologies of egalitarianism and class conflict Marxism, syndicalism and anarchism which rejected liberal democracy and favoured “direct action” such as industrial strikes and assassination.
Europe was a divided continent long before the First World War exacerbated its problems.
France and Spain, for example, helped the American colonists gain their independence from Britain, and Britain captured many French, Spanish and Dutch colonies during its struggle with Napoleon.
RESISTANCE TO IMPERIAL RULE The period 1770-1914 has been described as the “Age of European Imperialism” because it was characterized by a rapid expansion in European influence over the rest of the world.
However, at no time between 1770 and 1914 was most of the world under direct European control.
In the Americas European colonial rule was confined to the periphery, while in the Middle East and Asia important indigenous states survived despite the expansion of European influence.
The extensive Manchu Qjng Empire remained largely intact until the second decade of the 20th century.
Japan acquired a maritime empire and rapidly developed its manufactures and foreign trade with the help of Western technology.
Other Asian rulers, such as the shahs of Persia and the kings of Siam, kept their independence by playing off European rivals against each other.
Even in India regarded by the British as the most valuable part of their empire control of about half the subcontinent was shared with native maharajahs.
In Africa most of the interior remained beyond direct European control until the late 19th century.
Furthermore, some native African states inflicted defeat on European armies as the Zulus did at Isandhlwana in 1879, the Mahdists at Khartoum in 1885 and the Ethiopians at Adowa in 1896.
Most European colonies were of minor economic importance to their mother countries, although there were some notable exceptions.
Few colonies outside North America attracted large numbers of European settlers, except Australia, where the initial settlements were established with the aid of transported convicts.
Very few Europeans settled in equatorial Africa or Asia, and even India attracted only a few thousand long-term British residents.
CHANGES IN POPULATION In the 19th century the distribution of the world’s population changed considerably.
Although Asia remained far more populous than any other continent, the population of Europe increased rapidly, while that of North America exploded largely as a result of European migration.
The lil expansion of the European empires in Africa and Asia facilitated both Asian and European migration, while the African slave trade continued to brazil and Cuba until the late 19th century.
The great majority of people who left Europe more than 30 million over the period migrated to the United States.
Americans, although they often retained some aspects of their European heritage, were proud that they had left the restrictions and conflicts of the “Old World"" for the opportunities and advantages of the “New World” and supported the isolationist policy of the United States government.
The combination of a low tax burden with rapid westward expansion and industrialization gave the majority of white Americans a very high standard of living.
By the late 19th century the United States was the richest nation in the world, although its military power and international status were still rel a 1 1 vely undeveloped.
C ROSS-CULTl RAL 1NFLUENCE$ The worldwide success of the European peoples encouraged them to believe in their own superiority, but it also exposed them to other cultures which subtly altered their own civilization, Japanese art, for example, inspired French and Dutch painters and British designers, while Hinduism prompted the fashionable cult of theosophy.
In North America, popular music was influenced by African-American blues and jazz.
In Latin America Roman Catholicism became the main religion of the native peoples, but was obliged to make compromises with local practices and beliefs.
Outside the Americas European Christianity had little success in converting other ethnic and religious groups, Islam, for example, remained dominant in the Middle East and much of South and Southeast Asia, while Hinduism remained the religion of the majority in India, The Chinese and the Japanese largely remained loyal to their traditional religions, despite much missionary activity by the Christian churches, which was often prompted by deep divisions between the Protestant and Roman Catholic churches.
Throughout the period the vast majority of the worlds ethnic groups remained attached to their own indigenous traditions and had little knowledge of other languages or cultures.
Even in 1914 European influence on the world was still limited and undeveloped in many respects.
The largest European transcontinental empires those of Britain and France did not reach their apogee until after the First World War, and European cultural influence only reached its zenith in the later 20th century, by which time it bad been subsumed in a wider “Westernization” of the world.
A Many of the won OLiistde Europe were feughr by European powers, or by people of European origin.
In Latin America, for example, there was a sequence af wars of liberation, as the Spanish colonial elites staged successful revolutions against rule from Spain.
T he American Revolution or War of Independence gave birth to a new nation, die United States of America.
Before 1763 the colonists, with their own colonial legislatures, had enjoyed a large measure of self-government, except in overseas trade, and had rarely objected to their membership of the British Empire.
Changes to British policy' after 1763 gradually destroyed this arrangement and created a sense of common grievance among the colonies.
In order to police this vast area and to reduce substantial wartime debt, the British government took steps to manage its North American empire more effectively.
Having no representation in the British parliament, the colonists viewed these measures as a deliberate attempt to bypass the colonial assemblies, and they responded by boycotting British goods.
Although most of these taxes were repealed in 1770, Committees of Correspondence were organized throughout the Thirteen Colonies to publicize American grievances.
A Between 1700 and 1770 the etanomir structure of the American colonies became increasingly diversified and wptihtkaied as the population increased sixfold la some 1,500,000.
Manufacturing developed on a significant scale and there was a dramatic growth af trade, not only with the mother country and tbe British West Indies but aba illegally wilb the Ftatch West Indies and [anlinenld Europe.
Ite flilriBfui [dwues _J Otter British lerrilwnfl ^ 1 ""^ IlSfilYB i I Spwfcb ittiitay Boundary of riw nxriMfl Crfwte 1756 — ProdamalMW Lina of 1763 -Mary of Quebec mtobluted 1774 Gulf of Mexico AY^ / HUDSON'S BAY COMPANY EAST FLORIDA Alia tide Ocean In response to the Ten Act of 1773, a symbolic ""tea party"" wax held when protestors dumped incoming tea into Boston harbour rather than pay another ‘‘unjust"" lax.
Feeling the need to enforce its authority, Britain passed the Coercive Acts of 1774 , which closed Boston harbour and imposed a form of martial law.
Meeting in Philadelphia in 1774, the First Continental Congress asserted tile right to “no taxation without representation"" and, although still hoping that an amicable settlement could be reached with Britain, denounced these new British laws as violations of American rights.
When Britain made it clear that the colonies must either submit to its rule or be crushed (the Restraining Act, 1775), the movement for full American independence began.
War broke out when British troops clashed with the colonial militia at Lexington and Concord in April 1775.
The colonists were deeply divided about what they were fighting for and faced the full might of the British Empire.
Britain hail the greatest navy and the best-equipped army in the world, although the small size of the British army in the American colonies composed of regular soldiers, American loyalists, Hessian mercenaries and Native American tribes, especially the Six Nations and the Cherokee is evidence that Britain did not initially take the American threat seriously.
The Americans, however, with militiamen and volunteers, had more than enough manpower to defend themselves, and in most battles they outnumbered British troops.
Much of the fighting, especially in the south, took the form of guerrilla warfare, at which American militiamen, aided by the civilian population, were much more adept than the British regular troops.
They had the advantage of fighting on their own territory and, unlike the British, had easy access to supplies.
By the wars end America had also won the support of Britain’s enemies France, Spain and Holland.
PART 4 31 if Paro tid The Declaration of Independence On 4 July 1776 the Second Continental Congress adopted Thomas JePerson’s Declaration of Independence.
This document furnished the moral and philosophical justification for the rebellion, arguing that governments are formed in order to secure the “self-evident"" truth (if the right of each individual to “life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness"" and that their power is derived from the consent of those they govern.
Grounded in the notion that ""all men are created equal"", the Declaration asserted the colonists 1 independence from Britain and effectively cut all ties with the mother country.
The / first phase was / mainly located in New f England but culminated in the American failure to capture Quebec in December 1775, thus enabling the British to retain Canada.
The American Norfolk^ blockade v ’ ctor F at Saratoga proved to be a major turning point in the war as it galvanized France into entering the war on America's side, contributing badly needed financial aid and its powerful navy and troops.
Naval warfare now assumed greater importance, with Frenclt/American and British ships fighting for control of the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea.
Spain declared war against Britain in June 1779, followed by Holland in 1780.
In September 1781 the French fleet drove the British navy from Chesapeake Bay, preparing the way for the British surrender at Yorktown , the last major battle of the war Occasional fighting continued for over a year, hut a new British cabinet decided to open peace negotiations.
The Treaty of Paris recognized the new republic and established generous boundaries from the Atlantic Coast to the Mississippi, and from the Great Lakes and Canada to the 31st parallel in the south.
The Revolution was A The battbfroiils of the Ameficon Wor of Independent* siretdied from Quebec in ihe north in Florida in the south, and from the Allonlic caasl as for west as whal is nov southwestern Illinois.
Ang* 9^ S<W & 3,93 ffopnfrlf j Limoges SAVOY_ ArtKiani „ a 93 5a rdin«in> 9.93 ©• J JW R«v o/ Bifivay Spanish"" 4.93 ^ Jri ) Sw'ionlaubon ' r '“*b A T % Ntentpollietf.
Tension between the moderates and anti-royalists grew as French royalist armies, backed by Austria and Prussia, gathered on France’s borders.
A new National Convention, elected by universal male suffrage, declared France a republic.
Anti-revolutionary uprisings, the presence on French soil of enemy armies and continuing economic problems, led to a sense of national emergency.
The Assembly appointed a Committee of Public Safety, dominated by the extremist Jacobins and led by Robespierre.
In order to combat the foreign threat, the Committee of Public Safety introduced conscription.
During 1794 the French proved successful against the invading forces of the First Coalition , and victory at Fleurus in June left them in control of the Austrian Netherlands.
In July the moderate faction ousted Robespierre, who went to the guillotine.
Executive power was then vested in a Directory of five members, and a five-year period of moderation set in.
He was brilliantly successful during 1796, forcing Austria out of the war, but then led an unsuccessful expedition to Egypt to try and cut Britain’s communications with its Indian empire.
Meanwhile, the Directory had become profoundly unpopular with all sections of the population, and was overthrown by Napoleon on his return to France in October 1799.
In 1800, following the first-ever plebiscite, from which he gained overwhelming support, he was confirmed as First Consul of France a position that gave him supreme authority.
He proceeded to introduce a number of ▲ The French Revolution did not occur simultaneously throughout the country, but spread out into the countryside from urban centres.
Some areas remained stubbornly resistant to revolutionary rule, but by the mid-1790s even these were brought under the control of central government.
The crowned heads of Europe feared the spread of revolutionary fervour into their own countries, and were thus anxious to quell the revolutionary French.
However, the Austrians were eventually defeated at Fleurus, while the Prussians were repulsed in Alsace, as were the Sardinians in Savoy, the Spanish in the south, and the British on the Vendee coast and the Mediterranean.
T he French Revolution of 1789 represented a major turning point in the history of continental Europe, for it marked the beginning of the demise of absolutist monarchies and their replacement by nation states in which the middle classes held political power.
It arose partly from attempts by King Louis XVI to overcome a mounting financial crisis by summoning the Estates-General, a body of elected representatives which had not met since 1614.
While the king prevaricated, the First and Second Estates refused to surrender any of their privileges, and on 17 June 1789 the Third Estate proclaimed itself a National Assembly.
Riots had broken out in many parts of France early in 1789 in response to a disastrous harvest in 1788 that had reduced many peasants and industrial workers to starvation.
When the people of Paris stormed the Bastille prison symbol of royal absolutism on 4 July 1789, an enormous wave of popular unrest swept the country, and in what was known as the “Great Fear” the property of the aristocracy was looted or seized.
The National Assembly reacted by abolishing the tax privileges of the aristocracy and clergy and promulgating the“Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen”, in which the main principles of bourgeois democracy liberty, equality, property rights and freedom of speech were enunciated.
Other reforms followed, including the replacement of the provinces of France by a centralized state divided into 84 departments.
PART 4 measures to create a centralized administrative structure, including the founding of the Bank of France in 1800, Between 1801 and L804 a hotly of law's was created, known as the Napoleonic Civil Code, which embodied many of the fundamental principles of the French Revolution and was subsequently imposed in countries conquered by Napoleon’s armies.
In 1801 be signed a concordat with the Pope, thus helping to ensure that he received the Pope’s approval when he declared himself emperor in 1804.
JV1 ] LI TA KY CA M PAJG [VS By the end of 1800 France had once again defeated Austrian forces in northern Italy and by February 1801 it had made peace with all its opponents except Britain.
In October the French fleet was complctely destroyed by the British in the Battle of Trafalgar, but by the end of the year Napoleon’s armies had inflicted heavy defeats on the Austrians and Russians at Him and Austerlitz respectively.
They then moved on through the German states, defeating the Prussians In October 1806.
Following his defeat of the Russians at Fried land in June 1807, Napoleon persuaded the tsar to join forces with France to defeat Britain, which once again was isolated as Napoleon's sole effective opponent.
War against the Fifth Coalition resulting from the French military presence tended to make Napoleon's rule unpopular with his subject nations.
The imposition of the Napoleonic Civil Code in countries annexed by France, while potentially beneficial to the citizens of Europe, still represented an unwelcome domination by the French.
It also caused disquiet among Napoleon's allies, the Russians, who in 1810 broke with France, eventually joining Britain and Portugal in the Fifth Coalition, hi 1812 Napoleon attempted his most ambitious annexation of territory yet, launching an invasion of Russia.
Although lie reached Moscow in September, he found it deserted and, with insufficient supplies to feed his army, he was forced to retreat.
In Spain the British and Portuguese armies finally overcame the French, chasing them hack onto French soil.
At the same time the Prussians, Austrians and other subject states seized the opportunity to rebel against French rule.
The Fifth Coalition armies took Paris in March 1814, Napoleon abdicated and was exiled to the island of Elba, and U>uls XVJIT ascended the French throne.
A year later, while the Coalition members were negotiating the reshaping of Europe at the Congress of Vienna, Napoleon escaped and raised an army as lie marched north through France.
Following defeat at Waterloo in 1815, lie was sent into permanent exile on St Helena, The reconvened Congress of Vienna deprived France of all the territory it had acquired since 1792, It could not, however, prevent the spread of revolutionary and Napoleonic ideas in Europe, as the maintenance or adoption of the Napoleonic Civil Code in a number of countries after 1815 testified.
T Napoleon s armies waged war across Europe in fib attempt la impose French note and ihe Cnril Code Ihroughout the conlinem.
The turning paint in his fortunes, came in 1812 when, with an army already fighting in Spain, he embarked on on invasion of Russia.
French supply lines were stretched Eds> far to support ihe army through the Russian winter, and the troops were forced to retreat, with mast of the survivors deserting.
Napoleon was eventually raptured in 1814 on French soil by the armies of the Fifth Coalition, and imprisoned on the island of Elba.
The final battle occurred following hrs escape, when o revived French army was defeated at Waterloo, in Belgium, on 18 June 1815, From 1793 onwards the rulers of the European slates formed various alliances, in an attempt to counter the threat from France.
Britain was q common member, with other countries joining when it became expedient to da so.
Russia aka joined oil five coalitions, although bom 1807 to 1810 it was allied to France.
Spain, a member of the First Coalition, become a French ally and then puppet stale from 179b until the Spanish people rose up in protest in IBD8 and precipitated the Peninsular War. grand duchy OF WARSAW neihERIAND; ONFEDESAnON f OF RHINE •JJbn fa hi 1808 Charles IV of Spain was forced to abdicate in favour of Napoleons brother Joseph.
The largest centre of manufacturing was London, whose products included silk, gin, soap, glass and furniture.
Its population had increased from an estimated 120,000 to 675,000 between 1550 and 1750, and the resultant demand encouraged developments in agriculture, industry and transport.
Around 650,000 tonnes of coal was shipped to London from Newcastle each year a trade that employed 15,000 people by 1750.
I n the late 18th and early 19th centuries Britain became the world’s leading industrial nation in a process of economic growth and change that is regarded as the world’s first industrial revolution.
In some respects, however, the process was of an evolutionary nature, with change occurring at different speeds in different sectors of the economy.
There were a number of reasons why the process of industrialization first occurred in Britain rather than any other country in Europe.
In 1750 Britain had a well-developed and specialized economy, substantial overseas trade and an average per capita national income that was one of the highest in Europe.
The country was also fortunate in its natural resources, among them fertile land on which a productive agricultural sector had been able to develop.
Early enclosure of fields , together with crop improvements and livestock breeding, meant that British agriculture could feed a rapidly increasing urban workforce.
Supplies of coal fundamental to the nature of Britain’s industrialization were widespread and plentiful, and the development of a national market in coal was facilitated by coastal trade.
Navigable rivers provided initial internal transport, while faster-flowing rivers supplied water power for industry and corn-milling.
The British government also played a very important role in establishing the conditions under which industry could thrive.
Britain was free from the internal customs barriers and river tolls which stifled trade in Europe, while laws protected the textile and iron industries from foreign competition.
Private property rights and a stable currency stimulated economic development, as did the stability provided by a strong state in which warfare, taxation and the public debt were managed by sophisticated bureaucracies.
Shipping and trade were protected by Britain’s naval supremacy, which also helped to secure trading privileges and build up a worldwide colonial empire obliged to conduct trade using British ships.
Rapid economic progress was further encouraged by Britain’s success in war, in particular the war of 1793-1815 against France , during which Britain remained free from invasion and escaped the economic dislocation engendered by war on the continent of Europe.
The war created a demand for armaments, ships and uniforms, which in turn stimulated Britain’s shipbuilding, iron-smelting, engineering and textile industries.
The textile industry In 1750 a variety of textiles silk, linen, fustian (a mixture of linen and cotton) and, in particular, wool had long been produced in Britain.
The skilled workforce employed in both industries was largely home-based and organized by merchants who thus built up capital and entrepreneurial skills.
Such skills were used to great effect in the second half of the 18th century, when the cotton industry developed rapidly.
Technological change allowed Lancashire to produce and sell cotton cloth more cheaply than India, where production depended on low-paid labour.
Inventions such as Arkwright’s water frame and Watt’s steam-powered rotative engine transformed cotton spinning in the last decade of the 18th century into a factory-based, urban industry.
Lancashire became the centre of the world’s cotton manufacturing industry and exported cotton cloth throughout the world.
The woollen industry continued to be of importance, especially in the West Riding of Yorkshire, where mechanization was introduced and British wool was supplemented by merino wool imported from Australia.
Iron, coal and transport Innovation in iron production in the 18th century facilitated smelting, and later refining, using coke instead of charcoal.
Steam power, fuelled by plentiful coal supplies, began to replace man, horse and water power, encouraging the development of the factory system and rapid urbanization near to coalfields.
These developments were selfsustaining, for while steam engines increased the demand for coal and iron, better steam-driven pumps and rotary winding equipment facilitated deeper coalmines.
Canals were constructed to carry heavy and bulky goods, and roads were improved by turnpike trusts, opening up the national market for goods.
The combination of colliery waggon ways and the steam engine led to the piecemeal development of a rail network from 1825 onwards which by 1850 linked the major urban centres.
The consequences of the Industrial Revolution The economic and social effects of industrialization were complex and wide-ranging.
Eleven per cent lived in London, which remained the largest manufacturing centre, and more than 60 towns and cities had over 20,000 inhabitants.
Crowded and insanitary living conditions meant that urban death rates were considerably higher than those in rural areas.
At the same time, the development of the factory system generated issues of discipline, as some workers resented capitalist control of work processes and the replacement of traditional skills by machines.
London's brewing and refining industries in particular were among the largest in the country, and mare loanage passed through the port of London than any other port in Brrfoin.
Moral debates were prompted by the employment of women and children as cheap labour.
The vast majority of the industrial working population was employed in retailing and warehousing, workshops and small enterprises rather than in factories.
Capital and technology had become less involved with agriculture and more involved with industry, especially manufacturing, and with trade and construction related to industry.
Vet agriculture was still the largest single occupation and most of Britain's food was still home-prod need.
By 1850 Britain was no longer the only country to have undergone an industrial revolution.
British industrial workers had also taken their skills to the Continent, In the second half of the century a considerable number were to emigrate to the United States, where the process of industrialization was eventually to lead to Britain losing its position as the world’s greatest industrial power. _ a “ s A As ihe papulation of England increased, its geographical distribution shifted in favour of the developing industrial regions.
Lancashire, ihe Wesi Riding and Devon, the most populated counties shared 10 per cent of the told Engfeh population. ly 1851 the four mast industrialized counties Lancashire, West Riding, Staffordshire and Warwickshire contained nearly a quarter af ihe English papulation.
The availability of resources such as cool and iron ore largely determined the sites for the development of new heavy industries, but elsewhere long-standing home-based manufacture of textiles was transformed into factory-based manufacture, by the use water-power if coal was not readily available.
T he industrialization of Europe is considered to have started in the 1830s, some decades after the beginning of the Industrial Revolution in Britain in the late 18th century.
Much debate has centred on whether British industrialization “spilled over” into Europe (and if so, to what extent), or whether European countries accumulated their own technological and manufacturing knowledge.
There is no question that there were substantial flows of skilled labour, entrepreneurs, capital and technology from Britain, and later from France and Germany, to the less industrialized parts of Europe.
However, although the basic model of industrialization remained British, each country developed its own national characteristics.
Substitutes were found for the particular resources that Britain possessed but which other countries lacked, more organized banking systems supplied finance to accelerate growth, and more aware governments supplied the ideologies and incentives to motivate growth.
As a result, industrialization in the countries of continental Europe was more state-driven and more revolutionary in character than in Britain.
The culmination of this model was the abrupt industrialization of the USSR under the Soviet system from 1917 onwards.
Regional development In the first half of the 19th century many of Europe’s modern nation-states were yet to come into existence.
The process of industrialization often took place in the context of shifting political allegiances and the forging of national identities.
Political alliances and wars, such as the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71, introduced border changes that were often somewhat haphazard in economic terms.
Industry in its early stages was predominantly confined to a number of rather circumscribed regions.
The existence of coal and iron was the most important criterion for determining the speed at which regions developed, but locally available resources were also important, especially the supply of skills in textile regions.
Some of the emerging industrial regions subsequently faded, such as the areas around Le Havre, Leipzig and Dresden, while some new ones emerged, such as that bordering the Ruhr in Germany.
Even at the beginning of the 21st century, much industrial activity in Europe is dominated by regional “clusters” of activity, rather than by a general spread of industrialization to all corners.
Development of industry The pattern of European industrialization (starting in northwest Europe and moving northwards, southwards and eastwards) tends to support the idea that it was based on that of Britain.
It is certainly beyond doubt that the technological advances developed in Britain, for example in textile machinery and steam engines, did not need to be reinvented.
However, the technology often needed to be modified to suit local conditions.
For example, the type of steam engine most popular in Britain (developed by James Watt) consumed too much coal for its use to be worthwhile in regions where coal was more expensive than in Britain.
As a result, water-wheels and the more efficient water turbines were often used to power machinery in France and Italy.
Similarly, in the textile industry it was found that machinery developed for the manufacture of woollen and cotton cloth in Britain was not as suitable for the finer textiles of France and Spain.
The scattering of industrial areas encouraged the growth of railway systems, to facilitate the delivery of raw materials to manufacturers and the distribution of manufactured goods to customers.
In countries such as Spain and Italy the railway was envisaged as the catalyst that would set in motion the process of industrialization, but in these countries, which were among the last to industrialize, the building of railway lines had little appreciable effect.
O M-Wflfc • owrlUft egalitarian, such as Belgium and France, it often had the effect of widening social inequalities for some years.
The national income per head, the most common indicator of overall prosperity and growth, rose throughout Europe , but its steepest increase was in northern Europe, where industrialization took its strongest hold.
So, despite the squalor and misery of industrial regions and cities, it seems that industrializing nations as a whole, and certain sectors in particular, enjoyed long-term economic benefits.
Elsewhere in northern Europe, and in Switzerland, industrialization made considerable headway, although the intense industrialization of northern France and Germany is not reflected in the per capita figures of those countries, since the majority of the population was still engaged in agricultural production.
Belgium experienced a spurt early on and then again at the turn of the century, while others, in particular the Scandinavian countries, were relatively late developers.
Indeed, while Britain had a 13. per cent share of the world industrial output in 1913, Germany, with its much larger population, had 14. per cent, and was thus second only to the United States in terms of its industrial might.
The most obvious effect of industrialization was on economic growth and on the living standards of the populations of the industrialized countries.
The nations of northern Europe (including Denmark) pulled away from the rest of Europe in terms of their national wealth.
Frame had its borders relumed ta those of 1792, Poland was divided once again and 39 Germon spouting slptas wore nrgcmued inlo the German Confederation, dominated by Prussia, which was given hotf af Saxony.
Auslria lost its possessions in norlhwttf Europe to the Dutch in the newly created United Netherlands, but was given much of narihem itoFy by woy of compensation.
V During the 1620s and early 163&s rebellions broke out owass furope. with liberals calling for an end to absolute ftwnordiy in Spain ond Portugal and in the llolwn peninsula.
The Greeks, with the help of the French, British and Russians, drove the Ottomans horn Atorea The Russians aha intervened to crash rebettw in Pobnd in 1830, having defeated their awn Decembrist Revolution in 162S, the French brought about o degree of comtituriafiaf reform following the replacement of Charles X by Louis Phdwe in 1830, and Belgium achieved independence from the United Netherlands the some year.
Y] fooubfa oH&dtfa t815-4& F~1 ymeONeiheMIBt5-30 U~%\ SwJfrtrt'tBlS >*s, F ollowing their initial victory over Napoleon In 1814, the major European powers met at the Congress of Vienna to decide on the future political map of Europe.
The Congress was dominated by three principles; territorial compensation for the victors, the restoration and affirmation of the ruling royal dynasties, and the achievement of a balance of power between the major European states.
Elsewhere, national boundaries were redrawn, often with little regard to ethnic groupings, thus planting the seeds of nationalist tensions.
There was a shared conviction that the spread of republican and revolutionary movements must l>e prevented.
In September 1815 Russia, Austria and Prussia formed a ""Holy Alliance”, agreeing to guarantee all existing boundaries and governments and to uphold the principles of Christianity throughout Europe.
The alliance was subsequently joined by the other major European powers with the exception of Britain, the Pope and, not surprisingly, the Ottoman sultan -and over the next 40 years there were several occasions when the autocratic rulers of Europe took military action to suppress uprisings in states other than their own.
Revolutionary activity in the south In 1820 there was an explosion of revolutionary activity in Spain.
M5< In 1820 his authority was challenged by an army revolt, supported by riots across Spain , with the result that the liberal constitution was re-established.
PART 4 Insurrections in Naples, Piedmont and Portugal in the summer of 1820 also attempted to introduce constitutional forms of government, and initially met with some success.
However, Tsar Alexander I of Russia persuaded the Austrians and Prussians to support him in threatening military intervention, and in March 1821 Austria sent an army to crush the revolts in Piedmont and Naples.
In December 1825 Russia faced revolutionary action on its own soil when a group of military officers tried unsuccessfully to prevent the accession to the tsardom of Nicholas I, preferring his more liberal-minded brother.
The following year the continuing instability in Portugal prompted the British to intervene, in this instance with the intention of aiding the preservation of its constitutional government.
In Greece a revolution broke out in 1821 with the aim of shaking off Ottoman rule and uniting the whole of the ancient Hellenic state under a liberal constitution.
The Ottomans enlisted support from the Egyptian viceroy Muhammad Ali, whose troops seized a large area of the country by 1826, when Russia, France and Britain intervened to defeat the Muslim forces.
Unrest in the north By 1830 revolutionary passions were rising in France.
King Charles X dissolved an unco-operative Chamber of Deputies and called an election, but when an equally anti-royal Chamber resulted, he called fresh elections with a restricted electorate.
Demonstrations in Paris during July forced him to abdicate in favour of Louis Philippe, whose right to call elections was removed.
His reign, known as the “July Monarchy”, saw insurrections as industrial workers and members of the lower middle class, influenced by socialist and utopian ideas, demanded an increased share of political power, including the vote.
Nationalist resentment at decisions taken at the Congress of Vienna led to insurrection in both Belgium and Poland in the 1830s.
In Belgium, which had been given to the United Netherlands in 1815, riots broke out in 1830 and independence was declared in October.
Inequalities in the electoral system provoked a strong movement for reform, which resulted in the Great Reform Bill of 1832.
This expanded the electorate by 50 per cent and ensured representation from the newly developed industrial centres.
Further calls were made by the Chartists for universal suffrage, with petitions presented to Parliament in 1838 and again in 1848.
The revolutions of 1848 By 1848 many of the European countries were suffering from an economic crisis; the failure of the potato and grain crops in 1845-46 was reflected in the price of food.
Revolutionary agitation began in Paris in February 1848, forcing the abdication of Louis Philippe and the establishment of the Second Republic.
Fr ASj v , Canicn , a v Q r ^ r oW, KINGDOM of THE TWO 54 Cl LIES V Sicily Malta demands of the Hungarian nationalists and granted them a separate constitution.
This, however, was annulled some months later, leading to a declaration of independence by Hungary.
Discontent in Austria spilled over into the southern states of the German Confederation, and liberals in Berlin demanded a more constitutional government.
As a result, the first National Parliament of the German Confederation was summoned in May 1848.
From revolution to reaction In June 1848 struggles between the moderate and the radical republicans culminated in three days of rioting on the streets of Paris.
In crushing the rioters the more conservative factions gained control, a trend that was repeated in Prussia, where royal power was reaffirmed.
The second half of 1848 was marked by waves of reaction that spread from one city to another.
The restoration of Austrian control over Hungary was achieved partly by playing off against each other the different ethnic groups within the empire.
However, despite the suppression of the 1848 revolutionaries, most of the reforms they had proposed were carried out in the second half of the century, and at least some of the nationalist movements were successful.
The Habsburgs faced rebellions in Hungary and in the Italian cities of Milan and Venice, which were supported by Piedmont.
Although the revolutions in Italy, Germany and Hungary were all defeated, the liberal constitutions, unification and independence they were seeking did eventually come about.
EXPANSION AND DECLINE 1700-1918 S> holyROMAN empire iAUClA AND i s KINGDOM Boday I ^ F ^ HUNGARY TRANSYLVANIA SERBIA 17J 8-39 WtfS 17*4-3S ► During ihe 1 Blh century ttie Habsburg Empire look every opportunity to es pond its territory al Ihe eitpenw of ite neighbours, As o result of Ihe Wnr of the Spanish Succession, the Habsburgs gwned territory in the ttelher lands and Italy.
Ring Louis XIV of France supported the claim to the Spanish throne of Philip, Duke of Anjou, who was his infant grandson and the greatnephew of Charles.
The outcome, formalized in the Peace of Utrecht , was a compromise under which Philip attained the Spanish throne on condition that he renounced any claim to France, and the Austrians gained control of territory in Italy and the Netherlands.
During the 18th century the Austrian Habsburgs were the major dynastic power in central Europe.
They were threatened, however, when on the death of Charles VI of Austria in 1740 other crowned heads of Europe refused to recognize his daughter Maria Theresa as his successor.
In the resulting War of the Austrian Succession , Bavaria, France, Spain, Sardinia, Prussia and Saxony joined forces against Austria, the Netherlands and Britain in an unsuccessful attempt to oust Maria Theresa.
Reform of the monarchy During her long reign Maria Theresa embarked on transforming the diverse Habsburg dominions into a centralized nation state, and initiated many progressive reforms in the spheres of education, law and the Church.
Her minister, Hagwitz, put the Habsburg finances on a more stable footing, and these reforms reduced the rivalry between ethnic Germans and Czechs.
When Joseph II succeeded his mother in 1780, he was able to build on her centralizing policies, and although his most radical reform that of the tax system was abolished by his successor, Leopold II, before it was given a chance to work, Joseph is generally considered to have been a strong and enlightened monarch.
In the years immediately after the French Revolution of 1789, and during the period of Napoleon’s leadership, the Habsburg Empire became involved in a succession of wars against France , as a result of which it temporarily lost much of Austria, as well as territories in northern Italy and along the Adriatic.
Austria was by this time largely under the control of Foreign Minister Metternich, who used his influence to persuade the other major European powers to assist Austria in crushing revolts in Spain, Naples and Piedmont.
His own methods involved the limited use of secret police and the partial censorship of universities and freemasons.
Although reforms of the legal and administrative systems were set to take effect in Hungary later that year, they did not apply to the rest of the Habsburg territories.
The unrest started in Vienna in March 1848 (as a result of which Metternich was dismissed) and spread to Prague, Venice and Milan.
A Constituent Assembly was summoned to revise the constitution, but its only lasting action was to abolish serfdom.
By the autumn the unrest had reached Hungary as a number of ethnic groups within the empire made bids for greater national rights and freedoms.
In December the ineffectual Ferdinand I abdicated in favour of his nephew, Francis Joseph.
Not feeling bound by the April Laws, Francis Joseph annulled the Hungarian constitution, causing the Hungarian leader Louis Kossuth to declare a republic.
From 1849 onwards an even more strongly centralized system of government was established.
Trade and commerce were encouraged by fiscal reforms, and the railway network expanded.
Coupled with peasant emancipation for which landowners had been partially compensated by the government these measures led to a trebling of the national debt over ten years.
Higher taxes and a national loan raised from wealthier citizens led to discontent among the Hungarian nobles, who wished to see the restoration of the April Laws.
Crisis and change Several factors combined in the 1860s to create a period of crisis for the Habsburg Empire.
It was becoming clear that Prussia, under Bismarck, presented an increasing threat, but Austria was unable to keep pace with military developments because of the insistence of the international banks that it balance its budget.
Unrest in Hungary was presenting a threat to the monarchy, and also making it difficult to collect taxes and recruit for the army.
A centralized government was unacceptable to the Hungarian nobility, but provincial government would be unworkable because of ethnic conflict.
Austria was forced to reach a constitutional settlement with Hungary in 1867, forming the Dual Monarchy of Austria-Hungary.
Although Francis Joseph was crowned head of both, and there were joint ministries for finance, foreign policy and military affairs, each nation had an independent constitution and legislature.
Encouraged by the constitutional change of 1867, many of the ethnic groups within the Dual Monarchy became increasingly vocal in their demands for the right to promote their language and culture, if not for outright autonomy.
In Hungary, although other languages were not actually repressed, a knowledge of Hungarian was necessary for anyone with middle-class aspirations.
Croatia was granted partial autonomy within Hungary in 1878, but continued to be dominated by its larger partner.
There were also demands for greater autonomy from the Czechs in Austria, which were resisted by the German-speaking majority.
It was annexed in 1908 in order to protect Habsburg trade routes to and from the Dalmatian coast.
The resulting incorporation of a large number of Serbs into the empire was actively opposed by Serbian nationalists and was to contribute to the outbreak of the First World War in 1914.
Following the defeat of the Austro-Hungarians in the war, the Treaty of Saint-Germain broke up the empire, granting autonomy to its constituent nations and reducing Austria and Hungary to less than a quarter of their former area.
However, they were forced to give it up in the mid-19th century during the process of Italian unification, and in 1867 were persuaded to grant Hungary equal status to that of Austria.
In 1849, with Louis Kossuth appointed president of an independent republic of Hungary, the Austrians accepted Russian assistance, offered in the spirit of the Holy Alliance, and the rebels were eventually crushed at the Battle of Timisoara.
EZ3 Ceded to Frante 1860 I j 1 1 (edfflS Awnin 1 f | frupedtoWilM t S6J 'Ddff» «i whidi tUtes bacome iDpiml fif iialy —► LipwfaMins cJ P^knonsese l-BAO — ► Smite of Gfliibaldi 1 s Ttauwnd 1340 A Bottle toft dcfle A In 1859, following a war waged by Piedmont and France agaiml iht Austrian Ha bsburgs, Lombardy was liberaled bom Austrian tufa.
Hw outocrahr infers af Florence, Parma and Madwia were also overthrown and provisional gavernmeals set op under Piedmontese authority.
In May 1861 Garibaldi answered requests for support from Sicilian revolutionaries and kmded an army in western Sicily He proceeded io rout the Neapolitan army in a series of battles and to proclaim himself ruler of the Kingdom of the Two Skifos.
Venetia was reded by Austria to Italy, fallowing Austria's defeat of 1066 at the hands of ibe Prussians,, wham Italy had supported.
A mong the most important developments in 19thcentury Europe was the unification of Italy and Germany as nation-states a process that fundamentally altered the balance of power in the continent.
Although nationalist feeling had been stimulated by the French Revolution of 1789, and was originally associated with liberal ideas, unification was actually the result of diplomacy, war and the efforts of conservative elites rather than of popular action.
German unification was promoted by Prussia, the most powerful German state, in order to protect its own domestic political stability; In Italy, Piedmont played this role for similar reasons.
Attempts to l mf y Italy The Napoleonic Wars had a dramatic effect on Italy.
Napoleon redrew boundaries and introduced French political and legal ideas.
These developments were a major setback for Italian nationalists, who sought to remove foreign interference and unite Italy.
A major figure in this movement was A Iht Congress of Vienna m IBM—15 restored member* of Ihe ewiservaiive iGlared boundaries wiihm Italy ital tad Austrian Habsburg dynosly lo pwwr to ben last under Najwbon s rule.
Ii dso Modena, Parma and Tuscany the idealist Giuseppe Mazzini, who hoped the people would overthrow their existing rulers, both Italian and foreign.
In 1848 a wave of revolutionary fervour swept the cities of Europe including those in Italy* where the rebels attempted to dispense with Austrian domination and to persuade local rulers to introduce constitutions.
King Charles Albert of the kingdom of Sardinia hoped to defuse the revolutions by expelling the Austrians from Lombardy and Venetia, but military defeats at Custozza and Novara forced him to abdicate in 1849 in favour of his son Victor Emmanuel IL in Rome, Venice and Florence republics were briefly established, but France intervened to restore Pope Pius IX to power and the Austrians reconquered Lombardy and restored the conservative rulers of central Italy.
The rise of Piedmont Moderate nationalists concluded that the hest hope for Italian unification lay with Piedmont* which was economically advanced and had introduced a relatively liberal constitution.
Garibaldi then transferred the territory he had conquered to the Piedmontese king, who became head of the unified kingdom of Italy proclaimed in 1861.
The remaining territories of Venetia and the Patrimony of St Peter were annexed during the subsequent ten years.
In 1806 Napoleon dissolved the empire, replacing it with a new Confederation of the Rhine comprising states in southern and western Germany, but excluding Austria and Prussia.
The Confederation became a French satellite; its constitution was modelled on that of France and it adopted the Napoleonic legal code.
A diet , presided over by Austria, was established at Frankfurt, but plans to create a federal army and achieve constitutional harmony among the states failed.
Following unrest in Berlin, the Prussian king, Frederick William IV, introduced constitutional reforms and seemed sympathetic towards German unification.
Middle-class German nationalists established a parliament at Frankfurt which drew up a constitution for a future German Empire.
However, they were divided over whether to pursue a “Greater Germany”, to include Catholic Austria, or a smaller grouping, dominated by Protestant Prussia.
The parliament fell apart in July 1849 and by the end of the year the old order had been restored in both Germany and the Austrian Empire.
Industrialization made Prussia the richest German state, and increased its military power relative to that of Austria.
The expansion of Prussia The leading role in German unification was played by Otto von Bismarck, the Prussian Chancellor between 1862 and 1871.
Bismarck, who had come to see Austrian and Prussian interests as incompatible, sought to secure Prussian influence over northern and central Germany, and to weaken Austria’s position.
He hoped that success in foreign affairs would enable him to control Prussia’s liberals.
In 1864 Austria and Prussia jointly ousted Denmark from control of the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein, but the two powers increasingly competed for control of the German Confederation.
When Bismarck engineered a war with Austria in 1866 , most German states supported Austria.
Prussia, however, enjoyed advantages in military technology and defeated Austria quickly, signalling the end of the German Confederation and making German unification under Prussian leadership more likely.
Each member state retained some autonomy, but the Prussian king, William I, became the Confederation’s president, responsible for defence and foreign policy.
Although the south German states were apprehensive about Prussian domination, Bismarck used their fear of the territorial ambitions of Napoleon III of France to persuade them to ally with Prussia.
Bismarck needed to neutralize France if he was to achieve German unification on his terms, and he therefore provoked a war over the succession to the Spanish throne.
In the resulting Franco-Prussian War France was decisively defeated, losing the largely German-speaking areas of Alsace and Lorraine to Prussia.
In January 1871, in the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles, the German Empire was declared, merging the south German states with the North German Confederation.
The new empire had a federal constitution, leaving each state with some powers, but the Prussian king became emperor and most government posts were put into Prussian hands.
With well-developed industrial regions in the north and east , a united Germany represented a powerful new economic force in Europe.
A During 1870-71 the Prussians, under Kaiser William I and Chancellor Bismarck, defeated the French army and laid siege to Paris.
This display of strength convinced the southern German states to join with the North German Confederation in a unified Germany dominated by Prussia.
T The German Confederation was established following the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815.
It comprised 39 German-speaking states, by far the largest of which was Prussia, and included states under the control of the Habsburg Empire.
During the 18th century the major European states became more of a threat to the f Etonians.
It was clear that the weaponry' and the military capacity of the European states were moving ahead of those of their Islamic counterparts.
At the same time, Europe's ideological conflicts reverberated among the Ottoman Empire's Christian subjects, encouraging bids for separatism and liberty which usually had Russian backing.
Whole communities in the Caucasus switched their allegiance from the Ottoman states to the Russian Empire, and disaffection spread among the prosperous and previously co-operative Greeks of the empire's heartlands.
TlIK SLIDE INTO DEPENDENCY The Ottoman state responded to its losses with a programme of expensive remilitarization, as well as political and economic reform and development, funded precariously from what were now seriously reduced revenues.
The strategy for survival was to replace the empire’s traditional patchwork of cultural and religious communities with a new model Ottoman society' in which there was one legal system, one citizen status and one tax rating lor all.
This was progressive, liberal 19th-century policy', but it attacked vested Interests in the provinces and among the Muslim clergy.
The reform movement engendered a limited revival of international confidence in the Ottomans.
During the Crimean War of 1853-56, British and French armies fought to defend Ottoman interests against Russian military escalation in exchange for an Ottoman commitment to equality of status for its Muslim and non-Muslim subjects.
This was a deal die i )ttoman state was unable to honour; twenty years after the Crimean campaign, the Ottoman authorities were still employing ill-disciplined troops to contain unruly Balkan Christians, provoking an international outcry and eventually die resumption of full-scale war with Russia, Under the agreement reached at the Congress of Berlin in 1878, die region s political map was redrawn [maps J and 3). u Turkey in Europe"" became a much-reduced presence.
The rise of the “Young Turks” The new sultan, Abdul Hamid II, swiftly shelved the constitution he had adopted as the price of survival in 1876.
The empire’s political geography was now predominantly Middle Eastern, and Abdul Hamid was keen to exploit ^H^ATE OFSiMeI ■ 1774; tQjtu&iQ f78J j_ gARABAK H ibtjtary to JZI -AZERBAIJAN frtfcutory lq 7 T^C PERSIA jaw fcf.
AT-O LIA ; Cnto 1 4 The birth of the Republic of Turkey 1920-23 I I Republic flfbkto 1923 Boundary of Ottonart tortrd BtahlRted by Treaty of Stores 1920 Elfii Area pieced under (keek cdmmisitctiw 1919 I WWi {oninoled by Greet troops 1921-27 -Beuttay of wea of nflumt ssmbWted by Treaty of Store 1920 KUR Reaps Areas of Europecn fifluente; French m his status as caliph which gave Ottoman agents access to Muslim communities worldwide, including those living under the British Raj.
Pan-Islamic policies met widespread, if covert, criticism from those within the Ottoman elite who would have preferred a state with a nationalist Turkish identity to one with a more diffuse Ottoman or Islamic facade.
The CUP was committed to the retention of “Turkey in Europe” and relatively dismissive of the empire’s Middle Eastern provinces and peoples.
In 1908 they forced the sultan to renew the long-suspended constitution of 1876, and the following year deposed him in favour of his more pliant brother.
The CUP set out with democratic ideals but found that these were incompatible with the empire’s ethnic divisions.
Showpiece general elections served chiefly to demonstrate the voting power of the minorities, particularly the Arabs.
CUP administration survived only by becoming increasingly dictatorial, particularly when it faced a new round of territorial losses.
It was in an attempt to remedy this situation that the leader of the CUP, Enver Pasha, with German military assistance, took the Ottoman Empire to war in 1914.
Casualties were immense and the loyalty of the empire’s minority populations was suspect, with thousands of Christian Armenians massacred for their pro-Russian sympathies.
Apathy and disaffection among the empire’s Arab Muslims was even more dangerous.
In 1916 the Hashemi “sharif”, governor of Mecca, raised a desert army which, allied with the British, successfully detached all remaining Arab provinces from Turkish control.
The birth of the new Turkey Post-war schemes for dismembering the empire and reducing the Ottoman sultanate to puppet status were built into the Treaty of Sevres , which the sultan’s administration in Constantinople meekly accepted, thereby losing any last shred of credibility.
By 1923 the Ankara regime had won diplomatic and military recognition from all its former antagonists, including the Greeks, who had been defeated by Kemal’s forces in 1922.
The Sevres agreement was replaced by the more generous Treaty of Lausanne , which legitimized Ankara’s right to govern an independent Turkish Republic in a region broadly corresponding to modem Turkey.
The Ottoman sultanate was abolished by the treaty and the archaic caliphate followed it into extinction in 1924.
The Greeks, who saw the Turkish defeat as an opportunity to claim territory in western Anatolia with a substantial Greek population, had dispatched troops to Smyrna in 1919.
Between 1920 and 1922 their troops established a firm grip on the region.
During this time, however, Turkish nationalists became increasingly organized under the leadership of Mustafa Kemal, and in August 1922 a Turkish nationalist army attacked the Greek forces and drove them from Anatolia in disarray.
The other European powers, recognizing the overwhelming Turkish support for Kemal, withdrew, and the Republic of Turkey was founded in 1923.
However, this marked the end of expansion to the west and in fact Romania soon cut its ties with Russia and in 1883 made an alliance with Germany and Austria.
In the southwest the Transcaucasian territories were acquired between 1801 and 1830 and the route to them finally secured by the conquest of Ghechenia — completed in 1859 and Cherkessia in 1864.
In 1885, however, Russian troops clashed with Afghan forces at Pendjeh and came up against another imperialist power, Britain, which sent a stem warning that Afghanistan was not for the taking.
In the m id-19 th century Russia also turned Its attention to the eastern end of Asia, acquiring the regions north and south of the Amur River.
This enabled it to establish Vladivostok the vital warm-water port that gave yearround maritime access to the Far Bast.
The Trans-Siberian Railway built between 1891 and 1904 linked Vladivostok to Moscow, and brought the potential for trade with the Far East, It tempted Russian policymakers to take over Manchuria in order to provide a more direct route to the coast, despite warnings from economic pressure groups that they should l>e concentrating on expanding internal markets In Siberia.
The dream of eastern expansion reached both its apogee and its catastrophe in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904—5, which resulted in a humiliating defeat for Russia.
PART 4 Economic development The economic development of the Russian Empire was continuous throughout the 19th century and into the 20th century, but four periods can be distinguished.
First there was slow and steady growth from 1800 to 1885, interrupted by setbacks in the 1860s when the iron industry in the Urals was adversely affected by the emancipation of the serfs.
Then, from 1885 to 1900, there was rapid government-induced growth, with a onesided emphasis on railway building and heavy industry.
Economic stagnation, prolonged by the effects of the revolution of 1905-7 , constituted the third period.
The final period, from 1908 to 1914, was a time of renewed economic growth on a broader front.
It was during this last period that the big rush to emigrate to Siberia began, stimulated by the government itself, with the intention of solving the problem of land shortage in European Russia that had contributed greatly to the rural disturbances of 1905-7.
Emigration to Siberia increased rapidly and the population of Siberia rose from 5. million in 1897 to 8. million in 1910.
Settlement was concentrated along the Trans-Siberian Railway, which provided a link back to the west for a developing capitalist agriculture and the gold, copper and coal mines.
The 1905 Revolution Russia’s economy expanded in the 1890s with little attention to infrastructure and a complete refusal to link economic with political changes.
This created tremendous tensions in the Russian social fabric, which were exacerbated by the government’s repressive measures and its attempts at a gigantic foreign-policy diversion.
The revolution of 1905 started under liberal slogans, and indeed the demand for representative popular government on the Western model was a common denominator throughout.
It developed, however, into something much more threatening than a mere change of political regime.
These institutions acted as local organs of power, initally side by side with the old authorities, and in some cases led armed revolts that aimed at the complete overthrow of the imperial government.
They were to resurface in 1917, with a decisive impact on Russian and world history.
The revolution of 1905 was not simply an urban movement of Russian workers and intellectuals.
Agriculture had been neglected by the state in its drive for industrialization, and since the emancipation of the serfs in 1861 it had experienced either stagnation or a slight improvement, interrupted by the dreadful famine of 1891.
The non-Russian nationalities also revolted in 1905, demanding autonomy or independence, depending on their level of social and national maturity.
These demands would also resurface in 1917, leading to the complete disintegration of the Russian Empire, although the formation of the Soviet Union in 1922 delayed the establishment of independent national states on the territory of the former Russian Empire for nearly 70 years.
Overall, the period 1800-1914 saw a clear shift in the centre of economic gravity from the Urals to the Ukraine and Poland.
T During the years of revolution, 1905-7, urban revolt was widespread across European Russia, with strikes and armed uprisings.
Revolts also took place in large cities in Siberia and Central Asia, where there was a substantial Russian or Ukrainian population.
Rural revolt, on the other hand, was most intense in the Ukraine and to the south of Moscow, in provinces where land was held in common by the peasants and redivided every 20 years according to family size.
This led to a strongly developed sense of community, making the peasants sympathetic to socialist revolutionary agitators. pEtamr rflrotf in 1 5% of area * 5*nb in jirtwn ■area 1905/1906/1907 O Swiel of Worfcm Deputies nlatfcMm trim aw 1905 □ Annod ""m udwn WW3 Ctetear6ef T 90S O Witipy mutiny 1905/1906/1907 _ .j.
Like so many pioneering journeys in the West, it relied heavily on the local knowledge of Native Americans.
Sacajawea a Shoshone woman who had lived with the Mandan was particularly valuable to the venture as a translator.
T hroughout the 19th century American pioneers moved inexorably westwards across the Appalachian Mountains in search of good farmland and new opportunities.
Either through diplomacy, conquest or purchase, millions of acres of new territory came under United States control to form the transcontinental nation that we recognize today.
This enormous landmass was swiftly occupied by settlers, and as these new areas gained large populations they were admitted to the Union as states.
Its territory was subsequently enlarged in two great expansionist movements.
Firstly, with great astuteness, Thomas Jefferson bought a great swathe of the Midwest from France in 1803 for a meagre $15 million.
The “Louisiana Purchase”, as it was known, instantly doubled the size of the United States.
West Florida was annexed in 1813, while under the Adams-Onis Treaty of 1819, Spain ceded all of East Florida to the United States and gave up its claim to territory north of the 42nd parallel in the Pacific northwest.
The second wave of expansion involved the acquisition of Texas, Oregon and California.
In 1835 American settlers in Texas staged a successful revolt against Mexican rule, winning the Battle of San Jacinto in 1836, and the Republic of Texas was born.
As each new territory was colonized by American settlers and a viable government formed, it became eligible for admission to the Union as o state and entitled to representation in Congress.
For many years, Britain had contested America’s claims to the Oregon Country.
Explorers of the West At the beginning of the 19th century part of the impetus to venture west came from the desire to increase trade not only with the Native Americans but also with Asia.
Reports from the expedition of Lewis and Clark provided valuable information about the natural wealth of ▲ Settlement took place in a number of States caused by political and economic stages, often as a result of the displacement developments.
Many European economic of people from areas within the United migrants also became American pioneers. the West.
Zebulon Pike explored the sources of the Mississippi and visited Colorado and New Mexico, while Stephen H Long investigated lands near the Red and Arkansas rivers.
As well as these government agents, traders and fur trappers, such as Jedediah Smith, travelled extensively between the Missouri and the Pacific coast.
It was they who opened the Santa Fe Trail between New Mexico and Missouri in 1821, while “mountain men”, hunting in the Rockies in the 1820s, spread word of the riches to be found there.
The War of 1812 against Britain led to many people overcoming their fear of opposition from Native Americans and travelling westwards to find new agricultural land.
Most of the first settlers were southerners who had been displaced by the growth of the plantation system with its slave labour force.
By 1830 their settlements filled southern Indiana and Illinois and were overrunning Missouri.
In the following decade newcomers from the northeast settled around the Great Lakes, and by 1840 almost all the Old Northwest had been carved into states.
Many pioneers had also moved into the newly acquired territory of Florida and into the land bordering the Gulf of Mexico.
Most settlers here came from the southeast, looking for fields where they could grow cotton.
Small farmers had been followed by large-scale planters, who brought slaves to the region the majority from the eastern states.
Once settlers had occupied the entire area, pioneers began to push beyond the Mississippi.
Many Americans believed in “manifest destiny”, the idea that America was destined by God and by history to expand its boundaries over the whole of North America.
This early trickle of settlement was hugely accelerated by the discovery of gold in California in 1848.
When gold fever swept the nation, more than 100,000 “Forty-Niners” poured into California.
Although relatively few found gold, many stayed on as farmers and shopkeepers.
Utah was settled not by profit-seeking adventurers but by Mormons searching for an isolated site where they could freely worship without persecution.
The journey of the Mormons to the shores of Great Salt Lake in 1847 was one of the best-organized migrations in history.
Much of the West remained unsettled even after the frontier reached the Pacific Ocean.
PART 4 Mountains and the Sierra Nevada, and after the war ranchers and farmers occupied the Great Plains west of the Mississippi.
Cattle ranching on the open ranges involved driving herds over long distances along recognized trails , from the pasture lands to the railhead and on to market.
The pastures became exhausted, and the Homestead Act of 1862 encouraged farmers to move from the east onto free or lowcost land.
The settlers enclosed the pasture lands, barring the roving cattle herds.
Settlement of the West largely brought an end to the traditional way of life of the Native Americans.
Farmers occupied and fenced in much of the land, and white settlers moving west slaughtered buffalo herds on which many Native Americans depended for their survival.
At the same time, the federal government pushed more and more Native Americans onto reservations.
In the short period of one century, the United States expanded from being an infant rural nation confined to the Atlantic coast to a transcontinental powerhouse, with a large rural and industrial population.
This territorial expansion occurred at a phenomenal speed and settlement proceeded rapidly, despite formidable physical and human obstacles.
Having established its own internal empire from the Atlantic to the Pacific, the USA was now in a position to challenge European supremacy on the world stage.
Alternative overland routes were established by pioneers seeking land or gold, and by surveyors looking for railroad routes.
A During the 18th century the Delaware Native Americans made a slow westward migration and in 1830 the Indian Removal Act also forced the southern tribes westward.
Demands by white settlers for more land led to the establishment of Indian reservations and a series of bloody conflicts.
ZOO CONFEDERATE; TgJd otto repined 300,000 ▲ The Union was able to muster many more troops than the Confederacy, and suffered a smaller proportion of casualties.
Overall, 20 per cent of soldiers in the Civil War died the majority of them as a result of disease.
T Although it was the issue of slavery that prompted the Southern states to secede from the Union, the situation was not dearcut, with four of the Union states Delaware, Maryland, Missouri and Kentucky permitting slavery.
T he American Civil War was fought between the Northern states , who wished to maintain the United States of America as one nation, and the Southern states , who had seceded to form their own nation.
The causes of the war included the longstanding disagreements over slavery and its expansion into the new territories, as well as conflicts over economic disparities between North and South and the division of power between the federal government and individual states.
Although slavery had been a marginal issue in the founding of the Republic, abolitionists began to attack this Southern institution in the early 19th century.
Following the Missouri Compromise of 1820, which forbade slavery in the Louisiana Purchase north of 36° 36"", many thought that slavery would gradually die out as the tobacco industry declined.
After 1830, however, the opening up of virgin lands in the Deep South to the cotton economy , coupled with the ever-increasing demand of European textile mills for raw cotton, suddenly enhanced the value of slave labour.
The sectional divide American politics began to divide according to sectional interests, focusing on the status of slavery in the new western territories.
The Compromise of 1850 forbade slavery in California , while the Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854 opened up these two territories to slavery leading to much violence in Kansas.
The issue of slavery came to the forefront during the presidential election of 1860.
The Republican candidate, Abraham Lincoln, was hostile to slavery and opposed its extension to new territories, although he had pledged not to interfere with it where it already existed.
Following his election as President in 1860, however, South Carolina immediately seceded from the Union, a decision followed by Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana and Texas.
These seven states formed the independent Confederate States of America early in 1861 and they would be joined by four more (Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee and Arkansas) once war was declared.
They were considered vital to the profitability of cotton production, which hod expanded to meet an increased demand from the rapidly industrializing countries of western Europe.
The outbreak of war War broke out on 12 April 1861 when Southern forces opened fire on federal-owned Fort Sumter.
Arguing that secession was illegal and that the Union must be preserved, Lincoln took this as a declaration of war.
The Confederacy won some early victories in 1861-62, successfully repelling Union attempts to capture their capital at Richmond, Virginia.
The Union was forced (in particular by the defeat at the First Battle of Bull Run in July 1861) to disband its militia in favour of a new army of 500,000 volunteers.
As the war progressed, however, both sides were forced to introduce conscription to raise troops.
While the Union cause seemed imperilled in the east, in the southwest Union forces were successful in their attempt to seize control of the Mississippi, culminating in the capture of New Orleans, the largest city and most important port in the Confederacy.
The Confederate attempt to invade Maryland in September 1862 was thwarted at the Battle of Antietam.
This encouraged President Lincoln to sign the Emancipation Proclamation on 1 January 1863, which freed all slaves in the Confederacy.
Freedom for the slaves took place gradually as the Union armies moved southwards, and the Proclamation helped break down the opposition to recruitment of African-American soldiers.
By the war’s end, 186,000 of them had served in Union armies, albeit in segregated regiments under the command of white officers and at vastly reduced levels of pay.
As the war progressed, the Union’s greater manpower and superior economic and industrial resources began to prevail.
The Union victory at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania in July 1863 proved to be the major turning point.
The Confederacy was never strong enough again to undertake another major offensive.
The next day the Confederate garrison of Vicksburg, Louisiana, which had been besieged by the Unionists since mid-May, surrendered.
Not only had the Confederacy suffered huge and irreplaceable losses in the east, but it was also now split in two, with Union troops controlling the Mississippi.
The second half of 1863 saw further decisive battles in the west in the Tennessee campaign, with the Confederate forces being driven back into Georgia.
XS 5 \ 0 Tort P**®** o*'° Ffoin Apfi In 1864 the Union implemented two simultaneous campaigns.
The first, centred on Virginia, saw some of the fiercest fighting of the war , with no real victory for either side, although this war of attrition gradually depleted the human and material resources of the Confederates.
In the second Union campaign Atlanta was captured, followed by General Sherman s “scorched earth” march through Georgia to Savannah and then north through the Carolines, which caused much devastation and famine in its wake, Wilmington, the Confederate's last remaining seaport, was effectively closed down at the loginning of 1865 as a result of the Union naval blockade of Sou them ports.
At the outset of the war, the Confederacy had believed that the demand from Britain and France for cotton would force them to enter the war on its behalf.
As the war progressed, however, the two countries decided not to risk intervention for a losing cause.
The Confederate General Robert E Lee was forced to evacuate Petersburg and Richmond, and surrender to General Ulysses 8.
Grant at Appomattox Court House on 9 April 1865, effectively ending the war.
By the end of May, the last Confederate forces had laid down their arms.
The first modern war In many ways the Civil War was the first “modern” war.
It was fought by mass citizen volunteer and conscript armies, rather than by professional soldiers.
Railroads played a crucial role in the movement of troops and raw materials, while telegraphs were used tor military communication as well as for virtually immediate Press reporting.
The war also saw the first use of rudimentary iron-clad battleships, machine-guns, trench systems and dugouts.
The Civil War was fought at the cost of enormous loss of life , but it had the ultimate effect of preserving the United States of America as one nation bv settling the dispute over the division of power between the federal government and individual states in favour of the former.
Furthermore* as the final decades of the 19th century were to reveal t the Civil War brought many economic benefits to the North, under whose leadership the United States had developed* by the end of the century, into the world's greatest industrial power.
A Mosi of lb lighting in the Civil Was toot plate on Southern terrilory, with ihe Confederates adopting defensive tactics, an familiar Terrain, add the Union side farced to maintain lengthy supply lines The Union side devised the ""Anaconda Plan* by which They first encircled the Southern slates by land and «n, and then split them up by seizing (antral of ihe Mississippi River in the spring of 1863 and marching through Georgia in ihe winter of 1864-65.
The earliest manifestation of this development was the laying down of hard-surfaced roads, known as turnpikes, mainly in New England and the midAtlantic states.
During the “Turnpike Era” (1790-1820} more than 3,200 kilometres of road were constructed, the earliest being the Lancaster Pike between Philadelphia and Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
The most famous turnpike, the government-financed National Road, had crossed the Appalachian Mountains from Maryland to Virginia by 1818 and reached Illinois by 1838.
These roads provided an early stimulus to economic development and westward expansion.
The steamboats stimulated the agricultural economies of the Midwest and the south by providing quick access to markets for their produce at greatly reduced prices, and enabled manufacturers in the east to send their finished goods westwards.
The first half of the 19th century also witnessed widescale building of canals.
The first railroad was opened between Baltimore (which funded the project) and Ohio in 1830.
Other cities followed Baltimore’s example, and, with the markets of Ohio, Indiana and Illinois in mind, 5,324 kilometres of track had been laid by 1840 a figure which trebled over the next ten years.
The introduction of the telegraph in 1837 further enhanced the speed of communication.
Domestic United States manufacturing began to flourish when imports were scarce during the War of 1812 against Britain.
These early forms of manufacturing were concentrated in the east and mainly processed the products of American farms and forests.
In addition, the country benefited from a large and expanding labour force, which also provided a vast domestic market for industrial goods.
By 1860 its population had reached 31. million, exceeding that of Britain.
Industrialization after the Civil War In 1860 American industry was still largely undeveloped.
Most industrial operations were small in scale, hand-crafting remained widespread and there was insufficient capital for business expansion.
This situation changed fundamentally after the Civil War , with the rapid development of new technologies and production processes.
Machines replaced hand-crafting as the main means of manufacturing, and United States productive capacity increased at a rapid and unprecedented rate.
Industrial growth was chiefly centred on the north, while the south largely remained an agricultural region.
Mass immigration, coupled with natural growth, caused the population to more than double between 1870 and 1910 to reach 92 million.
In the late 19th century mass industrialization was stimulated by a surge in technological innovation and improved factory production methods, enabling goods to be produced faster, in greater quantity and thus more cheaply than ever before.
The typewriter was introduced in 1867, followed by the cash register and the adding machine.
Electricity was first used as a power source in the 1870s, while international telegraph cables and the invention of the telephone assisted communication in the latter part of the century.
Railroad-building likewise increased at a dramatic rate, providing a great stimulus to coal and steel production and rivalling the steamboat and canal barge as a means of transportation.
The highly profitable railroads provided the model for the development of the modern corporations that financed and directed this great industrial expansion.
In order to eliminate cut-throat competition between companies and to encourage capital investment for further expansion and greater efficiency, enterprises were increasingly consolidated into large-scale units, often monopolies, owned by limited liability shareholders.
The federal government helped to create an entrepreneurial climate in which business and trade could flourish without undue hindrance.
As a result of these developments the United States was transformed, by the end of the 19th century, from an essentially agrarian economy into a country in which half of its now culturally diversified population lived in its evergrowing cities.
It had replaced Britain as the world’s leading industrial power, and was thus set to dominate the global economy in the 20th century.
T The pattern of migration to the United States was influenced portly by political and economic developments in Europe.
Before the 1890s most immigrants came from northern and western Europe, in particular from Ireland following the Potato Famine in the 1840s, and from Germany.
By 1900 the majority of migrants were from central and eastern Europe, Russia and Italy.
The creation of the United States of America had signi/leant repercussions for Canada, It not only defined the Ganadian-Ameriean border (with Britain giving up all laud south of the Great Lakes) but also fundamentally altered the composition of Canada’s population.
Between 40,000 and 60,000 Americans who remained loyal to the British crown flooded into Canada during and after the war, creating the basis for Canadas English-speaking population (mop 7 L The Constitutional Act of 1791 The kiss of the Thirteen Colonies encouraged Britain to tighten its rule over its remaining North American possessions.
Acknowledging the bicultural nature of the Canadian population and the loyalists* desire for some form of representative government, the Constitutional Act of 1791 divided Quebec into two self-ruling parts English-speaking Upper Canada and French-speaking, largely Catholic, Lower Canada dominated by a British governor and an appointed legislative council.
There were also significant English-speaking pockets in Lower Canada, most notably the dominant merchant class in Montreal and farmers in the eastern townships.
Canadian independence was further secured when repeated American invasions were repelled in the War of 1812.
WESTWAKI) EXPANSION Canada's survival as an independent country ultimately depended on population growth and economic development.
In the east, internal communications were improved in the first half of the 19th century through the construe* tion of roads and canals.
Simon Fraser and David Thompson, with fur traders and the British Hudson's Bay Company (which also controlled vast tracts in the northeast of the country) following swiftly behind.
A Since the 17lh century French-speaking Canadians had largely settled along the 5) Lawrence River.
New Brunswick D uring the 18th century territorial rivalry between the French and British in North America gradually increased, coming to a head In the Seven Years War of 1756-63, Although the British initially suffered defeats, their troops rapidly gained the upper hand after the appointment of General Wolfe in 1757 and by 1760 they had effectively defeated the French.
From Union to Confederation Canadian discontent with oligarchic rule led to two short rebellions in both Upper and Lower Canada in 1837 and 1838, forcing Britain to reassess how best to keep Canada within the empire and how to unite the French and English Canadians.
The resulting Act of Union of 1840 combined Upper and Lower Canada into the new Province of Canada and by 1848 Canadians had gained a degree of self-government.
Under this system, however, both Canada West and Canada East (formerly Upper and Lower Canada respectively) had equal representation in the province’s legislative assembly.
This did little to ensure national unity and encouraged political stalemate; further problems arose after 1850, when the population of Canada West exceeded that of Canada East, with the former unsuccessfully demanding representation by population.
During the 1850s and 1860s calls grew to dissolve this ineffectual union and to replace it with some form of federal government by which each part of Canada could control its own affairs while a central government protected national defence and common interests.
After conferences in Charlottetown and Quebec , the British North America Act was signed by Queen Victoria in 1867.
This act created the largely self-governing federation or Dominion of Canada under the British crown, with a constitution based on the British parliamentary system.
It initially comprised only four provinces , with a population of 3. million people, only 100,000 of whom lived west of the Great Lakes.
The driving ambition of the “Fathers of the Confederation” was to unite all of the remaining British colonies in North America in order to achieve the economic and social development necessary for a viable nation, especially in the face of ongoing American expansionism.
In 1870 the government vastly extended Canadian territory by purchasing Rupert’s Land from the Hudson’s Bay Company ; while the company retained its trading station and forts, it gave up its monopoly of the area which had long been difficult to enforce.
The province of Manitoba was created in the same year, following the Red River Rebellion by settlers of mixed French and Native American ancestry, led by the metis Louis Riel.
Similar financial incentives enabled Prince Edward Island to become the seventh province in 1873, although Newfoundland remained a proud self-governing colony until 1949.
Realizing that population growth was necessary for national survival, the Canadian government actively promoted immigration from the British Isles and the United States and, towards the end of the century, from central and eastern Europe; this once more changed the cultural and ethnic mix of Canada’s population.
The new settlers moved primarily to unoccupied lands on the prairies , which enabled the provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan to be created in 1905.
In 1912 the remaining parts of the former Hudson’s Bay Company lands were added to Quebec, Ontario and Manitoba.
The situation reached crisis point when, in 1917, the Canadian parliament introduced conscription.
Ironically, the fact that 55,000 Canadians lost their lives fighting for the empire in the First World War led ultimately to the transformation of Canada into a fully independent sovereign nation under the Statute of Westminster in 1931.
As the population grew in the newly settled territories, provinces were created and federated to the central government in Ottawa.
In 1912 Manitoba and Ontario were greatly enlarged to the north, with the annexation of land from the Northwest Territories.
Further boundary changes occurred in 1927, when the colony of Newfoundland was enlarged at the expense of Quebec, and in 1999, when the Nunavut Territory administered by its majority Inuit inhabitants was created.
The French had taken control of Santo Domingo from the Spanish but were to lose it in 1809.
They had already lost the colony of Saint Domingue in 1804, when it became independent Haiti.
The Spanish territory was rich in minerals and included Potosi, the silver-mining capital of the world, although its resources were by now on the verge of being exhausted.
I n 1800 few people, either in Europe or the Americas, could have anticipated that 25 years later all of Spain’s mainland American colonies would be independent republics.
Several colonial rebellions had occurred during the late 18th century, but they had all been defeated, and should not be interpreted as antecedents of independence.
In 1780 a creole revolt against Spanish tax increases was superseded by an antiSpanish rebellion among the American Indians, led by Tupac Amaru.
The small minority of creoles hastily jettisoned their own protest in favour of helping the colonial authorities to suppress this revivalist Inca movement at the cost of 100,000 lives, most of them Indian, Creole allegiance The creoles’ fear of the African, Indian and mixed-race peoples, who made up approximately 80 per cent of Spanish America’s population in the late 18th century, meant that many of them looked to Spain to defend their dominant social and economic position.
This rationale was strengthened after a slave revolt in the French Caribbean colony of Saint Domingue in 1791 led to the founding, in 1804, of Haiti, the first African-Caribbean republic in the Americas.
Most creoles calculated that their interests ultimately depended on Spain, despite an expanding list of grievances against the mother country.
It was not until Napoleon invaded Spain in 1808, and installed Joseph Bonaparte in place of the Bourbon King Ferdinand, that some creoles began to reconsider their options.
During this time Jose de San Martin, aided by Bernardo O'Higgins, had been liberating Chile.
Leaving O'Higgins behind as president of the new state of Chile, San Martin travelled north to take Lima and to attempt to liberate what was to become Peru.
In 1822 he was forced to seek help from Bolivar, and in September 1822 retired from command.
Bolivar subsequently completed the liberation of Peru at the Battle of Junin.
In this he was aided by Antonio Jose de Sucre, who went on to win the final battle against the Spanish at Ayacucho in 1824.
Bolivar himself returned to Colombia but was unable to hold together the republic he had created, and in 1830 (the year of his death) it broke up into the three modern-day states of Venezuela, Colombia and Ecuador.
PART 4 authorities that rapidly developed in resistance to French rule in the name of Ferdinand; or [o establish autonomous ruling authorities.
Spain's commercial monopoly had been tightened up, and Spanish Americans were unable to exploit legally what they perceived as lucrative trading opportunities in the British and United States markets.
A new system of colonial administration had been introduced that interfered with well-established informal mechanisms for allocating power and resources within Spanish American societies.
Bourbon absolutism aimed to strengthen the position of pen insularcs at the expense of Spanish Americans.
By the end of the 18th century, creoles accounted for a far smaller proportion of the upper levels of the colonial bureaucracy than in 175(1.
UNITED STATES INDEPENDENCE FROM SPAIN During the first two decades of the 19th century there was a gradually developing sense among elite creoles in Spanish America that their interests might best be served hv selfgovernment.
This redefinition of their position was enhanced by an incipient sense of national identity that it ad been developing within creole communities throughout the 18th century an idea of being distinct not only from Spaniards hut also from each other.
The political ideas of the French Enlightenment, although probably less influential in the development of independence movements than was once thought, were certainly of importance to some of their leaders, notably the Venezuelan, Simbn Bolivar.
During the 1810s, as Spain oscillated l>etween reformist liberalism and absolutism, Spanish Americans first declared, and then fought for. their independence , Nevertheless, the battles between republicans and royalists remained fairly evenly balanced until events in Spain during 182H-21 provided the final catalyst to the creation of a political consensus among creoles that was needed to secure independence.
Once it had become clear that Spanish liberalism, which returned to power in 1821, was hem on restoring the pre-1808 relationship between Spain and the American colonies, commitment to independence became widespread throughout Spanish America with the exception of Peru, where menu fries of the Tupac Amaru rebellion remained vivid.
Peru was eventually liberated in 1824 by Bolivar’s troops, after the retreat of the Spanish had been initiated by an invasion from the south led by the Argentine Jnsede lS^o Martfn, By 1828 the last royalist troops had been expelled from South America, and Spain's empire in the Americas was reduced to Puerto Rico and Cuba , Independence from Portugal Brazil's independence was partly the result (if colonial grievances, although less severe than those felt by Spanish Americans.
However, in overall terms, it was even more attributable to events in Europe than was the decolonization of Spanish America.
The Portuguese monarchy implemented milder versions of the Bourbon reforms in the late 18th century, hut in general the local elite played a far greater role in governing Brazil than their counterparts in Spain’s colonics.
This represented a shift in political power from Portugal to Brazil which was to prove i rreversi hie.
Brazil was unique in that it won its independence largely without the damaging consequences of civil war anti economic collapse that occurred elsewhere in the region.
In Spanish America mineral production plummeted to less than a quarter of its level before its independence struggles, industrial output declined by two-thirds, and agriculture hv half.
The corporate institutions of Spanish colonialism remained intact, the Church remained strong, and militarism was strengthened.
Creoles simply took over the property abandoned by fleeing Spaniards and established themselves as a new oligarchy, which regarded the masses with at least as much disdain as their Spanish predecessors had done.
A Simon Bolivor wrc instrumental in lb liberation bom Spunbh rule of much of South America.
However he failed in his attempts la hold together ibe RepuWk of Gran Colombia, and disci dniNcrtioned.
Argentina last ihe folk land Islands to ihe Brilish in 1833, hut secured T he newly independent republics ut Spanish America faced formidable challenges of reconstruction In the years following their wars of independence.
Spain was too weak m do much beyond defending its remaining colonial possessions, but it fought two wars over Cuban independence before United States military intervention in 1898 led to the Spanish-American War and the secession of Cuba and Puerto Rico to the United States.
It was briefly ruled by the Austro-Hungarian, Maximilian von Habsburg* as emperor , supported by French troops, Britain had colonies in Guiana and British Honduras, and eonsolh dated its commercial and financial dominance throughout most of the region, especially in Brazil and Argentina.
Economic developments Throughout the 19th century Latin American economics remained dependent on the export of raw materials (maps L 2 nncf j) f continuing patterns of production established in colonial times Although there has been considerable debate about the wisdom of this policy* in practice they had little choice.
The colonial powers had left behind scant basis for the creation of self-sufficient economies* and the independent states sin)ply did not have die resources necessary’ for such development* Attempts were made to encourage industrialization in Mexico* Colombia and Brazil in the 1830s and 1840s* but they all succumbed to competition from European imports.
The export of primary products brought considerable wealth to Latin America* especially once the development of steamships and railways in the 1860s had modernized transportation, hi the last quarter of the 19th century Latin American economies were able to benefit from the overall expansion in the world economy fuelled by European and United States demands for raw materials and markets for their manufactured goods , At the time it made economic sense for Latin America to exploit its comparative advantage in the world market as a supplier of raw materials.
Although this strategy later proved to be flawed, it did result in rapid economic growth and a wave of prosperity among Latin American elites in what became known as “la belle gpoque” of Latin American development . (>n the eve of the First World War, the region was produeing 18 per cent of the world's cereals, 38 per cent of its sugar and 62 per cent of its coffee, cocoa and tea.
Balh Peru and Bolivia last mil lo Chile in the Yfor ol The Paiifk fa 1879. surrendering territory rich in nitrates and, in Bolivia s cose, an aullef la the sea.
PART 4 Elitist politics Politics in 19th-century Latin America was entirely an elite affair, with electoral contests typically involving at most ten per cent of the population and dominated by rivalry between liberals and conservatives.
Most of the republics had adopted liberal constitutions based on that of the United States, but these were to prove an inadequate blueprint for the authoritarian reality of Latin American politics.
The major challenge in most countries was to consolidate central state authority over remote and often rebellious areas.
Until well into the 1850s local leaders, known as caudillos , raised armies to fight for their interests, holding sway over their followers by a combination of charisma, blandishment and brutality.
In these circumstances, many liberal statesmen found themselves obliged to pursue distinctly illiberal policies.
As the century wore on, Latin American liberalism, which came to power in most Latin American countries during the 1850s and 1860s, took on an increasingly conservative cast.
One distinctive legacy of liberalism was an appreciable reduction in the wealth of the Catholic Church, particularly in Mexico, although liberals did not succeed in diminishing the religious devotion of the majority of the populations.
Social changes Conditions barely improved for the Latin American masses.
Indeed, American Indians had good reason to feel that their plight had been less onerous under colonial rule, when they had at least enjoyed a degree of protection from the Spanish crown against encroachments on their communal lands.
The attempts of liberal governments to turn Indian peasants into smallholders by forcibly redistributing their lands left most Indians worse off, particularly those in Mexico.
Slavery was abolished in Central America as early as 1824 , and in the Spanish South American republics during the 1850s , but it continued in Portuguesedominated Brazil, where a weak emperor was reluctant to antagonize the powerful plantation owners.
Brazil did not pass legislation to end the trade in slaves until 1850 and it took until 1888 the year before Brazil declared itself a republic for slavery itself to be abolished.
Even in conditions of allegedly “free” labour, however, the lack of alternative work meant that many former slaves had little choice but to join a floating rural proletariat, subject to seasonal work in exchange for pitiful wages.
During the middle part of the 19th century the populations of most Latin American countries more than doubled , and by the end of the century Latin America’s integration into the world economy was beginning to bring about changes in the socio-economic structure which independence had not.
Urbanization, industrialization and their consequences continued from the 1880s onwards.
The late 19th century saw the emergence of a middle class based Latin American population in 1820 and 1880 E A The 19th century saw large population their numbers between 1820 and 1880, increases in most Latin American countries. while the population in the economically Many countries experienced a doubling of successful Argentina quadrupled. on professionals and state bureaucrats.
Trade unions among the working classes most of which were organized by European immigrants to Argentina or Brazil first became active during this period, and public education programmes were initiated in the larger countries.
It was not until after the First World War, however, that the political consequences of all these socio-economic changes were to manifest themselves.
I045*US Q cotton [W1 Coded lB4i 1050 m henequen I | Ceded hy Tnoaty of Guadalupe Mddgu 184B Ceded 1853 l&scbden Pufrfwsel 1829 Dole slavery obobshed MWU Mexico-1867 A Mexico was substantially reduced in size during the mid-19th century.
It lost Texas to an independence movement in 1836 and California, New Mexico and Arizona after being defeated in the 1846-48 war with the United States.
Further territory was ceded in 1850 and again in 1853, as a result of the Gadsden Purchase.
The smaller islands remained European colonies, while the United States retained control of Puerto Rico.
ThK gave I he Company control of territories that remaned formotfy under the rule of Indian princes.
The British army consisted mainly ol Indian Mm, known os sepoys, who themselves mutinied against British authority in 1857 This is regarded in indta as the country's first war of independence A n English East India Company fleet first reached India in 1608 and, over the course of the next century, the Company developed its trade steadily around the coasts of the subcontinent.
It quickly established trading posts, known as “factories”, starting at Surat in 1619 and followed by Madras in 1634, Bombay in 1674 and Calcutta in 1690.
Although originally entering the “Indies” trade in pursuit of spices, the Company made most of its fortune from cotton textiles, whose manufacture was highly developed in India.
However, until the second quarter of the 18th century, there was little to suggest that the British presence in India heralded an empire.
The turning point, which was to lead to British supremacy in India, came only in the mid-18th century when the Mughal Empire began to break up into warring regional states, whose needs for funds and armaments provided opportunities for the Europeans to exploit.
Another factor was the growing importance of the English East India Company’s lucrative trade eastwards towards China, which enhanced its importance in the Indian economy, especially in Bengal.
British-French rivalry Conflicts between the European powers started to spill over into Asia, with the French and British beginning a struggle for supremacy that was not finally resolved until the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815.
In southern India from 1746 the British and French backed rival claimants to the Nawabi of Arcot.
In the course of their conflict Robert Clive, who rose from a clerkship to command the English East India Company’s armies and govern Bengal, introduced new techniques of warfare borrowed from Europe.
These not only prevailed against the French but opened up new possibilities of power in the Indian subcontinent.
This created an opportunity for the conversion of the Company’s economic influence in Bengal into political power; the defeat of the residual armies of the Mughal emperor at Buxar in 1764 completed this process.
Nor was political stability within the empire in India achieved with any greater ease.
Most notably, in 1857 the “Great Mutiny” of Indian soldiers in the Bengal army saw the British lose control of the central Ganges Valley and face rebellion in the heartland of their empire.
Effects of British rule The carrying forward of the imperial project in the face of so many problems was a reflection of the importance attached to India by the British.
In the course of the 19th century it became “the jewel in the crown” of the British Empire, to which it was formally annexed in 1858 when the English East India Company was dissolved.
PART 4 < The ropid growth of India's Toilway network was on important factor in the Transition from subsistence fornimg to fommefdol agriculture.
As it became easier ro transport produce from the countryside to the ports so ihe demands of the British market fat specific produds tame to be reflected in the crops grown.
Outing tie American Civil War , for example, when the supply of raw American cotton to the Lancashire cotton mills dried up, many Indian farmers switched ta cotton production.
When the war ended and the mills reverted ta American cation, the Indian market collapsed, leaving farmers unable to return la food production.
Its most significant role was to supply a large army which was extensively used for imperial defence around the world.
What effects British rule had on India remains a controversial question.
The agricultural economy grew, with expanding foreign trade and British capital providing the rudiments of a modern transport infrastructure.
However, the once-great textile industry declined and few other industries rose to take its place.
A strong imperative, especially from the 1840s onwards, was to “civilize” India along Western lines, introducing “scientific” education, a competitive market economy and Christian ethics.
However, a conservative view held by some in the British administration in India warned against disturbing “native” custom.
After the Mutiny, such conservative counsels won out and were reinforced by a deepening British racism, which denied equal rights to Indian subjects of the British monarch.
Some groups mounted a ferocious defence of their traditional rights, but others responded positively to what they regarded as modernizing trends, especially taking up Western education.
For such groups, the racism of the late-Victorian British and their turning away from earlier liberal ideals proved disappointing and frustrating.
An Indian National Congress had been formed in 1885 to advance the cause of Indians within the empire.
However, by the early 1900s it had already begun to reject the politics of loyalism and to express more fundamental objections.
As the shadow of the First World War fell across the Indian landscape, the British Empire, which had succeeded in bringing India into the 19th century, was fast losing its claims to lead it through the 20th.
In 1920-22, shortly after the war, Mahatma Gandhi launched the first of the mass civil disobedience campaigns which signalled the beginning of the end of British rule in India.
Province Wellesley 11 BOD), Singapore (I819] and Melaka , which were ctwwlifuted (with the addition in 1846 of tnbuan in Borneo] as the Straits Settlements in IB26 r in order fa service rfs trade with Chino.
Its conquests in lower Burma loflawing the Second Angb-Burmese War [113521 including Pegu and the seaports of Motlobon, Berstein ond Rangoon were designed to protect India s eastern frontier.
Meanwhile, the victory of the Dutch over Wnhhabi influenced Muslim ralonrars in western Sumatra in the Fodri War enabled them to undertake limited expansion along the east and west coasts of Sumotro.
British, Dutch and Spanish colonialism Britain's emergence as the leading commercial and seaborne pow er in the region was confirmed after 1795 when Us naval forces, operating from Madras and Pinang in the Strait of Malacca, captured Dutch East India Company possessions throughout the Indonesian archipelago.
By 1815 Britain controlled Java and the Spice Islands , and was soon to establish itself in Singapore (1819} and in Arakan and Tenasserim in Lower Burma following the First AngloBurmese War Although Java was handed back to Holland in 1816, Dutch power in Indonesia remained totally dependent on British naval supremacy until the Second World War.
Between 1762, when the English East India (Company was granted a permanent trading post in Canton , and the 1820s, when Assam tea production began, total Bengal opium exports increased 1,500 per cent from 1,400 to 20,000 chests per annum, and exports of Chinese tea tripled from 7,000 to over 20,000 tonnes, Britain’s interest in Southeast Asia in this period was driven by its need to find trade goods saleable in Canton in exchange lor tea, and by its desire to protect its sea lanes.
This required Javanese peasants to grow cash crops (mainly sugar, coffee and indigo) for sale at very low prices to the colonial government.
PART 4 island of Luzon, the seat of Spanish colonial authority since the late 16th century, the emergence of an educated mixedrace Filipino-Spanish-Chinese elite, known as the ilustrados , began to challenge the political predominance of the Iberian-born friars and the Madrid-appointed colonial administrators.
Southeast Asian resistance The existence of newly established dynasties and kingdoms, especially in mainland Southeast Asia, complicated the task of the European colonialists.
From the mid-18th century onwards Burma, Siam and Vietnam had all experienced extensive political renewal under the leadership of new dynasties.
This encompassed a revitalization of Theravada Buddhism and Confucianism; the subjugation of minority populations to new state-sponsored forms of culture, religion, language and governance; the development of Chinese-run revenue farms and commercial monopolies; and the limited acquisition of Western military technology.
The principal reason for the British annexation of Lower Burma between the 1820s and 1850s was to check the expansionist policies of a succession of Konbaung monarchs.
French involvement in Indochina, which began with the capture of Da Nang in 1858, was spurred by the antiCatholic pogroms initiated by the Vietnamese emperor Minh-mang and his successors.
The political and cultural self-confidence of the Southeast Asian rulers went hand in hand with rapid economic and demographic growth.
After a century of stagnation, the exports of Southeast Asia’s three key commodities increased by 4. per cent per year between 1780 and 1820, with Aceh alone accounting for over half the world’s supply of pepper 9,000 tonnes by 1824.
In the same period the region’s population more than doubled to over nine million.
This meant that when the Europeans began to move in force against the indigenous states of Southeast Asia after 1850, they encountered fierce resistance.
It took the Dutch 30 years to overcome Acehnese resistance, and when the British eventually moved into Upper Burma in November 1885 and overthrew the Konbaung monarchy, it required another five years of sustained operations to “pacify” the remaining guerrilla fighters.
In the Philippines the energies unleashed by the emergence of indigenous resistance movements proved too much for the incumbent colonial administration.
However, three more years were to pass before the military forces of the Philippine Republic were finally subdued in a series of bitter campaigns which required the deployment of over 60,000 American troops.
Instead, new Western-educated elites emerged to take their place, eventually demanding political rights and recognition of what they saw as legitimate nationalist aspirations.
Between 1906 and 1908 the foundation of the Young Men’s Buddhist Association in Rangoon and the “Beautiful Endeavour” organization of Javanese medical students in Batavia led to the development of more radical forms of nationalism.
In Vietnam this took the form of the anti-French agitation of the “Confucian scholar activists”, such as Phan Ghu Trinh and Pham Boi Ghau, both of whom advocated the use of violence against the colonial state.
Meanwhile, Japan’s victory over tsarist Russia in 1904-5 had given the lie to the myth of Western superiority.
The fact that Western colonial authority rested for the most part on very small numbers of troops and armed police 42,000 for a population of 62 million in the case of the Dutch in Indonesia made it vulnerable both to external attack and internal subversion.
The rise of Japanese militarism during this period and the emergence of increasingly well-organized Southeast Asian nationalist movements sounded its death knell.
The introduction by the colonialists of Western-style bureaucracies, education, capitalist means of production and communications systems especially the telegraph (which was introduced into Southeast Asia in 1870-71), railways and steamships led to the demise of older monarchical forms of authority and the rise of Western-educated, nationalist elites.
Not satisfied with the outcome,, however, the British joined forces with ihe French in I B 56 to enoct hirthef concessions in the Second Opium Yfor.
India Company increased steadily, while Chinese exports remained fairly stalk.
Opium imports grew during ibis period, leading the Chinese to impose restrictions and Ihe British lo use force in order to protect their market Following ihe delect ol Chino in the Opium War of 1840-42, Ihe value of opium imported more than doubled.
This Opium Wars Western traders soort found ways to get around the coining system, and smuggling was widely practised.
More significantly, the British discovered an ideal commodity to sell in China; opium.
With most of South and Southeast Asia already colonized, (Ihina represented the final target in the Asian world.
China had enjoyed sizeable surpluses in trade with the West since the 17th century, exporting increasing amounts of raw materials in particular tea, sugar and raw silk in the face of growing competition from Japan and India.
However, it had also become economically dependent on the West, as it had few precious metals and needed the inflow of silver from foreign trade to facilitate the expansion of its internal trade.
In 1760 the Manchu Qjng government had restricted the activities of foreign traders to just four ports, thus facilitating the collection of duties from these traders.
Westerners attempted, hut failed, to persuade the Qing government to reform its restrictive policies, and it became dear that such policies could not he shaken off by peaceful means as long as Qing sovereignty remained intact.
PART 4 3 The Taiping Rebellion 1 as1-64 I I kta conhoM bv ratals l ISM —► Advance of Toifiing rebels I SSI-53 —► UnsuccsssM nofUMra eupdilwn 1B53-S4 —► Aitaince at Qing Irups 1864 —► Admixe od Wesnem 1mop& 1864 Direction of rEireos of rebels 1864 WoruKou^ GUANGXI Xiamoru (Amovf' _ ,_Guontgjhoii TAIWAN ▲ During the Taiping Rebellion the Qing revenues.
The Qing army was largely lost control of much of China's most fertile unsuccessful against the rebels, which were region, resulting in a 70 per cent drop in tax only crushed with the aid of Western troops.
China’s hard-earned silver began to flow out in large quantities, causing severe deflation in the economy.
The Manchu Qing, who did not want to see the resulting loss of tax revenue, responded by imposing a total ban on the opium trade.
This triggered the invasion, in 1840, of British gunships, against which the Qing armed forces proved to be no match.
The events of 1840 heralded the end of China as a world power in the 19th century.
British and French allied forces extracted further concessions from China in the Second Opium War in 1856-60 , while the Russians annexed around 1 million square kilometres (386,000 square miles) of Chinese Siberia north of the River Amur, and further territory in Turkestan.
These successive military and diplomatic defeats cost the Chinese Empire dearly in terms of growing trade deficits and of mounting foreign debts, mainly incurred by war reparations.
Although China remained technically independent, its sovereignty was ruthlessly violated a situation that led to the anti-foreign, antiChristian Boxer Rebellion of 1899-1901.
However, while employing the support of the West delayed the demise of the Manchu Qing government for half a century, in the long term it proved a fatal strategy.
In order to ensure a constant supply of goods for trading, the Western powers also exercised their influence over large areas of the Chinese hinterland, in addition, Britain was granted a lease on the territory of Hong Kong and the Portuguese gained the territory of Macau.
Only in the northeast, and in the province to the southwest of Beijing, were rebellions successfully put down by Qing troops.
Following the truce of 18 December, Emperor Xuantong abdicated, and control of Beijing passed to General Yuan Shikoi.
The Nationalists subsequently established their capital in Nanjing. this time already spread across southeast and central China.
Bowing to pressure from the Western powers, whose trading interests were likely to be disrupted by civil war, the Qing emperor signed a truce with the rebels on 18 December, which stipulated his abdication and the elevation of his general, Yuan Shikai, to the position of President.
The independent provinces recognized Nanjing as their new capital, and elected the Nationalist leader Sun Yat-sen as provisional President on 1 January 1912, although he stepped down on 14 February in favour of Yuan Shikai.
A As port of the plan to modernize Japan after the restoration of the emperor in 1847, Hie feudal domains were obolbhed and replaced by tentrolly administered Honshu'’ HamamoNf^Hl2 T Japanese atqukrfkms in (he tme 19th Kdl and early 20th centuries included the Korean Peninsula and the island of Tatoan, both of which provided raw materials far (he OtaftP SappcraP Hokkaido prefectures.
HB95) tropk al Co near 3 ACQUISITIONS OVERSEAS 1870-1933 HI Japanese Empee 1870 HI Twritory acquired I674 -95 witii dole I I lirttoryoo^cl 1905-10 wift dote kVI hponeseciaijpBtton I91B-22 n Mnnthuk-uo 1932 r~i OarniiDwedroneatTonultohce1133 ft Sit M TO qCIiHq SalcMfn RUSSIA (Spviit Union T he collapse of the Tokugawa regime in 1867 initiated a period of momentous change in Japan, in which society, the economy and polities were transformed.
The new leaders believed that to achieve equality with the nations of the West, Japan had to pursue an aggressive foreign policy, and for this it needed a viable and modern military capability, backed up by a modem industrial sector.
All this was done in the name of the emperor, who had been the focus of the anthTokugawa movement.
This system remained in place until 1945, with different groups dominant within it at different times.
Universal male suffrage was not granted until 1925, women were barred from political life, and there were draconian restrictions on labour activity as well as on ideologies and organizations deemed to be potentially subversive.
The concept of the “family state"" was promoted, according to which the emperor said to be descended from ancient deities was the benevolent patriarch of the Japanese.
Any criticism of the “emperor-given"" constitution was regarded as treason.
PART 4 Modernization of the economy In their efforts to compete with the West, Japan’s leaders studied and imitated Western economies, borrowing ideas as they saw fit.
The legal and penal systems and the military were all remodelled along Western lines.
A system of compulsory education was implemented from the turn of the century.
Agricultural output increased substantially, and then levelled off from the First World War onwards, but there was sustained growth in commercial agricultural products, especially silk cocoons.
Up to 1914 manufacturing remained largely focused on handicraft production of traditional products for the domestic market, which in turn enabled capital accumulation for the growth of larger-scale, mechanized production.
By the end of the Meiji period, factory-based silk reeling and cotton spinning were both major export industries, and the first heavy industrial plants had been established.
The First World War gave a major boost to manufacturing growth, and after 1918 the industrial structure was transformed.
The relative contribution of agriculture to the Gross National Product had declined dramatically.
The service sector had grown, and light industry (especially textiles), while remaining crucial in exports, had been gradually overtaken by heavy industry.
During the 1920s and 1930s some industrial sectors came to be dominated by business groupings called zaibatsu , who controlled multiple enterprises and huge assets.
Some zaibatsu came under fierce attack in the wake of the Depression , when falling prices and general instability brought agricultural crisis in some areas, and increasing internal political conflict.
Despite the growth of the Japanese economy in the 1930s, living standards were squeezed and the distribution of benefits was unequal.
Japan and the world One of the most pressing concerns of the new government was to rid the country of the “unequal treaties” imposed on Japan by the Western powers towards the end of the Tokugawa period.
These treaties, forcing Japan to open its ports to trade with the West, had been an important contributory factor in the collapse of the Tokugawa regime.
Japan eventually achieved a revision of the treaties in 1894, and in 1902 an alliance was concluded with Britain.
Although the Japanese victory was less than clearcut, it gave Japan a foothold in Manchuria and the freedom to annex Korea as a colony in 1910.
In all its overseas territories, but particularly in Korea, Japanese rule was harsh.
After the First World War the League of Nations mandated the former German colonies of the Caroline, Marshall and Mariana islands to Japan.
In 1927 Japanese troops in Manchuria were involved in the murder of a leading warlord, and in 1931 engineered an “incident”, in the wake of which the Japanese army, acting initially without the sanction of Tokyo, occupied the territory.
Tension between Japan and China finally erupted into full-scale war in 1937.
Russian losses of men and ships vastly exceeded those of the Japanese and as a result of this humiliation, and other losses on land, the Russians conceded defeat in September 1905.
Growth of railway mileage 1872-1942 National railways Pmrato igtonys Slreetrarc A The nationalization of much of the railway system in 1906 more than trebled the extent of Japan's state-owned lines.
T The rapid development of a railway network was one feature of the dramatic changes in transport and other parts of the infrastructure that occurred from the 1870s.
In the mid-19th century explorers ventured into Australia's inhospitable interior.
In New Zealand, however, Dieffenbach and Brunner both took Maori guides, who were largely responsible for the white men's survival.
T he history of both Australia and New Zealand long predates the arrival of Europeans in the late 18th century.
Australia had been inhabited by its Aboriginal population for around 60,000 years, while New Zealand had been home to the Polynesian Maori for around 1,000 years.
In 1769-70, during his first Pacific voyage, James Cook charted the coast of New Zealand and landed on the eastern coast of Australia, which he claimed for Britain.
As the land immediately around Sydney was unsuitable for agriculture, the colony relied heavily on intermittent supplies of foodstuffs shipped out from England throughout the 1790s.
The growing economy Initially, economic activity in Australia was confined to whaling, fishing and sealing, but in the early 1820s a route was developed to the inland plains and, with access to vast expanses of pastoral land, newly arrived free settlers turned to sheep-rearing.
The wool they exported to Britain became the basis of Australia’s economy, and further colonies based on this trade were established over the next three decades in Tasmania, Victoria, Western Australia and Queensland.
The ever-increasing demand for pasture brought the settlers into conflict with the Aboriginal population.
As well as seizing land and using violence against the Aborigines, the settlers carried with them alien diseases such as smallpox and influenza.
The development of overseas trade, dependent on coastal ports, and the expansion of mining industries helped to foster an increasingly urban society.
Australia’s population grew dramatically from 405,000 in 1850 to 4 million by the end of the century.
The Australian colonies developed political systems based on that in Britain, and most became self-governing during the 1850s.
The creation of the Commonwealth of Australia in 1901 promoted freer trade between the states within this federation and facilitated a joint approach to defence.
However, one of the first measures taken by the Commonwealth was to adopt the “white Australia policy”, designed to exclude non-white immigrants.
White settlers in New Zealand New Zealand was initially treated by the British as an appendage of New South Wales.
It only became a separate colony following the controversial Treaty of Waitangi in 1840, which provoked decades of conflict between the white settlers and the Maori, mainly because the treaty, which gave sovereignty to Britain, was not clearly translated for the Maori chiefs who agreed it.
While the Maori population declined, the settler population grew dramatically during the second half of the 19th century.
Tension over land triggered the Maori Wars of 1860 to 1872, after which large areas of Maori land were sold or confiscated by the government.
New Zealand evolved quickly to responsible government, and a central parliament, including Maori representatives, was established in 1852.
By 1879 the country enjoyed almost universal male suffrage, and women obtained the vote in 1893.
In 1907 New Zealand became, like Australia, a self-governing dominion within the British Empire, although its economy remained heavily dependent on British markets.
Breaking ties with Britain Until the 1950s both Australia and New Zealand retained close political ties with Britain, fighting alongside Britain in the two world wars.
Britain’s inability to defend the region adequately during the Second World War, however, encouraged both countries to enter into defensive arrangements with the United States, leading to the ANZUS Pact of 1951.
Swh Lultivaliun, however, t attributed to I be huge decline in the Aboriginal papulation.
These measures encouraged immigration and ted to o decline in ihe proportion of ihe population who were Maori o trend ihot was reversed somwhul after the 1930s.
Economic ties with Britain also declined after 1945, especially once Britain joined the European Economic Community in 1973.
A cultural reawakening among the Maori was evident by the beginning of the 20th century (in the Katana movement), and Maori political campaigning began in earnest in the 1920s and 1930s.
It took another 20 years and further protests, however, lxjfore any land was returned to die Maori, most of whom inhabit North Island.
Australia's Aborigines had begun to assert their identity and demand an end to discrimination during the 1930s, but it was not until 1967 that they won equal citizenship.
In the early 1970s the federal authorities began to promote the return of land to Aboriginal communities, but although the number of Aborigines is rising, they remain the most disadvantaged sector of Australian society.
I 1 MOSSLr^ jLsMfcSf i «""B-L / yf i /r yA / SORNO aKoto SOKO rO WAD At ""’VgenqrgcMTra ' -UjOWN UAHOMtY A The city of Timbuktu served for centuries as a trading post for tranvSnhnran caravans.
The Nortli African coastal region was firmly integrated into Mediterranean trading systems, while well-established transSaharan trading routes , based on exchanges of slaves, salt, gold and cloth, secured the dominance of Islam from the north coast to West Africa.
As the century progressed, trade in West Africa continued to lie orientated to the north, but the Atlantic slave trade, initiated by the Portuguese in the 16th century, became an increasing focus of economic activity, it is estimated that over 12 million slaves were despatched to the Americas between 1450 and 1870, of whom a quarter were exported during the 19th century.
The political, social and economic reverberations of European competition for slaves along the west and central African Atlantic coast extended far into the interior.
Slaves were exchanged for firearms, metal goods, beads and other manufactured goods.
With the formal abolition by Britain of the slave trade in I NOT (and despite the defiance by other European countries of this ban for many years after), ivory, rubber, palm oil, cloth, gold and agricultural products assumed ev er greater importance as trading commodities.
In East Africa trading activities were somewhat less dev eloped, as was urbanization and the formation of states.
The slave trade in this region remained relatively unaffected by its formal illegality until the latter part of the 19th century.
Encroachments in Ei kopeavs At the start of the 19th century the European presence hi Africa was largely restricted to the coastal regions of northern, western and southern Africa.
Spain had been in con trol of the Moroccan ports of Ceuta and Mclilla since the 16th century.
The Portuguese were in possession of large parts of Angola and Mozambique, in West Africa, British interests were expanding into the hinterland from the slave-trading regions of present-day Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Ghana.
British influence in the region was consolidated after 1807, when the Royal Navy took on the role of enforcing an end to the slave trade and merchants extended the domain of legitimate commerce.
A major area of British expansion was in southern Africa, where the Cape Colony was w rested from Dutch control in 1806.
The frontiers of this settler society expanded throughout the 19th century and a second British colony.
African politics Dynamic changes occurred, sometimes intensified by European contact, at other times with little reference to encroachment from the outside.
PART 4 2 The sfsiadqf Islam and Christianity 1860-1900 I I flkfifeiv meal BAD I I ChreSw aws 1B60 I 1 Afro* nLpra —► Musirv ne^nry Ktv.iy * OtbAj i fnissorarf oclwty ◄ The first European ""explorers"" in Africa were those that ventured into regions in West Africa already well known to Berber traders, but hitherto considered too dangerous for Christians.
From the mid-19th century onwards Europeans made expeditions into central Africa.
The Muslim religion spread south from North Africa (although the Coptic Christians held out in Ethiopia) and inland from Arab trading bases in East Africa.
This political turbulence was exacerbated by the arrival in the southern African interior from the 1830s onwards of migrant Boer Voortrekkers, attempting to escape control by British colonists.
They sought to establish independent states, largely in territory depopulated as a result of the mfecane, although they came into conflict with the Zulu in Natal, most spectacularly at the Battle of Blood River in 1838.
Many moved on again when the British annexed the republic of Natal in 1845.
In West Africa the advance of Islam, associated with the Fulani jihad of 1804, resulted in the disintegration of longestablished kingdoms, such as the Yoruba empire of Oyo and the Bambara state of Segu, though the Fulani were resisted in Borno.
By the 1860s the Fulani caliphate of Sokoto was pre-eminent in the region, having absorbed much of Hausaland into its aegis.
In Egypt the autocratic modernization strategy adopted by Muhammad Ali in the early decades of the century transformed this province of the Ottoman Empire into an independent state in all but name; Egyptian authority was extended southwards and the Sudan was invaded in 1820-22 in order to secure the upper Nile and find a more reliable source of slaves.
Around Lake Victoria in East Africa, the kingdoms of Buganda, Bunyoro and Karagwe were linked by the trading activities of the Nyamwezi to the Swahiliand Arabdominated coastal region, extending outwards from Zanzibar.
To the north, in Ethiopia, the ancient Christian state centred on Axum was fragmented and in disarray until the mid-19th century.
Thereafter, under the leadership of John IV and Menelik II, the Ethiopian Empire underwent consolidation and expansion; Ethiopia has the distinction of being the only African state to have successfully resisted 19th-century European colonial occupation.
Rival religions The creation and expansion of new states and societies, whether originating from within Africa or from external forces, were accompanied by cultural change and accommodation.
In North and West Africa, conquest and the spread of Islam were closely associated, although one did not presuppose the other.
Christianity had been present in North Africa from the 2nd century and, though checked by the rise of Islam, had become firmly established in Coptic Ethiopia.
Efforts to convert other parts of Africa to Christianity had been led by the Portuguese from the 15th century.
It was in the 19th century, however, that intense Catholic and Protestant proselytization occurred; some, indeed, see missionaries as crucial precursors of European colonialism.
Christianity did not, however, replace indigenous African religious traditions in any simple manner.
Adaptation and coexistence was more the norm and, in many instances, African forms of Christianity emerged that would later serve as an important ideology in mobilizing resistance to European colonialism.
At the start of the 19th century the interior of Africa was barely known to the outside world.
Expeditions, whether motivated by scientific and geographic curiosity or the search for natural resources and wealth, attracted considerable popular interest in Europe; the exploits of travellers and explorers were celebrated both in terms of individual achievement and as sources of national pride.
Among the best-known 19th-century expeditions were those that explored the sources of the Nile, the Congo, the Zambezi and the Niger.
The exploration and mapping of Africa proved of considerable importance to the drawing of colonial boundaries in the late 19th century.
In the initial phase the Afrikaners secured notable victories, but in 1900 their main towns were captured by the British.
General Kitchener finally defeated them by burning their farmsteads and imprisoning civilians in concentration camps.
In 1910, however, the Union of South Africa gained independence under the leadership of the Afrikaner general Louis Botha.
The speed of the process was bewildering, even more so when one considers that most of the African landmass and its peoples were parcelled out in a mere ten years after 1880.
European competition for formal possession of Africa was accompanied by intense nationalist flag-waving and expressions of racial arrogance, contributing in no small manner to the tensions that resulted in the outbreak of the First World War.
It was agreed that a nation that was firmly established on a stretch of coast had the right to claim sovereignty over the associated hinterland on which its trade depended for the supply of goods. and as a virtually untapped market for finished goods during Europe’s “second” industrial revolution.
Others view the partition of Africa in terms of intra-European nationalist rivalry, emphasizing the prestige associated with possession of foreign territory and the ambitions of individual statesmen and diplomats.
A variant of this theory emphasizes conditions on the ground, claiming that European powers were sucked further and further into Africa as a result of local colonial crises and trading opportunities.
Prospectors of all nationalities flooded into the region, and Britain was concerned about a possible alliance between the Afrikaners and the Germans to the west.
British reinforcements won several major battles, but the Afrikaners then adopted guerrilla tactics which were eventually overcome by the ruthless approach of General Kitchener.
Relations between Africans and Europeans The partition of Africa cannot be satisfactorily understood without taking into account the dynamics of African societies themselves.
In some instances colonial expansion was made possible by indigenous leaders who sought to enrol Europeans as convenient allies in the struggle to establish supremacy over traditional enemies.
Trading and commercial opportunities encouraged certain groups of Africans to cement ties with Europeans.
Some African leaders proved adept at manipulating relationships with European powers to their own advantage, at least in the short term; elsewhere, land or mineral concessions were made to Europeans in the hope that full-scale occupation could be averted.
In a number of celebrated instances , Africans resisted the initial European colonial advance, or rose in rebellion soon after.
Common informal means of resistance included non-payment of taxes, avoidance of labour demands, migration, or membership of secret religious societies.
Usually, Africans sought some sort of accommodation with the advancing Europeans in order to avoid outright confrontation.
In non-settler societies and beyond major towns and centres, many Africans were more or less able to ignore the European presence and get on with their own lives.
In southern Africa, the discovery and exploitation of diamonds and gold created huge demands for African labour.
Migrant workers came from as far afield as Mozambique, Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland.
Demands for agricultural labour threatened the viability of independent African cultivators in the region, although in some areas as in the case of cocoa production in the Gold Coast and Nigeria, for example colonial systems relied on indigenous peasant cultivators, who were frequently able to prosper from their participation in export markets.
Forced labour was widely used by agricultural concession companies in Mozambique and Angola, and by the rubber plantations of the Belgian Congo.
Communication infrastructure Railway networks werre built that linked coastal ports to the hinterland and served as a major stimulus to trade and commodity production.
Railways proved particularly important for the development of mining as well as for commercial agriculture.
They were also vital for the supply of labour and were crucial for the economic development of the region.
After the initial phase of railway construction, roadbuilding programmes, especially in the inter-war years, brought some of the most remote areas into direct contact with the colonial economy.
The arrival of trucks stimulated the re-emergence of an African merchant class, particularly in West Africa.
Rapid urbanization, a remarkable feature of the colonial era, was stimulated by the development of transport links and of internal and external trade.
Education and religion In much of colonial Africa the spread of education was closely linked to religious change.
The spread of Western education, building on earlier missionary endeavours, tended to be geared to the requirements of colonial regimes providing skilled workers, clerks and petty officials.
Many Africans eagerly embraced education, often as a means of social advancement.
Thus, the spread of literacy opened up new horizons and possibilities that could not easily be controlled by the colonial powers.
It is striking that many of the early African nationalists were the products of mission education men who became politicized when the opportunities opened up by their education were denied them by the inequalities inherent in colonial rule.
Education and Christianity were not, however, universally welcomed by Africans.
While offering social mobility to many, these agencies also threatened the power of traditional elites.
Frequently, forms of Christianity evolved which combined African belief systems and traditions with Western ones.
The Bible also offered fertile ground for reinterpretation in ways that challenged European rule.
Significant and wide-ranging as these changes were, however, innovations were seldom imposed on a blank slate.
Rather, colonial institutions were built on existing structures and moulded according to circumstances.
Far from capitulating to alien rule, many African societies showed great resilience and adaptability in surviving it.
T The export of raw materials from Africa affected agriculture and labour markets throughout the continent.
Although mining operations and large plantations were controlled by colonists, small-scale peasant production did survive in many places and benefited from export markets.
Railways were crucial to economic development, in particular for the transportation of mineral ores.
KlEftTORlCOcJB] j Q 5<jn Jwm \ KjftgthXi | fi»t ol Spain cehon f UGAN] rBElGlANf CWGOf COAST D-UrCH EAST NOTES G Bobov io 1 ' '^E TIMOR Da rwinflUy DZonaihaf BRAZIL StHetma AFRICA AUSTRALIA A Hie strengthening of (oloninl rale was linked la o number of ttowmit end palilkol Iae1w$ r incluefing ihe need for tow mater iok lo supply rapidly Indus hialiung economies □nd die desire lafind new markets for manufactured goods.
T he late 19th century witnessed dramatic changes, not only in the world economy hut also in the relationship between the manufacturing countries and those regions of the world from which raw materials were obtained.
The volume of international trade more than trebled between 1870 and 1914 {bar chart 1) alongside large-scale industrialization in Europe and the United States, and the spread of colonial rule, particularly in Asia and Africa.
London remained the world's leading financial centre through its operation of the international gold standard, which defined the value of the major currencies and so facilitated trade.
Transport and communications The enormous expansion of international trade was greatly helped by technological developments, especially in transport and communications.
Sailing ships gave way to larger and faster steam vessels, which required coaling stations strategically placed around the globe {map J), and merchant shipping fleets expanded to cope with the increased volume of tradeVoyages between continents were facilitated by the opening of the Suez Canal and the Panama Canal , Railways also helped to increase trading activities, notably in North America and Asiatic Russia.
These technological developments also encouraged massive migrations, including that of 30 million Europeans who emigrated to North America during the 19th and early 20th centuries.
The creation of wealth in the industrialized eountries led to growing interest in investing some of that wealth In the developing countries.
By financing railway building or mining development in these areas, industrial economies helped to increase imports of food and raw materials, and to create larger export markets for their manufactured goods.
Factors influencing imperial expansion In the late 19th century the world economy was becoming more integrated, with different regions increasingly dependent on one another.
Inevitably, competition between states intensified, spilling over Into the political sphere.
Britain's early lead as the first industrial power was linked, hv many observers, to the expansion of the British Empire from the late 18th century onwards, above all in India.
Other countries tried to emulate Britain by building up empires of their own.
As business conditions worsened in the 1870s and 1880s, a growing number of countries also sought to protect their home markets, imposing tariffs to limit the influx of foreign goods.
The attraction of untapped markets in Africa and Asia intensified as a result.
Political factors in Europe also contributed to the growth of imperialism.
The newly formed countries of Germany and Italy, as well as the declining state of Portugal, saw the acquisition of colonies as a way of asserting their status as world powers.
Overseas expansion also helped to div ert attention from the domestic social problems created by industrialization and population growth.
Further motivation was provided by Christian missionaries, who were effective in lobbying governments to defend their activities overseas.
PART 4 Political and economic changes taking place within non-European societies created important opportunities for the European powers to increase their influence.
Local “elites” groups who became wealthy through trade and collaboration with European powers often facilitated the colonization of an area.
Territory was sometimes acquired in order to protect existing colonial interests from rivals, or because it was particularly valuable for strategic, rather than economic, reasons.
Often, however, the colonizing powers found that in order to support a limited initial claim it became necessary to expand inland from coastal bases and establish further trade links.
Although no single factor can explain the growth of imperialism in this period, the results were nevertheless far-reaching, as evidenced by the “scramble” for overseas territories in the 1880s and 1890s.
By 1914 nearly all of Africa had been divided up between the European powers chiefly Britain, France and Germany which had also extended their control of Southeast Asia and the Pacific.
China, also highly prized by the Western powers because of the enormous potential market it represented, escaped formal partition only because the Western powers could not devise a means of dividing it that was acceptable to all of them.
The European powers were not alone in their enthusiasm for overseas expansion.
After defeating Spain in the war of 1898, the United States inherited many of the former Spanish colonies, notably the Philippines and Puerto Rico.
Japan, too, lacking economic resources to fuel its rapid modernization, increasingly looked to China and Korea.
It was the Europeans, however, who gained most from this phase of imperialism.
By 1914 the British Empire covered a fifth of the world and included a quarter of the world’s population, while the second-largest empire, that of France, had expanded by over 10 million square kilometres since 1870.
Although this phase of activity generated great tension among the colonial powers, aggravating their already existing mutual suspicions and feelings of insecurity, it was accomplished without direct conflict between them.
The consequences of colonial rule Imperial control had far-reaching consequences for the new colonies.
Their economies became more dependent on, and more vulnerable to, fluctuations in international trade.
Transport and other infrastructures tended to be developed to meet the needs of colonial, rather than local, needs.
Artificial colonial boundaries frequently included different ethnic or linguistic groups, sowing the seeds of future divisions.
Initially, the social and cultural impact of colonial rule was limited, but Western education, medicine and religion eventually led to a devaluing of indigenous cultures.
Although the colonial powers lacked the resources to employ force on a routine basis, they maintained their dominance of a region by repeated assertions of their superiority, alliances with local interest groups and occasional displays of firepower.
Its aim was to ensure a continuing supply of raw materials and to stimulate new markets for finished products.
The United States, which was less reliant on overseas trade, made a comparatively small investment given the size of its manufacturing output.
The United States was by this time the world's leading manufacturer, but with its rich supplies of raw materials and enormous internal market it had less need for external trade.
Europe's population trebled, with Britain experiencing a near fourfold increase.
The United States saw the most spectacular growth, caused by settlers flooding into the country, although the number of Native Americans, already decimated by war and foreign diseases, continued to decline.
High population growth around the world was matched by the development of large conurbations.
In 1800 there were some 40 cities in the world with a population of between 100,000 and 500,000, of which nearly half were in Asia.
By 1900 many of these had more than doubled in size and new cities had sprung up in the United States.
There were now about 80 cities with a population of between 250,000 and 500,000, but only just over a fifth of these were to be found in Asia.
In some regions it was caused by a a higher birth rate, in others by a decline in the death rate, but in most cases it was due to a combination of the two.
Factors contributing to population increase The birth and death rates in each country were affected by a range of socio-economic factors.
One of the main ones was the increasing supply of food, which reduced the number of people dying from malnutrition, and improved people’s overall health, causing them to live longer.
The Agricultural Revolution in 18th-century Europe had led to the use of more efficient farming techniques, which in turn had increased food production.
The expansion of the international economy and improvements in transport also contributed to improved food supplies by enabling large quantities of cheap food to be transported from North America and elsewhere to Europe.
Industrialization was another major factor in the population growth of the 19th century.
Although initially it created a new urban poverty, in most industrial countries the living standards of the working classes rose from the mid-19th century onwards as new employment opportunities became available.
Medical advances made childbirth less dangerous, and the increasing use of vaccination helped prevent major epidemics.
While in western Europe the use of birth control led to a drop in the birth rate from the 1880s onwards, at the same time birth rates in Asia began to rise.
Although it is usual to distinguish between “voluntary” migrants including those seeking improved economic prospects and “involuntary” migrants such as those ensnared in the slave trade for many individuals the motives for emigrating were mixed.
Before the 1890s most of these migrants came from northern and western Europe, but subsequently the majority came from central and southern Europe.
Europeans were particularly mobile during this period, settling not only in the United States but also in Latin America, Canada, Australasia, South Africa and Siberia.
Migration on this unprecedented scale was facilitated by the revolution in transport, which substantially reduced the cost of transatlantic travel, and by the investment of European capital overseas, which created opportunities for railway building and economic development.
Chinese migrants settled in Southeast Asia, Australia and the United States, to work in mines and plantations or to build railways.
Pressure on resources in Japan also led many of its citizens to emigrate to Manchuria and the Americas.
The overcrowded housing that resulted often led to squalor and disease.
This was due both to population growth and, especially in Europe and the United States, to the development of new industries in the towns.
At the same time, technological change in agriculture, particularly in Europe, led to a contraction in the demand for labour in rural areas.
By 1900 around 80 per cent of Britain’s population lived in towns of over 10,000 people, and London’s population had increased to over 5 million.
However, despite the fact that by 1900 many large cities had developed around the world, the majority of people still lived in rural areas.
Urban infrastructures were often unable to meet the new demands being made on them, leading to inadequate housing stock, water supplies and sewage disposal.
Such conditions were a factor in the cholera epidemics that affected many European and North American cities from the 1840s to the 1860s.
As a result, measures to improve public health were introduced in the 1850s, and the last major European outbreak of cholera was in Hamburg in 1892.
Improvements in transport, especially in the railway system, encouraged the building of suburbs, which greatly eased the problem of urban overcrowding.
Around 30 million people left Europe between 1815 and 1914 bound for the United States, driven across the Atlantic by rising unemployment at home in times of economic depression and, in the case of one million Irish emigrants, the disastrous potato famine of the mid-1840s.
Sometimes migrants left Europe in order to avoid persecution of various forms, as was the case with the Russian Jews, who from the 1880s were the target of officially encouraged pogroms.
Later European settlers headed for South Africa and beyond, to Australia and New Zealand.
Elsewhere in the world millions of Chinese and Japanese migrated in search of work, the majority to Southeast Asia but a sizeable number to the west coast of North America.
Yet it was also a time when people lived longer, were healthier and more literate, enjoyed greater participation in politics and had far easier access to information, transport and communication networks than ever before.
The Second World War ok) storied os a European conflict, but spread to the Parifir when Japan seized territory.
In the interior period disputes broke oul over territory in South America and East Asia, but elsewhere the reluctance of the colonial powers la become embroiled in territorial disputes maintained on uneasy peace.
T he world in 1900 was dominated by the nation-states of Europe, of which the most powerful were Britain, France, Russia, Austria-Hungary and Germany The country with the greatest industrial output in 1900 was the United States, which for the first half of the century chose to remain outside the struggle for supremacy between the European nations.
The colonial empires which underpinned it disintegrated and the United States became the leading world power in the second half of the century.
The first half of the century was dominated by the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the two world wars.
Of the total number of casualties in the Second World War it is estimated that half were civilians.
The scale of the killing was largely due to the increasingly lethal power of weaponry.
This reached so terrifying a peak with the invention and use of the atomic bomb at the end of the Second World War that thereafter the major powers sought to prevent local conflicts from escalating into major international wars.
THE COLD WAR After 1945 there was no reduction in bitter international conflict, hut it took a new form.
The war in Europe was fought by an alliance of the communist Soviet Union with the capitalist states of Europe and the United States against the fascist regimes in Germany and Ttalv.
Following the defeat of fascism, the United States and Soviet Union emerged as bitterly opposed superpowers with the resources to develop huge arsenals of nuclear weapons.
From 1947 a “Cold War’ developed between them and their allies, in the course of which they gave support to opposing sides in conflicts in, for example, Korea, Vietnam, Angola and the Middle East, while the two superpowers remained formally at peace.
The collapse of communism in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union in 1989-91 brought the Cold War to an end.
LOCAL CONFLICTS While there was no global war in the second half of the century, there were many local wars {map 2), which were waged with increasing technological expertise and precision.
Some were w ars of independence from colonial powers, most of which had given up their empires by 1970.
Other conflicts, such as the Korean War and Vietnam War , were struggles for national control between communists and non-communists, each side backed by one of the superpowers.
The United Nations, established in 1945 with the aim of stabilizing international relations, failed to bring about world peace, but helped to avert or negotiate the end of some conflicts.
Some of the most persistent campaigns of violence during the 20th century were conducted by powerful governments against people of the same nation but of another political persuasion, social class, ethnic group or religious belief.
In the Soviet Union under Stalin tens of millions of people were sent to their deaths in forced-labour camps.
In Argentina and Chile in the 1970s thousands of political opponents of the government simply “disappeared”, while in Cambodia in 1975-79, Pol Pot's brutal experiment in social restructuring resulted in the death of over one million people.
The Ottoman Turks deported an estimated 1,75 million Armenians from eastern Anatolia during the First World War.
In Europe under the Nazis, between the mid-1930s and 1945, six million Jews, along with other minority groups, died in concentration and death camps.
On the night of 9 November 1989 thousands of East Berliners flooded through the border to ibe West, many of I Hem Inking the opportunity of demonstrating their contempt for the East German authorities by dimbing on, and hi caking down, the Berlin Wall.
One result was an increase in localized wars, largely arising from boundary disputes, and in civil wars caused by conflicts between different ethnic groups oc between those with conflicting religious or political beliefs.
Democracy reached South Africa in April 1994, when the black population was allowed to vote in state elections for the first time.
HEALTH AND WEALTH During the 20th century enormous improvements in social and economic conditions took place, although the improvements were not evenly distributed around the world.
Those countries in Europe, North America and Asia that had gone through a process of industrialization in the previous century reaped the benefits, especially in the more stable economic environment of the years between 1945 and the early 1970s, when there was a general improvement in the standard of living for the majority of their citizens.
In other countries, most notably those in Southeast Asia, rapid industrialization took place from the 1970s.
Advances in medical technology transformed the lives of people in, for example, Europe, North America and Japan, but were by no means widely available outside the most affluent nations.
The dramatic decline in infant mortality rates and increased life expectancy in many countries during the second half of the 20th century can largely be ascribed to improved living standards, of which better medical care was just one part.
The world’s population doubled between 1940 and 2000 , with 90 per cent of the total growth in the 1990s taking place in the non-industrialized regions of the world.
Population increases were often accompanied by rapid urbanization, frequently unplanned and unsupported by improvements in the urban infrastructure.
Such rapid demographic change caused increasing social pressures, which could lead to social instability and conflict.
The supply of food and water became an overtly political issue during the later 20th century.
Political and environmental factors resulted in periods of famine in some regions of the world, notably sub-Saharan Africa, while in Western Europe and North America improvements in agricultural technology and subsidies led to gluts of certain foods, which were then stored to prevent falling prices.
By the end of the century the increasing demand for water was threatening to lead to conflicts as, for example, the damming or diversion of a river by one country caused water shortages in others.
THE WORLD ECONOMY The First World War profoundly changed European politics and society and destabilized the Europeandominated world economic system.
This led to reduced levels of trade and high unemployment problems which reached crisis point in the Great Depression of 1929-33 and were still there at the outset of the Second World War in 1939.
Following the war, international agreements and institutions were established to prevent further crises and to stabilize and expand world trade.
Both rich and poor countries suffered the consequences as unemployment rose to levels comparable with those of the inter-war years.
Many developing countries were encouraged to take out huge loans, the Y During the 20th century a growing number of women became actively involved in politics.
Their role was largely confined to the grassroots level, with the number of women holding government posts remaining low.
GLOBALIZATION AND NATIONALISM The defining feature of the closing decades of the 20th century and the start of the 21st century was considered by some to I'jc “globalization”, with multinational corporations moving their operations around the world in accordance with their needs, and individuals travelling and communicating with one another across frontiers with unprecedented ease.
An equally strong feature was nationalism expressed both by nations attempting to avoid domination by superpowers, and by groups within nation-states who felt oppressed on economic, religious or ethnic grounds.
The attacks on the United States on September 11, 2001, were a dramatic indication of the threat posed to the global community by international terrorist groups.
A Since ihe Second World Wor (here bos been o worldwide trend towards ihe creation of Iroding blocs between neighbouring sloies and erstwhile enemies.
The photo shows the financial district of San FrancisEQ. ns THE BUILD-UP TO THE FIRST WORLD WAR 1871-1914 1 European alliances 1B82 g~1 Country in Thru f mpcttiri' Allinme 1 S31 [ ) Countwy i4i liipte Allimce 1B82 HUNGARY ROMANIA BULGARIA Aegean A fter the defeat of Napoleon in 1815 Europe underwent a period of domestic transformation and upheaval that permanently altered its make-up.
New nation states such as Italy were created, while the great multi-ethnic empires of the Ottomans and Austria-Hungary began to weaken.
For much of the 19th century a balance of power existed in which no single European nation was strong enough to dominate, or attempt to dominate, the whole continent.
The rise of Germany The great European powers that had fought the Napoleonic Wars Britain, Prussia, Russia, Austria and France were growing at different rates.
The rise of Germany effectively altered the continent-wide balance of power.
The Industrial Revolution had changed the basis of national strength, making a country’s production of coal, iron and steel, and the sophistication of its weaponry, even more important than the size of its population.
Between 1871 and 1913 Germany moved from being the second strongest to being the leading industrial power in Europe an economic strength that from 1890 was combined with a ROMANIA BudsoretfO vjktnuhy BULGARIA OSaKa monte NEGRO A In on atfempl io isolate France ib newly unified Germany mode alliances with Austria-Hungary forming a huge power bloc in central Europe.
These alliances also included Germany's arch-rival Russia {1881) and Italy (18821.
In 1881 the German Chancellor, Count Otto von Bismarck, had concluded an alliance with Russia and Austria-Hungary, known as the “Three Emperors’ Alliance” a move intended to keep France isolated.
After Bismarck’s fall in 1890, however, German foreign policy became increasingly concerned with the desire for expansion, both in Europe and further afield, in Africa and Southeast Asia.
The Double Entente Meanwhile, France, which had been alternately fearful and resentful of German strength since the loss of Alsace and Lorraine in 1871, broke out of its isolation in 1894 by making an alliance with Russia.
The Franco-Russian alliance was a first step towards the creation of an anti-German coalition, but if Germany’s growing power was to be effectively opposed, Britain had to be included.
With a massive and growing global empire and the world’s first industrialized economy, Britain saw little profit in actively intervening on the Continent.
At the end of the century, however, its isolation seemed considerably less palatable as its economic dominance disappeared with the industrialization of other European countries and the United States.
Meanwhile, the criticisms levelled at its role in the South African War showed that much of Europe (and a sizeable proportion of the British people) resented its imperial domination.
The Triple Entente It was by no means certain that Britain would side with the Franco-Russian alliance.
France and Russia had been considered Britain’s greatest enemies during most of the 19th century, and in 1901 the British and German governments discussed signing an alliance of their own.
However, as German power continued to grow, Britain signed an entente with France in 1904 and with Russia in 1907.
Neither of these agreements was in fact a formal pledge of British mili-tary support for France and Russia in the event of a German attack, but Britain’s resolve was hardened by the growth of the German navy; urged on by Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz, the Germans had, since 1898, been building up their naval strength, and by 1909 it seemed possible that they could achieve naval supremacy.
Since naval supremacy had always been one of the cardinal elements of British policy, the British government, led by its very anti-German Foreign Secretary Sir Edward Grey, reacted by dramatically increasing production of British battleships.
The subsequent naval construction race, won by the British, increased the rivalry between the countries and made it more likely that Britain would intervene if Germany went to war with France and Russia.
During the second half of the 19th century Serbia, Bulgaria, Bosnia-Herzegovina and Albania all agitated for independence.
Austria-Hungary and Russia both coveted these areas, and in 1908 Austria annexed Bosnia into its empire.
Bosnia was a multiethnic area populated by Croats, Serbs and Muslims of Turkish and Slavic descent.
Serbian nationalists opposed Austrian rule in Bosnia, seeking to include the region in a larger Serbian national state.
When Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the Austrian throne, visited Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia, in June 1914, he and his wife were assassinated by a Serbian nationalist.
Austria’s response was to set about crushing Serbian nationalism permanently.
The Russians opposed Austrian attempts to dominate Serbia, while Germany promised to support any move the Austrians made.
When the Russians duly mobilized their entire armed forces, the Germans and then the French called up their armies.
As military goals became central to each nation’s policies, the outbreak of the First World War became inevitable.
Steel production 1890 and 1913 {in thousands of formes] \ -1 1890 I* 1913 2 Coal production 1890 and 1913 (in millions of tonnes] 1890 ▲ In October 1912 Montenegro, Greece, Serbia and Bulgaria declared war on the Ottoman Empire.
As a result, the Ottomans relinquished almost all their lands in southeast Europe in 1913, to the advantage of the victorious states.
A second war then erupted between Bulgaria and Serbia over territory in Macedonia o war which Serbia won, supported by Montenegro, Romania and the Ottoman Empire.
These two Balkan Wars, in creating a militarily strong and ambitious Serbia, inflamed existing tensions between Serbia and Austria-Hungary and thus contributed to the outbreak of the First World War.
Coal, vital to the process of industrialization, was also mined in increasing quantities.
This development of heavy industry was a necessary precondition for the manufacture of modern weapons, notably battleships.
Modem artillery and rtwthine-guns mode these trenches easy la defend and difficult to attack.
On the first day of the Battle of the Somme, I inly 1916, when the Btiibh attempted to break ihrough German lines, 20,000 British troops lost ■heir lives, with 1,000 killed in two attacks on the short sector between Hebufarne and Gommecoarl alone.
On the Eastern Front the Russians, after some initial success, were (arced back by an army equipped with modern weaponry for which they were no match.
Ihe llalrarrs became bogged down in a small area of northeast Italy, but were finally driven bock following the Battle af (aparellu in October 1917.
Troops of the Ottoman Empire became involved in fierce fighting with those of the British Empire in the Tigris Valley.
Sea ^ q Sicily GREECE 1 '“W>eni ‘ i J'ipdl V ci aengJiai^ I O n 1 August 1914 the German army crossed the Belgian border and the First World War began.
The armies of the Triple Entente (Britain, France and Russia ) Implemented plans drawn up in preparation for any German aggression.
The Germans had devised their famous ""Schlieffen Plan 1 ', according to which the German army would move through Belgium into France* sweeping around Paris and encircling the French army before the slower-moving Russians could muster their forces on the Germans' Eastern Front.
If executed properly the Schlieffen Plan might have resulted in a German victory in 1914, but although the German army made quick progress through Belgium, their Chief of General Staff, von Mohke, became increasingly concerned about Russian strength and transferred troops away from France to the Eastern From.
This “miracle” of the Marne was the first crucial turning point of the war.
The Schlieffen Plan was a political, as well as military, failure for the Germans.
By invading Belgium, the Germans had ignored long-standing treaties guaranteeing that country’s neutrality, and convinced the British of the need to enter the war, Germany thus found itself hemmed in on two sides by the Entente Powers, with only the support of Austria-Hungary, and later Turkey and Bulgaria.
The Western Front Stalemate quickly ensued on the Western Front, as the Germans* British and French built long lines of trenches stretching from the Swiss border, through northern France to the English Channel.
Long-range artillery pieces, accurate rifles and, most importantly* machine-guns gave the defenders a crucial advantage over the attacking forces.
Industrialization and a we 11-developed railway system also meant that more ammunition and other vital supplies were available than ever before and that large armies could l>e transported from area to area as the situation dictated.
The following year the French offensives against the retrenched German position on the Siegfried/1 linden burg line caused such heavy French casualties that there was mutiny among French troops.
Furthest entrance by Central Povrau on dote prised & Barrie men by Central Powers © Bottle wn by Enneale Powers K imkfw turtle 4Novel angogetneiit | AM convoy routes Ndvd Wockode iiF Cemnd Powers.
H Fighting around the world The picture on other fronts was more fluid, but just as bloody.
On the Eastern Front a large Russian army was heavily defeated at the Battle of Tannenberg in August 1914 , and although the Russians saw limited success in 1915, ultimately their large, but poorly organized, forces were pushed back.
The Germans made deep advances into European Russia in 1916, and by 1917 the morale of the Russian army and of its people was beginning to crack.
In the Middle East fighting also moved back and forth over a considerable area.
Initially, the Entente Powers fared badly, with British, Australian, New Zealand and French soldiers being pinned down and forced to withdraw from the Gallipoli Peninsula during 1915 and early 1916, and a British Empire force from India surrendering to the Ottomans at A1 Kut in April 1916.
An Arab uprising against Ottoman rule in the summer of 1916 pushed the Ottomans out of much of the Arabian Peninsula, and in December 1917 the British captured Jerusalem.
Despite these victories, the events in the Middle East had no decisive influence on the outcome of the First World War, which could really only be decided on the battlefields of Europe.
In Africa fighting broke out in all German colonies, but was most protracted in German East Africa where, in 1916, British, South African and Portuguese forces combined under General Smuts to counter the German forces.
In 1915 the Italian government, a signatory of the Triple Alliance , joined the Entente Powers, following promises of Austrian territory.
In the next two years hundreds of thousands of Italians were slaughtered before an Austrian-German force inflicted defeat on the Italian army at the Battle of Gaporetto in October 1917.
The entry of the United States By 1917 the fortunes of the Entente Powers within Europe were at a low ebb, and a German victory seemed a distinct possibility.
A disastrous German foreign and strategic policy was, however, to throw away their chance of victory.
It had been assumed by both sides before the war began that large fleets of battleships would engage in a decisive battle for naval supremacy.
It was a rather confused affair, with the Germans inflicting the greatest damage but being forced back to port.
In preference to surface fighting, the Germans turned early in the war to submarine warfare as a means of cutting off vital imports to Britain.
By sinking merchant ships without warning, however, the Germans inflamed United States opinion.
At first, after the sinking of the liner SS Lusitania in 1915, the Germans backed off, but in February 1917, in a dangerous gamble, they renewed their unrestricted submarine warfare around the British Isles.
They were hoping to knock Britain out of the war before the United States could intervene a rash gamble that failed when the Americans declared war on Germany on 6 April 1917.
The final push Following the signing of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with the Russians on 3 March 1918, the Germans were able to concentrate their resources on the Western Front.
Between March and July 1918 the German army hurled itself against the French and British lines, making significant breakthroughs and advancing further than at any time since 1914.
As United States troops and supplies flooded into Europe, the German advance petered out, and the German army began to crumple in the face of a counteroffensive.
Unable to increase their supply of men and weapons, the Germans realized that they had lost the war.
They approached the Entente Powers for peace terms and at 11.00 am on 11 November 1918 the fighting ceased.
A The original German ""Schlieffen Plan"" to encircle Paris from the northwest would almost certainly have resulted in a rapid victory.
Instead, the German army was forced to retreat following the successful Marne offensive by the French, and the two sides dug themselves in for a war of attrition that was to last four years.
In March 1917, anticipating the Nivelle offensive by the Entente Powers, the Germans withdrew to the Siegfried/Hindenburg Line.
A German offensive in 1918 was initially successful, but their much smaller army was overstretched, while the Entente Powers were now reinforced by United States troops.
The Germans were driven back until, in November 1918, they were forced to request a truce.
T The two sides were unevenly matched in terms of the number of men they mobilized.
The proportion of casualties (which includes those wounded, killed, reported missing in battle or dying from disease, and prisoners of war) was also uneven, with the Entente Powers suffering a casualty rate of 52 per cent against that of 67 per cent for the Central Powers.
O r o'** <^T irz KWNnWr^USTR)A/ / ■ rv i—A w( Hungary A °W'""' Sardinia ' 1 , V, ^D r OMANI A ° r ‘T na V * Yugoslavia *V *fii 1 Blncfc St-u ""K , > 0 B u LG A RIA . *\ p\f ' } Sofia Kg^i 'GREECE albani* ▲ As a result of the Paris Peace Conference of 1919 the Austro-Hungarian Empire was dismantled.
Most of it was formed into small nation-states, including the new state of Czechoslovakia.
In the south, however, several ethnically distinct regions were amalgamated with previously independent states to form Yugoslavia, under the domination of Serbia.
Germany lost territory in the east to the recreated Poland, while a demilitarized area was established along Germany's border with France.
The newly formed Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, threatened by antirevolutionary forces, was in no postition to resist moves to carve up territory on its western borders.
T he First World War changed the map of Europe and the Middle East for ever.
Centuries-old empires were destroyed and new national states were created.
The most important event in establishing the new Europe was the Paris Peace Conference (January-June 1919), which resulted in the Treaty of Versailles.
The conference was called by the victorious Entente Powers after Germany had asked for an armistice in November 1918.
In a desire to destroy German power, the French called for the division and disarmament of Germany and for such huge reparations that the German economy would have been crippled for decades.
The Americans, on the other hand, sought to establish a stable Europe and a new League of Nations to guarantee global security.
They believed that the peace should be based on President Wilson’s famous “Fourteen Points” and should be as magnanimous as possible.
The Treaty of Versailles The Treaty of Versailles, when signed in June 1919, represented a compromise between these different positions.
The treaty also stripped Germany of its imperial possessions in Africa and the Pacific, but since this empire had added little to German national strength, its loss did little to weaken it.
For all of its losses, Germany fared much better than its closest ally, Austria-Hungary.
PART 5 was broken up by the Treaty of Saint-Germain into a host of smaller national states : Poland, Czechoslovakia, Romania, Yugoslavia, Austria and Hungary.
Italy, which had entered the war in 1915 because of the promise of booty from Austria-Hungary, was rewarded with a sizeable chunk of new territory.
Russian territorial losses The greatest territorial losses of any country in Europe were those suffered by Russia, which had, under the tsar, been allied to France and Britain, but lost the war against Germany on the Eastern Front.
The greatest loss of Russian territory was to the newly created Poland, which gained further territory as a result of a brief war with Russia in 1921.
As a result of the Paris Peace Conference, nine new states were constructed from various parts of Germany, Austria-Hungary and Russia.
Whether or not this was a good thing for the European balance of power remained to be seen.
Both Germany and the Soviet Union were eager to regain much of the territory they had given up against their will.
In southeast Europe, meanwhile, a variety of different nationalities that had been held in check by Austria-Hungary were now exposed to a whole new set of tensions.
The League of Nations The Versailles treaty also called for the establishment of a League of Nations, an idea championed by President Wilson of the United States.
Unfortunately, the American public was not persuaded of its necessity, and after a bitter debate in the Senate the United States decided to stay out of the League and refused to ratify the Treaty.
The British and the French had been unable to master German might without American aid, and despite its losses Germany retained the potential to dominate Europe demonstrated by the recovery in its industrial output during the 1920s.
The dismantling of the Ottoman Empire The First World War finally broke up the Ottoman Empire but still left much of the Middle East in limbo.
Most of the region was assigned to British or French control alliances with some of the newly created protection to the boundaries of its eastern European states.
The most signatories, and a united foreign policy. under League of Nations mandates.
Even areas that gained nominal independence Egypt and the new Arab kingdoms were heavily reliant on Britain for their defence and development.
The one state that grew in strength during the immediate post-war period was, surprisingly, Turkey.
The long-term outcomes of the peace The Versailles treaty has been harshly criticized and, indeed, has been seen as one of the fundamental causes of the Second World War.
In 1923, in response to Germany’s inability to pay war reparations, the French moved their army into the Rhineland.
The German mark collapsed in value and by 1924 Germany was gripped in a cycle of hyperinflation that saw some people taking home their pay packets in wheelbarrows.
By the late 1920s, however, Europe seemed to be on the way to establishing a new equilibrium; the economies of all the major European countries had recovered and were experiencing strong growth.
For a while the strategy seemed quite successful, as eastern Europe developed a new stability.
Czechoslovakia evolved into a democracy, Poland became a nation-state capable of defeating the Soviet Union and establishing friendly relations with its neighbours, while Yugoslavia seemed able to accommodate a multi-ethnic population.
Perhaps if the prosperity of the 1920s had continued for longer, eastern Europe might have become stable enough to survive German and Russian attempts to take back their lost lands.
The Great Depression that started in 1929, and affected the economy of every country in Europe to some extent, brought to an end Europe’s brief period of co-operation and recovery.
This financial crisis served as the catalyst for the rise to power of the German Nazi party , which swept aside the settlement laid out in the Versailles treaty and ended attempts to find peaceful solutions to Europe’s complex problems.
Kuwait, nominally independent, remained strongly influenced by Britain, as was Egypt.
Large areas of Turkey were placed under European control, until Turkish resistance forced the withdrawal of all foreigners and led to the founding of the Republic of Turkey in 1923.
A President Woodrow Wilson of the United States arrived at the Paris Peace Conference advocating a liberal approach to world affairs, including an end to colonial rule and the setting up of a League of Nations to maintain world peace.
While the other victorious powers forced him to compromise on some of his aims, the League of Nations was included in the Treaty of Versailles.
To Wilson's disappointment, however, the United States Senate rejected American involvement in such an organization and refused to ratify the treaty.
Shortly before his death, however, Lenin made it dear that he did not regard Stalin as a suitable successor information that Stalin ignored and repressed in his drive to become leader of the Soviet Union.
Admiral Kolchak formed an Eastern Front in Siberia and in 1919 advanced beyond the Volga.
In the south, resistance was led by Denikin but he was brought to a halt short of Orel.
In the north, Yudenich led his troops to the suburbs of Petrograd, but was then driven back.
Wrangel, taking over what was left of Denikin's forces, defended the area around Sevastopol for some time but was finally forced to withdraw in November 1920.
Meanwhile, the Poles were attempting to gain as much as they could of Lithuania, White Russia and Ukraine.
They got as far as Kiev but then had to withdraw as the Red Army advanced in turn towards Warsaw.
When the Poles regained the initiative Lenin decided to sue for peace and, under the Treaty of Riga in October 1920,10 million Ukrainians and Russians were assigned to Polish rule.
By the end of the year military operations were over and the communist government was in control of what was left of Russia.
T he Russian Revolution one of the formative events of the 20th century was precipitated by pressures arising from the hardships experienced during the First World War.
A popular uprising in March 1917 led to the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II and the creation of a liberal Provisional Government, which was soon forced to share power with the socialist Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies.
As the revolution spread, soviets sprang up in many cities, peasants seized land from the gentry and soldiers deserted.
A dual system of government developed, with the soviets largely controlling those leaders who took their authority from the Provisional Government.
During the subsequent months the ideological rift between the two bodies widened, with the Provisional Government delaying the setting up of a Constituent Assembly (which was to decide on major economic and political policies), concentrating instead on a continued war effort.
In November 1917 the Bolsheviks carried out a successful coup, seizing control of the Winter Palace, seat of the Provisional Government.
Lenin then set about establishing a dictatorship of the proletariat and a one-party system.
Civil War The new Bolshevik government arranged an armistice with the Central Powers in December 1917, formalized in the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk in March 1918.
Under the terms of the treaty Russia relinquished control of its western territories.
The Red Army was initially pushed back, but its military superiority over the comparatively disunited White armies enabled it to regain control of Central Asia, the Caucasus and Ukraine, although territory was lost in the war with Poland in 1920.
This war did not spread the revolution into Europe, as Lenin had hoped it would.
Outside Russia proletarian support for communism was limited and when the Soviet Union was founded in 1922 it was confined to the territories of the old empire.
However, revolts by peasants in the spring of 1921 forced him to introduce the New Economic Policy , based on concessions to the peasantry and a semi-market economy.
Monufoduring bod recovered by 192B when the Fast Rve-Yeor Plan *m launched.
This succeeded in transforming Ihe Soviet economy, coaling hundreds of new mining, engine^ermg and metallwgkol enterprises in established industrial ureas, and new factories in the empty lands of the nan-Hussion republics.
NEP enabled Lenin to consolidate power, many convinced communists saw it as a slide towards a capitalist society.
The struggle for power among his closest followers was to be fought out partly on the issue of which policy should be taken as the true Leninist line. deportation to Siberia of kulaks helped control the peasantry.
It was, however, an economic disaster, leading to a catastrophic famine.
Fwed Eptsw rtgksrrr If taurwig [92ft □ U topper ™»g foriwfyi fitter 192$ NoHh Pde IrfB I r e t i e Stalin’s risk to poykr The struggle was won by Stalin, who outmanoeuvred rivals such as Trotsky and Bukharin, Paced with foreign hostility, and convinced that the revolution should achieve an industrial, proletarian society, Stalin launched his drive to catch up with the West in ten years with a return to the centralization and utopianism of the civil war years.
The First Five Year Plan was adopted in 1928, its aims being to develop heavy industry, which had been devastated during the civil war, and collectivize agriculture.
Industrial advance was indeed impressi ve, although at the cost of enormous waste, inefficiency and suffering, as wildly over-optimistic targets for output were set.
The population of the big cities nearly doubled between 1928 and 1933, and the urban infrastructure could not keep pace.
Targets concentrated on heavy industry', and although they were not met, the economy was transformed.
Magnitogorsk, the Turksib railway , the Dneprostroi hydro-electric complex and the White Sea Canal all date from this time.
They were also all built partially with prison camp labour, for the First Five Year Plan saw a vast expansion of the concentration camps of the civil war.
The forcible establishment of collective farms, with the the Soviet public until the late 1980s.
In 1939 the Stalin cult of personality was at its height and, to many sympathisers in Europe, this was indeed a brave new world.
BULGARIA CofWiggem 2 Revolutionary activity in Europe 1919-23 & teiilre cf FoyolutHjrniry octtoty Boundary 1913 -4 The Bolsheviks assumed thnt thcii revolution would spark off revolutions across Europe, and in 191M 9 il baked for a while ns if this would happen.
A soviet repuhlk in Hungary, led by Bela Run, survived five monlta in 1919, and Olivers in Bovarn and Slovakia lasted four and three weeks respectively.
The Sparfokist uprising under Rosa Luxemburg in Berlin in January 1919 was crushed by the new Weimar Repubfc ontf further insurrections in German towns were unsuccessful Strikes spread across Europe ham northern Holy to the Batik, bul Ihe European revolution the Bolsheviks hoped for laded lo mnlerialke.
From their southern bases they embarked on lengthy journeys to the north, by way of the mountainous west.
The most famous known as ""the Long March"" was that undertaken by the First Front Army, led by Mao Zedong.
The Fourth Army (led by a political rival of Mao) was denied access to Yan-an and sent away to remote Gaotai, where it suffered heavy losses after confronting some well-equipped Kuomintang troops.
Meanwhile, the Japanese, with the help of their Manchu collaborators, were firmly in control of Manchuria (which they renamed Manchukuo) and were poised to launch a full-scale invasion and occupation of the rest of China in 1937.
The most important and urgent goals for the new government were the unification and defence of the country, but they were not easily achieved.
The presidential term of the revolutionary leader Sun Yat-sen lasted for barely six weeks after his inauguration in January 1912, and in December 1915 President Yuan Shikai attempted to restore the monarchy by crowning himself emperor.
The attempt was a failure, as was that made by General Zhang Xun and the dethroned Qing Emperor Xuantong in 1917.
Both attempts, however, provided opportunities for local warlords to re-establish their power at the expense of central government.
Over the next 30 years, although a fragile equilibrium existed between the various warlords and other interest groups, the Chinese Republic was in virtual anarchy.
Civil war The first North-South War broke out in 1917 and resulted in a chain reaction that led to full-scale civil war and the establishment of a number of governing regimes across the country.
To challenge the authority of the northern warlords, Sun Yat-sen formed his own southern governments in Guangzhou in 1917, 1921 and 1923.
In 1924 Sun Yat-sen was invited to Beijing to discuss the possible unification of China, but he died there in March 1925 without concluding an agreement, and the second North-South War began the following year.
The Kuomintang was nominally unified at the end of 1928 under the leadership of Chiang Kai-shek, and gradually gained control of strategic regions.
It was not, however, until the end of 1930 that real unification of the party was achieved through the military defeat by Chiang of a rival faction.
For Chiang and the Kuomintang the next main task was to deal with the Communists, who now had an effective command structure and were armed.
Despite the fact that both the Kuomintang and Communists had a nationalist goal, they were more often enemies than allies, competing for the same power.
Most early Communists were also radical nationalists, and many had been heavily involved in the activities of the Kuomintang under Sun Yat-sen, making them doubly threatening to Chiang’s regime.
Consequently, immediately after the unification of the Kuomintang, Chiang launched five military campaigns to encircle and suppress the Communists in a rural area of Jiangxi province, where the communist “Central Soviet Area” was located.
In October 1934 he finally succeeded in overpowering the Communists, forcing them to abandon their Jiangxi base and, under the leadership of Mao Zedong, embark on the gruelling Long March to the north.
During 1935 Chiang’s army was equally successful in expelling units of the Red Army from other Red Bases in the central region of the country, so that by 1936 the Communists who had survived the journey were confined to an area in the province of Shaanxi around the city of Yan-an.
PART 5 ▲ Despite the political and economic turmoil of the first half of the 20th century, China still developed a railway network.
Together with the country's system of navigable rivers, the railways provided transport for the manufactured goods and metal ores produced by the Chinese businesses that thrived as foreign firms, hit by the Great Depression of 1929-33, failed or withdrew from China.
During the 1930s, however, his aims were largely frustrated by domestic and international conditions.
In particular, as Japan developed its imperialist policy towards mainland East Asia, successive Japanese governments turned their attention on a weak and fragmented China.
The Communists, from their stronghold in Yan-an, turned their attentions to fighting the Japanese.
They proved themselves a dynamic and efficient political and military force, and took the opportunity to play the nationalist card and thus rebuild their popularity.
By contrast, Chiang’s concentration on suppressing his domestic rivals was by now out of tune with the wishes of the general populace so much so that in December 1936 two of Chiang’s top military commanders mutinied in order to shift Chiang’s attention to fighting the Japanese.
This became known as the “Xi-an Incident”, and resulted in the first example of cooperation between the Kuomintang and Communists since the death of Sun Yat-sen.
In January 1941, however, the Kuomintang troops ambushed and annihilated the main force of the Communist-controlled New Fourth Army, thus demonstrating just how fragile this co-operation was.
The war against the Japanese created opportunities for communist propaganda, recruitment and military training which proved to be invaluable when the civil war between the Kuomintang and Communists was resumed immediately after the Japanese surrender.
The Communists gained control of the mainland, the Kuomintang fled to Taiwan, and the People’s Republic was established in October 1949.
Putting the unification of China before the defence of China had cost the Kuomintang dearly.
Economic expansion During the period between the 1911 Revolution and the birth of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, the Chinese economy struggled to survive the civil wars, the Japanese occupation of large areas of the country and the mismanagement of the Kuomintang.
This was largely due to the impact of the First World War and the Great Depression , when the industrial powers relaxed their grip on the Chinese market, creating opportunities for local businesses to become established.
Furthermore, while the Western gold standard collapsed during the Depression resulting in severe financial crises in the West China, which had its own silver standard, remained largely unaffected.
A Sun Yat-sen trained as a doctor in the early 1890s, but he subsequently turned his attention to revolutionary activity and was exiled between 1896 and 1911 before becoming the first President of the Republic of China in 1912.
T In 1945, at the end of the Second World War, the Communists (backed by Soviet troops) were the first to move into areas previously colonized by the Japanese.
They quickly established a strong foothold in the northeast (both militarily and in terms of popular support) from which to launch their offensive against the Kuomintang, who had spent much of the previous eight years in the southwest.
Rerce fighting ensued for three years, with only a temporary truce in 1946.
Despite United States backing, Chiang Kai-shek and the Kuomintang forces were eventually forced to retreat to Taiwan.
Allhough elected lo the presidency In 1917 on the basis of proposed agrarian and social reforms, hb governrmafs foifure lo meel its prombes led lo hb overthrow and execution in 1920, ► Following Ihe declaration of war on Germany by the United Stales in April 1917, most Central American and Caribbean slates, heavily under the influence af the USA, followed its lead.
On Ihe other hand, none af the countries of South America went further than breaking off diplomatic relations with die exception of Brazil, which sent naval units lo asitsl the Allies and contributed substantial omounb of food and raw materials to the war effort. 4n the Second World War nearly all Central American and Caribbean countries declared war on the Axb powers at the same time as the USA, and Mexico followed soon afterwards.
While most declared war aver ibe next two years, some hung bock until, by early 1945, i become dear that failure to do so could lead la exclusion from the projected United Nations.
T he first halt of the 20th century saw many major changes in the economic and social structure of the countries of Latin America, Export-led growth based on the production of primary products (mostly minerals or agricultural goods), which had resulted in appreciable economic expansion before 1914, was shown to he severely flawed.
At the same time the oligarchies whose sociopolitical dominance had been well-nigh absolute for most of the 19th century found their control of the state challenged by an emerging middle class.
Meanwhile the majority of the population , who had previously been excluded from participation in the state, began to feature in both cultural and political debates.
INC)M | ES The problems underlying Latin America's dependence on the production of raw materials were initially felt as a result of the dislocation of world trade during the First World War , Latin America, which at this stage relied largely cm foreign banks for supplies of credit and on foreign shipping tor transporting its goods, found itself Isolated from international finance and trade.
Production fell, imports were in short supply, and there was a high level of mass unrest.
The disadvantages of export-led growth became increasingly clear; Latin American economies, especially the smaller ones, found themselves over-reliant on one or two products, the prices of which were vulnerable to fluctuations in the weather, the emergence of new centres of production or substitute products and raw materials.
Economic growth tended to follow a ""boom-bust 1 * cycle, which made it difficult for countries to plan ahead or allocate resources rationally.
The Wall Street Crash of 1929 and the ensuing C Ireat Depression led to the collapse of the world market on which Latin America had relied for its exports.
In the 1920s Latin American countries could do little more than try to defend themselves against the effects of the Depression.
However, a consensus began to develop at least in the more advanced economies where a limited industrial base oriented towards the internal market had already evolved that Latin America needed to adopt an economic strategy of urgent industrialization.
The outcome was to consolidate the political and economic dominance of a bourgeoisie committed to capitalist modernization.
The revolution destroyed the political position of the oligarchy, and their economic strength was eroded over the next two decades by means of a programme of agrarian reform that redistributed laige landed estates.
In all the major Latin American countries during the early decades of the 20th century, the issue of how to incorporate the majority of the population into national life began to be debated.
Intellectuals and politicians, in particular those from the middle classes, became increasingly aw are of the political importance of the poorer sections of society.
This did not necessarily mean that the poor themselves were treated any better, although measures were taken in Mexico to improve the lot of the Indians.
By the end of the 1920s it had effectively displaced the European powers from Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean, During the Second World War the United States administration ensured the production of raw materials necessary to the Allied war effort by means of Lend-Lease aid agreements.
By tliis stage it was apparent to the governments of Latin America that only the United States could launch an effective defence of the western hemisphere.
The RISE of THE MILITARY One final change that occurred during this period, which was to have a major effect on Latin American polities after the Second World War, was the rise of the military.
With the consolidation of central state control in most countries during the late 19th century, the armed forces had begun a process of professionalization, mostly with the help of European advisers, which by the 1920s had given them a strong sense of corporate identity.
At this stage the military was content to intervene only briefly in the political process, but it was increasingly acquiring the conviction subsequently to prove so detrimental to the maintenance of democracy in Latin America that it alone was the institution which could best serve the national interest.
MT ▼ Al Ihe beginning ol the 20ih -century the United Stoles professed itself reluctant to become a colonial power dong the lines of some European awntries in Africa and Asia However, it was anxious to proteef Its own ecanaroit interests in ihe Caribbean and Cenlral America.
Mojffl mlfBiiM mm of workets I I up lo S35D NMil #rtr$700 m S3SO-S70O fc@Q& 1 t<sd iraT^fcjyaj jii ttousnfc'l ■I ■I 1^2 Pacific Ocea n A The Depression caused industrial production in ihe United Stales and tan-nda lo decline by over 30 per cent, leading to massive unempfoyrnenl, particularly in the Utirled Stales.
People migrated in swrch of writ, some of vrhkh was o diretl result of US-gdvfcnuranT spending under ihe Hew Deal launched in 1933.
It is naliceable. however, that the highest expenditure per capita was nal necessarily in those areas mosl depressed, such as the Deep South, bul in areas where ihe Democrat governmeni was mosl anxious to win pdilkof support at the next election.
T Every country in Europe experienced n drop in industrial production during the Depression, with ihe northeast being worst hit.
Millions of people lost their jobs, and many farmers and businesses were bankrupted.
Industrialized nations and those supplying primary products were all affected in one way or another.
In Germany and the United States industrial output fell by about 50 per cent, and between 25 and 33 per cent of the industrial labour force was unemployed.
The Depression was eventually to cause a complete turnaround in economic theory and government policy.
In the 1920s governments and business people largely believed, as they had since the 19th century, that prosperity resulted from the least possible government intervention in the domestic economy, from open international economic relations with little trade discrimination, and from currencies that were fixed in value and readily convertible.
The main areas of Depression The United States economy had experienced rapid economic growth and financial excess in the late 1920s, and initially the economic downturn was seen as simply part of the boom-bust-boom cycle.
It also became clear that there had been serious over-production in agriculture, leading to falling prices and a rising debt among farmers.
At the same time there was a major banking crisis, including the “Wall Street Crash” in October 1929.
The situation was aggravated by serious policy mistakes of the Federal Reserve Board, which led to a fall in money supply and further contraction of the economy.
The economic situation in Germany was made worse by the enormous debt with which the country had been burdened following the First World War.
It had been forced to borrow heavily in order to pay “reparations” to the victorious European powers, as demanded by the Treaty of Versailles , and also to pay for industrial reconstruction.
When the American economy fell into depression, United States banks recalled their loans, causing the German banking system to collapse.
Countries that were dependent on the export of primary products, such as those in Latin America, were already suffering a depression in the late 1920s.
More efficient farming methods and technological changes meant that the supply of agricultural products was rising faster than demand, and prices were falling as a consequence.
Initially, the governments of the producer countries stockpiled their products, but this depended on loans from the USA and Europe.
New interventionist policies The Depression spread rapidly around the world because the responses made by governments were flawed.
When faced with falling export earnings they overreacted and severely increased tariffs on imports, thus further reducing trade.
PART 5 # ^FINLAND 1 NORWAY V ' IRELAND^,, g, ' } HUNGARY POLAND ■ROMANIA YUGOSLAVIA SPAIN PORTUGAL 7 ~ V ljuRKEYVFTF CHINA HONDURAS A Guatemala EL SALVADOR ^ NICARAGUA -COSTARICA — PANAMA ‘EGYPT COLOMBIA CEYLON MALAYA NETHERLANDS EAST INDIES BRAZIL BOLIVIA PARAGUAY AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND 3 Decline in exports from countries TRADING MAINLY IN PRIMARY products J923-29 to 1932-33 Dedina in exports of primaiy graft iy m over 60 s o gB m-m Ml m-m i I m-m I m-m economic theory at the time, the initial response of every government was to cut their spending.
Under the Gold Standard, which linked currencies to the value of gold, governments were committed to maintaining fixed exchange rates.
However, during the Depression they were forced to keep interest rates high to persuade banks to buy and hold their currency.
Since prices were falling, interest-rate repayments rose in real terms, making it too expensive for both businesses and individuals to borrow.
The First World War had led to such political mistrust that international action to halt the Depression was impossible to achieve.
In 1931 banks in the United States started to withdraw funds from Europe, leading to the selling of European currencies and the collapse of many European banks.
At this point governments either introduced exchange control or devalued the currency (as in Britain) to stop further runs.
Political implications The Depression had profound political implications.
In countries such as Germany and Japan, reaction to the Depression brought about the rise to power of militarist governments who adopted the aggressive foreign policies that led to the Second World War.
In countries such as the United States and Britain, government intervention ultimately resulted in the creation of welfare systems and the managed economies of the period following the Second World War.
In the United States Roosevelt became President in 1933 and promised a “New Deal” under which the government would intervene to reduce unemployment by work-creation schemes such as street cleaning and the painting of post offices.
Both agriculture and industry were supported by policies to restrict output and increase prices.
The most durable legacy of the New Deal was the great public works projects such as the Hoover Dam and the introduction by the Tennessee Valley Authority of flood control, electric power, fertilizer, and even education to a depressed agricultural region in the south.
The New Deal was not, in the main, an early example of economic management, and it did not lead to rapid recovery.
Income per capita was no higher in 1939 than in 1929, although the government’s welfare and public works policies did benefit many of the most needy people.
The big growth in the United States economy was, in fact, due to rearmament.
In Germany Hitler adopted policies that were more interventionist, developing a massive work-creation scheme that had largely eradicated unemployment by 1936.
In the same year rearmament, paid for by government borrowing, started in earnest.
In order to keep down inflation, consumption was restricted by rationing and trade controls.
By 1939 the Germans’ Gross National Product was 50 per cent higher than in 1929 an increase due mainly to the manufacture of armaments and machinery.
The collapse of world trade The German case is an extreme example of what happened virtually everywhere in the 1930s.
The international economy broke up into trading blocs determined by political allegiances and the currency in which they traded.
Trade between the blocs was limited, with world trade in 1939 still below its 1929 level.
Although the global economy did eventually recover from the Depression, it was at considerable cost to international economic relations and to political stability.
Chile, for example, saw its exports drop by over 80 per cent, and India and Brazil suffered a fall of over 60 per cent.
From 1931, however, countries began to leave the standard, leading to its total collapse by 1936.
Although at the time this was seen as a disaster, it actually presented opportunities for recovery in many countries, allowing governments to intervene to create economic growth.
By the 1920s, however, he had changed his views and used his considerable rhetorical powers to whip up popular support for his fascist policies of nationalism, anti-socialism and state control of industry and the economy.
However, a plebiscite in Saarland in 1935 produced 90 per cent support for German rule, and in 1936 Hitler ordered troops into the Rhineland as a gesture of defiance.
In March 1938 the German Anschluss of Austria was achieved with support from Austrian fascists, and in October, following the Munich Pact (drawn up by Britain, France, Germany and Italy), Germany took over all regions of Czechoslovakia with a population more than 50 per cent German.
The Czech government ceded the rest of Bohemia-Moravia in March 1939, with Slovakia becoming a German puppet state.
On 1 September the Germans began their attack on Poland, and the British and French declared war.
They did not, however, send troops to aid Poland, which, attacked from the east by the Soviet Union and heavily outgunned, was forced to surrender.
I n the years between the two world wars, a political and socio-cultural phenomenon known as fascism arose in Europe.
Its exact form varied from country to country, but it was most commonly characterized by chauvinistic nationalism coupled with expansionist tendencies, anticommunism and a ruthless repression of all groups presumed dissident, a mass party with a charismatic leader who rose to power through legitimate elections, and a dependence on alliances with industrial, agrarian, military and bureaucratic elites.
Mussolini possessed a talent for arousing enthusiasm and giving a sense of power and direction to a society in crisis.
Through coercion, indoctrination and the creation of the cult of himself as “II Duce” , he was able to balance the different interests of his supporters.
His nationalist rhetoric attracted war veterans, while his promise to deal with the threat of revolutionary socialism won the support of the lower middle classes and a proportion of the peasantry.
Some workers saw the fascist syndicates as an appealing alternative to socialist unions, while landowners and industrialists made large donations to fascist groups because they battered peasant and labour organizations into submission.
Most importantly, the political establishment tolerated fascism and helped pave the way for Mussolini’s rise to power; with the much celebrated “March on Rome” in 1922, Mussolini, now Prime Minister, signalled the beginning of a new era.
Mussolini’s foreign policy wavered between aggression and conciliation.
He not only expanded Italy's Libyan territory, but in 1935 launched a successful assault on Ethiopia.
In 1935 Italy formed an accord with France and joined in condemnation of German rearmament before invading Ethiopia in October 1935, thereby alienating itself from both Britain and France.
A rapprochement with Germany was inevitable, and in 1936 the “Rome-Berlin Axis” was formed.
Italy joined Germany in assisting the Nationalists in the Spanish Civil War, further alienating itself from the rest of Europe, and in May 1939 signed the “Pact of Steel” with Germany.
Fascism in Germany Hitler’s rise to power in 1933 can be seen partly as a product of the harshness of the Treaty of Versailles , which placed an economic noose round the neck of the Weimar Republic.
In 1932 it became the largest single party and Hitler was appointed Chancellor in January 1933.
The regime’s emphasis on ideological conformity led to heavy censorship, while the Nazis mobilized the German youth to provide a new base of mass support.
The first phase of Hitler’s economic plans aimed to reduce the level of unemployment, while in the second phase Germany was intended to achieve self-sufficiency both in industry and agriculture, a goal by no means realized.
With the backing of an army that had been increased to more than twice the size allowed by the Treaty of Versailles, he managed to end German isolation in Europe through the Anglo-German Naval Pact of 1935 and to remilitarize the Rhineland in 1936.
In 1938 Austria was virtually incorporated into the Reich, as was the Germanpopulated Sudetenland an act accepted by Britain and France with the signing of the Munich Agreement in September 1938.
Semi-fascist Portugal allowed and the German supply lines across its territory.
Confident that Britain would not intervene, Hitler invaded Poland on 1 September 1939.
The Spanish Civil War The Spanish Civil War arose following the collapse in 1930 of Miguel Primo de Rivera’s seven-year dictatorship, and the three-year rule of the left-wing Prime Minister Azana, whose egalitarian reforms provoked bitter opposition on the part of the Establishment.
In 1933 Azana’s government was succeeded by a series of centre-right coalition governments, which dismantled his reforms and resulted in social unrest.
The Popular Front won the elections and Azana formed a new government, intending to reintroduce all his earlier reforms.
He was supported in his campaign by the fascist Falange, a party founded in 1933 by de Rivera.
The conflict attracted international interest, with Italy and Germany supporting the Nationalists and the Soviet Union the Republicans.
The German bombing of the Basque town of Guernica caused an international outcry, but neither Britain nor France was prepared to confront Hitler over his assistance to Franco.
When the Soviet Union decided to end its assistance to the Republicans, a Nationalist victory was assured.
By spring 1939 Franco’s government was recognized by most of Europe, and Spain entered an era of ruthless repression.
A During the 1920s and 1930s right-wing dictatorial regimes were established across Europe and the Iberian Peninsula.
However, many dictators, such as Horthy in Hungary and King Carol of Romania, regarded fascist organizations as a threat to their rule.
They were undoubtedly influenced in their rhetoric and practice by the German and Italian models, but were also shaped by each country’s indigenous features.
Many of these dictators were uncharismatic figures, who actually regarded fascist movements and organizations as a threat to their rule.
Only the Nazi dictatorship, with its aggressive expansionism, racism, and nationalist and militarist ideology, represented the full expression of fascism.
After Germany's invasion of western Europe, and its attempts to bomb Britain into submission, for three years the war was concentrated on the Eastern Front, with German troops sweeping across the western Soviet Union.
During 1942, however, they became bogged down, with losses in the north outweighing gains in the south.
In February 1943 the Soviet Union broke the siege of Stalingrad and the Germans were forced to retreat.
At the same time, their forces in North Africa were also fleeing to the safety of Italy.
The Germans fought a strong rearguard action, however in the east, in Italy and, from June 1944, in western Europe, with the Allied troops eventually meeting up just west of Berlin in May 1945.
It began as a struggle for supremacy in Europe, but soon engulfed North Africa, the Atlantic and the Soviet Union.
In December 1941, with Japan’s attack on Pearl Harbor and Germany’s declaration of war against the United States , the conflict became truly global.
The French and British decision to contest Hitler’s bid for European hegemony, after his invasion of Poland, took the Nazi leader by surprise.
Belated rearmament meant that France and Britain could do little to prevent Germany and the Soviet Union dismantling Poland under the German-Soviet Non-Aggression Pact of 23 August 1939.
Nevertheless, the Allies at this stage, Britain, France and the Polish government in exile were confident that Hitler could be forced by economic pressure into compromise.
During the next year Berlin consolidated and extended its political influence and control.
Hitler’s fascist partner, Mussolini, brought Italy into the war on 10 June, and the “Axis” was further strengthened with the signing of the Tripartite Pact between Germany, Italy and Japan on 27 September.
The Balkan states soon became German satellites , and the remaining neutrals were forced to grant substantial economic concessions.
Against expectations, Britain refused to sue for peace and withstood the Blitz over the autumn of 1940.
Unable to mount an invasion of Britain, the German foreign ministry and navy embarked on an “indirect strategy” against Britain.
Germany’s submarine fleet was given the task of severing Britain’s tenuous communications with the neutral United States.
However, although the U-boats cut deep into Britain’s reserves and posed a danger until the early summer of 1943, the indirect strategy failed to meet German expectations.
Moreover, Italian efforts in 1940-41 to carve out a Mediterranean empire complicated rather than complemented Germany’s war plans.
Britain’s maritime and imperial resources allowed it to inflict a series of humiliating setbacks on Italian forces in Egypt and Greece.
Hitler was compelled to come to the aid of his ally and was drawn into campaigns of little strategic importance and marginal economic benefit, which ultimately delayed his invasion of the Soviet Union by several weeks.
PART 5 ▲ During the final months of the war a race took place between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union for control of German territory.
The two armies eventually met west of the German capital Berlin and the Austrian capital Vienna.
They agreed to divide these symbolically important cities into zones of occupation, with the Soviet Union controlling the surrounding territories and thus holding the upper hand. and millions of civilians were enslaved in German farms and factories, where many of them died.
As military resistance crumbled, industrial plant was relocated away from the advancing German forces.
Aid was forthcoming from Britain and the United States, and although it was not critical, it did cover important shortfalls in transportation and communications.
On learning that Japan had decided against attacking the Soviet Union in the east, Stalin transferred troops from Siberia to meet the German attacks in 1941.
Better prepared for the harsh climatic conditions, the Soviet forces counterattacked the following spring, and while Germany made impressive gains in the south, in an effort to control the Soviet Union’s oil resources, the retaking of Stalingrad by the Soviets in February 1943 marked a turning point.
Soviet success at the massive tank battle of Kursk in July began Germany’s long retreat westwards, which ended when Berlin fell to Soviet forces two years later.
In terms of the number of casualties suffered and of the resources expended, the Second World War in Europe was predominantly a struggle between the Soviet Union and Germany.
By the end of the war some six million Jews, along with hundreds of thousands of other victims, had been gassed in the death camps, or starved, executed or worked to death in concentration camps.
Of those that survived the camps, many died as they were forced to march away from the advancing Allies.
The demand for a second front Given the enormity of the struggle facing the Soviet Union, Stalin demanded immediate support from his western allies.
Until late 1943 the contribution of Britain’s strategic bombing offensive was meagre, and was maintained largely to placate Soviet demands for a second front.
After five months of fighting, the two Allied pincers met outside Tunis and finally ejected Axis forces from North Africa by midMay 1943.
Against the wishes of the Soviet Union and the United States, both of whom favoured landings in northern France, Britain insisted on mounting landings in Sicily and Italy.
While these campaigns knocked Italy out of the war, they failed to provide a strategic breakthrough into central Europe.
Competing strategic priorities and the U-boat menace to the Atlantic convoys meant that it was only in June 1944 that the Western Allies felt sufficiently confident to create a second front by landing troops in Normandy.
Despite the Allies’ massive economic, military, intelligence and technical superiority, dogged German resistance forced the Allies to fight every step of the way.
In the face of inevitable defeat, an opposition cabal tried to assassinate Hitler in July 1944, but was quickly crushed.
Indeed, only in the Balkans and France did armed resistance to German domination meet with any real success.
Nazi Germany had to be ground down by aerial bombardment and huge land offensives.
The political consequences of the total defeat of Germany were enormous.
Culturally, the war dealt a blow to western European civilization and confidence from which it has struggled to recover.
Though it began, and was largely fought, in Europe, the Second World War spelt the end of European influence across the globe.
T Nazi Germany retained control in its conquered territories by installing puppet governments in the Balkans and its own administrations in Poland and the western Soviet Union.
Italian and German troops jointly occupied Greece until the Italian surrender in 1943.
Concentration and death camps were constructed, to which ""undesirables"", and in particular Jews, were transported from across Europe.
It began In September 1931 when the Japanese army set about seizing Manchuria as a first step in Japan’s construction of an economically self-sufficient bloc under its control.
The Japanese forces proved to be superior in battle to their Chinese counterparts and by the end of 193ft Japan had seized large areas of China and had forced Chiang Kai-shek's government to retreat to Chongqing.
However, despite the scale of the defeat, the Chinese refused to surrender a fact which Japan blamed on Western support.
Liujdvou | Amo^ 4 Fierce fighting look place fallowing the Japanese invasion af China in 1937, but despite a series of defeats, the Chinese refused la surrender ▼ 7Kb rale of ihe Japanese advance in Southeast Asia and the Padfi< look the Allied forces by surprise.
Dutch, British and United States territories fell like dominoes until Japan over-stretched itself in the Battle of Midway in June 1942, French Indochina, under the Vichy government, was sympathetic to Japan, as was Thailand.
Japan ruled over its new territories with an iron Ftsl and engaged in atrocities against bath native populations and European prisoners ol war.
At the same time, in an effort to deter the United States from intervening in East Asia, it signed the Tripartite Pact with Germany and Italy.
In response, the United States and Britain introduced a policy of economic sanctions, culminating, in July 1941, in an embargo on oil exports to Japan.
Faced with complete economic collapse or war with the Allies, the Japanese chose the latter and on 7 December 1941 launched a rapid offensive into the western Pacific and Southeast Asia in the hope of establishing an impenetrable defensive perimeter.
The Pacific War The speed and effectiveness of the Japanese attack, symbolized most notably by the assault on Pearl Harbor, took the US, British and Dutch forces by surprise and led to a series of humiliating defeats for the Western Allies in the first six months of the war.
Japan’s victories led it to portray itself as the “liberator” of Asia from European imperialism.
During the course of the war nominally independent states were established in Burma and the Philippines, and Japan’s ally Thailand was allowed to annex areas of Indochina, Burma and Malaya.
In reality, however, Japan ruled over its newly conquered territories with an iron fist and engaged in atrocities against the native population and European civilian detainees and prisoners of war.
In June 1942 Japan suffered its first major reverse when its naval expedition to seize the island of Midway ended in disaster with the loss of four aircraft carriers.
In addition, Japan’s war effort was undermined by the fact that it lacked the resources to replace its losses, with United States submarines cutting the supply routes to Japan.
By 1945 it was clear that Japan was on the retreat, but the Americans feared that it would still cost many more lives to bring about its defeat.
This was confirmed when the invasion of Okinawa in the spring of that year led to 10,000 American casualties.
At first it was hoped that conventional bombing of Japanese cities and Soviet entry into the war in Asia would persuade Japan to capitulate, but by the summer hopes had turned to the use of the newly developed atomic bomb.
The dropping of atomic bombs in early August on Hiroshima and Nagasaki which resulted in the death of 140,000 people and the Soviet invasion of Manchuria, proved to be the final blows for Japan, and on 15 August Emperor Hirohito announced the country’s surrender.
Although Japan’s attempt to carve out an empire had been defeated, the region did not return to the pre-war status quo.
For the United States the war demonstrated the importance of the western Pacific to its national security and led to a permanent commitment of American forces to the region.
Japan, meanwhile, eschewed militarism and sought economic expansion by peaceful means.
Indeed, when Japan surrendered on 15 August 1945, following the dropping of atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, its troops still occupied a large part of Southeast Asia.
T The 15 constituent republics of the Soviet Union were formed in the 1920s and 1930s, largely along ethnic lines.
They were dominated by the Russian Federation, by far the largest and wealthiest of the republics.
Russia was itself divided for administrative purposes into regions that had various degrees of local autonomy.
T he Soviet Union emerged from the Second World War victorious, but devastated by the loss of 26 million people.
Collective farms that had been destroyed during the war were reinstated, efforts were made to develop heavy industry, and the government returned to the use of terror as a way of controlling the population.
The economic development of the Eastern bloc was regulated from 1949 onwards by the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance and defence aims were unified in 1955 with the signing of the Warsaw Pact.
Only Yugoslavia, where Tito had come to power independently of the Red Army, developed a nonStalinist form of communism.
Khrushchev and Brezhnev Stalin died in March 1953 and by 1956, following a secret speech criticizing Stalin, Khrushchev had triumphed over his rivals.
Political prisoners were released from the labour camps, and fresh emphasis was placed on the importance of agriculture, housing and the production of consumer goods.
In order to achieve this economic change of direction at least partial decentralization was considered necessary.
Increased liberalization led to dissident movements in Russia and revolts across Eastern Europe.
Khrushchev improved relations with Yugoslavia, but his policies led to a split with China by 1960.
Soviet ^ 5m* anted interwti» m Bfalnsl FINLAND j&sdtholrr, ' ^TJsiniti Romania BOaKMtiL 1 BULGARIA A 1 Communist Eastern Europe 1945-39 m rqniiDfY nnrwMetj by Savief UnKin T 939—40 WQ Soviet rnr^nreohem 1956 \ _ | ienttpiy armexod SanMet Union 1945—47 IJBT SauUH intenunttan 196B lodepend&ir efttrufet acts dies 1948 frm*e 1956.
The Soviet Union then settled into a period characterized by a return to a centralized economy, with quotas that enforced quantity rather than quality.
With the growing competition in armaments and space technology, and the Soviet Union’s intervention on the side of the socialists in the Afghan Civil War, the Cold War intensified.
Economic development The post-war period saw a whole series of grandiose plans for scientific management of the economy.
Although Stalin’s plan for the “Transformation of Nature”, through windbreaks and shelter belts across the Ukraine, was shelved in 1953, Khrushchev’s “Virgin Lands” scheme to grow maize across northern Kazakh SSR was implemented.
The resulting soil erosion ruined 40,000 square kilometres of land and forced the Soviet Union to import grain.
PART 5 Romanian nationalism and caused Albania to establish closer links with China, A plan in 1971 for a giant computer grid to manage the whole Soviet economy was never implemented, and neither was the scheme to build a canal system that would have reversed the flow of several Siberian rivers in order to irrigate Central Asia.
Since 1917 “progress” had been envisaged as smoking factory chimneys and increased industrial production.
However, Soviet economic growth rates of 5-6 per cent in the 1960s dropped to 2. percent in 1976-4JG, and to 0 per cent in the early 1980s.
Defence costs, the Afghan War and support for the countries of Eastern Europe were more than the economy could sustain.
Rising expectations and a widespread black market led to labour unrest.
Subsidies on food and housing took up large parts of the budget, and poor-quality consumer goods left people with little on which to spend their wages, resulting in money being put into private savings instead of hack into the economy.
The dangers inherent in using poorly built and inadequately managed nuclear power to generate electricity were brought home to the world by the explosion at the nuclear power plant at Chernobyl in 1986, although a larger, hut unreported, nuclear accident had already occurred in 1957 at the test site “Chelyabinsk 40” in the Urals.
In Eastern Europe economic decline also set in from the mid-1970s onwards.
As loans from Western hanks became harder to arrange, and the Soviet Union ended its subsidized oil exports in the mid-1980s, wages T Heavy industry was cenlrnl to the development ol the Soviet economy, but caused severe sail and water pollution m many areas.
Even ihe empty wastes of northern Russia were exploited lor the valuable coal, oil and melds bund there. in Poland fell by 17 per cent in the period 1980-86.
Declining living standards, environmental issues, pollution and related health concerns heightened demands for a release from Soviet domination.
Mikhail Gorbachev When Gorbachev came to power in 1985 it was clear that the economy needed radical reform and that the cost to the environment and to people's health had been catastrophic, Pipelines were leaking oil into the permafrost across northern Russia, and most of Russia’s major rivers were polluted, in particular the Yenisei estuary around Norilsk, Grand projects, such as the building of the Baikal-Amur railway, bad enabled the development of further mining enterprises, but in so doing had contributed to the destruction of the fragile ecosystem of Siberia.
Damage to Lake Baikal from industrial effluent was an issue on which a growing green lobby focused, as was the dryingup of the Aral Sea, which lost 75 per cent of its volume and 50 per cent of its area between 1960 and 1989 due to overuse of its tributaries for irrigation.
WEST GERMANY I n the five decades after the end of the Second World War Western Europeans experienced an unprecedented increase in material prosperity.
This was the outcome of almost uninterrupted economic growth which, by the end of the 20th century, had led to average per capita incomes more than three and a half times as high as in 1950, with the income gap between “rich” and “poor” countries within Western Europe much smaller than in the immediate postwar years.
This rise in the material standard of living was associated with the increasing integration and interdependence of the European economies and their reliance on economic links with the rest of the world, underpinned by a profound structural transformation in which the relative importance of the agricultural sector declined.
Problems of post-war economic reconstruction At least 40 million people died throughout Europe during the Second World War and there was extensive damage to factories, housing, transport and communications systems.
In 1945 Western European countries were faced with implementing the transition from war to peace, reconstructing industries and re-establishing international trade and payments.
The immediate post-war period saw severe food shortages and a large number of displaced people.
Economic ▼ The European Economic Community was set up by the Treaty of Rome in 1957 and was renamed the European Community in 1967.
As a first step towards stabilizing European currencies, the European Monetary System came into force in 1979.
The Treaty of European Union was signed at Maastricht in February 1992, and the single European currency system was launched on 1 January 1999.
A major constraint, however, was that Western Europe relied heavily on imports, especially from the United States, but had neither the currency reserves nor export dollar earnings to pay for them.
To preserve their foreign currency reserves, European governments restricted imports from neighbouring countries, resulting in a low level of intra-European trade.
From 1948 to 1951 ERP funds enabled the countries of Western Europe to continue importing goods from the United States, and thus helped speed up the process of economic recovery.
In return the United States put pressure on Western Europe to build and maintain constitutional democracy as a bulwark against the spread of communism and the revival of fascism.
This restored limited convertibility between European currencies while allowing member countries to maintain controls on imports from the dollar area.
By 1958 the EPU had fulfilled its role, but the rapid expansion in trade had resulted in the increasing integration of the European economies a process that many sought to take further.
European integration Early French post-war plans for reconstruction called for the expansion of the national steel industry, while relying on unrestricted access to coal from the German Ruhr area.
In 1950 France suggested the formation of a common market for coal and steel.
Its success encouraged member states to push economic integration further to create a customs union and common market the European Economic Community which began to operate in 1958.
This increased the liberalization of internal trade and provided access to a larger market, while offering a protective shield against non-members; it also enabled the implementation of common policies.
Unlike the EEC/EC/EU, with its supranational institutional arrangements, EFTA was intergovernmental in nature.
Yet with many of its members eventually joining the economically and politically more powerful Community, EFTA gradually lost its significance.
Economic growth in post-war Europe Between 1950 and the mid-1990s all of Western Europe experienced an increase in material prosperity , despite variations in the rates of economic growth between countries.
Moreover, by 1994 the gap in per capita income between the poorest and the richest economies was much smaller than in 1950.
After 1973 practically all these economies experienced a slow-down in growth whose extent, however, differed between countries.
Post-war politics Closer economic integration was accompanied by gradual, though incomplete, political convergence.
Institutions of parliamentary democracy had never previously been firmly established in southern Europe.
The army-backed dictatorship of General Franco in Spain lasted until his death in 1975, but was followed by the restoration of the monarchy of King Juan Carlos, and free elections in 1977.
Greece experienced a bitter civil war, a military coup in 1967, and seven years of dictatorship that gave way to a democratic system only in 1974.
Elsewhere in Western Europe democratic systems did not escape problems.
Post-war France went through frequent changes of government until stability was achieved under Charles de Gaulle in the 1950s.
Italy not only had many short-lived governments throughout the second half of the 20th century but endured a serious crisis of corruption at all levels of government in the 1990s.
The 1960s saw short-lived left-wing activism, especially in Italy and Germany.
In Germany the environmentalist Green movement had limited electoral success in the 1970s.
The challenge to consitutional democracy in the 1980s and 1990s came from extreme right-wing, essentially racist, movements, which were most successful electorally in France and Italy.
Through most of the period from 1945 to the end of the century, power swung like a pendulum, or was shared, between moderate social democratic or Labour parties and moderate conservative parties.
This was the case under voting systems based on proportional representation that encouraged negotiation between political groupings and, as in Britain, a “first-past-the-post” adversarial system that encouraged competition between them.
Average annual growth of GDP PER CAPITA THROUGHOUT Western Europe til ▲ Western Europe experienced particularly rapid economic growth from 1950 until the early 1970s.
The large productivity gap separating Europe and the United States in the late 1940$ was rapidly reduced, and repair to war-damaged economies and changes in economic policy also created growth.
The price of raw materials remained low and there was little competition from the Asian economies.
From the early 1970s onwards, however, although the Western European economies continued to grow, they did so at a much slower rate.
By the end of the century California was not only the most populous state but also an international economic powerhouse.
Over 87 per cent were white and just over 10 per cent were African American.
The life expectancy of an American born in 1900 was 47 years, and only 4 per cent of the population was over 65 years old.
A large percentage still lived on farms, and in the years before the motorcar the railroads served as the lifeblood of the nation.
Over the coming decades great social, racial, technological and economic changes were to create a very different country.
During the 20th century huge numbers of Americans migrated to the west and southwest in search of new jobs and greater opportunities.
This mobility of labour helped the USA to remain a more flexible and productive economic power than other countries and was part of a realignment in the economy which saw the percentage employed in services increase from 40 to 76 per cent between 1920 and 1998.
Meanwhile, employment in agriculture fell from 25 to 5 per cent and in industry from 35 to 19 per cent.
Immigration and civil rights Immigration to the USA reached a peak in the early years of the 20th century, but from the 1920s onwards a more restrictive approach was adopted.
A quota system was introduced for each nationality, based on the percentage of the existing United States population of that nationality.
This enabled northern European immigrants to be favoured at the expense of those from other regions of the world.
In 1965 the quota system was replaced by a permitted annual total of immigrants.
There was an increase in the number of Hispanic Americans (people originally from Latin America, Cuba and Puerto Rico) in United States society.
By the end of the century they made up over 10 per cent of the population and were the fastest-growing group in the country.
The size of other ethnic groups also increased dramatically, in particular those from Japan, the Philippines, South and Southeast Asia.
In 1900 African Americans were politically and socially marginalized, the majority living on farms in the Deep South where their parents or grandparents if not they themselves had been slaves.
While they were supposedly guaranteed equal rights by the constitution, most southern states, politically dominated by whites, enforced segregation.
In many places they were discouraged from voting by poll taxes, literacy tests and other intimidatory tactics.
The industrial boom of the early 20th century, coupled with two world wars, created a need for factory workers in the northeast and Midwest.
Their political power was still curtailed and, with the famous exception of Henry Ford’s automobile plants, African Americans were usually given less prestigious and lower-paid jobs than whites.
The Civil Rights movement began in the 1950s with pressure both from above and below.
In 1954 the famous Supreme Court decision Brown v Board of Education attacked the notion of state segregation.
Subsequently, not only the South but the USA as a whole was forced to confront the issue of racial inequality.
The 1960s were particularly turbulent, with legal victories for equality being won in the face of continuing racism.
At the beginning of the 20th century the country’s two major political parties, the Republicans and the Democrats, were more sectional groupings often with competing interests than ideological entities.
The Democrats were loyally supported by the bulk of southern whites, for reasons stretching back to Republican rule during the Civil War, and were also often backed by a large number of farmers from poorer western states and different ethnic coalitions in the large cities.
They began a boycott of the dty's segregated bus system tfwl Insled more than o year, ending in a legal victory.
In 1960 sit-in protests slatted in restaurants and retail pullets, while in 1961 Freedom Rides buses filled with protesters against segregation began crossing the Deep South, culminating in a march on Washington in 1963 by 250,000 people.
African-American discontent was expressed in urban riots from the mid-1960s onwards, spreading la Grifornia on ihe wesl coast.
Native Americans were scattered throughout the West, on reservations and territories to which they had been forcibly resettled in the 19th century.
Hispanic Americans lived mainly in states that had been part of Mexico before 1848.
The non-white percentage of the population in the northeastern industrial regions, and in California, Texas and New Mexico, had increased markedly, partly as a result of internal migration, but also due to a large influx of migrant workers, many of whom were illegal immigrants.
Successive United States governments have placed restrictions on immigration, starting with the law of 1862 prohibiting Chinese immigration.
There were other, smaller, parties, including the Socialists, but they invariably performed poorly at election time.
Previously, African Americans had, when allowed to vote, almost always supported the Republicans , but Roosevelt’s massive increases in government social spending caused both they and many working-class white voters to switch allegiance to the Democrats.
As a result, the Democrats took over the Republicans’ previous role as the natural party of government, and from the 1930s regularly won a majority of the seats in Congress, especially in the House of Representatives.
The parties have now developed more distinctive ideologies, with the Republicans on the whole supporting fewer taxes, less government regulation and smaller government welfare plans than the Democrats.
Ethnic minorities are now encouraged by some to maintain their separate identities, although other factions have fought this idea, believing that it could undermine the cohesion of the American nation.
His policy of passive resistance, to which he adhered in the face of criticism from more militant African-American leaders, was based on the teachings of Gandhi.
He was a powerful orator, famous for his ""I have a dream"" speech, first delivered in 1963.
Despite important legislative victories won by the civil rights movement, protests became increasingly violent in the mid-1960s a situation that was exacerbated when Dr King was assassinated in 1968.
Although it has sometimes considered it necessary to employ force to defend its interests, in many instances economic backing or, conversely, the threat of trade sanctions has been sufficient to achieve its objectives.
A t the end of the Second World War the United States dominated the globe.
It not only had the world’s largest navy and air force, but it also dwarfed all other national economies.
With most major European and Asian countries devastated by war, the United States produced half of the world’s goods in 1945.
The question facing the United States was what it should do with its tremendous power.
Before the Second World War United States foreign policy had been unpredictable.
With much of the country firmly isolationist, there was no national consensus as to what part the United States should take in world affairs.
Most Americans seemed content to play a dominant role in North, Central and South America but had little interest in intervening in conflicts elsewhere.
After the Second World War many of those responsible for United States foreign policy, such as President Truman and Secretary of State George Marshall, considered isolationism was untenable given the strength of the Soviet Union.
Although the United States and the Soviet Union had been allies during the war, this relationship had been forced on them by necessity and a huge ideological rift still existed.
In the period following the end of the war the Soviets increased their domination of Eastern Europe , and many Americans worried that if the USA withdrew its forces from Western Europe the USSR would eventually dominate the whole continent.
The USA, committed to free enterprise, and hitherto dependent on Europe for a large part of its export trade, was alarmed at the prospect of communist governments restricting trade with the non-communist world.
Likewise, the Soviet government, led by Stalin, was suspicious of a Western Hemisphere dominated by the USA, and expressed doubt that capitalism and communism could peacefully coexist for long.
The Cold War years The perceived threat posed by the Soviet Union eventually proved decisive in the development of the United States into an economic and military world power.
President Truman committed the USA to a policy of “containment”, involving resistance to the spread of communism anywhere in the world.
In 1949 the USA played a key role in the formation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , which committed it to defending Western Europe.
There was a slight thaw in relations during the 1970s, when the USA and the USSR adopted a policy of “detente”, whereby the two countries tried to establish closer links of mutual understanding.
In 1980 Ronald Reagan, one of the harshest critics of detente, was elected United States president.
He committed his country to rolling back the “evil empire”, as he described the Soviet Union, and began the largest peacetime military build-up in the history of the United States.
Reagan and his advisers gambled that they could bankrupt the Soviet Union without causing all-out war and without damaging the United States economy.
The USSR, even though it devoted a far larger proportion of its economy to military expenditure than did the USA, found it impossible to match the advanced technology of its rival.
By 1989 Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev recognized that drastic changes were needed in order to reduce international tension and expand the Soviet economy.
Gorbachev’s liberalization led ultimately to the break-up of the Soviet Union in December 1991 , as a result of which the United States lost its major adversary and the Gold War came to an end.
As the leading superpower, the USA realized that its pre-war isolationist policy was no longer tenable, and that it had a major role to play in the reconstruction of Europe and in the encouragement of democratic regimes. damaging repercussions for United States international relations in some parts of the world.
The most extreme example of United States intervention was the Vietnam War.
President Kennedy committed United States ground troops to Vietnam in the early 1960s in an effort to “save” Vietnam and its neighbouring countries from communism , but even with more than 500,000 troops fighting in Vietnam the United States government could not “save” a people who did not wish to be saved.
During the war 60,000 United States military personnel and two million Vietnamese lost their lives, with millions more Vietnamese left wounded, orphaned, and homeless.
Trading links and globalization The United States strengthened trade with its American neighbours during the second half of the 20th century, and also looked westwards to the rapidly growing economies of Southeast Asia and East Asia.
In the 1990s, United States economic recovery encouraged the nation to play a leading role in the push towards more open global trading markets.
A third aircraft destroyed part of the Pentagon in Virginia, and a fourth jet crashed in Pennsylvania.
The United States produced evidence linking the attacks with Osama bin Laden, a Saudi dissident based in Afghanistan and leader of al-Qaeda, a loose network of terrorist groups.
On 8 October 2001, after building an international coalition against terrorism, United States President George W Bush launched air strikes against Afghanistan, targeting al-Qaeda bases and the Taliban government, which had refused to hand over bin Laden.
In December 2001, Afghan opposition forces, backed by United States and British special forces, overthrew the Taliban regime and an interim government took office.
As part of this war, a US-led invasion of Iraq was launched on 20 March 2003.
The regime of Saddam Hussein collapsed within three weeks and the invaders became an occupying force.
This was still in place when a democratically elected Iraqi government was formed in 2005.
Both the Organization of American States and the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation Organization proclaimed their intention of establishing free trade between their member states, in 2005 and 2020 respectively.
The towers collapsed, killing over 3,250 people a higher number of fatalities than at Pearl Harbor in 1941.
However, despite the Strategic Arms limitation talks, which culminated in the signing of treaties in 1972 and 1979 , and the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks , which opened in 1982, the destructive capacity of the two superpowers continued to grow.
In June 1950 North Korean troops advanced across the 38th parallel in a bid to unify the country.
They had nearly gained control of the entire peninsula when United Nations troops landed both in the southeast of the country and at Inchon, behind North Korean lines.
The UN troops advanced almost to the border with China, which reacted to this apparent threat to its territory and launched an attack in support of the North Koreans.
For the next two months the UN troops were on the defensive, but by June 1951 they had driven the Chinese and North Koreans back to a line north of the 38th parallel.
Protracted negotiations followed, with a truce eventually being signed in July 1953.
T he Gold War was an ideological, political and diplomatic conflict in the years 1947-91, between the United States and its allies on the one hand and the communist bloc led by the Soviet Union on the other.
Characterized by extreme tension and hostility, it had a detrimental effect on international relations in this period.
At the Yalta Conference in February 1945 the United States, the Soviet Union and Britain had agreed that free elections would be held throughout Eastern Europe.
It soon became apparent, however, that the Soviet Union under Stalin intended instead to fill the political vacuum in Eastern Europe with communist governments loyal to Moscow.
The “Iron Curtain”, dividing the communist regimes from the rest of Europe, had fully descended.
The Truman Doctrine Despite these events in Europe, President Truman of the USA hoped that some form of co-operation with the USSR could continue.
In February 1947, however, when the British announced that they were no longer able to provide economic and military support for the Greek and Turkish governments, the USA felt compelled to intervene.
Not to do so might allow Greece, in particular, to fall to the communists, thus creating a threat to United States global interests and national security.
This was followed by the Marshall Plan, which provided $13. billion in economic aid to the war-tom countries of Europe.
It was hoped that this would combat the spread of communism across the continent, but it was only partially successful because the states in Eastern Europe refused, or were prevented by Moscow from accepting, Marshall Aid.
All these crises encouraged the creation of a string of Western military alliances to deter any further expansion of communist territory, beginning with the formation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in 1949.
In the same year the USSR produced its first atomic bomb, and the Cold War took on a new character.
From the point of view of the NATO countries the tension was increased, while the USSR, knowing that it could match NATO in nuclear capacity, gained in confidence.
In 1955 it established with other Eastern European countries a military alliance known as the Warsaw Pact.
Despite, or because of, the huge arsenal of nuclear weapons stockpiled by both sides, none was ever used in warfare.
Indeed, the Cold War never resulted in actual combat between United States and Soviet troops, the risk of nuclear weapons becoming involved being far too high.
Instead, it took on the form of an arms race and later a space race and the provision of economic aid and military equipment to other countries in order to gain political influence and thus strategic advantage.
In some cases both sides intervened to defend their own ideology, and in a few cases one of them sent in troops.
The discovery by the USA of Soviet missiles being assembled on communist-led Cuba, within easy range of the United States mainland, led to the gravest crisis of the Cold War.
It almost resulted in a third world war, the tension easing only when the Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, agreed to withdraw the missiles.
The thawing of the war Over the next 20 years both superpowers attempted to ease tensions and “thaw” the Cold War.
The resulting “detente” produced superpower summit meetings and agreements to reduce nuclear arsenals.
In 1979 detente was abruptly ended when the USSR invaded Afghanistan, producing a new period of tension and hostility between the superpowers, and a fresh arms race.
He also began a process of internal reform in the USSR itself and gradually relaxed the Soviet grip on Eastern Europe.
With the demise of the USSR and the formal dissolution of the Warsaw Pact in 1991, the Cold War came to an end.
A United States naval blockade, and a tense period during which nuclear war appeared likely, eventually resulted in the USSR, under Khrushchev, agreeing to dismantle the nuclear bases.
A The Cold War was a period of political and economic confrontation between the two superpowers and their allies.
The area of highest tension was along the “Iron Curtain* that divided Western from Eastern Europe, but the two sides' opposition to each other was ployed oat in conflicts some of a military nature all over the world.
Immediately offer die conclusion of the First World War the League of Motions established mandates according la which countries victorious in the war, such as Britain and France, undertook to administer regions that had previously been colonies rrl Germany or the Ottoman Empire, with eventual independence as the ultimate goal Japan was ihe only country la expand its empire during the inter-wor period, moving into Manchuria in 1931 as a prelude to its lull-scole assault on China in 1937.
The wars corrosive effects on colonialism were initially seen most clearly in Asia.
Some colonies, such as Malaya and French Indochina, experienced Invasion and occupation bv Japanese forces, unleashing anti-colonial nationalism which could not be reversed after the war.
The African colonies, meanwhile, became vital sources of military manpower and raw materials for the Allied w ar effort, the mobilization of which involved economic and social change.
Colonial governments were forced to depart from their traditional approach of working through local political rulers and to adopt a more interventionist approach.
This laid them open to local criticism of wartime restrictions, food shortages atid many other hardships griev ances that often escalated into early forms of political protest.
Paradoxically, although the war weakened most of the colonial powers, it also increased their desire to utilize colonial resources to assist their own economic recovery after the war.
The colonial powers sometimes used force in the face of growing local resistance to their rule, as seen in the unsuccessful attempts by the French and Dutch to re-establish control of Indochina and Indonesia respectively, and in Britain's ultimately successful campaign to defeat a communist insurrection in Malaya.
The inevitability of independence Much of sub-Saharan Africa became Independent between 1956 and 1962.
PART 5 majority rule in East and Central Africa, and Zimbabwe’s legal independence was delayed until 1980.
By the 1970s only the Portuguese dictatorship seemed determined to retain its African colonies, fighting a series of protracted wars against guerrilla movements.
The financial and human cost to Portugal was enormous, provoking a military coup and revolution in 1974, with the new government committed to rapid decolonization.
Both the United States and the Soviet Union had traditionally been hostile to European colonial rule and had put pressure on their wartime allies, Britain and France, to make a commitment to reform.
In the immediate post-war period the colonial powers attempted to raise the living standards of the indigenous peoples in their colonies, hoping thus to appease both local feeling within the colonies and the international community.
Moreover, the United Nations, now responsible for the territories mandated by the League of Nations, became an important forum for criticism of colonialism.
An important factor by the early 1960s was the desire to avoid costly, and probably unwinnable, wars against colonial nationalist movements.
The long and bloody Algerian War , as a result of which France lost control of Algeria, had demonstrated the perils of opposing demands for independence.
Furthermore, such conflicts risked escalating the Cold War if the communist bloc offered support to the forces fighting for independence.
By the late 1950s economic integration in Western Europe was giving rise to serious doubts about the likely returns from large-scale colonial investment.
Moreover, as the French demonstrated, it was possible to decolonize while preserving many of the advantages, commercial and otherwise, of formal colonial rule.
A major consideration influencing British and French policymakers, therefore, was the hope that their respective colonies would opt after independence to join the Commonwealth of Nations or the French Community.
M*""**™* • JPQ^JGAjfTS 4 GuoeWoupc «. .. . 5 ^ w Martinique cl | LW3V&mQ; M f$Aeo l com RICA PANAMA „ i UVJU A/uoa j A5CXJ1.
Despite the effective collapse of the French Community in 1960, France has maintained close economic, diplomatic and military links with many of its former possessions.
Small island states Decolonization posed the question of whether small island states, particularly those in the Caribbean and the Pacific, could achieve viable independent nationhood.
One solution was to group small territories together into larger political units.
The Federation of the West Indies was formed in 1958 after many years of negotiation, although British Guiana and British Honduras opted not to join.
However, when its larger, more prosperous members, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago, gained separate independence in 1962 the Federation was dissolved.
Other island territories, such as Gibraltar, had originally been acquired for their strategic value, but this declined as Britain wound down its overseas defence commitments in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
The remaining European dependencies are mostly small territories, often islands.
In some cases, notably the Falkland Islands/Malvinas and Gibraltar , the issue of sovereignty remains unresolved.
In the case of Hong Kong and Macau, the return of sovereignty to China was agreed through negotiated settlements.
Some small islands, especially in the Caribbean and Pacific, have opted for a limited form of independence, retaining association with their former colonial power in matters such as defence and diplomacy, while others, including many islands in French Polynesia, have rejected offers of independence.
Attempts to form an economic and political union, known as the Federation of the West Indies, failed when the larger ex-colonies opted out, leaving islands such as Montserrat to be administered as British dependencies.
All the ex-British colonies in the Caribbean opted to join the Commonwealth of Nations on achieving their independence.
T The expansion of the British Commonwealth (the Commonwealth of Nations) in 1947 to include India and Pakistan enabled the organization to evolve into a multi-ethnic grouping, which nearly all Britain's former colonies decided to join.
South Africa left the Commonwealth in the face of condemnation of its policy of apartheid, but rejoined in 1994.
Pakistan left in 1972 in protest at the admission of Bangladesh to the Commonwealth, but rejoined in 1989.
In 1997 the first countries not previously British colonies Cameroon and Mozambique were admitted.
In the 1937 elections the Congress Parly won political control in provinces across the country.
Ils growth rate also accelerated, so Hwl by ihe end of the cenlury ihe population was increasing by 25 per ceni every ten years.
Hindus info India and Muslims into Pakistan D uring the 1920s and 1930s a struggle developed between Britain, determined to maintain control over its empire in India, and the growing force of Indian nationalism.
Political reforms in 1919, which were ostensibly a step towards eventual self-government, gave elected Indians limited responsibility in provincial government, but failed to satisfy nationalists.
Indian protests centred on the campaigns of non-violent civil disobedience organized by the nationalist leader, Mohandas Gandhi, seeking Indian self-rule.
Britain’s response was to combine repression (involving the detention of nationalist leaders among them Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru) with constitutional reforms in 1935.
These gave substantial power to autonomous provincial governments, while keeping overall control in British hands.
In India Britain suspended talk of constitutional change until after the war and Congress ministers resigned in protest at India’s involvement in the war without prior consultation.
The cost of mobilizing India’s economy to support the war effort was high, and was paid for by the victims of the Bengal famine of 1943 in which over one million people died.
In 1942, faced by a possible Japanese invasion, Britain offered India independence after the war, in return for its wartime support.
Congress replied with the massive “Quit India” protest campaign, which resulted in its leaders being imprisoned until 1945.
By 1945 Britain, lacking the will or the resources to rule by force, sought to accelerate India’s independence.
Britain hoped to maintain Indian unity through a federal structure, but Congress insisted on a strong, centralized government, while the Muslim League demanded greater provincial autonomy.
In the face of violence between the Hindu and Muslim communities, Congress agreed to the partition of India, with the creation of a separate Pakistan from the mainly Muslim western provinces and Bengal.
In August 1947 India and Pakistan became independent , and millions of Hindu and Muslim refugees subsequently sought safety in the two new states.
At least one million people died in attacks and reprisal killings carried out by one or other of the opposing religious groups.
India since independence Since independence India has remained the world’s largest democracy.
During the premiership of Nehru , his government introduced five-year plans, and controlled foreign and private enterprise, in an effort to increase agricultural and industrial production.
Attempts were made to attack poverty and social underprivilege, although measures to emancipate women and the lower castes were seen as challenging traditional Hindu values.
Her attempts to tackle mass poverty and encourage birth control alienated conservative opinion.
She was found guilty of electoral corruption in 1975 and declared a state of emergency.
Growing Sikh separatism led to Mrs Gandhi’s assassination by Sikh extremists in 1984.
Tensions also emerged between the central government and India’s Naga, Tamil and Muslim communities.
The country laced poverty and political division, aggravated by West Pakistan’s attempts to assert its dominance over East Pakistan.
Whereas india was a leading force in the non-aligned movement, Pakistan aligned itself with the Western nations.
While the Indian army remained non-political, Pakistan’s army, which first seized power in 1958, often intervened in polities.
During the 1960s the economic gap between West and East Pakistan widened.
In East Pakistan separatism developed under Sheikh Mujib-urRahman, whose Awami League triumphed in the 1970 elections.
When West Pakistan sent troops to restore order in 1971, civil war broke out and India intervened on MujilVs behalf.
Pakistan was defeated and an independent Bangladesh was created in January 1972.
Continuing political instability and military interventions have since added to Bangladesh’s problems of mass poverty.
Zulfikar AH Bhutto’s modernization programme in the early 1970s alienated many in Pakistan, and in 1977 he was ousted in a military coup led by General Zia-ul-Haq, who sought to create a more Islamic state.
Through subsequent periods of military rule and democracy, the country faced the problems of Islamic fundamentalism and separatism.
Sri Lanka The British colony of Ceylon contained, in addition to its majority Buddhist Sinhalese population, a large Hindu Tamil minority.
When it became independent iti 1948 government attempts to make Sinhalese the official language alienated the Tamil minority, who campaigned for autonomy.
In 1960 Mrs Sirimavo Bandaranaike became the world’s first woman prime minister.
She changed the country’s name to Sri Lanka in 1972 and pursued radical socialist policies.
Junius Jayawardene, reversed this trend and tried to appease the Tamil community.
However, in 1983 longstanding ethnic tensions erupted into a prolonged civil war which Indian military intervention in 1987 failed to end.
Relations between Tndia and Pakistan were soured by their rival claims to Jammu and Kashmir.
Immediately after the formation of India and Pakistan, from which Kashmir initially remained independent, the new Pakistan government sent troops to lay claim to the predominantly Muslim state.
The Hindu maharaja, Sir I lari Singh, immediately acceded the state to India, who sent troops in his support, forcing the Pakistanis into a partial withdrawal The United Nations intervened and ruled in 1949 that a plebiscite should take place, hut the two sides failed to reach agreement on how this should he administered.
In 1965 serious lighting between Tndia and Pakistan culminated in a Soviet-arranged truce, and in 1972 each country accepted that the dispute should be solved bilaterally, Violent protests in Kashmir for greater autonomy have, however, persisted since the 1980s.
Territorial disputes between India and China escalated after China absorbed Tibet in 1959.
In October 1962 China invaded india in Arunachal Pradesh, forcing Indian troops to retreat before a ceasefire was arranged.
These regional tensions have led both India and Pakistan to maintain large armies and to develop nuclear weapons.
In 2002 there was a threat of war between the two countries over Kashmir.
J Area of Bhitoi dainetf by Ctour P Border confer r* People demanding autonomy SRI 1 LANKA Gofcml yp A The dynastic tradilmn in South Asian politics has lad to several woman holding positions af power.
She served n Further term during die 1970s and in 1991 was appointed far a third by her daughter Chandriko Kumarntunga, who was then serving os president.
Elsewhere, border disputes hove occurred between India and Chine, and between Bhutan and China.
In 1971 fast Pakistan broke away horn West Pakistan la form the independent stale of Bunglndesh, and bath Pakistan and India have experienced (Joints far autonomy from people within their harden, among them the Baluchis in Pakistan and the Nagas in Assam.
The subcontinent's mast serious separatist activity has been that of the Tamils in Sri Lanka, where an estimated 65,000 people were killed in a 2Q year civil war before the declaration af a ceasefire in 2002.
T The Federation of Malaysia was formed in 1963 but Singapore, an original member, left in 1965.
The Republic of Indonesia, formed in 1949, has occupied East Timor since 1975.
I n 1920 Thailand was the only country in Southeast Asia that was not under Western colonial administration, although indigenous anti-colonial movements had been established in most parts of the region, even if in rudimentary form.
At one extreme was the peaceful transfer of power in the Philippines, which had become a colony of the United States at the conclusion of the Spanish-American War in 1898.
The United States, with its strong anti-colonial tradition, was uncomfortable with its new responsibilities and moved rapidly to transfer political and administrative powers to Filipinos.
In 1935 it established the Philippine Commonwealth, granting the Filipino government control of internal affairs, and promising full independence on 4 July 1946.
To a large degree, the process of decolonization was driven by the colonial power itself.
At the other extreme was the turbulent situation in French Indochina and the Dutch East Indies, where anticolonial agitation was, for much of the 1920s and 1930s, vigorously suppressed by colonial administrations.
The fiercely anti-Western sentiments expressed by the Japanese, and their effective destruction of the myth of white supremacy, influenced the political aspirations of the indigenous populations of the region.
Following the Japanese surrender in August 1945, the Dutch and French faced severe opposition to their attempts to re-establish control over their former colonies.
In the Dutch East Indies a fierce military and political battle was waged between the Dutch and the forces of the newly declared Republic of Indonesia until, towards the end of 1949, the United States acting through the United Nations put pressure on the Dutch to withdraw.
Burma achieved independence early in 1948, but was almost immediately riven by ethnic and political splits.
In 1962 it became a military-led state in which all dissent was ruthlessly crushed.
British rule in Malaya came to an end by peaceful negotiation in 1957, although from 1948 to 1960 British and Commonwealth troops were involved in the suppression of a major communist rebellion in the country.
North Vietnam attempted to overthrow the southern regime and reunify the country.
The United States, anxious to prevent the spread of communism, became militarily involved in the 1960s but was eventually defeated by the Vietcong's guerrilla tactics.
The Vietnam War In French Indochina the anti-colonial struggle was to last much longer.
After a long, draining guerrilla war, the French forces were defeated at Dien Bien Phu in 1954.
However, at the Geneva Conference which opened in May 1954, the Communists failed to secure a united Vietnam under their control.
In the late 1950s communist North Vietnam began the armed struggle to overthrow the southern regime, funnelling supplies of men and arms down the Ho Chi Minh Trail in reality a shifting complex of jungle routes into the South.
The United States first committed ground troops to Vietnam in 1965, although much of its military might took the form of mass bomber raids from bases in Thailand and aircraft-carriers in the South China Sea against the Ho Chi Minh Trail and urban centres in North Vietnam.
However, despite some striking successes including Vietcong fighting their way into the compound of the United States Embassy in Saigon the offensive failed to dislodge the southern regime and its ally.
In 1970, in an attempt to protect its forces in the south, the United States launched an invasion into eastern Cambodia with the aim of destroying the communist sanctuaries there.
It was now clear, however, that the United States could not defeat the Vietcong and, following strong domestic pressure, United States forces were withdrawn from Vietnam by the end of March 1973.
In April 1975 communist troops entered Saigon, the southern regime collapsed, and Vietnam was united under communist rule.
The post-colonial era The period since the mid-1960s has seen an extraordinary economic transformation in large parts of Southeast Asia.
This was largely achieved through heavy investment by East Asian, European and American multinational companies, which took advantage of Southeast Asia’s low wage costs.
High economic growth rates were sustained over a number of decades, with a particularly rapid spurt in the late 1980s.
The industrialization of Southeast Asia was mirrored by the rapid pace of urbanization.
Cities expanded rapidly (6ar chart), with the result that a high proportion of the population now live in shanty towns surrounding the prosperous commercial centres.
Rapid economic growth created fortunes for Southeast Asia’s tycoons, with the large urban middle class and those living in rural areas also benefiting.
Southeast Asia’s long boom was brought to a sudden halt in the middle of 1997.
Beginning with the Thai baht, many of the region’s major currencies came under intense speculative pressure and were forced to devalue.
In the wake of the financial meltdown unemployment soared and large sections of the population faced severe economic hardship.
The causes of the crisis differed from economy to economy, but the overcommitment of largely unregulated banks, widespread corruption and unsustainable budget deficits by governments with over-ambitious spending plans were clearly important factors.
Riots in Indonesia in May led to the end of President Suharto’s 30-year period in power, and in Malaysia a split in the dominant political party, coupled with popular protest against corruption, provoked a serious challenge to the prime minister, Mahathir bin Muhammad.
A Southeast Asia has tor centuries been a provider of raw materials to Western and Japanese manufacturers.
While exports of agricultural products (including hardwoods from its rapidly diminishing rainforests) continue, Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand have also developed into producers of manufactured goods, in particular electrical and electronic products.
As their industrial sector has expanded so have their cities, with people flooding in from agricultural regions in the hope of finding relatively well-paid employment in manufacturing and expanding service industries.
Social and finantiol adjustments will be required in order to provide a decent standard of living for a forge population of pensioners.
The Allied {predominantly American) occupiers moved swiftly to incorporate democratic reforms into a revised constitution.
The emperor was retained as a ceremonial figure, but power was exercised by a legislature elected by universal suffrage.
By the time the United States administration ended in 1952, Japan had been redefined as a bastion of anti-communism in hast Asia, and expenditure of around $3. billion by the United States military during the Korean War had stimulated the economy into growth. secure support for economic growth as the primary goal of the nation.
As wealth accumulated, domestic demand became an increasingly important source of growth.
By the late 1960s it was apparent that such unrestrained economic expansion had environmental costs, with outbreaks of illnesses caused by industrial pollution such as ""Minamata Disease” and “Yokkaichi Asthma"" serious enough to attract international attention.
Japan’s vulnerability to disruption in the supply of an energy source on which it had become almost wholly dependent was exposed amid panic buying of daily essentials by the public, rapid inflation and the temporary cessation of growth.
Japan responded quickly and effectively to these challenges, Energy-intensive heavy industries were obliged to raise their efficiency and clean up their effluents or move overseas, as Japan felt the effect of competition from Korea and the other emerging industrial economies in East Asia.
Small, fuel-efficient cars were suddenly in demand, and Economic expansion Ch er the next two decades Japan enjoyed an extraordinary period of economic expansion.
Industrial production had recovered to pre-war levels by 1955, and during the 1960s average annual growth rates exceeded 10 per cent.
Japan’s deficiencies in mineral resources were of little importance in an era when cheap raw materials could be acquired easily from overseas.
The United States offered a ready market for manufactured exports, made more competitive by an increasingly undervalued currency, It also provided access to Industrial expertise for Japanese technologists.
Foreign policy focused overwhelmingly on trade promotion, although one important territorial issue was resolved w ith the return of Okinawa to Japanese sovereignty by the United States in 1972, The “family state"" of pre-war times was replaced by a “developmental state"", in which a stable political regime under the conservative Liberal Democrats allowed major industrial groupings to re-emerge under the guiding hand of an elite bureaucracy.
However, labour shortages, high land prices and pollution controls in large cilws, plus competilinn ham overseas, fuelled a relocation of industry within Japan la areas that had not previously proved attractive la investors.
T In the 1960s Japanese manufacturing was largely dominated by heavy industries such as steel production and shipbuilding.
By the 1970s, however, more profitable industries, in particular vehicle manufacturing, were increasingly important.
In the 19fl0s new industries^ such os those producing semiconductors and other electronic equipment, experienced a boom and continued la expand in the 1990s, The changing balance of industrial production exports responded quickly, until the threat of protective tariffs from countries in North America and Europe on cars exported from Japan forced Japanese car manufacturers to increase their production in these regions.
Industry shifted towards “knowledge-intensive” sectors such as electronics , in which Japan established international standards and dominated world markets.
Growth did slow from the heady rates of the 1960s, but still averaged over 4 per cent per annum in 1974 to 1985, and Japan was able to weather the second oil crisis of 1978.
Foreign relations and trade As the 1980s progressed, relations with the United States became more problematic.
The cost to the United States of protecting Japan during the Cold War was high, while Japan grew ever richer on burgeoning trade surpluses.
The United States became sensitive to the effect of imports from Japan on job prospects at home.
It put restraints on trade in manufactured goods between the two countries, and pressure on Japan to open up its markets to United States farm produce, such as rice.
Japanese agriculture itself was by now heavily subsidized and plagued by inefficiencies linked to the small farms inherited from the land reforms of the 1940s.
It attempted, unsuccessfully, to adapt to competition from imports by changing the crops that it produced.
The Plaza Agreement of 1985, between the United States, Japan, France, Germany and the United Kingdom, sought to resolve global trade imbalances by expanding Japan’s domestic demand.
The rapid appreciation of the yen was also expected to make Japanese products less competitive in international markets and to boost imports to Japan.
It was matched by a rapid expansion in Japan’s foreign aid, the aim of which was to support infrastructural improvements in neighbouring countries.
This facilitated production of, and created additional demand for, Japanese products in these countries.
Japan became the centre of a regional manufacturing system tied together by trade flows of raw materials, components and manufactured goods.
Tokyo was transformed into one of the world’s three great financial centres.
Investments at home and overseas were buoyed up by low interest rates and the willingness of banks to lend against property assets, which soared in value.
This speculative “bubble economy” finally burst in the early 1990s as land prices collapsed, obliging the government to shore up the ailing banking sector.
The banks’ problems were compounded by the subsequent economic crisis in Southeast Asia as loans to finance new factories in Thailand, Indonesia and elsewhere turned sour.
Its politicians were attempting to relax bureaucratic control of domestic markets and to continue the reform of its financial systems.
Such changes were a necessary counterpart to the growing climate of openness in Japan’s trade and financial relations with the outside world.
The popular opposition to military participation in the Gulf War of 1991, and Japan’s inability to counter the threat posed by North Korean missiles, indicated the mismatch between Japan’s status as a pre-eminent global economic power and its low political and military profile.
The occupation by Russia of the islands to the northeast of Japan also remained a sensitive issue at the end of the century.
T The ""hollowing out"" of the Japanese economy, which saw Japanese direct investment in Asia increase tenfold between 1985 and 1990, added a new dimension to Japan's economic ties to other countries in the region, which had previously been dominated by imports of raw materials, and exports of products manufactured in Japan.
Attempts were mode during the 1970s to restrict the size of families, culminating In a law passed in 1979 (generally considered to have failed) limiting married couples to one child.
As in many other developing countries, o felling death rate has ensured tfiot. despite o reduced birth rate, the population continues to grow officially at around 1 per cent per year, although this takes no account ol a large, mobile, unregistered population, mainly to be found in rural China.
The country's urban population has grown steadily as a proportion uf the total, except fur the period of the Cultural Rnvlufw , when it declined.
At the lime of Moo's death in 1976 the maturity were clustered, os they hod been for centuries, In the rich agricultural regions, with around 20 per cent of the population in cities.
T he People's Republic of China was founded on 1 C letober 1949, following the defeat of the Japanese invaders and the unification of the country under a single government.
The immediate priorities were to establish law and order, implement land reforms, balance the state budget, stabilize prices and nationalize industry.
I laving gained public support for these essentially nationalistic policies, from the mid1950s onwards Chairman Mao Zedong began to introduce communist reforms.
Initially, the communist programme was heavily influenced by the Soviet Union, with whom China had signed a pact in 1950.
It involved wholesale rural and urban collectivization, with the assets of large property owners being taken over by the state.
Other radical social measures were passed, including giving women equal legal status with men in terms of marriage and employment.
The five-year plans The main thrust of the programme was industrialization, formalized into a series of five-year plans.
The aim was to create an economy that did not depend on imports from capitalist countries, and the policy was initially effective in changing China's economy from one based on agriculture to one based on heavy industry.
In his second five-year plan, known as rhe ''Great Leap Forward”, Mao rejected the Soviet model and developed a specifically Chinese communism based on peasant labour, lie instructed collectives to build and run small-scale iron and steel foundries.
However, not only did it prove impossible to produce metal of an acceptable standard, but the scheme also took labour away from the agricultural sector.
Production of food dropped as a consequence, leading to a nationwide famine that claimed tens of millions of lives (bar chart 1}, The plan also seriously backfired in the industrial sector, with production dropping by up to 50 per cent, forcing the government to de-industrialize the economy.
The Cultural Revolution Chairman Mao's main concern was to promote his ideology and increase Ins power, leading him into conflict with other, more pragmatic, members of his government, in particular President Liu ShaoqL Mao launched his Cultural Revolution in 1966 in an attempt to revive his control over the party and society.
There they were joined by millions of young people, whose schools and universities had been closed.
Industrial production was severely disrupted, and the economy brought near to bankruptcy during the ten-year process.
PART 5 Foreign policy under Mao Immediately after the revolution of 1949, China allied itself with the Soviet Union and gave assistance to independence movements in Southeast Asia.
It also provided troops to assist the North Koreans in their efforts to unify their country in 1950, and aided the Vietnamese in their battle to expel the French from Indochina in the early 1950s.
From the early 1960s, however, China’s relations with the Soviet Union soured, mainly due to Khrushchev’s repudiation of Stalin’s policies.
At the same time, China also lost support among the neutral, newly independent countries of the developing world when it crushed anti-Chinese opposition in Tibet, and entered into a border dispute with India.
The Cultural Revolution was a period of intense xenophobia, but in 1971 Mao, in an apparent reversal of policy, welcomed President Nixon’s initiative to normalize relations with the United States.
In October of that year the People’s Republic of China replaced Taiwan in the United Nations and re-entered the world stage.
China after Mao Mao’s death in 1976 initiated a power struggle between the “Gang of Four” and Deng Xiaoping.
China’s industrial output rose steadily during the 1980s, and increased dramatically during the 1990s by over 20 per cent each year.
In the agricultural sector China made important gains through the reform of farming practices.
From 1978 onwards state ownership and planning were reduced, “the market” was respected and nurtured, and property rights were gradually defined.
Communes were abolished and citizens permitted to run private businesses and engage in market activities.
Instead of attempting to make China self-sufficient, the new regime adopted an export-led growth strategy, copied from other newly industrialized countries.
Demands for democracy As China became more open to Western economic principles and ideology during the 1980s, many people, in particular students, began also to demand modernization of the political system.
Hu’s demotion and subsequent death triggered pro-democracy demonstrations in many major cities during April 1989.
Throughout May demonstrators occupied the vast Tiananmen Square in Beijing, demanding Deng’s dismissal and political reform.
With the world’s press watching, the Chinese government held back for several weeks.
However, overnight on 3-4 June the army moved in to disperse the demonstrators.
Hundreds were killed and thousands were injured; arrests, imprisonments and executions followed.
Later that year the Chinese government decided to privatize state-owned enterprises operating at a loss roughly 30 per cent of the state sector.
With mounting unemployment from the collapse of the public sector, the trend towards a semi-capitalist society continues in uneasy contrast to the strict party control, creating a great deal of uncertainty about the political and economic future of the world’s most populous nation.
KOREA Nongiirijf Hangzhou* a k TAIWAN Pacffte Ocean ▲ The majority of industrial production in the 1980$ was to be found along the Yangtze River, which was used to transport raw materials and finished goods to internal and foreign markets.
T Communist China represents a vast potential market to the capitalist economies.
Special Economic Zones, in which a free market economy (including foreign goods and capital) could function, were established by the Chinese government in the 1980s os an experiment.
They were followed by ""open cities"", initially along the coast but later inland, where foreign businesses have special access to the vast Chinese market.
The ease with which African countries were drawn into the Second World War highlighted their status as European possessions.
North Africa became a major theatre of conflict, and many African soldiers served with the Allied armies.
African colonies were also used as major sources of vital raw materials and foodstuffs.
Industrialization and urbanization increased markedly, as did the production of foodstuffs and cash crops by African cultivators.
In political terms, the refusal of the colonial powers to extend to Africa the democratic ideals for which they had fought in Europe sharpened Africans’ sense of the injustice of colonialism.
The independence granted to India in 1947 and other countries in Asia around this time encouraged African nationalists to press for similar political freedoms in their own continent.
The rise of an educated African elite, which took advantage of new economic opportunities and skill shortages in the colonial bureaucracy, provided a social base for the developing anti-colonial consciousness.
A growing desire for independence was also fuelled by the fact that in the years immediately after the war, Britain and France relied on African raw materials, purchased at artificially depressed prices, to rebuild their shattered economies.
Between 1945 and 1951 Britain made a profit of £140 million on commodity transactions with its African colonies, while injecting only £40 million in return via the Colonial Development and Welfare Acts.
The gaining of independence The speed with which the process of gaining independence swept through Africa was in many ways a mirror image of the hasty 19th-century partition of Africa among the colonial powers.
Libya gained independence in 1951 largely because the United Nations could not agree who should control the former Italian colony.
The vast British-controlled Sudan gained independence in 1956, as did the French colony of Tunisia.
ZIMBABWE , ra MJbobar ► With a lew exceptions (he boundaries of colonial Africa, hastily drawn in the ""scramble for Africa 11 , continued into modern times as the boundaries of Ihe new independent stales.
Won in southern Sudan, Zaire and ihe Biafrart region of Nigeria all failed la establish new stales.
The self pradorned Somaliland Republic was loss successful al establishing independence.
Western Sahara was occupied by Morocco after being granted independence by Spain hi 1976.
SENEGAL T Far most stntes the establishment of n democratic system wilh multi-party elections has la ken several decades, and a few hove yet to achievert.
In ibe late 1980s and 1990s, however, the increasingly strong grassroots support for democracy was reinforred by the collapse af communism in the Soviet Union [to which many autocratic African leaders had baked for ideological inspiration) and by pressures from the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank la democratize as a condition af loan extensions.
PART 5 f jr j* 3 South Africa under apartheid A \W[ UndwSarfiMwai ivtodt 191S-90 CKK BIckL African HcnwbtiJ f t \Wm fottoi vioteficfl ir m mid 1960s lows w*fh popytawi E nvIMMX) □ 200,000-1,000.000 O irtis 200,000 BOTSWANA Upifigtan CAPE P RO V TRANSKtt w °' e -“ r 0 ° Uil«»»9.
Violent protests, coupled with international economic pressure, eventually led to President de Klerk's announcement of the abolition of apartheid and the release from prison of the ANC leader, Nelson Mandela, in 1990.
Protests in Bophuthatswana and KwaZulu Natal had threatened to disrupt them, but they passed off relatively peacefully.
The African National Congress was victorious, taking 63 per cent of the vote, and Nelson Mandela was sworn in as President of South Africa in May 1994.
Kvvame Nkrumah, that sparked off a wave of decolonization in sub-Saharan Africa.
Ghana provided a model of relatively peaceful transition to independence, while in French-controlled Algeria and British-occupied Kenya protracted and bitter insurrection was waged by the National Liberation Front and the Mau Mau movement respectively.
The hastily granted independence of the Belgian Congo (Zaire, now Democratic Republic of Congo) in 1960 resulted in the attemptedsecession of the copper-rich southern region, giving rise to political instability and foreign interference that characterized the post-independence history of many African states.
Not all African countries gained independence during the first wave of national liberation.
The Portuguese colonies of Angola and Mozambique finally won independence only after a coup d’etat in Lisbon in April 1974, led by General Spinola.
The struggle in Guinea-Bissau (which had claimed its independence a year earlier) persuaded Spinola that the Portuguese African empire could no longer be sustained.
A bitter guerrilla war was also fought in Southern Rhodesia , against a white colonial regime that had proclaimed its own independence from Britain in 1965.
After independence The upsurge of African nationalism, which brought so many countries to independence, also engendered huge optimism and unrealistic expectations of rapid economic development.
All too often, however, the new governing elites were illprepared for office, ambitious development plans went awry, expectations of rapid industrialization were misplaced, and political instability became endemic.
During the Cold War competition for influence in Africa became an important proxy for global conflict, and former colonial powers could exert great economic power.
Foreign aid was often provided in the form of military training and weaponry, rather than as a stimulus to economic development.
When the Ghanaian president Nkrumah was deposed in a coup in 1966, much of the early optimism for independent Africa began to wane.
The civil war that broke out when Biafra sought to secede from Nigeria in 1967 highlighted the problems of military involvement in civil affairs, and of the failure of nationalism to supersede ethnic divisions.
Economic and social developments Many African countries have made solid economic and social progress since independence, with massive provision of primary and secondary schooling, and the extension of basic health facilities.
Following independence, countries such as Ghana and Mozambique adopted the rhetoric of socialist transformation; others, such as Kenya and the Ivory Coast, proclaimed the benefits of capitalism, while Tanzania sought to disengage itself from the world economy and concentrate on autonomous development.
Although none of these approaches proved particularly successful in the long run, many African countries made considerable economic progress in the 1950s and 1960s as a result of relatively high commodity prices.
In Nigeria the exploitation of oil reserves provided spectacular wealth for its political elite.
Falling commodity prices and increased interest rates severely affected those economies that had been encouraged to borrow on international markets.
By the mid-1980s some, such as Zambia, were so stricken by debt that they had no option but to accept “structural adjustment programmes” proposed by the International Monetary Fund, remodelling their economies on free-market principles and enforcing cuts in social provision.
As a result, large parts of Africa experienced economic stagnation during the 1980s.
In the early 1990s optimism replaced the euphoria of the independence era and the gloom of the 1980s, as several civil wars ended and democratic elections were held across the continent.
As the decade wore on, however, such optimism appeared ill-founded as bitter ethnic and religious disputes and civil wars broke out and the prospect of democracy and development receded in several key states.
A A wave of popular support brought Nelson Mandela to power in the 1994 elections.
Many material and social advances have been made, although expectations of rapid improvements in living conditions for the black majority population have proved somewhat over-optimistic.
In most coun trios, however, with the notable exception of Brazil, row moieriofs continue la be the morn exports, pointing io Latin America's consistent failure to increase its mmndnetoring output.
Until the mid-1960s, most countries were committed to state-led Industrialization, with r the aim of achieving virtual self-sufficiency in both manufacturing and heavy industry.
Economic nationalism was a dominant ideology, with governments seeking to maximize their control over the production of raw materials.
During the 1980s, largely ns a consequence of the debt crises that had by then hit all the Latin American economies, neo-liberal orthodoxy swept the region, with most governments implementing policies of deregulation, privatization, encouragement of foreign investment and fiscal reform.
By the mid-1960s govemment-led industrialization had not only failed to generate the anticipated number of jobs, but had also not progressed much beyond light Industry and proved unable to compete effectively in local or interB national markets.
This was partly the result of weaknesses within tite strategy itself, which required Latin American m f countries to import more in the short term in order If) establish their industries, leading to balance of payments difficulties.
The politicization of economic decision-making by Latin American states also had a detrimental effect on industrialization policies.
Some Latin American countries did become more industrialized during the 1950s and 1960s , but were still far more dependent on the production of raw materials (mop /} than had been anticipated when the policy of LSI was launched.
International df.rt ohisis The failure of the industrialization model was one factor contributing to the debt crises that hit Latin America in the early 1980s, The major cause, however, was the disintegration, during the 1960s, of the system of international financial regulation that had been in place since 1944, When oil price rises in 1973 led to a surplus of “petrodollars* 1 on the international lending markets, Latin American countries, which had never succeeded in generating internally the levels of capital needed tor development, appeared to be ideal targets for loans.
With economic depression and inflation in the developed economies, these loans were effectively set at very low, or even negative, interest rates.
When United States interest rates rose dramatically in the early 1980s, Latin American countries found themselves unable to service their debts.
As bankers hastened to call on the services of the International Monetary' Fund , most debtor countries were obliged to sign stabilization agreements with the IMF as a prerequisite to the rescheduling of their debts.
The aim of these agreements was to cut spending and increase exports, thereby maximizing revenue to make interest payments.
The 1980s are referred to as “the lost decade lf of Latin American development; economies contracted and there was a huge net transfer of capital out of the region, in the 1990s capital investment returned to Latin America, and it is now accepted that much of the original debt will probably not be repaid.
However, Latin America could continue to be burdened by interest payments well into the 21st century.
KNTS Politically, this period saw the introduction of full suffrage throughout the region, with women granted the vote hy the mid-1950s in all Latin American countries, and literacy qualifications gradually dropped, although not until as late as 1989 in the ease of Brazil.
However, for much of the period the democratic process was compromised at best, and completely suspended at worst.
Most countries were governed by populist regimes in the 1940s and 1950s which, although elected, tended to use dictatorial methods once in power Argentina's Juan Domingo Perdn was the classic example.
Nevertheless, populism generated a level of political activity among the masses which alarmed those in the property-owning classes to such an extent that most were prepared to support military coups in the 1960$ anti 1970s.
USA kinds counter Tfidulrorwry mavemenl (1986s I 6 Covert intervention by USA to defeat loft wing guerrillas 9 United States invasion to restore stable government (19B3] 10 United States invasion to arrest President Noriega an charges ol drug trafficking 11 'Negotiated' United States invasion lo restore democrary 12 North American free Ti ode Agi eemeni A In the serond hdf of ihe 201b century ihe United States extended its sphere af influence beyond its immediate neighbours in Central America and Ike Caribbean into South America.
Even adjacent countries such as Argentina, Bolivia and Paraguay have markedly different erhnk proportions.
In mony parts ol the region die broad lean 'Latin' appears singularly inappropriate. development economies learned either in the USA itself or at national military training schools based on the United States model.
The military leaders argued that only they were capable of bringing about national development and that the democratic process would have to he suspended until the country was “ready* for electoral polities.
The repression for which these regimes became internationally condemned was directed initially at the Left, but gradually acquired a random nature designed to inhibit all political activity, even among moderates.
A process of redemocratlzation began In Latin America in 1980, and by 1990 there were elected governments in every country of the region apart from Cuba.
Most Latin American countries are still some distance away from being fully consolidated liberal democracies, with civilian control over the military, respect for civil rights, freedom of the press and broadly representative political parties.
The process of resisting authoritarianism stimulated a wide range of grassroots organizations concerned with, for example, human rights, womens issues and neighbourhood self-help, many of which are reluctant to be recruited by formal political parties.
The question of ethnic identities also assumed an increasing significance, particularly in 1992, the quincenteunlal of the European ""conquest"", ""'discovery"" or ""encounter’ 1 with the Americas.
There is still a potentially dangerous gap between the concerns of the people and of the government in many Latin American countries.
A Between 1956 cmd 1958 Fpdel Cinlrokd a i evolutionary movement m Cuba that readied in theoverthrow of the dklriar Fufgenrio Batista on 1 January 19S9 and the installation ol Castro as (Meskterf.
The resultant oil boom facilitated the rapid modernization of the producer states.
It also contributed to the economies of the surrounding countries, partly through the wages paid to immigrant workers in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states, and partly through the provision by the oil-rich countries of politically motivated development aid.
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries , whose most powerful members are in the Middle East, attempts to ensure a minimum price for crude oil by controlling supplies.
D uring the Second World War calls for independence intensified from the territories in the Middle East held as mandates by the French and British.
In the same year Britain relinquished its mandate of Jordan, but was left with the growing problem of its mandate in Palestine.
The new State of Israel The issue of whether a Jewish State should be established in Palestine became a focal point of international politics.
The mass influx of refugees from Nazi-occupied territories and the suggestion by the United Nations that Palestine be divided into Arab and Jewish states, with Jerusalem as an international zone , exacerbated tensions (already high in the interwar period) between the growing Jewish immigrant community and the Arab inhabitants of the region.
A civil war between Arabs and Jews from November 1947 escalated into an international war between Israel (proclaimed a state on 14 May 1948 after the British withdrawal) and the Arab countries of Egypt, Syria and Iraq, which ended in an Arab defeat and armistice agreements by July 1949.
More than 700,000 Palestinians fled to refugee camps in the West Bank and East Jerusalem (the remaining Arab parts of Palestine, annexed by Jordan in 1950), Gaza (ocupied by Egypt), and other Arab countries.
Sinai, captured by Israel in 1967, returned to Egypt under a peace treaty in March 1979.
In 1964 the Palestine Liberation Organization began a guerrilla war against Israel, and in 1987 a Palestinian Intifada increased pressure on Israel to negotiate.
The Oslo Agreement led to limited self-rule for the Palestinians in parts of the West Bank and Gaza Strip vacated by Israeli forces.
Peace talks stalled over the status of the city of Jerusalem, terrorist attacks on Israel, and the continued building of Jewish settlements in the occupied territories.
In 2000, after the breakdown of peace negotiations, a second Intifada broke out and the cycle of violence continued.
However, in January 2005 a new president of the Palestinian Authority was elected on a platform of renewing the peace process.
Events in Lebanon The Arab-Israeli conflict spilled into neighbouring Lebanon, where a delicate balance of power existed between Maronite Christians, and Shi’ite and Sunni Muslims.
Although the Agreement of Ta’if prepared the ground for peace, fighting only ended in 1991, with victory for the Muslims.
In 2000, Israeli troops withdrew from southern Lebanon, and Syria-backed Hizbollah forces moved in.
Socialism, nationalism and fundamentalism Defeat by Israel in 1949 served as a catalyst for the emergence in Egypt, Syria and Iraq of army-led, nationalist, secular regimes that advocated socialist reforms to improve living conditions for the countries’ rapidly growing populations.
Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt became the champion of Arab nationalism, advocating non-alignment, with some co-operation with the Soviet Union, as a way of curtailing the influence of Western powers in the Middle East.
In 1956 Nasser’s nationalization of the Suez Canal led to a failed attempt by Israeli, British and French troops to gain control of this vital sea-route.
Egypt’s anti-Western approach was opposed by Saudi Arabia, Israel and Iran, who saw Egypt’s growing power as a threat.
The tensions arising from the widening social rifts in many oil-rich states resulted in the emergence of “political Islam”, which combined radical religious teaching of Islam with the desire for social and political change.
The Iranian revolution of 1979 under Ayatollah Khomeini, with its specifically Shi’ite character, encouraged other Islamic opposition movements.
In Afghanistan, Islamic groups fought the Soviet intervention of 1979 before engaging in a civil war which resulted in the Taliban establishing a fundamentalist government in 1997.
In December 2001, opposition forces, backed by United States and British special forces overthrew the Taliban, and formed an interim government.
Wars in the Gulf region The Iranian revolution caused particular concern in neighbouring Iraq, which feared a similar rebellion from its own large population of Shi’ite Muslims.
Both countries also included large Kurdish populations, and Iraq accused Iran of supporting an uprising of the Iraqi Kurds in 1979.
At the end of an eight-year war in which an estimated one million people died, neither side had made significant gains.
During the war, Iraq received aid from most of the Arab states and, shortly before the end of the fighting, used chemical weapons against its own Kurdish population, some of whom had supported Iran.
Debts incurred by Iraq in its war against Iran, territorial claims, disputes over the price to charge for oil, and loss of prestige were all factors that contributed to Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait on 2 August 1990.
Ignoring international condemnation, Iraq annexed Kuwait and could not be persuaded by United Nations sanctions to withdraw.
In January 1991 an international alliance led by the United States declared war on Iraq, initially concentrating on an aerial bombardment of Iraqi military installations.
On 24 February, ground forces moved in, and by the end of February Iraqi troops retreated from Kuwait.
Iraq’s subsequent suppression of revolts by Shi’ite Muslims in the south and Kurds in the north led to UN-backed “no-fly zones” for Iraqi aircraft north of the 36th and south of the 32nd parallels.
The whole Iraqi population suffered from punitive economic sanctions, imposed in an attempt to force the Iraqi government to comply with UN requirements to eradicate its weapons of mass destruction.
In 2003, US-led forces invaded Iraq over its alleged possession of such weapons and overthrew the regime of Saddam Hussein.
A democratically elected government was established in 2005 but civil order was still a long way from being restored.
Israel also expanded its territory in 1967 and 1973, although the Sinai region was returned to Egypt in 1979.
T Iraq's desire for further oil-rich territory prompted its attacks on Iran in 1980 and on Kuwait in 1990.
This has, however, enjoyed limited success, with the parliaments of many of the stales anxious to assert their g uionomy The Russia n Federation is divided into administrative regions that ore directly conlra lied from Moscow and constituent republics whkh, since 1993, have been eniitled la their own constitutions.
Fallowing the passing of discriminatory ethnic laws in many of the new states, around three million Russians returned to their native country during the 1990s.
Many Asians migrated to Belarus and Ukraine in the hope af finding an easy route inla western Europe.
Although heavy industry and collective farms remained under state control, private individuals could form co-operatives.
Non-profi table firms were no longer propped up by tile state* but allowed to go bankrupt.
Nevertheless, economic growth continued to fall, while crime* inflation and unemployment rose.
Strikes among miners in 1989 were the first sign of popular discontent at the Soviet Union's economic problems, exacerbated by the devastation caused by tile explosion at the Chernobyl nuclear reactor in 1986 and the Armenian earthquake of 1988.
Mis radical approach to internal affairs was matched by his foreign policy.
The withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan in 1988-89, negotiations with the United States to end the arms race* and encouragement of, or tacit support for* the countries of Eastern Europe in their bid to free themselves from Soviet domination in 1989-90 all had a tremendous effect on world politics.
However, while Gorbachev was praised abroad for his bold foreign-policy decisions* his popular support at home was waning.
The economic crisis within Russia in the autumn of 199(1 proved a turning point.
A “500-day plan"" for rapid market reform was rejected by Gorbachev, as a consequence of which reformers left the government* and under pressure from political hard-liners and military and industrial leaders, Gorbachev appointed more reactionary communists to power.
The Baltic States demanded outright independence but Gorbachev was desperate to keep the Soviet Union together* and force was used in Vilnius * as well as in Tbilisi and Baku , The rise of Russian nationalism allowed Boris Yeltsin* sacked by Gorbachev from the position of Mayor of Moscow in 1987, to return to politics, first as head of the Russian Supreme Soviet and then as democratically elected, anti-communist President of Russia* in June 1991.
PART 5 ► Ethnic tensions and rivalries in the Caucasus region, held in check by the centralized control of the Soviet Union, broke out into armed conflicts after the collapse of the Soviet Union in late 1991.
Many smaller regions within the larger republics battled to achieve autonomy.
Chechenia declared independence from Russia in 1991, but although Grozny and the surrounding region was extensively bombed, the Russian army failed to defeat the guerrillas and the republic achieved de facto independence in 1997.
Georgia was also the scene of armed conflict, both for control of the republic and as a result of successful attempts by the regions of Ossetia and Abkhazia to assert their independence.
The republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan waged a bloody war over control of Nagorno-Karabakh, which Armenia won. against the rebels, and his defiance was largely responsible for the failure of the coup.
Thus Yeltsin’s position was strengthened, and although Gorbachev was reinstated his power was diminished.
Yeltsin’s presidency Yeltsin, as President of the Russian Federation, inherited the unresolved problems of his predecessor.
Although he introduced rapid market reform, including privatization, the economic decline continued.
Some people made huge profits but savings were wiped out, leading to real hardship among the population.
The Orthodox Church gained support, as did nationalist, rightwing parties such as Zhirinovsky’s Liberal Democrats.
Yeltsin did not call new elections for the communist-led Supreme Soviet, now called the duma , but ruled by decree instead.
Furthermore, he did not form his own political party, and neither did the democrats, thereby weakening the democratic system.
From December 1992 there was open conflict between Yeltsin and the duma , and Yeltsin replaced his reformist prime minister with the more conservative Viktor Chernomyrdin.
Yeltsin won public support in a referendum in April 1993, but conflict with the duma continued and in September it was dissolved.
The political leaders within the duma retaliated by proclaiming Yeltsin’s removal from the presidency, with the result that in October they were besieged in the parliament building.
Their response was to order an attack on the Kremlin and other key buildings, leading to a three-hour battle.
New elections resulted once again in a majority for the Nationalists-Communists, but Yeltsin, although in ill-health, won the presidential elections of June 1996.
A financial collapse in the summer of 1998 discredited the market reformers and brought a new conflict between Yeltsin and the duma, with the latter rejecting Yeltsin’s attempt to restore Chernomyrdin as prime minister.
Nationalist demands Nationalism, responsible for the break-up of the Soviet Union, also threatened the Russian Federation.
Autonomous republics, such as Tatarstan and Yakutia , demanded “sovereignty”, in which their own laws would take precedence over those of Moscow.
Yeltsin’s Union Treaty of March 1992 compromised by granting them considerable autonomy, and finally even Tatarstan signed in February 1994.
Chechenia split from Ingushetia and declared independence after the August 1991 coup.
In 1999 a fresh Russian offensive was launched against the separatists, but it failed to end their military and terrorist campaign.
The so-called Dnestr Republic rejected Moldovan rule with Russian military support, and there was conflict between Russia and Ukraine over the Crimea and over which country should control the ships of the former Soviet navy, based in the Black Sea.
In Georgia, President Gamsakhurdia’s extreme nationalism led to his overthrow in 1992.
Azerbaijan and other oil-rich states in Central Asia attracted Western investment, but a revival of Islamic fundamentalism led to civil war in Tajikistan.
At the beginning of the 21st century the future of the region remained uncertain, both in economic terms and in relation to democratic reform.
Three of them were killed by the army, which was divided in its support.
With Gorbachev a prisoner in his summer retreat in the Crimea, Boris Yeltsin, then President of Russia, eventually persuaded the army to stand firm behind Gorbachev, and thus defeated the communist rebels.
T The collapse of the communist regimes of Eastern Europe occurred between 1989 and 1990.
In general, the ""peoples' revolutions"" were carried off relatively peaceably.
Only in Romania, where the communist regime put up a fight, and in the former Yugoslavia did fighting break out.
T hroughout the 1980s the communist regimes of Eastern European underwent a profound crisis.
The unelected communist governments had always had trouble maintaining their legitimacy in the eyes of their electorates, but since the radical reforms introduced in the Soviet Union under Mikhail Gorbachev they could no longer threaten critics with the ultimate sanction of Soviet military intervention.
In the most reformist of the communist regimes Hungary the demise was gradual and was managed by the communist government itself.
Some of its increasingly radical measures had a profound effect on other communist governments.
The decision, for example, to open the borders with Austria and let thousands of East German “tourists” depart for the West forced the East German government into belated attempts to save itself by offering concessions of its own.
In Poland, where the Solidarity movement challenged the hegemony of the state as early as 1979, the end of communism was negotiated and brought about by partial elections held as a result of negotiations between government and opposition.
The East German and Czechoslovak regimes both collapsed as a result of public demonstrations.
In Bulgaria the government fell following a coup, which overthrew Todor Zhivkov, and in Romania the end of the Ceausescu regime was brought about by a violent uprising.
Political and economic transition All the post-communist countries embarked on the construction of a democratic system of government and the conversion of a centrally planned economy into one that was market-led.
One of the major problems was their lack of experience of democratic government.
Although some institutional and legal changes, such as a multiparty system and free elections, were introduced quite rapidly, the development of a democratic political culture proved more difficult.
The bulk of the electorate still expected the state to guarantee not just security but also their well-being.
Increasing inflation and declining Gross Domestic Product caused most people’s living standards to decline.
In this economic climate former communists gained significant popular support with promises to minimize the negative consequences of economic change.
The problem was how to liberalize and privatize an economy under conditions of relative instability.
Major disagreements existed between the proponents of the gradualist approach and those who advocated the “short, sharp shock treatment” involving simultaneous radical liberalization of prices and large-scale privatization.
Some countries particularly those in which former communists still held power, such as Romania and Bulgaria adopted a slow and often inconsistent approach; others, such as Poland, adopted a radical path.
In this respect Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic proved more successful than countries such as Bulgaria and Romania.
In post-communist Czechoslovakia the national grievances felt by many Slovaks resurfaced and were compounded by the fact that the process of industrialization undergone by the region of Slovakia since 1948 had left it largely dependent on markets in the Soviet Union and other Eastern European countries.
This placed it at a disadvantage in a country that was increasingly seeking Western European trading partners.
Furthermore, while the Czechs preferred a centralized state, the Slovaks sought a loose confederation.
In Yugoslavia the federal system developed by President Tito in the 1950s and 1970s gave some credence to national autonomy while controlling nationalist self-assertion in the constituent republics.
With the decline of communist power, the economic disparities between the constituent republics and the pressure for democratization gave rise to nationalist resentments.
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, with a Serb population of 2 per cent of the total, achieved independence peaceably in 1991.
The process of independence in Slovenia, which also included a Serb population of around 2 per cent, was accomplished in 1991 with only a brief intervention by the Yugoslav army.
In Croatia, however, the conflict that broke out in 1991, following the Croatian declaration of independence, was more violent, with the Yugoslav army fighting on behalf of a Serbian minority of around 12 per cent of the total.
An organized campaign of “ethnic cleansing” was undertaken, principally by the Serbs, with the aim of creating ethnically homogeneous regions in Bosnia as a prelude to its dismemberment and incorporation into Serbia and Croatia.
In Kosovo, a region in southern Serbia where the large ethnic Albanian population sought independence, violence erupted in 1998 between the Kosovo Liberation Army and the Yugoslav army.
Attempts to bring about a negotiated settlement failed and ethnic Albanians in Kosovo became the target of a Serbian campaign of ethnic cleansing.
In June 1999, following a NATO campaign of air strikes, Serbian forces withdrew as NATO troops entered Kosovo.
Significant Hungarian minorities remain in Romania and Slovakia, and the Bulgarian population is around 10 per cent Turk.
There is also still a sizeable Roma population in Romania, Hungary, Slovakia and the Czech Republic, although accurate figures are difficult to come by.
In the mid1990s Poland's more radical approach appeared to have paid off, although at the end of the 20th century it was still unclear as to which country would be the most successful in the long term.
All the Eastern European countries were keen to join the European Union, but not all passed the EU's various entry criteria, which relate to the effectiveness of both their market economy and their democratic system.
The government of Serbia, however, was anxious to defend the rights of Serbs throughout the region, and bloody conflicts ensued.
In 1999 the crisis in Kosovo led to another massive movement of people as over 850,000 ethnic Albanian Kosovans fled from Yugoslavia.
When negotiations between the superpowers the United States and Soviet Union over the creation of such a force failed, various alternatives were suggested.
The term is used to describe efforts made by the United Nations to diffuse civil and regional conflicts.
In the period 1948-56 other UN truce supervision forces were established in areas of dispute, although it was not until 1956 that a fully fledged peacekeeping force, the United Nations Emergency Force, was established by the General Assembly to police and monitor the ceasefire between Egypt and Israel.
In such operations, members of the peacekeeping force have acted as intermediaries, with responsibility for helping the belligerents negotiate a settlement.
H 1946-9 [ | 1970s ■ 1950s ] 1980s r7l | | 1990s • DOMINICAN REPUBUC HAITI 5Jt SIERRA LEONE ' 40 1 11 LIBERIA 27 » MOZAMBIQUE & 25 A UN peacekeeping operations mound the world hove included Ifwse attempting to restore or molnloin peace between warring notions, such as ihe IronIraq Military Observer Group af 1988-91. ond those intervening io protect ond bring aid to the civilian population in a slate affected by civil war, such n the Operation in Mozambique in 1992—95.
The UN Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, which arrived on the island in 1964 to avert civil war, polices the ""green line"" between opposing Turkish and Greek Cypriot forces.
Used in cases of inter-state conflict, it is known as “first” or “classical” peacekeeping.
It attempts to bring about an end to the fighting, separate the opposing forces and encourage the creation of a lasting peace.
Such operations have usually included the supply of UN humanitarian assistance to the affected civilian population.
From the 1960s to the late 1980s classical peacekeeping was used in the majority of peacekeeping operations, including that of the United Nations Force in Cyprus , deployed on the island in 1964 in order to separate warring Turkish and Greek Cypriot communities, and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, sent to supervise the Syrian Golan Heights in 1974, following the Arab-Israeli War.
All of the UN’s peacekeeping efforts between 1948 and 1990 were, however, constrained by the existence of the Cold War , during which the majority of conflicts were affected to some degree by rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union, neither of whom wanted UN involvement if this compromised its own national interests.
This occurs when the UN becomes involved in intra-state conflicts in “failed states”, where governmental functions are suspended, the infrastructure is destroyed, populations are displaced and armed conflict rages.
In these circumstances the UN has performed three different peacekeeping roles.
First, it has acted as a neutral force and honest broker between the warring factions, seeking to encourage the negotiation and implementation of a peace agreement and to prepare and conduct national elections as a means of furthering reconciliation and stability.
This was the case with the United Nations Angola Verification Missions from 1989 onwards and the UN mission to Cambodia in 1991-95.
In 2004 the Greek Cypriots rejected a UN plan to reunify the island because they felt it gave too many concessions to the Turks.
There are also two British military bases on the island, under an agreement made when Cyprus became independent in 1960.
Second, it has interposed itself between warring parties to ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid to the war-torn population, as in the case of the United Nations Operations in Somalia in 1992-95.
Finally, “second generation” peacekeeping has been used to create a stable environment for the re-establishment of democracy, as was the purpose of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group in Namibia in 1989-90 and the United Nations Mission in Haiti in September 1993.
In the case of the UN operations in Bosnia , Somalia and Rwanda, however, the UN did not have the consent of the various warring factions.
Rather, the UN was forced by the international community to act in the interests of the civilian populations.
The UN’s hasty reaction to such demands resulted in clouded mandates, which made the implementation of peacekeeping problematic.
Peacekeeping is inherently risky, and almost 2,000 peacekeepers have lost their lives since 1948.
The UN’s role has also at times been compromised by a failure to remain neutral, as when a large force, sent to the Congo in 1960 by the Security Council, lost its impartiality, and became involved in fighting against the Soviet-orientated, democratically elected prime minister, Patrice Lumumba.
UN peacekeeping operations have generally worked well where the task is fairly limited and clear cut such as the patrolling of ceasefire lines in Cyprus but when the situation is more complex, as in Rwanda or Bosnia, the UN peacekeepers have often found themselves out of their depth.
Nevertheless, peacekeeping has, in many cases, assisted in ending war and in creating the conditions in which the causes of the war can be addressed through diplomacy, and the economic and social reconstruction of a war-torn country can commence.
A Kofi Annan, a Ghanaian diplomat, was elected Secretary-General of the United Nations in 1996 the first black African to hold the position.
Among the international crises in which he became involved as peace-maker in the late 1990s were those arising from events in Bosnia and Iraq.
Sarajevo was besieged and the UN attempted to keep the airport open to allow supplies to be flown in.
The UN force lacked sufficient military strength, however, to implement their policy; with only limited freedom of action it was forced to withdraw from two of the areas in the summer of 1995, leaving them to be overrun by Bosnian Serbs.
In addition, democratic processes were reinstated in many South American countries, which experienced periods of right-wing dictatorship during the 1970s and early 1980s.
However, in many countries democracy is only tenuously established, and human rights abuses continue; in Africa some of the newly democratic countries have slipped back to being one-party states, and in others there has been clear evidence of rigged elections.
The majority of the world's countries now support the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , adopted by the UN in 1966, which sets out a range of rights, including freedom of conscience, freedom from torture and slavery, and the right to demonstrate peaceably.
The Declaration, according to the General Assembly of the United Nations, was to be a “common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations”, and during the second half of the 20th century efforts were made to define, articulate and enforce the fundamental rights of all peoples of all nations.
Definition of human rights The United Nations, chartered in 1945, was not the first body to recognize and assert basic human rights.
The first ten amendments to the United States Constitution, the Bill of Rights , outline what early Americans believed to be their inalienable rights.
The League of Nations, the international organization established as a result of the Treaty of Versailles , drew up conventions on slavery and forced labour.
Yet the United Nations was the most powerful force within the field of human rights in the 20th century, and the breadth of conventions created in the first 50 years of its existence surpassed those of any prior body.
They cover areas such as employment, the rights of children, refugees, development, war crimes and the eradication of hunger and malnutrition.
The earliest conventions were generally concerned with civil and political rights, while more recently the UN has turned its attention to the rights of people to economic and social development and to peace and security.
Elective democracy In the first half of the 20th century most democratic governments were to be found in countries in Europe and in North and South America , although in some of these countries sections of society were still barred from voting for reasons of ethnic origin, gender or income.
After the Second World War, and in particular in the last two decades of the 20th century, elective democracy spread to the great majority of countries in the world, although the fifth of the world’s population who live in the People’s Republic of China were still not able to exercise full democratic rights.
It remains to be seen how the spread of democracy will affect human rights.
In countries where political opposition is not tolerated, however, governments often go to great lengths to ensure that political rivals are silenced, and human rights abuses, including a ban on the freedom of speech, imprisonment without a fair trial, torture and execution, are common.
Discrimination on the basis of religion often occurs when a religious group is seen as a threat to the status quo because of demands for autonomy, although it is difficult to distinguish it from discrimination on ethnic or political grounds.
An example of an area riven by sectarian conflict is Ireland , where British rule and domination by Protestants was resisted by Catholic Nationalists for centuries.
Six of the nine northern counties of Ulster remained part of the United Kingdom, albeit with their own parliament.
Although Protestants predominated in much of the north, there was still a sizeable Catholic minority, which found itself under-represented in the political system, and in the allocation of public housing and of public investment.
These factors led to the development of a Catholic civil rights movement in Northern Ireland in the late 1960s and to clashes between Protestant and Catholic paramilitary groups and civilians, as a result of which the British army was deployed in the province.
The introduction of internment in 1971 was seen by many Catholics as a transgression of their civil and political rights and an escalation of political violence ensued.
In March 1972 the Northern Ireland parliament was dissolved and direct rule imposed from London.
The subsequent 25 years, during which over 2.750 civilians, soldiers and KUC officers lost their lives, saw several peace proposals and peace movements gain support and then founder On flood Friday 1998 an agreement was brokered between political representatives of the two sides, which established a Northern Ireland Assembly with both Catholic and Protestant representation.
However, the new assembly and accompanying executive were subsequently suspended amid further disagreement between Protestant and Catholic leaders.
This was partly due to wars * hut also due to people seeking refuge from poverty, persecution and economic and environmental disasters.
Refugees often end up in the poorest countries, which lack money to support their own Citizens, let alone refugees.
These displaced populations arc a growing concern to the international community.
With so many nations still struggling to develop eeo* nomically and politically, the provision of basic human rights on a world scale seems an immense task, A strong international legal foundation has been laid for the respect of human rights.
However, the reluctance of the international community to use economic and military' sanctions against governments that abuse human rights and the ineffectual nature of these sanctions means that world* wide transgressions of human rights are likely to continue.
Demands for autonomy by minority groups, including the Bosnian Muslims and Kosovan Albanians in a The piviskom of Ireland 1922 Cdtiota os perceruoge of pgpjtasicn.
Ch9QS I [ufrSfo lafTiser Tugasfewa,, and ihe Kurds in Iraq and turkey, have resulled in attempts by ihe governments cantwned to suppress entire peoples ond eradicate their cullures. hi 1927, Mbwing «nturi«s of r«bgpou$ coflixT, [rtwo was omo™ n iw, wrwm predominated in ihe Irish Frw S*0k r and oka formed the maicxify in large rural ureas of hotestenUontroBed Northern Ireland, which were included in the province in or der la provide H wtih luffioeot agocuffufol land.
In several European countries, including France nnd Switzerland, women were not given the right to vote uniil after Ihe Second World War.
In some countries, such as the United States and most Western European nations, the female franchise was preceded by long fights for political equality; in other countries women were granted the right to vote partly in recognition of the contribution they made towards the struggle for independence from colonial rule.
Improving women’s lives has become an international concern in the 20th century.
Women’s lives differ from men’s in every area, in eluding education, health and employment, in ways that have not always been readily apparent.
Gender inequality means different things in different cultures, but the use of gender as a category of analysis in measuring the quality of people’s lives has greatly changed perceptions of the social interactions of women and men.
The increased desire in the 20th century to recognize the importance of women s daily lives has also led to greater scrutiny of the employment of women and the ways in which work is measured.
International statistics on employment. for example, indicate the extent to which women are participating in paid employment {map 2), and the type of job in which they are employed.
However, the 1995 United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women in lSeijing stressed the importance of valuing unpaid labour.
In the industrialized world work is often valued by the remuneration attached to it.
Volunteer, domestic and childrearing work (unpaid labour that is most often performed by women) has been devalued and, in terms of statistics, gone i in reported.
Activities such as subsistence production anti housework, in which a large proportion of women in developing countries are involved, are now being measured more effectively, although progress remains to be made Statistical Information on womens lives has revealed not only that governnients have invested less in females than in males, but that women provide more care to children and older people, have different access to education and employment from that of men, and usually work longer hours in and out of their homes throughout their lifetime than men.
In short, women often experience a poorer quality of life than their male counterparts.
Although overall there has been a global trend towards improvement in the provision of secondary education for girls , this disguises the fact that within individual countries attendance at school may be affected by war or by economic difficulties.
Furthermore, when assessing improvements in women’s lives it is necessary to look at more than one variable.
Even in countries that awarded women the vote relatively early , women may still he represented in fewer than 10 per cent of administrative and managerial jobs, whereas in countries that granted women the vote relatively lute (such as Switzerland, Honduras and Botswana) more than 30 per cent of women are in such employment.
One indication of women’s status in society is the number who are political representatives, specifically those holding ministerial-level appointments.
There have often been long periods between u country's enfranchisement of women and the election of the first woman to the national parliament.
At the end of the 20th century there was still little female representation worldwide.
Even in a country such as the United Stales, where over 50 per cent of women ▼ In Africa, parts. cE Asia and South America women are largely responsible for ihe agricultural work done in iheir community.
They noi only provide their families with load, buf frequently produce cash cops for sale in local markets.
However, in several countries of Asia and southern Africa more women than men ore in paid employment.
There seems to be a twoway effect whereby education gives women the information and confidence to make family-planning decisions, and access to contraception gives young women the opportunity to fulfil their educational potential before starting a family.
In many countries, although girls might receive a primary education, they are then expected to leave school and work in the home or the fields.
Some cultures still consider secondary education for girls a largely wasted investment.
Non-governmental organizations Many of the changes brought about in women’s lives have come not from governments but from grassroots activists.
Although women may be poorly represented worldwide in the traditional spheres of national politics, women have found that they can bring about change through participation in professional groups, trade unions, locally elected bodies and a growing number of non-governmental organizations , of which there are estimated to be 30,000 worldwide.
Such groups have allowed women’s concerns to be voiced and supported on local, national and international levels, enabling them to build the skills necessary to exert political pressure and to collect the statistical information required to persuade governments to act.
Although disparities between the lives of men and women still exist, and progress remains to be made in the way in which men and women live and work together, the past century has witnessed vast changes in the way some men and women perceive women’s roles.
Women’s rights have become human rights and the work of women has begun to be recognized as having no less an impact on society and the economy than that of men.
Although the United States Constitution did not actually prohibit women from standing for office, the first female Representative was not elected until 1917.
The majority of Congresswomen have come from the eastern states and the west coast, although in 1998 Vermont, New Hampshire and Delaware were among those which had still never elected a woman.
T There is a strong correlation between the percentage of a country's women who are literate and its fertility rate.
Women in industrialized nations, where literacy rates are much higher, have smaller families than those in non-industrialized nations, where educational provision is often fairly limited and that for girls is particularly poor.
V The oil crisis of 1973—74 arose largely as a result of the Arab-lsroeli War.
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (QPEC1 controls the majority of the world's oil exports and in 1973 its Arab members persuaded the organization 9o place on embargo on Ihe supply of oil to those nations that supported Israel.
The subsequent shortage of ail Id the industrialized world severely disrupted production and oil prices soared.
Japan ravaged, with manufacturing and agricultural output severely disrupted.
The United States economy remained strong, however, and i*s strength became a mainspring of recovery in Europe, The European Recovery Programme provided United States investment tor Western European economies from 1948 to 1951 effectively speeding up the process of economic recovery.
Co-operation between Europe and the United States aided recovery to the extent that by 1951 all Western European economies had at least recovered to their highest pre-war level of output and were entering a ""golden age"" of growth that was to last until the first oil crisis in 1973.
New institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund , the World Bank and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade , were designed by the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference at Eretton Woods in 1944 in order to support the recovery.
The United States was, and has remained, the wealthiest economy in the world, and for the early part of the post-war period it was also the major source of technological change; large United States companies look their innovations abroad and invested in new plants in less advanced economies.
In 1975 the total value of such multinationals’ overseas stock was 4. per cent of world output, rising to 9. per cent by 1994.
About a quarter of the stock is located outside the major industrialized nations, spreading new technologies to newly industrializing countries.
This growth was based on high levels of T During lbs 1970s OPEC engineered two substantial increases in the price of oil, largely through the tactic of restricting supply.
The price of oil subsequently dropped again from the mid-1900s onwards as member rations ignored OPf C's limitations on exports.
PART 5 productive investment, the import of United States technologies, and improvements in the quality of the workforce through education and training.
By 1970 the 20 countries with the highest GDP per capita were mainly to be found in Europe, and the world’s wealth was concentrated largely in the North Atlantic.
Developments in East Asia, however, were just as remarkable, with Japan entering the “top 20” economies for the first time in 1970.
Japan’s output had grown by more than 9 per cent a year since 1950, driven by high investment and the rapid adoption and adaptation of United States technology.
The skills of the workforce had also improved rapidly, with the average length of time spent in primary and secondary education rising from 9 to 12 years.
The extent to which this made them vulnerable became all too apparent in 1973 when the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries a cartel whose Arab members were the most powerful placed an embargo on oil exports to the nations that supported Israel in the Arab-Israeli War.
Oil suddenly became scarce and prices rose sharply , causing major disruption in the United States and Europe.
A major slowdown in activity followed, and it took the advanced economies time to recover.
The richer European countries had largely caught up with the United States by this time, with the result that their growth was beginning to slow from 4 per cent per annum to a figure closer to the United States level, which had dropped from 2. to 1. per cent following the 1973 oil crisis.
With a post-1979 growth rate of only 1. per cent in Western Europe, unemployment rose sharply.
In Japan growth remained high at 3 per cent, although this was well below the level of 8 per cent during the golden age.
Openness and growth in the modern world Countries adopted different growth strategies after 1950.
Those in Latin America, many in Africa and some in Asia such as India opted for a more self-sufficient approach, substituting home-produced goods for imports.
The open strategy made it necessary for these countries to react to external demands, and to adjust their methods of production accordingly.
As the world moved, especially after 1970, beyond simple mass production towards the specialized production of high-technology products, the countries that had adopted the strategy of openness became increasingly successful.
Lessons have been learnt, and trading arrangements that remove barriers between member nations are becoming more common.
The European Union, one of the oldest trading blocs , expanded in 2004 to include ten eastern European states.
Its barriers to external trade stimulate inward investment by countries such as Japan.
The East Asians have set up an outward-looking bloc in APEC , in an attempt to stimulate trade.
However, as they learnt in the economic crisis of 1997-98, openness may aid growth, but it can leave their economies vulnerable to the vagaries of the world market.
However, a large proportion of its population continues to live without what are regarded as basic amenities such as running water in the industrialized world.
T A country's openness to trade is calculated by adding together the value of exports and imports , and dividing the total by its Gross Domestic Product.
In countries such as Argentina (with the lowest ""openness"" score) trade represents less than 12 per cent of its GDP while others, of which Singapore is the prime example, import manufactured parts, assemble them into products, and export the finished goods.
In general the economies of those countries that have been open to trade have expanded most rapidly, as seen in the contrast between the low growth rates in some countries of South America and Africa, and the high growth rates in Southeast Asia.
The western European economies have also grown rapidly because trade barriers have fallen within the region, with much of Europe becoming one large market.
The Gulf states in the Middle East have seen the largest increases, mainly because ol the economic expansion arising from their oil revenues, Global population tin millions) Population growth The population explosion of the 20th century is not only the result of more babies being horn, hut also of better health care, nutrition, education and sanitary conditions, all of which have led to increased life expectancy.
These conditions have aided population growth even in the face of disasters such as famines and epidemics.
However, high population growth rates can also put greater pressure on public services and lead to a fall in living standards, poor nutrition, inadequate education and high unemployment.
The negative aspects of high population growth are compounded in developing regions (where over 75 per cent of the world's population lives) because of the greater incidence of poverty and economic instability.
Most countries do not have the resources to support such large populations and the number of people without access to food, sanitation.
A The inuwra in global papulation has □{derated rapidly since 1950, although it is projected to slow down somewhat in ihe second decode of the 21st century, Over half al the world's population now lives in South, East and Southeast Asia.
Despite indications that the rate of growth is slowing slightly, projections pm the total population for the year 2G25 as high as 8 billion.
The ten largest cities in She 1990s all had aver ten million inhabitants, and the mojorily were to be found in the newly industrializing world.
In 1900 there were only a handful of titles with papulations of over a miHion, By 2000 such settlements were scattered liberally around the glob.
PART 5 safe water and health services increases as the population grows.
Furthermore, the inability of a country to provide for its citizens’ basic needs affects its chances of maintaining or achieving economic and social growth.
Balancing the growth of the population with the Earth’s resources and society’s ability to provide these basic necessities is crucial for a healthy population and continued development.
Thus, what may appear as low rates of growth per annum can actually result in significant increases in population over a few generations.
Recognition of the adverse effects of our burgeoning population assisted in reducing growth rates in the 1980s and 1990s.
This was achieved through a combination of improved education and the wider availability of contraceptives.
However, while growth rates in developing regions have decreased, many will remain as high as 3 per cent or more in the 21st century.
European countries currently reflect the lowest rates of growth , with some countries such as Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania, Latvia and Estonia actually experiencing negative growth rates, leading to population decline.
When coupled with the migration of people into cities, population decreases affect rural communities most severely.
Before the 20th century comparatively few people lived in cities, and the urbanization that occurred was largely the result of industrialization.
Urbanization is now also a result of migration into the cities of people from agricultural areas unable to support them financially.
Populations have not only moved from rural environments to cities within their own country.
In many cases these migrations have resulted in significant minority cultures developing in the host nation.
Many countries in the developed world now have multicultural populations, and people with racially mixed backgrounds are becoming more common.
Demographic ageing The populations of many developed countries are getting older as a result of falling birth rates accompanied by improved health and healthcare, and the same process is predicted to occur in developing countries, assuming current improvements in life expectancy.
This demographic shift towards societies in which older people predominate can be a positive reflection of a country’s health and prosperity, but it also signals the need for changes in the structure of the labour force, and for a shift away from a youth-centered culture towards one in which better health and social services are a priority.
Growing and demographically changing populations have many implications for societies around the world in terms of standards of living, trends in health and ill-health, and the quality of the environment.
T The world's population has always been migratory to a certain extent, but the 20th century saw increased movement.
This was partly as a result of economic factors but also as a result of political pressure and war.
European Jews, an increasing number of whom migrated to Israel after the First World War, were forced by German Nazism to seek asylum elsewhere in Europe and in the United States in the 1930s.
Most of those who did not escape were transported to death camps in eastern Europe.
Stalinist policies in the Soviet Union also resulted in millions of people being forced into Siberian labour camps.
Since the Second World War, major migrations have taken place in Asia and Africa as a result of war, and economic migrants from developing countries have sought work in the economies of North America, Europe and the Gulf states.
A worldwide increase in life expectancy during the 2l)th century suggested that the human population was the healthiest it had ever been, and increased health spending also gave cause for optimism , However, at the end of the 20th century millions of |>eople continued to live in poverty and had no access to adequate food, safe water or health sen ices.
New infectious diseases, such as AIDS and Hepatitis C, had spread across the world, while epidemics of older infections, such as cholera and yellow fever, had also broken out.
Treatment of bacterial infections after making huge advances with the introduction of penicillin in the 1940s had been complicated by the evolution of drug-resistant bacteria.
Health services arc now widely recognized as crucial to economic development, hut they arc often the first to be axed by governments in the face of economic instability 2 Hmm of people infected with HfV \m (pci 100.0001 < Whilethe indications are ihal in the roluOTioizal world the HIV infection rate is beginning to siabifae or decline, NIV/AID5 is taking an increasing hold in many lountiies of Southeast Asia and in Africa south of the Sahara.
ANempts to curb the spread of the dtsaase are often hampered by iasuffkieni medfcol families, although a degree of success has been achieved by health education projects that pul across the safe-sex message.
Kinee the 1950s life expectancy has increased by over 50 per cent in developing regions and by 12 per cent and higher in industrial countries, to approximately (S3 and 7-1 years respectively.
Global immunization programmes have reduced the occurrence of diseases such as tuberculosis and measles, and have helped to contain the spread of many controllable diseases.
These health measures have contributed substantially to a fall in infant and child mortality rates , and new and better vaccines are continually being developed. p rj f if A The moiked diffeieotK m lifestyle and diet between Ihe developed and developing vmHd are r dlecled la the major causes of death.
Causes of ill-health Improved health for some has been accompanied by greater ill-health for others, and a major cause of this has been poverty, which at the end of the 20th century affected over one billion children and adults throughout the world.
Lack of funds for basie needs naturally leads to undernourishment a ml higher susceptibility to disease.
Some of the most extreme poverty is to lie found in the growing number of urban centres , where public health systems cannot keep up with the demands placed on them by growing populations.
The high death rates from cancers, and heart and circulatory diseases in developed countries are partly due to greater life expectancy, but they are also undoubtedly related to unhealthy lifestyles.
While wealthier, industrialized countries often have better education, more advanced medical technology, access to better health care and the higher incomes to pay for it, their populations as a whole also tend to have unhealthy diets, indulge in excessive drinking and smoking, and suffer from lack of exercise.
The populations of industrial countries, and of large cities throughout the world, are also plagued by pollution, in particular air pollution, which is thought to he causing an alarming rise in respiratory problems such as asthma.
In developing countries, by contrast, infectious and parasitic diseases account for the majority of deaths.
Since the 1980s health professionals have watched the disease spread worldwide, into all sectors of society, but in particular to the poorest, and estimates suggest that in the late 1990s over 33 million people were infected with the HIV virus that is believed to lead to AIDS, of whom 95 per cent lived in the developing world , Water-borne diseases (such as cholera, typhoid, diarrhoea and guinea worm disease) are also common.
In the 1990s the World Health Organization ) estimated that 78 per cent of people living in developing countries still had no access to safe water.
Shortage of water is projected to become an increasing problem in the 21st century, with populations growing in areas where there is little available.
Advances in agricultural science and practice are being made in order to make the best use of limited resources, but international conflicts threaten to break out over use of river water.
Instead of just treating illness, health promotion programmes help people take steps to improve their overall health.
Widespread immunization programmes, better education and nutrition, and increased access to family planning services all contributed to reductions in the infant mortality rate during the latter part of the 20th century , particularly in parts of Africa and Asia.
One area where preventive health practices are fighting for a stronger foothold is in the use of addictive substances.
Nicotine is one of the most widely used drugs; WHO statistics indicate that nearly one third of all adults smoke (and nearly half of all men), with most people starting before they reach the age of 20.
Many developed countries have seen a significant decline in consumption since the 1970s (although the popularity of smoking among young people, in particular young women, gives cause for concern), but the tobacco industry continues to seek an expansion of its market.
As a consequence, cigarette smoking in industrialized countries is on the increase , and health departments and practitioners expect to see an upsurge in smoking-related heart disease and cancers.
Human health is possibly the most important issue facing the world in the 21st century in that it is both affected by and has an impact on environmental and demographic changes, and on social and cultural developments.
Most of the developed countries managed to reduce their rates by over 60 per cent between the 1960s and the late 1990s.
While the developing world has, on the whole, not managed such large percentage drops, in many countries the infant death rate has been cut substantially in real terms.
The five countries consuming least per head of population are Mozambique, Liberia, Ethiopia, Afghanistan and Somalia.
Periods of drought in subSaharan Africa have severely affected agricultural production, and in many areas this has been exacerbated by war.
In other parts of the world, such as China, Cambodia and North Korea, the policies of political leaders have been responsible for millions of deaths from starvation.
T It is estimated that around a third of the global adult population smokes.
Although smoking is declining in parts of the industrialized world, in other areas, notably China (included in the figures for Western Pacific), smoking is becoming increasingly popular.
The World Health Organization estimated that in the mid-1990s over 60 per cent of Chinese men smoked.
T hu Gross World Output (the total amount of money generated worldwide) in 1050 was S3,8 trillion.
This near-tenfold increase was not, however, distributed evenly around the world.
At least half of the extra wealth was created by the United States, Japan and the countries of Western Kit rope, where per capita incomes (the amount of money generated by a country divided by its population) grew markedly, By contrast, elsewhere in the world economic underdevelopment and high population growth rates I resulted in per capita incomes actually decreasing.
Equally noticeable, however, is the disparity within a country between those with an income sufficient to provide a decent standard of living and the poorest members of society.
In the United States the “poverty line 71 is calculated in relation to the cost of providing a nourishing diet for one person tor one year.
In 1996, 15 per cent of the United States population was considered to be living below the poverty line, with a disproportionate number from the minority ethnic groups.
In some European Union countries poverty is defined in relative terms, giving a typical figure of between 2 and 6 per cent.
Tiie Hr man Development Index Despite the wide disparity of incomes within the industrialized countries, the majority of their populations have their most basic health and educational needs met.
In many nonindustrialized countries, on the other hand, free access to doctors and schools is by no means universal.
The disparity between the conditions experienced by the populations of the richest aud the poorest nations of the world prompted the United Nations in 1990 to develop an index that defined and measured human development.
Life expectancy The Human Development Index scores a country cm the basis of the age to which a baby born in that country' might be expected to live.
In so doing it takes into account not only the general health of the population, but also the infant mortality rate.
While the latter has improved dramatically since 1960 , at the end of the 20th century' it was still over 10 per cent in many nondndustriulized countries, resulting in an average life expectancy at birth of between 40 and 50 years of age.
However, those who survive the early years of life can expect to live well beyond their forties.
For example, in Malaw i, where the infant mortality rate is around 14 per cent, a girl who has survived until 15 years of age can expect to live, on average, until she is 62 years of age.
In many countries improved health care, including vaccination, has resulted in substantial increases in life expectancy for both children and adults.
Programmes to provide access to fresh water are also helping to improve the health of young and old people alike, and thus not only to improve life expectancy but also to raise the quality of people’s lives.
Education and literacy In 1959 the United Nations General Assembly proclaimed that a The child is entitled to receive education, which shall be free and compulsory', at least in the elementary stages/ 1 Education became, for the first time in history, the right of young people worldwide.
In 1962 the UN went further and attempted to remove barriers to education for such reasons as sex, religion, ethnic group and economic conditions.
Education thus became the right of all people, hut the extent to w hich they are given the opportunity to exercise that right remains highly variable, depending on where a person lives and whether they are male or female. it is difficult to compare the amount of money spent on education hv the different nations of the world.
Their resources are meagre, however, in comparison with those available to the countries of the industrialized world.
Enrolment in primary education, which begins at any time between the ages of 5 and 7 and provides the basic elements of education, increased markedly, with the result that the majority of children now receive some form of schooling.
Secondary education and tertiary education , in institutions such as middle and high schools, vocational schools, colleges and universities, experienced an even more startling increase during the second half of the 20th century, with enrolments more than doubling.
The take-up of higher education was highest in North American countries, and at its lowest in such areas as sub-Saharan Africa and China.
High primary education enrolment levels did not necessarily mean high levels of post-primary education.
Many countries experienced setbacks in educational progress in the 1980s as war and decreased aid and trade led to cutbacks in government provision of free education.
Enrolment in school often drops if parents have to shoulder the burden of paying for their children’s education, and even where education is free, parents may keep their children at home to provide vital agricultural labour, or because they cannot afford to clothe them properly.
At the end of the 20th century education was just one of the necessities denied to many of the world’s population pointing to the need for a redistribution of monetary wealth and natural resources on a worldwide basis.
However, the focus of each country continues to be on how it can best provide for its own citizens and operate in a growing global economy.
Some of the poorest nations spend free access to a decent education for all.
It also ranks the countries of the world according to both their development score and their GNP per capita.
Some countries (particularly those in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union) achieve a much higher development ranking than would be expected from their GNP per capita, while the development rankings of other, comparatively wealthy, countries (in particular many of the Arab oil states) are lower than expected.
Many do not even have desks, while books, paper and writing equipment are all in short supply.
Once the trees have been removed,, however, the land ran only be used for a short while for agricultural and graring purposes before ihe lopsofl becomes nuiritionally depleted or eroded.
Changes in the environment range from those readily visible such as deforestation, desertification and atr pollution or smog to less visible phenomena, such as climate change, damage to the upper ozone layer, mineral depletion, water pollution, and the extinction of plants and insects.
Although these changes began to occur before the 20th century, it is only since the 1960s that they have been brought to public attention.
Tj df** BURMA M Annual av«roge global tompenrtures showed a marked increose during Ihe wond half of ihe 20th century, with the ihree hottest years af ihe cenfury attuning in the 1990s.
A Ttie law-lying region af the Canges della would be severely affected by a one-metre rise in sen level.
One of the mast densely populated regions of the world can ill afford to lose fertile land in this way. brought world leaders together to discuss the state of the environment and draw up plans of action.
For cultural, economic and geographic reasons, numerous divergent views arc held on the state of the environment, but it is generally agreed that some environmental monitoring and action is necessary.
One of the most important concepts in environmental theory at the beginning of the 21st century is that of “sustainable development” an approach to the use of the Earth s natural resources that does not jeopardize the well-being of future generations.
Although the Earth’s average temperature has always fluctuated naturally, many believe that emission of GG 2 from the burning of fossil fuels such as coal and oil are increasing the greenhouse ef/eet and have been responsible for a rise of around 0.5° Celsius (1° Fahrenheit) during the 20th century.
The larger industrial countries emit most , although many are now working towards curtailing, or at least stabilizing, their emissions.
However, countries that have industrialized only recently are reluctant to restrict their industrial development or invest in new technology necessary' to bring about a reduction.
Forests naturally absorb harmful CO-., and deforestation also contributes to rising CO, levels.
The accidents at Three Mile Island in the United States in 1979 and at Chernobyl in the Ukraine in 1986, coupled with the problems associated with the disposal of nuclear waste, have led many to see the nuclear industry as one of the major threats to humans and to the environment.
PART 5 4 Acid deposition and urban pouimoN1990s fiamy aid ieptttav r~i pH hess rtian: 4.
I 1 pH 1 Mi • pW 4.5—S.O t^wtth^ImJDfwpoflifan _R iodft r Sod Paula SanK ago* ◄ Acid deposition is caused by high levels of sulphur and nitrogen being discharged into the atmosphere by industrial processes and combining with water vapour and oxygen to form acids.
The acidic particles can fall close to the site of their source, causing pollution and erosion of city buildings, or be carried hundreds of kilometres away by prevailing winds, to affect vegetation in rural areas.
Despite attempts by many governments to clean up the air in their cities, the increasing use of motorized transport has contributed to unacceptable levels of pollution in many of the world's cities.
Industrialization and globalization An increasing demand for electricity is made by the world’s industries.
While providing many benefits, such as increased wealth, employment and self-sufficiency, industrialization can also lead to an increase in air and water pollution, to changes in land use and to rapidly growing urban environments.
One of the effects of industrialization has been increased emission into the atmosphere of sulphur and nitrogen.
This falls back to Earth, either as dry deposits, or, combined with natural moisture, as “acid rain” , not only damaging trees and natural vegetation but also affecting crops and fish stocks in freshwater lakes.
Technological developments, particularly in areas such as transport and electronic communication, have helped to create a global economy in which people, products and information can move easily around the world.
However, aircraft, ships, trains, passenger and heavy goods vehicles all pollute the environment, and require large-scale changes to the landscape.
Since the 1960s regulations have been established regarding such activities as offshore oil drilling, navigation and fisheries.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which came into force in 1994, not only gives countries economic control over their coastal regions, but also the obligation to monitor and regulate marine pollution.
Global efforts are being made to conserve land and protect ecosystems, but preservation or protection is costly and may be hard to achieve in countries whose resources are already insufficient to meet population needs and whose economies are racing to catch up with those of the richer nations.
The notion of sustainable development requires changes in the way people live their lives, and in the relative importance they assign to consumption over protection of the Earth’s resources changes that are difficult to achieve.
Coral reefs (which cover less than 1 per cent of the ocean floor, but provide habitats for about 25 per cent of marine life) are susceptible to damage caused by destructive fishing techniques, recreational use, changing sea levels and chemical pollution.
W hen the American Wright brothers made the first flight in a motorized aircraft at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina In 1903 their invention was recognized as a milestone in transportation history.
At the beginning of the century' steamboats and trains were well-established methods of transport worldwide, and use of the recently invented telephone and car was spreading through the industrialized nations.
At the same time, in vast areas of the nonindustrialized world, millions of people continue to live in real villages, excluded from, or touched only lightly by, the technological wonders of the late 20th century.
Gars were initially owned only by the well-off, but the innovation of mass-produced, and therefore relatively inexpensive, ears greatly expanded their ownership in North America and Europe during the 1920s and 1930s.
Japan, in particular, saw a boom in car production and ownership from 1965 onwards, and by the end of the 20th century' China had also increased its car production, from 80,000 cars a year in 1970 to around 1. million.
Alongside the marked increase in car ownership, air travel has also become the norm for those in the industrialized world.
In large countries, such as the United Stoles, Canada and Russia, people travelling la destinations within Iheit country have increasingly lamed ham roil to air travel.
In order to reduce environmental pollution, governments, town planners and vehicle manufacturers are being urged to consider these issues when designing new transport networks and developing new models.
The invention of the radio-telephone in 1902 and subsequent improvements in the quality of transcontinental telephone signals enabled the human voice to travel huge distances.
However, the most significant advance in this sphere was the development, during the 1960s, of a network of communications satellites that allowed not only aural, but also visual, signals to be sent up into space and bounced back, greatly enhancing telephone links and enabling live television broadcasts to be made from one side of the world to the other.
Several hundred active communications satellites now orbit the globe, and without these none of the major developments in communications of the late 20th century would have been possible.
Mass television ownership enables people worldwide to share programmes.
American and British soap operas are shown, for example, dubbed, on Russian television.
Major events, such as the football World Cup Finals, are watched simultaneously by hundreds of millions of people.
For those without access to a television set, the radio often provides a link with the outside world.
The most spectacular development in international communication since the 1980s has been the Internet, giving millions of people in the industrialized world almost instant access to a vast network of information, and the means to communicate with each other speedily and cheaply.
It has been made possible largely through the development of the microprocessor, which enabled small personal computers to be manufactured from the mid-1970s onwards.
By the mid-1980s these machines had become powerful enough for their users to be able to access the Internet, a worldwide computer networking system.
First developed in the 1970s for the United States Department of Defense, it was subsequently extended to the academic community, commercial organizations and the general public.
The technological gap between rich and poor nations is an enormous challenge for those in the process of industrializing, although it may also be to their advantage if there is sufficient money to buy the latest technology.
In China, for example, where until recently few households had a telephone, the old telecommunications technology, involving the laying of cables, is being bypassed in favour of the installation of radio masts for mobile telephones.
Cultural integrity All forms of communication require language and there are estimated to be over 5,000 languages in use.
Although there are, of course, benefits to a country having a common language, there are also disadvantages.
There has been a sharp decline in the number of different African languages spoken, leading to a disintegration of the cultural values and traditions attached to those languages.
Cultural integrity is also challenged by developments in global communications, which have provided the most technologically advanced countries with a powerful means of spreading their ideologies and culture.
The extent to which countries can participate in the “global village” will affect their future prosperity.
There is no question that modes of transportation and communication will continue to evolve at great speeds, but whether they will become universally available remains uncertain.
A Computer technology represents huge profits for the countries involved in producing it, and has provided businesses and individuals worldwide with enormous benefits.
It has also created a widening social and economic gap between those who have access to it and those who do not.
T The most widely used official language in the world is English, partly as a result of British influence in the 19th century but more recently because of the domination of United States culture.
In countries such as China and India, where many languages are spoken, it is essential to have a single language in which official communications can be made.
In applying the basic guidelines outlined below, a commonsense approach has been adopted that allows for deviations where they serve a purpose.
The conventional Anglicized spelling, without accents, is used for large and familiar places (e.g.
However, in keeping with current academic practice in the United States, accents are omitted from the Spanish forms of American-Indian place names dating from before the 16th-century conquest.
Where a name has changed due to political creed or ownership, this is often reflected in the maps.
Thus St Petersburg is sometimes shown as Petrograd or Leningrad in maps of 20th-century Russia, and Strasbourg is spelt Strassburg when it was under German rather than French control.
If a country was once known by a name that differs from the one it holds at present, this is used where appropriate.
Thus Thailand appears as Siam on many of the maps dating from before 1938 when it adopted its present name.
However, where appropriate, the former spelling adopted under the Wade-Giles system also appears (e.g.
For the sake of clarity, diacritics are generally omitted from names derived from other non-Roman scripts by transliteration notably Arabic and Japanese.
The index The index includes the names of people and events as well as place names.
To avoid unhelpful references to maps, place names are indexed only when the place is associated with a particular event or is marked by a symbol included in the key.
References to maps are indicated by italics , as are references to pictures.
The Development of Sedentary and Nomadic Civilizations UNESCO, Paris 1994 Jansen, M and Urban, G Mohenjo Daro Vol.
Food, Metal and Towns Routledge, London 1993 Shinnie, P The African Iron Age Clarendon Press, Oxford 1971 Tattersall, I “Out of Africa Again ... and Again?”, in Scientific American Vol.
Longman, Harlow 1985 Mabogunje, A.L. and Richards, P “The land and peoples of West Africa”, in Ajayi, J.F.A. and Crowder, M History of West Africa Vol.
The Growth and Destiny of a Man and of a World-Empire Harvester, Brighton 1980 Braudel, F Civilisation and Capitalism, 15th-18th Centuries Vol.
An Introductory Survey Macmillan, Basingstoke 1985 Hosking, G A History of the Soviet Union Fontana, London 1992 Keep, J Last of the Empires.
