One is a unique look at the crisis by a Communist diplomat then in Washington.
Janos Radvanyi was the Hungarian charge 1 in Washington at the time (there was no ambassador), an affable fellow with whom I had | much contact.
On May 17, 1967, he defected, i turning up later at Stanford where he wrote “Hungary and the Super Powers” to be pub; lished in May by the Hoover Institution.
What follows * is from it. > <no j IN SEPTEMBER and October, 1962, Radj vanyi reported home that the United States i was overreacting to reports of Soviet activity . in Cuba.
He did so in part because Soviet dipt lomats here had told him the uproar was { ^ part of the American pre-election campaign.
I But one day he received a copy of a cable to I Budapest from Hungarian Ambassador { Janos Beck in Havana.
Defense Department photograph of Soviet missile installations at San Cristobal , Cuba , Oct., 1962 . as being provocatively anti-Soviet,” Radvanyi I * writes.
States Intelligence Board’s estimate was l that the Soviets would not introduce offensive missiles into Cuba.
Radvanyi attended the first of three meetings with Soviet Ambassador Anatolyi F Dobrynin and the heads of all the Communist embassies in Washington.
Dobrynin discussed the meeting the previous day between President Kennedy and Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko.
As to the Kennedy-Gromyko meeting, “nothing extraordinary had happened”; the German situation had been discussed at length along with disarmament.
At this point in his account, Radvanyi states that “it seems highly unlikely to me” that Gromyko had not been “privy to the Kremlin discussions” about the ( missiles but that “it is altogether possible that Dobrynin may not have been informed.” c^s> THE CRISIS became public with the President’s Oct. speech.
Dobrynin “characterized it as serious and offered two reasons for his concern.
First of all, he foresaw a possible American attack on Cuba that would almost surely result in the death of some Soviet military personnel who had been sent to handle the sophisticated new weapons.
Thus by implication the Soviet ambassador was admitting the presence in Cuba of Soviet mediumrange missiles.
The Pearl Harbor attack, he suggested, might have been responsible for this unwarranted paranoia.
But, as Radvanyi notes, the Soviet envoy did not disclose that before the party he had met with Attorney General * Robert F Kennedy in the third floor of the embassy.
At another gathering of the Communist diplomats on Oct., this time at the I Soviet embassy, they discussed Walter Lippmann’s column of the previous day suggesting dismantling of American missiles in Turkey along with the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Only the Romanian ambassador indicated he had some reason to think that it was just that; Lippmann, as far as I know, has nevqr said whether the idea '( was simply his own.
According to RFK’s account, Adlai Stevenson on the 20th had suggested a swap involving withdrawal of American missiles from both Turkey and Italy and giving up the naval base at Guanv *fnamo Bay in Cuba.
The President rejected V the proposal. , <*e meeting on the 26th Dobrynin said he still had no information on how Moscow would meet the quarantine.
The Soviet ambassador concurred with my analysis, adding that the Soviet Union found itself in a difficult position in Cuba because its supply lines were too long and the American blockade could be very effective.
Ruzek t i emarked grimly that if the Americans inI va «ed, it would definitely trigger a nuclear i war.
At this point I lost self-control and r asked whether it was not the same to die from an American missile attack as from a Soviet one.
Shocked at this news I inquired of Dobrynin whether he planned to evacuate the families of Soviet diplomatic personnel.
I emphasized that unless a quick political solution were found within the next few days, the United States would proceed with the invasion and nothing short of a miracle could save the world from nuclear war.
Fidel Castro was outraged and Moscow sent Anastas Mikoyan to Cuba to reason with him.
Mikoyan explained how he had tried to win Castro’s approval to the United Nations inspection of the missile dismantling process in Cuba, one of the President’s terms to which Khrushchev had agreed, but which Castro rejected.
They were inspected from the air, the tarpulins covering them pulled back by the Soviet sailors on ships taking them home.
Peking, accanvas-covered cording to Mikoyan, had sent tons of propaganda material, and Mao Tse-tung had transmitted to Havana one message after another assuring the Cubans that the eight hundred , million Chinese stood firmly behind them and that the Americans were paper tigers.
Mikoyan reported that while the Chinese had done nothing to help defend Castro, they had refrained from shelling Quemoy and Matsu during the days of the crisis.
Mikoyan noted ironically that j they might easily have stepped up pressure \ against Taiwan which — with the Americans \ involved in the Caribbean — could have j changed the whole situation ...” i \ In defense against the Peking charges, i hurled by now at Moscow, of “adventurism” in deploying the missiles and “capitulationism” for taking them out, “Mikoyan ofr f fered two explanations for the Soviet action.
The missile deployment in the Caribbean, he said, was aimed at defending Castro on the one hand and, on the other, at achieving a definite shift in the power relationship between the socialist and the capitalist worlds.
He concludes that the American warnings against installation of the missiles, may not have seemed all that strong to Moscow and hence the Soviets went on.
McGeorge Bundy, Mr Kennedy’s asP sistant for national security, said publicly \ that he knew there was “no present evidence, and I think there is no present likelihood” of “a major offensive capability” being installed in Cuba.
Yet on Sept. the United States had taken pictures that Bundy' knew about of crates on the decks of Soviet ships in route to Cuba crates similar to those used to send IL-28 light bombers to Egypt and Indonesia.
BENJAMIN C BRADLEE Philip L Geyelin, Editorial Page Editor; Howard Simons, Managing Editor; Gerald W Siegel, Vice President and Counsel; Robert P Thome Treasurer; Joseph P Lynch, Vice President-Advertising; Jack P Patterson, Circulation Director; Julian J Eberle. production Operations Director.
