Shortly afterward, in his office, he told me that a U-2 had just finished a photographic mission and that the Intelligence Community has become convinced that Russia was placing missiles and atomic weapons in Cuba. –Robert Kennedy On October 16, Kennedy learned that his most serious problem was not Berlin, not the quest for racial justice, not the November election.
U-2 photo on October 14, 1962 confirms construction of ballistic missile sites in San Cristobal, Cuba.
When Kennedy received this information at the start of the day, he was irate that Khrushchev had lied, having told him the Soviets would not put offensive weapons in Cuba and that he would not do anything to disturb the United States elections.
Later, at a 11:50 am meeting, the top foreign policy and security advisors, Bobby Kennedy, McGeorge Bundy, Robert McNamara, Dean Rusk and General Marshall Carter met with the President.
Carter announced that a medium-range ballistic missile, about 65 feet long, had been discovered.
The U-2 flights revealed that there were at least 16 Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba near launch pads that were under construction.
The committee agreed that the Soviet missiles needed to be removed, but didn’t decide whether to first seek a military or a diplomatic solution.
A surgical strike to destroy the ballistic missiles A general strike against all missiles and Soviet forces in Cuba A general airstrike followed by a blockade Diplomacy An invasion of Cuba By the end of the meeting, JFK preferred a surgical or general strike; he didn’t think they had the two weeks that would be needed to prepare for an invasion.
He felt he needed to show strength and respond to Khrushchev before Congress learned of the presence of ballistic missiles.
The State Department, Department of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff opposed a surgical strike.
For JFK, the missiles were a political concern of equal weight to the military.
His advisors believed that missiles in Cuba didn’t actually change the military balance.
But his primary concern was that his September 4 statement had said the United States would not allow offensive weapons in Cuba, so inaction now would be seen as weakness.
According to Robert Kennedy, at the conclusion of this first meeting, 11 favored a blockade, 9 wanted a military strike.
The Ex Comm Favored a Blockade or Military Strike Following a White House luncheon for Libya’s crown prince that was also attended by UN Ambassador Adlai Stevenson, Kennedy invited Stevenson to the family quarters.
He further suggested that before taking military action, the existence of any military base should be negotiable.
Stevenson followed up with a memo the following day that focused on the role that world opinion would play once the crisis became public.
Read Stevenson’s memo October 18, 1962 The CIA told JFK they believed launch sites were for IRBMs because of their longer launch pads.
October 19, 1962 Before traveling to Illinois for campaign appearances, Kennedy met with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Only the Chairman, General Taylor, had been included in Kennedy’s advisory group.
Kennedy expressed his concern that a United States attack on Cuba would lead to the Soviets taking Berlin, and then to use of nuclear force.
He was also concerned that a blockade of Cuba would be met with a Soviet blockade of Berlin.
The long-held view of the Joint Chiefs had been that an invasion of Cuba was necessary, and that with the discovery of offensive weapons, it was absolutely necessary.
As the President’s preference had evolved to be a blockade, the Chiefs, led by Air Force Chief of Staff General Curtis LeMay advocated for at least an air strike on Soviet installations, hoping it would lead to an invasion.
However, the Chiefs’ doubt about the success of a blockade, on top of his own, led Kennedy to defer making a decision and to allow his advisors, led by Robert Kennedy, to continue deliberating the response.
The Joint Chiefs Wanted an Invasion October 20, 1962 Robert Kennedy asked JFK to return from campaigning.
The CIA reported that in addition to the presence of IRBMs in Cuba, 8 MRBMs were now ready to be fired.
This fact increased the chance that a United States strike on Cuba would be met with a nuclear response … and lead to nuclear war.
JFK decided to enact a naval blockade and be prepared to undertake an air strike on the missiles and missiles sites.
October 22 Morning President Kennedy called former President Eisenhower.
Eisenhower said he thought that only a blockade or full-scale invasion of Cuba would work, and he would support whatever course Kennedy chose.
United States Navy ships evacuated 2,810 women, children and other non-combatants from Guantanamo, taking them to Norfolk, Virginia.
October 22 6 PM Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin, was called to the office of Secretary of State Dean Rusk and was given a copy of the forthcoming speech.
Seeking to avoid misunderstandings, in a personal letter to Khrushchev, Kennedy warned that the United States was determined that the Soviet threat to the Western hemisphere be removed.
Dobrynin was surprised as he had not known of the missile deployment, and denied it.
October 22 7 PM After informing congressional leadership of the crisis and his plan for a blockade, Kennedy announced it to the nation on a televised speech.
He said the purpose of the limited blockade was to prevent offensive military equipment from being shipped to Cuba.
I have directed the continued and increased close surveillance of Cuba and its military buildup… Read the full speech As Seen By the USSR Oct 22, 1962 Moscow time Upon reading United States newspaper reports of a crisis atmosphere in the capitol, and learning of Kennedy’s scheduled 7 PM address to the nation.
Malinovsky advised calm, saying that the United States was unlikely to strike immediately and that it was unlikely the USSR would need to put their missile forces on high alert.
Khrushchev said their objective was to restrain United States actions against Cuba; they did not want a war.
The existing equipment would belong to Cuba, and Cuba would respond to the United States invasion.
The group finally decided to put their troops in Cuba on full alert, to prepare to defend Cuba militarily and if necessary, to used tactical weapons but not nuclear weapons.
They decided not to issue orders to the forces on the island until they heard Kennedy’s speech.
Blockade, not Invasion; USSR Turns Around Ships Oct 23, 1962 Moscow time The Presidium was relieved when they received a copy of Kennedy’s speech announcing a blockade, not an invasion.
Oct 23 10 AM Moscow time After breaking for sleep, the group reconvened.
General Pliev was ordered to establish a reliable radio connection with Moscow.
There would be no further consideration of allowing Pliev the authority to use tactical nuclear weapons.
The Presidium decided to turn around all vessels with weapons to avoid the United States having access to them.
Despite this agreement, the ship carrying the second load of nuclear warheads, the Aleksandrovsk, was ordered to remain on course, as were four Soviet subs armed with nuclear missiles.
The Presidium ignored Kennedy’s demand for the removal of nuclear weapons.
Khrushchev’s reply included a request that the United States show prudence and avoid actions that could lead to catastrophic consequences.
As Seen By the US October 23, 1962 JFK’s informal group of advisors became the official Executive Committee of the National Security Council, ExComm.
They had to decide how to implement the blockade; how they would respond if a U-2 was shot down; what to do if the Soviets took action against West Berlin.
McCone reported that the Soviet missiles were not seen in the latest U-2 photos, possibly due to extensive camouflage.
The Organization of American States unanimously approved the blockade, allowing the United States to formally declare a blockade.
Late in the day, Robert Kennedy asked Dobrynin what orders the captains of ships headed for Cuba had.
Dobrynin, who had not known of the missile emplacements, did not know of the ships’ orders.
Kennedy informed him that the United States intended to stop Soviet ships.
Launch site Oct 23 1962 As Seen by the USSR October 23, 1962 Khrushchev’s dilemma – if he allowed the United States to inspect his ships in international or Cuban waters, he would look weak, but a military confrontation could well result in the use of nuclear weapons.
He decided to accelerate the five ships that could reach Cuba before the blockade and turn back those that could not.
The Aleksandrovsk was routed to the nearest Cuban port, La Isabela, rather than its objective of Mariel as the Soviets had intercepted information that the United States was searching for a ship carrying nuclear warheads and American planes had twice overflown the port of Mariel on the afternoon of October 23rd.
The Soviet Union sought to address the imbalance in nuclear weaponry by installing such weapons in Cuba.
According to Richard Reeves writing in President Kennedy, the United States had approximately five thousand deliverable nuclear weapons.
United States intelligence estimated that the Soviets had three hundred deliverable weapons.
The United States estimate of the number of Soviet intercontinental missiles targeted at the United States was now seventy-five.
Those missiles had relatively primitive guidance systems, and analysts on both sides doubted they cold even come close to their presumed targets.
In addition, they had deployed an air defense system of SAMs capable of striking aircraft at 70,000 feet.
They also had 40 MiG-21 and 6 MiG-15 fighter aircraft, as we// as helicopters, gunboats, tanks and artillery.
