Elian Gonzalez Related topic: The Guantanamo Bay Prison Overview: Obama Is About to Visit Cuba.
There are only 90 miles of ocean between the longest dictatorship in the Americas and the longest uninterrupted democracy.
These waters are filled with tears for the disappearance of thousands of Cuban rafters who fled the Castro government and its miseries; this is a narrow sea that divided for many years families, friends and lovers.
He took over the media, transforming it into a big public relations machine for the state, and he expropriated all forms of private property during the '60s.
Top 10 misleading and outrageous statements from NYT's Nikole Hannah-Jones.
Appearing on a podcast with Ezra Klein in 2019, Hannah-Jones promoted Cuba as a country with a ""viable and sufficiently ambitious integration agenda"" due primarily to socialism.
And that's largely due to socialism — which I'm sure no one wants to hear,"" Hannah-Jones argued.
She previously wrote an article on The Oregonian in 2008 where she boasted that Cuba had a very high literacy rate, a low HIV-infection rate, universal education, and a ""model"" universal health care system that assisted Black Cubans.
As you may know, I came to the United States with my parents from Cuba in 1964.
In other words, I sympathize with Cubans who want to leave the failed communist state but it should be done in an orderly fashion.
In fact, it's reminiscent of the Mariel episode 42 years ago when Fidel Castro openly encouraged 100,000 to leave.
So the government is once again sending people north, but using the Mexico corridor to do so.
Fidel Castro jailed and tortured political prisoners at a higher rate than Stalin during the Great Terror.
He murdered more Cubans in his first three years in power than Hitler murdered Germans during his first six.
Fidel Castro shattered — through mass-executions, mass-jailings, mass larceny and exile — virtually every family on the island of Cuba.
Many opponents of the Castro regime qualify as the longest-suffering political prisoners in modern history, having suffered prison camps, forced labor and torture chambers for a period three times as long in Fidel Castro's Gulag as Alexander Solzhenitsyn suffered in Stalin's Gulag.
Fidel Castro also came closest of anyone in history to starting a worldwide nuclear war.
In the above process, Fidel Castro converted a highly-civilized nation with a higher standard of living than much of Europe and swamped with immigrants into a slum/sewer ravaged by tropical diseases and with the highest suicide rate in the Western hemisphere.
CIA Says Most 'Havana Syndrome' Cases Not Caused by a Hostile Foreign Power.
The CIA has found that most of the 1,000 cases of ""Havana Syndrome'"" were not caused by actions taken by a hostile foreign power.
The agency said that about two dozen cases remain unexplained and they will continue to investigate what caused them.
But the upshot is that no physical evidence has yet been found to validate the theory of a directed energy weapon being used on American diplomats.
And other evidence points in an entirely different direction, one involving the mysteries of the brain.
They sit on the United Nations Human Rights Council and violate human rights.
Pakistan Mauritania Qatar Somalia Russia Libya Cuba Eritrea Venezuela China As Hillel Neuer points out, Cuba's credentials are just what you are looking for for a seat in a human rights group: a 60-year totalitarian regime; bans free speech, association; blocks vital food & medical aid; infiltrates & subverts entire hemisphere; drug trafficking; sends doctors abroad as slave labor.
And Venezuela, another charmer when it comes to respecting its citizens.
As Cubans were protesting for their freedom, President Joe Biden's response was weak, despite widespread support for the protests from Cuban-Americans.
The Castro regime responded to the protests with overwhelming violence, opening fire on unarmed protesters, publicly beating individuals believed to be participating in protests, and allegedly torturing and sexually assaulting those imprisoned.
As the White House scrambled to appear more sympathetic with the freedom protesters, Biden met with a Cuban rapper, a former food blogger, and a former staffer for President Barack Obama.
Cuba and China have signed a cooperation plan to push forward construction projects under Beijing's controversial overseas infrastructure program, the Belt and Road Initiative , which has saddled many participating countries with heavy debt loads.
The agreement implemented a memorandum of understanding the two nations signed in 2018, when Cuba agreed to become a BRI participating nation.
Under the agreement, the two nations aimed to work together on projects in several key sectors, including communications, education, health and biotechnology, science and technology, and tourism, according to the Agencia Cubana de Noticias news agency.
The Chinese Embassy also stated that a timetable and a roadmap had been proposed to implement the projects, without giving details.
Christians in Cuba are facing extreme repression and even more severe human rights violations than usual this year as the regime condemns those accused of marching in the July 11 protests to outrageous prison sentences and Christians become an increasingly visible part of the anti-communist movement.
Cuba experienced some of the largest protests in its history this summer.
An estimated 187,000 people in almost every municipality on the island marched peacefully on that day demanding an end to the communist regime.
Massive protests again rocked Cuba on November 15, this time led in many cities by priests and nuns, who have increasingly taken on a leadership role in the anti-communist movement.
In reality, the ""vanguard of the proletariat,"" as Marx called them, live like members of a royal court headed by a monarch.
A nearby example is communist Cuba, where Fidel Castro amassed a fortune estimated at between $500 million and $900 million while his brother Raul possessed $100 million.
Fidel's son Antonio was photographed vacationing on his yacht in the Aegean in 2015, where he lived in luxury while his countrymen lived on $20 a month.
There is speculation as to the net worth of Cuba's current president, Miguel Díaz-Canel and as to how much he may amass in the future.
Marxist disdain for one's people is not the exception — it's the rule for all communist leaders and their families.
I am a Hispanic woman whose family fled Communist Cuba in order to give their children a better future.
Like so many others, my family fled brutal repression in favor of America's freedom and prosperity.
Conservative Republican policies are by far best-suited to protect that American freedom for generations to come — our values of faith, freedom, and family connect with the broader Hispanic community.
In merely 8 months, Biden has stifled the economic recovery he inherited and reversed policies that were helping Hispanic Americans.
He has enabled policies that have sent our cost-of-living skyrocketing.
Abroad, Biden's total lack of leadership also undermines the cause of freedom around the world — look no further than 90 miles off our coast.
The Cuban government on Tuesday made it illegal to criticize the regime on social media, giving the government more tools to punish pro-democracy protesters.
The decree comes a month after the regime restricted internet access for citizens in an attempt to stifle criticism.
Internet access in Cuba has been inconsistent since the protests started on July 11.
The big demonstrations began four weeks ago, sparked, curiously, by a rap song.
Marco Rubio, R-Fla., spoke in favor of an amendment he co-sponsored with fellow Florida Republican Rick Scott to require the Biden administration to facilitate uncensored access to the internet for the people of Cuba in the wake of pro-freedom protests.
Specifically, the Rubio-Scott amendment would create a deficit-neutral reserve fund in the National Telecommunications and Information Administration to build up and deploy existing technology on the island.
Robert Menendez, D-N.J., chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, backed up Rubio.
The demonstrations that shook Cuba on July 11 will soon be a month old.
Since then, a Carthaginian peace has descended on the unhappy island, with mass arrests, show trials, and disappearances having the desired effect of suppressing further demonstrations.
The Biden administration meanwhile remains paralyzed, with self-doubt appearing to sap its confidence.
Which means that, hard as it may be to accept, the opportunity for real change is being squandered.
This is a harsh assessment, given the degree of hope the July 11 events unleashed throughout the world that Cubans might get their freedom back.
Something real changed on July 11, when thousands saw each other in the streets in some 40 cities from one end of the island to another.
Once a population has an experience of collective fear and loss, terror can be used only sporadically, tactically, as in the present cat-and-mouse game.
Over just nine days this month, Cuban state media announced the deaths of five generals, sparking a wave of discussion and rampant speculation among analysts and exiles.
The senior military leaders all appear to have died between July 17 and 26.
Some were serving and others retired, but all had lauded military careers.
It is not clear what caused the deaths, and there is no indication they were related.
The deaths of several generals in a short space of time come as the revolutionary vanguard that has led the communist country for six decades hands over power to a new generation.
On July 11, Cuban citizens rallied in the streets to protest food and medicine shortages and electricity outages.
Cuba is going through its worst economic crisis in decades, along with a resurgence of coronavirus cases.
Cuban officials blame the decades-long embargo with the United States for the collapsing economy.
The internet, basically unavailable until 2008, has only been widely available in Cuba Since July 2019, when the Cuban government began lifting restrictions on internet access.
Since that time, Cuba has slowly entered the digital world, with mobile access to the internet becoming available in December 2018.
As Cuba's citizens protested, many of them pulled out their cellphones to post videos and images across social media platforms.
The Cuban government began immediately blocking access to those platforms.
This is reminiscent of Arab Spring, when the governments of Egypt, Libya, and Syria completely shut down the internet to quell the protests.
Other governments in the Arab world were rumored to have arrested and even executed people for things they posted on the internet.
Minor Arrested for Witnessing Protests Says Police Threatened to Rape Her.
A 17-year-old girl sentenced to eight months of house arrest for having witnessed protests in Cuba on July 11 told the independent outlet Cubanet in an interview this week that police forced her to strip naked and threatened to subject her to rape by two large men.
Gabriela Zequeira Hernández was on her way back home from the hairdresser in her native Havana when she noticed what she described as the largest crowd of people she had ever seen in her life.
On July 11, Cubans nationwide took to the streets of nearly every major city in the country demanding an end to the communist regime.
The protests reportedly attracted thousands of people, the vast majority marching peacefully through main streets and into central plazas calling for the communist regime to step down, and represented the largest nationwide simultaneous protest in recent memory.
He and his ilk are much more heavily influenced by well-known celebrities and others who have spent their lives supporting the Castros.
Check out some of the signatories: Jane Fonda, Susan Sarandon, Daniel Ellsberg, Cornel West, Noam Chomsky, Oliver Stone, etc.
But then these are the people with and to whom Democrats socialize and listen, not regular people.
I would wager that the vast majority of them voted for The Hologram and The Cackler, too.
This is the Elian Gonzalez scandal × 27, except these people won't be treated like heros when they get back.
The United States Coast Guard announced the return of 27 Cuban refugees to the communist country on Tuesday , caught attempting to navigate to Florida on two separate vessels.
The slightly over two dozen people are believed to be the first large group of balseros, or rafters, caught attempting to enter the United States in this manner since the July 11 protests.
On that day, thousands of Cubans marched in the streets of dozens of municipalities nationwide and every major city on the island, demanding an end to 62 years of communist rule.
The protests triggered a wave of state-sponsored violence including public beatings, police opening fire on unarmed civilians, and the imprisonment and threatening of minors.
Ted Cruz blasted Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas for saying that Cubans who come to the United States by sea will be turned away as his department releases thousands of illegal migrants, stopped at the southern border, into U.S. communities.
According to a report on Tuesday, border patrol has released about 50,000 illegal immigrants without a date to appear in court, and only 13% of them have reported to an ICE office.
In the past, migrants eligible for release into the United States after being caught at the border were assigned court dates.
Former President Donald Trump reached an agreement with Mexico that required migrants awaiting their court hearings to remain in Mexico instead of the United States The Biden administration terminated that agreement.
Five high-ranking Cuban generals have passed away under mysterious circumstances over the past ten days.
According to Periódico Cubano — a Florida-based news outlet that seeks to establish ""a communication bridge between Miami and Havana"" — reported on Tuesday that Brigadier General Armando Choy Rodríguez passed away.
A Cuban university — which first shared the news with the public — offered no details on the cause of his death.
Five high-ranking Cuban military leaders die in a 10-day span. ive high-ranking Cuban generals have died in a 10-day span, according to the Cuban government, which has yet to provide causes of death.
Cuban television also confirmed Monday that Manuel Eduardo Lastres Pacheco, a former general who had served under Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara during the revolution in the 1950s, had died.
He was a controversial figure in the military who gave the order in 1996 to shoot down a civilian plane from the Cuban exile group ""Brothers to the Rescue,"" exacerbating tensions between Cuba and the United States Cuban Americans Turn on Biden.
Tensions rose in front of the White House Sunday as a small group of socialists in defense of the Cuban communist regime attempted to confront a peaceful assembly in support of the rights of Cuban people.
Lilia Gort, who was participating in the much larger assembly against communism, came from Tampa, Florida, because, as she told Breitbart News, ""We want freedom for our people in Cuba.
AOC Tries To Explain Why She Only Blames The United States Embargo For What's Happening In Cuba.
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and three other House Democrats affiliated with the far-left Democratic Socialists of America have so far remained silent while the DSA appears to back Cuba's communist regime against protesters demanding freedom.
All four members have yet to speak out about the ongoing protests in Cuba.
AOC Discovers That Republicans Want Cuba's Communist Dictatorship to Fall.
Regime change in Cuba has enjoyed bipartisan support until the radicalization of the Democrats in recent years.
Presidents of both parties wanted the murderous, long-winded, weird-bearded communist thug Fidel Castro gone.
Kennedy, a Democrat, even launched an invasion led by Cuban exiles to topple Castro, in April 1961.
The Bay of Pigs invasion failed and Castro remained in power until he couldn't hold on anymore, at which point he passed power sideways to his brother, Raul.
Castro died a near-billionaire, which was quite a feat for a communist who was supposed to share wealth with the people.
If there remain citizens in America who, because of race or any other reason, are deprived of the benefits and protections of a free society, we should work to bring those benefits of freedom to them.
The answer is not to abandon the principles that make us a free country.
Those who are the loudest and most aggressive about what is supposedly wrong don't want a free country.
Their complaint is not about absence of freedom, but who has power and who will be in charge and running the show.
Nothing could make this clearer than the recent bizarre statement of Black Lives Matter about the current civil unrest in Cuba.
And, like all countries that are run by communists, the people there live deprived and oppressed.
Democrats, completely undeterred by the election lessons of 2020, cozied right up to BLM's messaging.
It took five days, but the White House has apparently had enough time to consider the question and agrees that yes, communism is a failed system.
Even that admission was like pulling teeth from this president, who's been surprisingly muted in his response to the Cuban protests.
Black Lives Matter, which is finally ending this ruse that they're anything but Marxist radicals, released a blistering statement blaming the United States for every cruel and inhumane thing that's happened to the Cubans over the last 62 years of oppressive rule.
As the American left argues openly for socialism, it's helpful to keep in mind just how dreadfully those policies have failed — and just how viciously socialists have responded to those who got in the way — in countries throughout the world.
Watch the recent protests in Cuba and you will see how regular people feel about the direction the American left wants to take.
Since the communist revolution in 1959, leftists in America have celebrated purported Cuban progress in areas such as health care and education.
Little mention was made in those quarters about the Cuban government's human rights abuses, which include political executions, arbitrary imprisonments, an unfair legal system, and severe limits on freedom of expression, free association, free assembly, free movement, and, of course, a free press.
The problem with the left's embrace of Cuba's communism is it belies its ultimate lack of regard for those freedoms we, as Americans, hold most dear.
Byron Donalds has signed onto a resolution from a fellow Florida Republican, Rep.
Donalds says it's critical that the United States stand in strong opposition to the violent suppression of mass public protests there.
Not only did they shut down the internet, but they were like, 'There was a 12-year-old kid who was in the crowd at the protests.
The police, the military police threw him on the ground, hit him with the butt of their gun in the back of his neck, broke his neck.
These are the things that are occurring in Cuba right now, today,"" the freshman Florida lawmaker says.
Now in 2021, as we see Cubans crying out in the streets against the tyranny of the island nation's regime, it's quite clear that people like Hannah-Jones are dangerous ideologues who have no problem implementing that same kind of socialism here.
During a 2019 interview with Vox's Ezra Klein, Hannah-Jones talked about the nations she thought had made the greatest strides in terms of fairness and diversity.
No doubt the lady whose crowning achievement is propaganda on how evil our country is, wouldn't recognize America as a place of notable equality and diversity.
She actually claimed that communist Cuba is the most ""equal"" place in the west.
Yet here we are with protestors against a failed, evil state in the streets of Havana, and our own government, media, and professional classes are worried that ossified Communism in Cuba may fall.
After opening the United States southern border to pseudo-political refugees, the Biden Administration is terrified that thousands of real ones might come to Miami in the fashion it invited millions to storm into Texas.
Its immigration policy was entirely utilitarian and hinged only on whether illegal immigration altered the demography of the electorate in the correct way.
This sudden eruption of dissent was caused by a perfect storm of calamities, all of which have revealed the Big Lie of the revolution.
Lately, life in Cuba has become more unbearable than ever for just about every Cuban.
The loss of revenue from Venezuela, a collapsed economy, gargantuan foreign debt, a disastrous sugar harvest, uncontrolled inflation, a plague that is intensifying in Cuba rather than abating, a crumbling health care system, medication shortages, food shortages, water shortages, electricity blackouts, and increased repression, to name but a few.
Never mind the sanctions by the United States or the so-called embargo that Cuba's military junta and many of the world's news outlets are blaming for the current crisis.
These are inconsequential factors, a decoy skillfully manipulated by the oligarchs in order to distract from their own ineptitude and the congenital defects of the communism they embraced.
These protesters know the ultimate cause of their distress is their lack of freedom in all spheres of life, which is nothing new.
He Doesn't Seem to Know It, But Joe Biden's Problems Are Mounting Fast.
In the last fiscal year under Donald Trump's ""Stay in Mexico, Amigos"" enforcement policies, border agents arrested 458,000 illegals, a 53 percent drop from the previous year.
So far this fiscal year under Biden's Bienvenidos policy, agents have arrested more than one million illegals with still three more months to go.
But you don't hear much about this border chaos, because Kamala Harris has already been there to straighten things out.
Once they're breathing freedom, emigres from there tend to vote Republican.
I Want to See Sanders, Warren, AOC Get on a Raft and Sail to 'Socialist Paradise' Cuba.
Ted Cruz railed against communists during a speech at Turning Point USA's Student Action Summit on Sunday, noting that people only seem to flee communist-run countries for America, not the other way around.
A group of protesters urging American action to protect the lives of thousands of Cubans who began protesting peacefully against the regime this week across the island told Breitbart News on Thursday that the communist regime has launched a ""civil war"" and ""genocide"" against those seeking freedom.
While Cuba has seen a growing number of peaceful assemblies against the ruling Castro regime in the past decade, the scale of the protests that began on Sunday — spanning over 60 municipalities from one tip of the island to the other — is a dramatic escalation from what the country has experienced in recent memory.
President Miguel Díaz-Canel, the figurehead of the ruling Castro dynasty, issued an ""order of combat"" on Sunday demanding that civilian ""revolutionaries"" take the streets and violently assault anyone suspected of protesting against the regime.
The U.S. government can utilize high-altitude balloons to provide internet access to Cubans, a Federal Communications Commission commissioner says.
Ron DeSantis, a Republican, called on President Joe Biden to restore an internet connection to the island after the ruling regime moved to shut it off.
The pro-freedom protests in Cuba are fluid, but the communist dictatorship there seems willing to soften its tone and allow travelers to bring in food and medicines amid the unrest.
In the United States, Republicans called for the Biden administration to be more active in supporting protesters.
However, the United States and other free nations mostly seem to be condemning the Cuban government's actions while waiting to see what happens next.
Cuban Special Forces Thugs Raid The Home Of Protester, Kill Him In Front Of Wife And Children.
Ramos Herrería said members of a special forces unit known as the Black Wasps invaded the home of her daughter's longtime friend in Cárdenas.
She said the armed black-clad men hunted the young woman's husband who had been involved in the protests.
There is a huge pool of blood in the room,"" Ramos Herrería said adding the victim's relatives believe he is dead and the couple has children ages 2 and 12.
The violence comes amid shortages of food and medicine and a lack of access to healthcare for COVID patients who are dying at home.
BLM lavishly praised genocidal commie Fidel Castro in resurfaced tweet and blog post.
Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez drew the ire of a former Florida Democratic congresswoman after she suggested that the United States is partially responsible for the the deprivation that has led to civil unrest in Cuba in recent days.
Black Lives Matter posted a statement Wednesday praising the Cuban government amidst mass anti-communist protests.
The statement, posted to their Instagram and Twitter accounts — blamed the United States for the country's instability and credited the Cuban regime for granting ""black revolutionaries"" asylum, as reported by Fox News.
Black Lives Matter blames US, praises Cuban regime, social media erupts.
Black Lives Matter faced fierce criticism late Wednesday after posting a statement that blasted the United States and praised Cuba's government while the island was destabilized by historic protests and violent crackdowns.
The statement — originally posted on Instagram and later tweeted and retweeted — blamed the United States embargo for the country's instability and credited the Cuban government for historically granting ""Black revolutionaries"" asylum.
Marco Rubio, R-Florida, was quick to rebuke an initial tweet that linked to the statement.
BLM blames 'cruel and inhumane' United States embargoes for Cuba unrest.
Black Lives Matter has blamed the 'cruel and inhumane' United States for the current unrest in Cuba, as the activists praised the Communist regime for harboring a convicted United States cop killer and for its 'solidarity' with oppressed people.
The group sparked a furious backlash with the statement shared online following a week of violence on the island and furious protests over food shortages and rising prices.
BLM shills Cuba's lily-white dictatorship, all the black people protesting across Cuba.
The statement came out with some funny timing, too, according to Fox News: The BLM tweet was sent out at about the time Cuban President Miguel Díaz-Canel admitted in a televised address that his government's failures played a role in the protests over food shortages and other issues.
He had earlier called on ""revolutionaries"" to counter the anti-government protesters.
Black Lives Matter Global Network Foundation, Inc.'s tweet echoed Díaz-Canel's early statements that blamed the U.S. embargo for the country's economic devastation.
Cuba is going through its worst economic crisis in decades and is also facing a resurgence of coronavirus cases.
Resignations and calls for ending communist dictatorship are coming fast.
It's always a bad sign when the elites start resigning during times of crisis, as if to get out early to save their skins.
There's more than one now as Cuba erupts into protests and calls to end the communist dictatorship, so it's getting to be a pattern.
So here we got one report of a resignation of one of the regime's thuggier members, Cuba's Deputy Minister of the Interior, Brigadier General Jesús Manuel Burón Tabit, according to top Cuba expert Carlos Eire, writing at the indispensible Babalu blog.
The Obama cat has the Biden administration's tongue as the Communist thugs carry on in Havana, imprisoning anyone who can get the word out on the open air prison they maintain to support the regime.
The continued tyranny and immiseration appear to be reaching a breaking point with the protests that have brought the regime back into the news.
In a statement on Tuesday , the Chinese government reaffirmed its support for its fellow Communist regime in Cuba, and that it would ""stand ready to work with Cuba"" in suppressing the new wave of anti-government protests across the country, as reported by Breitbart.
The statement was issued by Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian, who recently gained notoriety for falsely claiming that the United States was responsible for creating the coronavirus, which actually came from China and has since spread throughout the world.
Ron DeSantis Providing Leadership on Cuba While Joe Biden Is Missing in Action.
Cuban-Americans in Florida have been out in the streets, rallying on behalf of their brethren in Cuba.
They've been calling on Florida and the United States to help the Cuban people.
While Joe Biden has said that he would ""stand with the Cuban people,"" it's not clear that he's actually doing anything at all to back up those words.
Some folks in Florida tried to organize boats to go to Cuba and provide help but the United States government was discouraging that.
Meanwhile, Florida Governor Ron DeSantis was striking all the right notes, meeting with Cuban-American leaders in a round-table discussion to discuss the deteriorating situation in Cuba.
DeSantis also corrected the Biden team for falsely painting the protests in Cuba as a reaction to the pandemic.
Joe Biden has seemed absent in dealing with the protests of the people of Cuba calling for their freedom.
While Biden said he supported the Cuban people after a delayed response, even then the criticism seemed muted because he seemed unwilling to even use the term ""communism"" to describe the regime.
Instead, his team seemed to blame the pandemic and ""mismanagement"" for the problem.
Biden finally got around to it today, calling communism ""a failed system,"" after being dragged into saying something more.
The mayor of Miami, Florida, has called on the United States to consider military action to overthrow the Communist regime in Cuba — even if that means launching airstrikes.
He highlighted previous United States military action in Panama, Kosovo and Pakistan, the latter of which ""probably saved thousands"" of lives by killing Osama bin Laden when President Biden was vice president.
The heavy arm of the Cuban government has been falling on the people protesting the government, but it's also falling on those who have been trying to cover what's going on in the media.
One person has died during demonstrations in Cuba over food shortages, high prices and other grievances against the government.
The interior ministry said on Tuesday that Diubis Laurencio Tejeda, 36, died during a clash on Monday between protesters and police in the Arroyo Naranjo municipality on the outskirts of Havana.
It said an unspecified number of people were arrested and there were some people injured, including some officers.
The statement accused demonstrators of vandalising houses, setting fires and damaging power lines.
It also alleged they attacked police and civilians with knives, stones and other objects.
The confirmation follows reports that scores of activists, protesters and journalists, including a reporter for one of Spain's leading newspapers, have been detained as Communist party security forces seek to smother Sunday's historic flare-up of dissent.
I'm seeing reports of 57 to hundreds of missing or arrested Cubans after Sunday's protest, which spanned across the island.
Cuban civilians documented multiple instances throughout the country of state security agents firing live rounds into crowds and beating protesters with baseball bats and other weapons.
Witnesses also documented the use of tear gas and other repressive anti-riot gear.
Media and Democrats Remain Silent as Biden Administration Turns Away Asylum Seekers from Cuba.
The Democrats and their allies in the media would very much like for you to ignore both.
You may not like or agree with Donald Trump's plans for the border when he was President, but he had one.
Over and over, we got nothing but stories about how awful it was that the Trump administration was stopping asylum seekers from coming to the United States.
The southern border is in shambles right now as immigrants flood the border, making it difficult to tell the honest asylum seekers and true immigrants from those with nefarious intent.
Eliminating that was the Trump administration's goal, and they were attacked for it.
The Biden administration, meanwhile, wants you to know that the Trump days are long gone, and it's a new era.
Alex Mooney, R-W.Va., joins ""The Daily Signal Podcast"" to talk about what life there is like.
We can add this one to the shooting of 1996 when a civilian plane was shot down by the regime.
As people march in Cuba, we remember the ones who were killed this week in 1994.
In the early morning hours of July 13, 1994, 37 men, women, and children were killed by government agents seven miles off the Cuban coast, as they sought to travel to freedom on board the ""13 de Marzo"" tugboat.
Eleven of these Cubans were children, ranging in age from Helen Martínez Enríquez — just five months old — to Mayulis Méndez Tacaronte, aged 17.
Yesterday , one of the biggest news stories making the rounds involved the sudden emergence of widespread protests in Cuba.
They were being described as pro-democracy demonstrations calling for the end of the dictatorship that currently controls the country under President Miguel Díaz-Canel.
People were taking to the streets in more than two dozen cities and numerous smaller towns.
But as of this morning, things suddenly appear a lot more subdued in Cuba.
There are still some sporadic reports of protesters showing up, but the activity appears to be significantly muted compared to Sunday and Monday.
It might be, or at least close to it because the Díaz-Canel regime has already begun cracking down on the protesters, while still attempting to blame the unrest on the United States.
The initial Biden administration response to the mass rallies for freedom that took place across Cuba on Sunday was a disgrace.
As Cubans took to the streets defying the Communist regime's totalitarian police, a senior State Department official tweeted that the administration viewed the protests as merely a result of unhappiness ""about rising COVID cases/deaths"" in the island country.
The slogans shouted by thousands who risked imprisonment or worse were about an end to the Communist dictatorship installed in the 1950s.
The starvation and shortages that have outraged demonstrators are a direct result of the regime's policies and repression.
But that money was largely funneled to an unaccountable and brutal government, not its long-suffering citizens.
Democrats Start to Panic After They Realize They've Screwed up in Florida.
Protests in Cuba against the communist regime and the decades of oppression it has produced have provided a test of will in Florida.
While Republicans, both in the state and nationally, are always outspoken against the Cuban government and understand the reasons the people there are fed up, Democrats have attempted to straddle a line that can't be straddled.
Tepid denouncements that refuse to name communism as the problem and distract to other issues do not play well in a state like Florida.
We saw the White House try to make the unrest about COVID vaccines, which is not only ludicrous but an obvious attempt to bolster their own flailing messaging on the pandemic.
Meanwhile, local other Democrats appropriated the justified protests against a dictatorship in Cuba in order to whine about anti-rioting laws in Florida.
Former President Donald Trump is standing behind Cuban protestors in their quest for freedom from Castro's communist regime.
Don't forget that Biden and the Democrats campaigned on reversing my very tough stance on Cuba.
Remember when Obama attended baseball games with Castros while they imprisoned, beat, and killed the Cuban people,"" Trump released in a statement Monday afternoon.
Joe Biden MUST stand up to the Communist regime or — history will remember.
Never forget the United States left's disgusting love affair with the Castro regime.
It's not easy to run a hideous dictatorship and still have fans and defenders in fashionable quarters, but the Castro dictatorship has managed it all of these decades.
The mass, spontaneous protests that broke out all over the country last weekend are yet another sign that the Cuban government lacks all legitimacy.
In Cuba, it is the government versus the people, and lo, all these years, Castro's apologists have been with the government.
They have romanticized Fidel Castro, the founder father of Cuba's junta.
On Monday , CBS This Morning unbelievably attempted to blame the Trump administration for Cuba's economy crumbing after decades of the island nation's brutal, corrupt communist regime oppressing its people.
The broadcast then urged the Biden administration to appease the authoritarian government by removing sanctions on the dictatorship.
On Monday , CBS This Morning drew criticism from the reasonable when they blamed former President Trump for the plight of the protesting Cuban people.
John noted last night the large anti-regime protests in Cuba, and one hopes that this is the beginning of the end for the Castro tyranny, in just the way that mass protests in Eastern Europe in 1989 presaged the fall of the Berlin Wall in November of that year, and the collapse of Communist rule shortly thereafter.
Protestors took to the streets ""in cities all around the country"" according to media reports.
There are credible reports of building unrest among Cubans for several months now, but protests usually require some planning, coordination, and communication.
It is reported today that Cuba has shut down the internet to hinder further protest planning.
Cubans know the island's top source of hard currency is the exploitative export of Cuban experts in exchange for euros and dollars.
They're also aware that that hard cash enriches the rulers and bigwigs in the army, which controls up to 80% of the Cuban economy.
And that at the same time the Cuban people lack the most basic necessities.
Castro's heirs have clumsily attempted to replicate China's Communist model, which allows some free enterprise while maintaining tight controls over macro economics.
Havana has touted its biochemical industry and sent physicians and nurses across the world in exchange for hard cash, but while Cuba displays 14 ""medical tourism"" facilities on the island, health care for the locals is among of the world's worst.
Like an unwatched pot suddenly violently boiling over, Havana and other cities have erupted in defiant protests by Cubans fed up with living in their perpetually depressed tropical police state.
True to form, the Castroite regime has already reflexively cracked down on the protests with brutality.
Here in the U.S., some on the left initially tried to portray this as Cubans being upset over COVID-19 infections and a lack of vaccines.
Republicans spotlight Cuba as socialism failure as protests erupt amid historic economic crisis.
Republicans are pointing to unrest in Cuba as evidence that socialist policies ultimately fail, despite a trend among far-left Democrats to embrace them.
Thousands of Cubans took to the streets in Havana over the weekend to lash out at the worsening conditions in the country under the communist regime, as Cuba faces its worst economic crisis in decades.
Marco Rubio, R-Fla., and Ted Cruz, R-Texas, had particularly strong words against Cuba's system of government.
On Sunday after a State Department official described the heroic Cuban protests against the tyrannical communist government as the people ""expressing their right to peaceful assembly"" to ""express concern about rising COVID cases/deaths & medicine shortages,"" Rep.
Dan Crenshaw blasted her, firing, ""Stop playing cover for communists and support the Cuban people.
Julie Chung, Acting Assistant Secretary for United States Department of State's Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs, tweeted, ""Peaceful protests are growing in #Cuba as the Cuban people exercise their right to peaceful assembly to express concern about rising COVID cases/deaths & medicine shortages.
Sanders loves trashing Republicans but won't condemn truly oppressive Cuban Communists.
Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., often uses his Twitter account to disparage policies in the United States and Republican politicians he doesn't like, but he has been silent about thousands of protesters gathering in the streets Sunday calling for the end of the communist regime in Cuba.
Sanders, who previously defended some of the policies of Cuba's previous communist dictator Fidel Castro, including his literacy program, was silent until Tuesday afternoon on whether he supports Cubans speaking out against the communist regime.
He finally spoke, but only when prompted with a question, and he did not limit his comment to Cuba.
Thousands of Cubans took to the streets on Sunday in a number of cities to protest against human rights abuses, a lack of freedom, and a worsening economic situation in the communist-ruled country.
Videos uploaded to social media appear to show demonstrations in a number of towns and cities, including the capital, Havana, on Sunday.
Protesters, chanting in Spanish, said they ""weren't afraid"" of the regime led by Miguel Diaz Canel, and said they wanted access to COVID-19 vaccines and an end to the regime.
It comes amid reports of gas, electricity, and vaccine shortages across the Caribbean island nation.
Socialists in Congress Silent as Cubans Rise Up Against Communist Dictatorship.
Protests erupted yesterday in all of Cuba's major cities against the nation's ruling Communist dictatorship following over six decades of oppression.
Protesters chanted ""freedom,"" ""enough"" and ""unite,"" and demanded the dissolution of their nation's communist dictatorship.
Protesters had specific complaints about the nation's food shortages, high prices, and handling of the coronavirus outbreak, which were correctly attributed to their government.
The Biden administration was initially silent on the protests, and only commented that they'd vow to condemn any violence in Cuba.
Biden himself waited until this morning to say that the United States stands with the Cuban people.
Cuban President Blames United States for 'Social Unrest' after Massive Anti-Communist Protest.
Cuban President Miguel Diaz-Canel on Monday accused the United States of provoking social unrest in his country, one day after thousands of Cubans took to the streets to demand an end to the Communist dictatorship that has oppressed and anchored citizens in poverty for decades.
He suggested that the United States is responsible for inflicting economic misery in Cuba by imposing trade sanctions.
The Cuban president also alleged that mercenaries hired by the United States intentionally manufactured the anti-government protests to destabilize Cuba, the BBC reported.
On Sunday , protests in Cuba erupted as citizens took to the streets over a lack of food, medicine, and other necessities under the brutal regime of the Cuban government.
In response, social media was flooded with calls for support and several major media outlets took notice of what was happening.
The problem is that this is a moment when the American government should take notice, and it largely seems to have ignored it.
You had politicians like Marco Rubio and Ron DeSantis release statements, as well as other Republicans, but the party in power was all but silent.
There's something pretty amazing going on in Cuba today, as we reported here and here.
It's pretty fair to call it an uprising in Cuba, at this point, against the Communist government, with thousands in the street upending police cars — and police joining the protesters.
It's something that may not have been seen since 1959, with the massive numbers of people.
Massive Demonstrations in Cuba Demanding Freedom, Waving American Flag, Taking on Police.
If you know your Cuban history, that's the last time the government changed hands — when Fidel Castro took power.
There's also another powerful symbol that some are waving — the American flag — to them, a symbol of freedom.
Imagine if the folks on our left in this country understood that meaning as well these Cubans do.
Some activists called it the largest spontaneous popular protest since Fidel Castro took power in 1959, with protesters openly denouncing the regime of Miguel Diaz-Canel.
Miami mayor leads calls for United States intervention in Cuba as thousands take to the streets of Communist-run nation.
Thousands of Cubans took to the streets from Havana to Santiago on Sunday chanting 'down with the dictatorship' in the biggest anti-government demonstrations on the Communist-run island in decades.
The images of protests in Cuba that have gone viral on social media prompted officials in the United States to call for an American-led intervention to topple the ruling government in Havana.
Thousands of Cubans marched on Havana's Malecon promenade and elsewhere on the island to protest food shortages and high prices amid the coronavirus crisis.
Thousands of protestors gathered in Havana and towns across the country to protest various government shortcomings including food shortages, medicine shortages, rising prices, and pandemic restrictions.
Although many protestors attempted to film the march, Cuban authorities eventually shut down internet service within the area.
As millions march against communism across Cuba, Biden administration makes an outrageous response.
Defying death, terror and beatings, millions of Cubans took to the streets across Cuba shouting ""Freedom"" and ""We are not afraid"" in a collective call to end to the 62-year communist dictatorship.
It was breathtaking, a thing of beauty, comparable only to Tiananmen or the fall of the Berlin wall.
It took unprecedented courage, too — against state goons, secret police, government death squads, and paid thugs — who are responding now like cornered rats, knowing very well their survival is at stake.
It's too soon to tell if the Cubans have won, a big general strike has been called today.
But even if they didn't, this was a vast people's repudiation of communism, that brutal system so praised by the United States left.
Earlier today , demonstrations against Cuba's Communist dictatorship broke out across the island.
Shouting ""Freedom"" and other anti-government slogans, hundreds of Cubans took to the streets in cities around the country on Sunday to protest food and medicine shortages, in a remarkable eruption of discontent not seen in nearly 30 years.
The Times, though, is pretty much always on the side of government, especially when the government is socialist.
Cuban Refugee Warns America Is Swallowing The 'Poison Pill' Of Communism.
He is the Cuban-American immigrant who spoke at the last Republican convention and warned America not to trust the Democrats.
He talked about his family escaping communism and praised America for being the land of the free.
This week, he was interviewed by Lisa Boothe and once again, he sounded the alarm.
Ted Cruz jabs CNN, suggests Cuban leader Raul Castro should join liberal network.
He and his late brother Fidel Castro reigned for six decades, the latter taking power in 1959 following the Cuban Revolution against then-leader Fulgencio Batista.
Cruz, who is the son of a Cuban immigrant, has often spoken out about the dangers of the communist regime in Cuba and their history of human rights abuses.
Castro's exit comes as Cuba is experiencing food shortages and financial instability as the COVID-19 pandemic shuttered its tourism industry.
Some in the media are treating this as some ""Washington moment,"" or when President Washington decided not to seek a third term in 1796.
My guess is that Raúl Castro knows that this is a good time to get out because the island is facing some difficult times.
COVID has hit Cuba hard and cut into tourism, the only thing the island has to bring in dollars.
COVID stopped those flights full of tourists, and the economy shrank 11% last year.
Thanks to President Trump, United States sanctions have made it more difficult for Cuba's regime.
The 89-year-old Castro made the announcement Friday in a speech at the opening of the Eighth congress of the ruling party, the only one allowed on the island.
But he previously indicated that he favors yielding control to 60-year-old Miguel Diaz-Canel, who succeeded him as president in 2018 and is the standard bearer of a younger generation of loyalists who have been pushing an economic opening without touching Cuba's one-party system.
Anyone with half a brain — maybe even much less than that — can easily discern the handiwork of Castro, Inc. in the neurological injuries sustained by American and Canadian diplomats in Castrogonia.
Yet, most media outlets keep treating this news story as some kind of impenetrable mystery.
Here is the latest installment from the Castro News Network , which prefers to refer to the injuries as ""Havana Syndrome"", a term invented by Canadians in order to absolve Castro, Inc. of all responsibility by implying that mass hysteria of some sort is involved.
The article predictably quotes Bernie Sanders' senatorial colleague and fellow Castrophilliac Jeanne Shaheen, who blames Trump for botching the investigation and silently implies that he did so on purpose so he could punish Castro, Inc. unfairly.
Anyway, it looks as if Jar-Jar Biden has now greased the skids for a quick and easy absolution of Castro, Inc.
In addition to their miserable record on human rights, with thousands of political dissidents held in warrantless detention and imprisonment in 2020 alone, the Cuban regime has offered safe haven to America's most notorious domestic terrorists.
Four among them are William Guillermo Morales, Victor Manuel Gerena, Charles Lee Hill, and Joanne Deborah Chesimard.
Hill, along with two members of the Republic of New Afrika , shot to death a New Mexico state trooper in 1971 on a motor vehicle stop and later hijacked an airliner to Cuba.
Gerena is a fugitive from the 1983 Wells Fargo heist of seven million dollars in Connecticut and a member of Los Macheteros, a group that fired a surface-to-air missile at the FBI office in Puerto Rico and engaged in shootouts with agents.
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo announced Monday that the United States is re-designating Cuba as a state sponsor of terrorism, citing its harboring of terrorists.
A government television broadcast in Cuba this week urged citizens to eat guinea pig and other rodents, suggesting rodent meat is more nutritious and ""sustainable"" than pork or beef, Cuban outlets reported on Wednesday.
In recent years, the Castro regime has blamed President Donald Trump for extensive food shortages and failed distribution of government-mandated rations.
While the Trump administration has imposed significant sanctions on the regime in response to the increased frequency of human rights violations against pro-democracy dissidents in the Obama era, these sanctions have targeted elite individuals and military-linked corporations, not sources of food for the general population.
She gleefully starred in and helped produce a tourism commercial to boost the America-hating, terror-sponsoring regime's income.
Jill Biden in Cuba to study Cuba's achievements in health and education,"" read a headline in Stalinist Cuba's media, Oct.
More interestingly, during Jill Biden's co-production with communist apparatchiks of her Potemkin tourism commercial to boost the income of Castro's military and secret police who majority own Cuba's tourism industry — her frequent escort was a Cuban lady named Josefina Vidal.
The KGB-trained Vidal was expelled from the United States in Oct. 2003 for her suspected operational links to Cuban spy Ana Belen Montes, responsible for the deepest and most damaging penetration of the United States Department of Defense in recent history.
Presumably that will include the dismantling of the 50-plus governments' coalition that has withdrawn diplomatic recognition from Nicolás Maduro's regime, which is supported by a large Cuban military deployment.
A return to Obama's policy means an influx of millions of tourist dollars to the coffers of the repressive communist regime in Havana, at a time of growing popular unrest and confrontations with the police throughout the island.
Of course, Democrats like to make fun of anti-communists and pretend their political enemies are right-wing extremists.
However, as Landau's narrative shows, the devices of Cuban communism and the program of the Democrats are virtually the same.
Communists are dead set against individual self-expression, but our individualism, as Emi Rivero proved with his own life, is consistent with nature.
We are simultaneously possessive, selfish, charitable, and capable of sacrifice for a greater good.
Anti-capitalists protest our nature and believe the government can change it.
El Regimen since its inception has been composed of more than those whose last name is Castro.
This clique gradually expanded its membership and consolidated its strength over the next decade or so under the tutelage and patronage of Fidel Castro, carving out their own private fiefdoms within El Sistema (the Politico-Economic System In Cuba) as they did so.
He is the person who touted Cuba's health care system as superior to ours, despite the fact that you have never heard a single person say, ever, ""Well, the doctor told me I have cancer.
But Michael Moore tried to sell a whopper of a lie that Cuba — communist, backwater, island prison Cuba — has a better health care system than the United States in his 2007 mockumentary, Sicko.
People risk their lives on rickety little homemade rafts to cross shark-infested waters to escape that place, not to go there to get back surgery.
Sanders was on the top of the heap in the Democratic presidential race ... right until he made remarks praising Fidel Castro on 60 Minutes.
The case for socialism is bleaker now than it was even back in Wayland's day or in Owen's day.
The reason is that by now it has been tried all over the world, and it is a bust.
A humanitarian bust, and an economic bust — in every respect it is the God that failed.
Before the Soviet Union fell, the Soviets had turned every country that they controlled into a prison and every economy that they controlled into a poverty zone.
The young people of Cuba have shiny white teeth and they can read, he claims.
Well, let them read Armando Valladares' Against All Hope, a book about the author's existence for decades in a Castro prison for having done nothing wrong.
There are dozens of books like this written by brave Cuban freedom fighters.
When I turn to thinking about life in a Cuban hellhole today, I am reminded that Bernie Sanders' socialism is no joke.
Imagine being held as a political prisoner in Fidel Castro's workers' paradise for a few years, a Yanquí accused of espionage for bringing wider Internet access to a small enclave of Jews in Cuba.
Your guards allow you to dress in normal clothes to greet a congressional delegation of three senators from your home country.
The first two bring you sympathy, conversation, pledges of assistance, and candy.
The third sits quietly throughout most of the meeting, and then at the end wonders why everyone talks badly of your jailers.
I hope this is obvious by now but there is zero conceivable political benefit to soft-pedaling your criticism of Fidel.
Pro-Castro voters in America are like less than 1 percent of the electorate.
Someone in a position of authority in the campaign needs to pull Sanders aside and just give him a script about the 1970s and 1980s and tell him never to deviate from it.
On Sixty Minutes, for example Sanders defended his affection for Fidel Castro by saying, ""But, you know, it's unfair to simply say everything is bad.
Moreover, apart from the moral idiocy of suggesting that improving literacy is worth imprisoning and torturing political enemies, and murdering up to 140,000 people, saying that Castro substantially raised Cuban literacy rates is a big lie.
Instead, we left because of the dictatorship, the sudden semi-starvation, the constant propaganda, the indoctrination at schools, the militarization of society, the paranoia, the constant surveillance, the secret police, the arbitrary arrests and disappearances for having said something wrong, the closure of newspapers, the lack of the most basic necessities for life, and because Cuba was becoming a Soviet colony.
Following praise of Castro's Cuba by Democratic presidential candidate for president Sen.
Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., I must take the opportunity to correct the misinformation and false claims so frequently touted by Castro's apologists.
First of all, it is appalling to those personally affected by the Castro regime legacy of firing squads, torture, imprisonment, brutal oppression and terrorism to witness a United States presidential candidate seek to decipher some nominal good from the abject and all-pervasive evil of totalitarianism.
Many of those who support Sanders today may not have been around to witness the evils of communism over the past few decades.
You will see some beautiful images, of men in suits smoking cigars and driving vintage cars, turn-of-the-century brightly colored Spanish architecture buildings, paparazzi snaps of Jay-Z and Beyonce walking the streets of Havana, and pictures of President Obama inexplicably and peacefully enjoying a baseball game with communist dictator Raúl Castro.
Bread lines, gas lines, food shortages, crumbling infrastructure, crippling poverty, and an oppressed people suffering under the jackboot of socialism.
Caravans of Cuban-Americans Protest Bernie Sanders and Rally for Donald Trump.
Caravans of Cuban-Americans rallied in support of President Donald Trump on Saturday after Sen.
Photos and videos emerged on social media in Miami featuring long lines of cars and trucks flying Cuban and American flags and honking their horns.
Others wore MAGA hats and waved Trump 2020 flags to show their support of the president.
The Cubans, it turned out, gave Chávez the wrong cancer treatment — probably radiation or chemotherapy, which has limits on uses — and, as a result, were unable to correct it after they discovered the error.
That doomed Chávez, a victim of the very Castrocare he touted, as Bernie Sanders does now, as the solution to all of Venezuela's ills.
Venezuela's hospitals now look like Cuba's or, given the lack of water, electricity, and money, probably worse.
But it was Castrocare itself, the elites-tier version, that did Chávez in.
The examples of Castro, treated with Western medicine, and Chávez, going down with a treatable illness made untreatable by Castrocare, tell the whole story about the worth of such a system.
Given the opportunity, he keeps lavishing love on a dictator who drove thousands of his country people to exile, slaughtered thousands more, imprisoned tens of thousands of his people, and drove his country into decades of poverty.
While he once had a lead in Florida, home to the majority of refugees from Cuba, as well as their descendants, now Biden is in the lead.
Cubans are coming out strongly in support of Trump, a man who not only does not praise Castro but who reinstated the embargo that Obama, the last Democrat president, revoked.
Four former Cuban political prisoners, who spent a combined 81 years in prison for their opposition to communism, have sent a letter to Democratic National Committee Chairman Tom Perez condemning presidential candidate Bernie Sanders for praising the late dictator Fidel Castro.
In remarks to 60 Minutes Sunday and in subsequent remarks on Monday, Sanders insisted that it was ""unfair"" to categorically condemn the Castro family's over half-century-long stranglehold over Cuba, claiming that Fidel Castro imposed a successful ""literacy program"" on the country.
Bernie Sanders Receives Glowing Praise From Cuban Communist Government — Florida Poll Shows Immediate Collapse.
Well, it might not exactly be the best endorsement for the American political aspirations of Bernie Sanders but the official communist propaganda outlet in Cuba, Granma, is heaping high praise upon Bernie ""Fidel"" Sanders for his support for the communist regime.
By the time I climbed the steps of the emergency room entrance in San Miguel, Havana, I could already tell that the supposed first-class health care provided in Cuba was a myth.
Friends told me to dress ""like a Cuban"" and not to speak while inside, since my Argentinean accent would give me away the moment I said hello.
A member of the opposition Cuban Patriotic Union party came along to guide me in my journey to the core of communist-style medicine.
We entered the hospital at 10 p.m. on an ordinary Saturday night in September.
The scarce equipment available gave the building the appearance of a makeshift medical camp, rather than a hospital in the nation's capital.
Breadline Bernie Makes It Harder for the Left to Hide Its Love Affair with Communism.
While it might have been politically prudent to walk that contention back, Bernie doubled down.
Communist Cuba Praises Bernie Sanders On Front Page Of State-Run Newspaper.
Communist Cuba praised socialist Bernie Sanders, the front-runner in the race for the Democratic nomination for president, for his recent praise of the communist nation.
Senator Bernard Sanders is the first socialist since Henry Wallace to have a realistic, if long shot, chance of becoming President of the United States.
With his status as frontrunner for the Democratic Presidential nomination secured, following his victory in the Nevada caucus, had come increased scrutiny.
In an interview with 60 minutes, which aired on CBS, last Sunday evening, Sen.
Sanders was asked about some comments he had made in the 1980s about Fidel Castro and his regime.
We're supposed to believe that it is a wonderful thing in Communist countries where the leaders care so much for their people.
Abortion is available on demand in Cuba, and in 2019 they raised the mandatory minimum wage.
Thank goodness Cuba doesn't have the problem with wealth and income inequality that the United States does because that would cause division and strife.
Higher education professors will now receive $56 to $68 per month, very similar to the fake Indian running for President, who wants to move towards socialism, who is worth millions and got paid $400,000 for the tough task of teaching one course.
One estimate suggests he had an annual income of $150 million, allowing Fidel Castro's net worth to grow over the course of his adult life.
Plus, he likely had a range of other assets, like vehicles, boats, and valuables, which are part of the total.
Before his death in November 2016, Fidel Castro's net worth was estimated at $900 million.
However, as certain information about the infamous Cuban leader is hard to come by, it could have been higher.
On CBS' 60 Minutes, Senator Bernie Sanders recently praised the achievements of communist Cuba.
In 2016, The Washington Post fact-checker Glenn Kessler debunked a politician's claim that Castro's rule significantly improved Cuban healthcare and education.
In today's Cuba, children are taught by poorly paid teachers in dilapidated schools.
Cuba has made less educational progress than most Latin American countries over the last 60 years.
Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., the socialist Democratic presidential front-runner, made waves when he merely reiterated his lifelong warmth toward the viciously evil Cuban communist regime.
But, of course, Sanders hasn't merely praised Castro's literacy programs (which, by the way, were propagandistic exploits.
He said that the Cuban people ""had an almost religious affection"" for Castro.
As it turns out, there is hardly a single communist regime of the past half-century for which Sanders has not expressed some level of moral support.
Cuban Americans share some personal knowledge of Castro's Cuba with Bernie Sanders.
Since Bernie Sanders decided to look at the bright side of the Cuban revolution a few Cuban Americans have come forward to offer their personal perspectives as people who actually lived under Castro's regime.
Shockingly, their memories of Cuban communism are not, primarily, positive tales of expanded literacy.
When Sebastian Arcos and family members tried to travel from Cuba to the United States, authorities stopped them in what turned out to be a sting operation to arrest one of his uncles, who had advocated and fought for Fidel Castro's revolution more than 20 years earlier.
That was Dec. 31, 1981, and for trying to leave the island nation, Arcos was jailed for a year.
His father, also a political supporter of the communist revolution and like many other citizens soured on the broken promises of democracy, was imprisoned for six years.
The Latino, Cuba, Argentina and Venezuelan community in/around Miami-Dade is the central voting block for democrats; proud and loud.
However, there is one issue, one central issue so encompassing they will walk away.
The murderous bloodthirsty Cuban dictator Fidel Castro is hated with the blazing sun of a thousand supernovas.
Appearing Sunday on MSNBC's ""AM Joy,"" Voto Latino CEO Mar'a Teresa Kumar said Democrats could ""kiss Florida goodbye"" if Sen.
Bernie Sanders was the Democrats nominee in the 2020 presidential election.
Florida's Democrats in panic after Bernie Sanders blows a kiss to Castro.
Bernie Sanders has always had a soft spot for Fidel Castro and the communist dictatorship the latter created.
But instead of keeping it to himself and off the air, he went all out to praise Cuba's brutal regime for its phony ""literacy"" and ""free"" health care on 60 Minutes.
No, he tortured, killed and imprisoned them first. like that is likely to cost the Democrats Florida.
Bernie Sanders Praises Fidel Castro's 'Massive Literacy Program' In '60 Minutes' Interview.
Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders praised former Cuban dictator Fidel Castro's ""massive literacy program"" during a CBS ""60 Minutes"" clip that aired on Sunday.
Speaking to CBS News' ""60 Minutes,"" Sanders, a self-proclaimed democratic socialist, pointed to social welfare programs introduced under Castro's regime that he described as redeeming, despite the communist dictator's often repressive human-rights violations against Cubans.
Bernie Sanders, who has cemented his position as the 2020 Democratic primary front-runner, is still defending Fidel Castro, claiming as recently as this weekend that the late communist tyrant was not all that bad.
After all, the Vermont senator explained during a Sunday appearance on CBS's 60 Minutes, the murderous Castro regime had literacy programs.
Anyone who knows anything about Florida politics knows you never, ever defend the regime responsible for why there are so many Cubans in the Sunshine State in the first place.
Yet, here is Bernie Sanders, the man with the clearest path to the Democratic nomination, doing exactly that.
John Alpert is an American photojournalist whose work is featured in the Netflix documentary Cuba and the Cameraman.
He first went to the island nation in 1972, a little more than a decade after the Cuban Revolution.
Over the next 45 years, Alpert returned to Cuba, each time taking pictures of its towns and cities and people.
The images he took are a timeline that chronicle how Castro's socialist revolution played out for the Cuban people in the years that lay ahead.
A disarmingly polite young photojournalist at the time, Alpert was one of the few Americans granted face-to-face meetings with Castro.
The Democrats Want to Turn the United States into Cuba; They Should Just Move There.
Having recently returned from several days in Cuba, I watched the Democrats debate last week and wondered why they don't just hop on a plane and move to Havana, the Cuban capital that has been languishing in the 1950's thanks to Fidel Castro's revolution.
Sure, the old cars are pretty cool to drive around in but most of them are dirty, loud, and don't come close to meeting Obama's emissions standards.
The reason why they remain on the roads is not so much because of the United States embargo (the newer automobiles are Russian for the most part) but because the people working under the Communist regime can't make enough money to pay for a new car.
In fact, the government owns many of the cars, including those used as taxis and for tours.
The United States special envoy for Venezuela, Elliott Abrams, said that Maduro has the money to alleviate the shortages of food and medicine in that country but has preferred to pay debts to Russia and China and continues sending oil to the Cuban government, his main ally in the region.
The United Nations General Assembly voted overwhelmingly Thursday to condemn the American economic embargo of Cuba for the 28th year, rejecting United States criticism of human rights violations there and criticizing the Trump administration's increasingly tough enforcement measures.
Trump administration bans United States flights to ALL Cuban cities except Havana in fresh crackdown against regime.
Supporters of the ban said it would starve the Havana government of cash and limit its ability to repress Cubans and support Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro, whom the United States wants to overthrow.
Opponents said prohibiting flights would simply make it harder for Cuban-Americans to visit their families outside the capital, without making a significant impact on the Cuban government.
In Cuba after the collapse of the Soviet Union — and the end of its generous subsidies — fuel was so scarce that many people stopped driving and the government imported thousands of Chinese bicycles.
The crisis trickled down to nearly every aspect of life, bringing blackouts, food shortages, even a vitamin deficiency thought to be the cause of a mysterious neurological condition that struck more than 50,000 people.
Known as the Special Period, that era of hardship and severe rationing began in 1991.
It finally came to a close at the end of the decade, in large part because oil-rich Venezuela and its leftist leadership came to the rescue.
Then there is Cuba, with which the restoration of relations was an ideological fixation for Obama, as it has been for many American leftists for half a century.
Irrespective of what one thinks of the American embargo, it was at the very least a point of leverage which Washington held over Havana, and a president genuinely interested in human rights and democratic reform on the island would only have lifted it in exchange for at least some concessions from the communist regime.
It drastically revised the list of ""prohibited Cuban regime officials"" able to use American financial institutions, permitted Americans to do business with Cuban state monopolies, and lifted a variety of other trade sanctions on the regime.
Other than the release of a captured intelligence asset and an imprisoned American citizen, however, the Obama administration received nothing substantive in return.
Another trope that ought to have been put to bed by now is the idea that socialism is a workable plan that simply has not been implemented properly.
Trump admin imposes new travel restrictions on Cuba, banning cruise ships.
The United States announced major new restrictions on United States citizens traveling to Cuba on Tuesday , blocking the most common way Americans are able to visit the island — through organized tour groups that license United States citizens to travel automatically — and banning United States cruise ships from stopping in the country.
However, Americans can travel to Cuba if it is covered under specific categories, which included organized group travel, known as group people-to-people travel, until Tuesday.
Ever since I visited Cuba last November, I've realized this is a question I am ill-equipped to answer at gunpoint.
Now I also see an old woman queueing up in a supermarket with a ration book.
A mother overwhelmed with gratitude because I gave her a packet of wet wipes for her baby.
In a disturbing report out of Panama, Panamanian authorities have made a new bust linked to Cuba, intercepting a huge shipment of cocaine worth $90 million at the canal, bound for Turkey.
After helping reduce Venezuela to the brink of famine, Cuba is rationing basic foodstuffs.
She said some items, such as chicken, would be limited to a fixed amount per purchase or per customer.
Other items, including eggs, rice, beans and sausages, would only be available to buy with a ration card, and would be limited to a maximum monthly amount.
Cuban gay rights activists denounced the government's decision to cancel this year's parade against homophobia, accusing it of snatching away their main platform at a key moment as the Caribbean nation is set to debate legalizing same-sex marriage.
The state-run National Center for Sex Education , which has spearheaded advances in lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender rights in recent years, announced on Monday it would not hold its 12th annual conga.
Venezuela's Maduro was preparing to flee to Cuba but was stopped by Russia, Pompeo says.
Venezuelan leader Nicolás Maduro was prepared to leave the country Tuesday and seek asylum in Cuba but was stopped by Russia, United States officials said.
Cuba, the socialist police state so adored by Obama administration twerps like Ben Rhodes, is finding itself in the line of fire for its brutal grip on Venezuela.
President Trump has vowed to make the socialist dictatorship pay by threatening Cuba with 'full and complete' sanctions, which is exactly what it deserves.
Trump threatens Cuba with 'full and complete' embargo, 'highest-level sanctions,' citing Venezuela role.
As Venezuela plunged into a dramatic televised scene of chaos and violence on Tuesday, President Trump warned he would impose a ""full and complete embargo"" and sanctions on Cuba if its troops do not cease operations in the ravaged South American nation.
National Security Adviser John Bolton alleged earlier Tuesday that Cuban troops were keeping Maduro in power in Caracas.
Cuba Arrests Pastor, Wife During Holy Week for Promoting Homeschooling.
The communist government of Cuba once again arrested Pastor Ramón Rigal and wife Ayda Expósito on Wednesday shortly before they had planned to leave the country.
Rigal and his wife are at the forefront of an Evangelical movement against allowing the regime to educate their children.
The organization Christian Solidarity Worldwide confirmed the arrests Thursday but did not provide details on what prompted them, according to the Spain-based Diario de Cuba.
John Bolton Honors the Bay of Pigs Freedom-Fighters, Who Obama Apologized For.
I am delighted to be here in Miami among such brave and distinguished company.
But one craven, sniveling apology to the terror-sponsoring mass-murderers whose lifelong craving was to nuke his country wasn't enough for President Obama.
The Democrat mayor and a retinue of associated New Orleans city officials spent all of last week in Havana, Cuba In a way, however, the visit seems appropriate.
After all, the rulers of one place drove out practically all productive residents with punitive socialist policies that converted a once charming and prosperous place into a huge slum except for a few tourism enclaves.
Algeria's longtime socialist strongman, Abdelaziz Bouteflika, got thrown out of power this week, following 20 years of what even he admits was failed rule.
He got thrown out the way they all pretty much do, given the predictable-as-sunrise failure of socialism.
He was hardly the worst of them; he just seems to have gotten too old to stay a strongman.
What's cool, though, is that Bouteflika's exit creates some problems — big problems — for the Castro dictatorship over in Cuba.
Bouteflika was one of their longtime candymen, sending funds to prop up the otherwise unsustainable regime through his employment of the Castroite Cuban doctors program, which brought the regime big cash.
Cuba would need to spend $2 billion a year for oil if Venezuela stops deliveries.
Cuba would have to spend nearly $2 billion a year to meet its domestic oil needs if Venezuela's National Assembly and interim president Juan Guaidó manage to stop deliveries to the Caribbean island.
Trump administration allows first lawsuits against Cuba for United States property seized during Castro's revolution.
The Trump administration is taking a historic step against the Cuban military and intelligence services controlling that country and propping up Venezuelan strongman Nicolas Maduro, the State Department announced Monday.
For the first time, U.S. citizens will be able to sue some entities whose businesses are built on property seized from them in the aftermath of Fidel Castro's 1959 Communist revolution.
Title III of the Libertad Act, also known as the Helms-Burton Act, authorized such lawsuits but has been suspended by successive presidents every six months since it passed in 1996.
The embassy in Havana cut its staff in half in 2017 after dozens of people complained of headaches, nausea and other ailments from hearing mysterious, penetrating high-pitched noises — believed to be an acoustic weapon — possibly from the Russians.
But a fresh analysis of an audio recording made by United States personnel in Cuba revealed that the source of the piercing din is the song of the Indies short-tailed cricket, known as Anurogryllus celerinictus, a study says.
If this explanation had any merit, the deafening effects of these crickets would have been discovered long ago.
Cuba Has Detained Half a Million Dissidents, Still Starving Prisoners to Death.
Marco Rubio said the United States should find additional ways to punish Cuba after the Canadian government confirmed that one of their diplomats assigned to Havana developed the same mysterious health problems that nearly two dozen United States personnel and other Canadian diplomats experienced.
Canada's government on Thursday announced it is reviewing its diplomatic presence in Cuba after confirming that the staff member was affected.
Medical tests showed that the person suffered from the same health issues that had affected a dozen other Canadian personnel, spouses, and their children, officials said.
Canadian diplomats allowed to leave Cuba after another employee falls ill.
Canadian diplomats stationed in Cuba are being allowed to return home after another employee mysteriously fell ill.
Eight employees and five children have reported unexplained symptoms including headaches, dizziness and trouble concentrating.
I read the 10,000-word piece, and was struck by all of its amazingly well-reported angles and insights, as well as its superb sourcing, which included interviews with the diplomats who were actually targeted, and accounts from Obama administration officials, such as Ben Rhodes, who led the Cuba normalization efforts.
Former President Barack Obama urged Florida voters on Friday to support Democrats to improve the lives of Cuban citizens.
The former president criticized President Trump for rolling back his efforts to open up communist Cuba during his 2016 visit with Raul Castro.
Putin's meeting with Cuba's appointed president comes with a $50 million loan for weapons.
The Russian government has granted Cuba a $50 million loan to buy Russian military equipment, just days before Cuba's handpicked President Miguel Díaz-Canel is scheduled to meet with Vladimir Putin in Moscow.
The arms deal is to be signed during a series of meetings of the Cuba-Russia Intergovernmental Commission that started Monday, according to the Russian newspaper Kommersant.
The newspaper quoted sources as saying that the talks would focus on the sale of armored vehicles, helicopters and small arms as well as replacement parts for battle tanks.
Mysterious attacks on United States embassy staffers in Cuba, China came from microwave weapon.
What was thought to be some kind of ""sonic"" weapon turns out to have been weaponized microwave radiation.
After delivering the official report to Congress, the agency released a ""fact sheet"" to the press on the Accountability Review Board's findings and recommendations.
The ARB process, which Congress established, investigates what happened and issues recommendations aimed at preventing future incidents.
Most Cuban-Americans from the Historic Exile (those who left between 1959 and 1979) traveling to communist Cuba do so for one primary reason.
Out of nostalgic feelings, they go back to search for the way things were — which, of course, is delusional, because the Castro Brothers turned one the most successful and advanced countries in Latin America into a totalitarian hellhole with a failed socialist economic model after gaining power in 1959.
The house where their parents once lived is most likely occupied by strangers who may not want to let them inside.
After Cuban-Americans emigrated to the United States or elsewhere, Cuban authorities confiscated their homes without providing them any compensation and, in the majority of cases, turned them over at greatly subsidized prices to Cubans who stayed behind.
So there is a great fear shared by these Cubans that the Cuban-American visitors are there to reclaim their former homes.
Even if they let them in, they do so with great reservations and never let their guard down.
In 1958 (the year prior to the ""glorious"" revolution), Cuba ranked 13th from the top, worldwide with the lowest infant-mortality rate.
This meant that robustly capitalist and immigrant-swamped pre-Castro Cuba had the 13th lowest infant-mortality rate in the world.
This put her not only at the top in Latin America but atop most of Western Europe, ahead of France, Belgium, West Germany, Israel, Japan, Austria, Italy, Spain, and Portugal.
Today all of these countries leave Communist Cuba in the dust, with much lower infant mortality rates.
Today Cuba is ravaged by diseases that had been long-eradicated in pre-Castro Cuba And of Cuba's ""doctors"" fortunate enough to escape their indentured servitude to the Castro-Family-Plantation, the overwhelmingly majority flunk the exam given in the United States for licensing as doctor's assistants.
And even plummeting from 13th to 49th , Cuba's ""impressive"" infant mortality rate is kept artificially low by Communist chicanery with statistics and by an appalling abortion rate of 0.71 abortions per live birth.
Cuban scientist sentenced to one year in prison for 'disrespecting' government authority.
Cuban biologist Ariel Ruiz Urquiola wanted to start an eco-friendly project on his farm in Viñales, a mountainous region west of Havana.
But now those plans are on hold because he was sentenced to one year in prison for ""disrespecting"" officials.
We will fight tooth and nail,"" said Ruiz Urquiola's sister, Omara Ruiz Urquiola.
We've long been told that Cuba's health care system is one of the greatest in the world.
In spite of the fact that health usually correlates with wealth in national statistics, we're assured that Cuba's obvious poverty is offset, at least in part, by amazingly low infant mortality rates and life expectancy.
But in a new short article for the journal Health Policy and Planning, Gilbert Berdine, Vincent Geloso, and Benjamin Powell examine some of the ways that the data is being manipulated in Cuba to ensure better-looking health statistics.
For example, on the matter of infant mortality, doctors have been known to redefine dead infants as dead fetuses.
The United States has pulled two more of its workers out of Cuba and are testing them for possible brain injury, three United States officials told The Associated Press on Friday , amid concerns they may have been affected by the mysterious health incidents harming United States diplomats in Cuba and China.
A few years ago, I was in Mexico for Christmas and met a man who flew commercial flights.
He told me that many Mexicans refuse to work for ""Cubana,"" the once private airline and now another state company.
Just yesterday, a Canadian friend, who is familiar with Cuba, told me it's the end of tourism.
We don't want to politicize a terrible tragedy, and we pray for the families.
As U.S.-Cuba relations warmed in recent years, Matilde Portela, an Airbnb host, reveled in the flood of American tourists.
Several Cuban-American lawmakers are decrying a State Department decision to grant visas to a troupe of Castro-backed Cuban artists who are scheduled to appear at the Kennedy Center.
They are also asking Secretary of State Mike Pompeo to consider denying the visas before the two-week festival begins on May 8.
From the Island to the World,"" are apologists for the Castro regime, making the show an extension of the Cuban government's propaganda machine, the lawmakers argue.
In fact, what's happening as Cuban ""President"" Raul Castro ""steps down"" in favor of Cuban ""President"" Miguel Diaz-Canel is about what happened when Korean ""President"" Kim Jong-il stepped down in favor of his son Kim Jong-un — except that Korea's Kim Jong-il actually kicked the bucket before his son fully took over the reins of the mass-murdering, terror-sponsoring, nuke-rattling regime.
In fact, much of the vital day-to-day functions of the Stalinist regime will remain in the hands of Raul Castro's son Alejandro Castro-Espin, a KGB-trained colonel in Cuba's secret police and a fanatical Stalinist.
The Los Angeles Times demanded that as Castro era ""ends"" in Cuba, so should the U.S. embargo.
NPR followed hopefully, and Buzzfeed provided a romanticized photo spread.
Reading such affectionate and hopeful portrayals might make one want to believe that Cuba really is currently undergoing a transformation that will define its future.
I hate to shatter that optimism, but Cuba isn't changing, and American policymakers and media really shouldn't be so naïve and optimistic about it.
Don't Recognize Cuba's Next Leader as Legitimate, Florida GOPs Urge Trump.
Florida Republicans are urging President Trump to not recognize the next strongman in Cuba as legitimate after Raul Castro steps down on April 19.
Castro, 86, announced in December that he would resign due to health issues.
He first became acting president in 2006 when his brother Fidel was ailing.
National Assembly of People's Power elections will be held this Sunday, and those lawmakers will pick the next president of Cuba.
Study Offers Simple Explanation For 'Sonic Attacks' That Injured 24 American Diplomats In Cuba.
A new report offers a simple and compelling explanation for what may have caused the ""sonic attacks"" in Havana, Cuba, that left 24 United States embassy workers and their families with neurological damage.
American diplomats reported in September 2017 that they and their spouses were subjected to agonizing sounds while staying in a Havana hotel.
The victims were left with ""brain abnormalities,"" including ""hearing, vision balance and memory damage,"" according to The Associated Press.
The initial reaction was that Cuba was responsible for the mysterious sounds.
United States officials believed Cuba utilized a ""covert sonic weapon"" against the American diplomats, The Washington Post reported.
Fresh row over mysterious sickness affecting United States diplomats in Cuba.
When a mystery illness rippled through the US embassy in Cuba in late 2016, the diplomatic fallout was rapid.
The United States slashed the number of people at its Havana mission and expelled 15 Cuban diplomats after at least 24 American staff and family reported a mix of headaches, dizziness, eyesight, hearing, sleep and concentration problems.
Many of the affected diplomats said their illness came on after they heard strange noises in their homes or hotel rooms.
Some reported that the sounds — which ranged from grinding to cicada-like to the buffeting caused by an open car window — appeared to be directed at them, and that their symptoms abated when they moved to another room.
There are still no indications of what may have caused the diplomats' mysterious symptoms.
Since 2010 64 hospitals have been closed, the country has lost a third of its hospitalization capacity, patients give gifts to doctors and dentists to receive treatment, many surgeries are not performed due to a lack of surgeons, or that necessary to operate; doctors are abandoning their profession to sell crafts, or become drivers; epidemics of all kinds are on the rise, and the lack of medication aggravates or leads to the death of patients.
This is not the start of a story about a country in sub-Saharan Africa, but rather a ""medical powerhouse,"" as Castroism portrayed Cuba to the world, an achievement purportedly resulting from its Marxist-Leninist revolution.
Barely four years ago the Castroites murdered black human rights activist Orlando Zapata-Tamayo.
This black Cuban had endured an 83-day hunger strike seeking to alert the world to the Castro regime's cowardly Stalinism and racism.
Finally a series of savage beatings by his Communist jailers finished him off.
Naturally, the United States media was no more revelatory of his death than they'd been of his jailing or hunger strike.
Nineteen American citizens have reported symptoms similar to those suffered by United States diplomats who had been identified as victims of alleged attacks in Cuba.
They will ask you questions and fill out paperwork, without listening or paying attention, and will give you a referral to go to the polyclinic you are assigned to, where there are always long waiting lines and you will almost never find a specialist, so you will need to return constantly until there is one, as they work in hospitals and from time to time come to the polyclinics to practice.
President Trump should further unwind President Obama's directives on Cuba and once again designate the communist nation as a state sponsor of terrorism, a panel of Cuban and diplomatic experts told Congress last week.
Bush Otto Reich, Heritage Foundation analyst Ana Quintana and the Cuban Studies Institute's Jaime Suchlicki.
Quintana argued that Cuba never met the standard to be removed from the State Department list in the first place.
Cuba Knows Truth About Sonic Attacks, Rubio Says After Flake Dismissal.
There is no doubt that the Cuban government conducted or was aware of the 2017 sonic attacks on United States diplomats in Havana, Sen.
At least 24 American diplomats or their family members were injured in separate incidents year, and investigators have pointed to the use of sophisticated acoustic-attack gear.
Injuries and symptoms included concussions, hearing loss and dizziness.
Officials testified before Congress that some Americans were treated for traumatic brain injuries and concussions.
Federal documents released on Wednesday revealed the gifts during Obama's final two years in office included more than $2,000 worth of cigars, rum and other famous consumer products from the Cuban government.
Cuba gave the gifts after Obama attempted to ease tensions with the communist regime, a measure that included the easing of the United States ban on imported Cuban liquor and tobacco.
The tobacco and liquor were accompanied by a carved wooden bust of Abraham Lincoln.
Newly disclosed declassified documents from Global Affairs Canada obtained by CBS News reveal Canadian officials were calling incidents affecting American diplomats in Havana, Cuba, ""attacks"" as far back as April 26 — months before the United States State Department first publicly acknowledged them as such.
Canadian victims reported symptoms including ""headaches, dizziness, nausea, hearing loss, nosebleeds, cognitive functions including loss of short term memory,"" similar to those of at least 24 Americans in Havana suffered.
In a show of extreme force, Cuba's Castro dictatorship beats and arrests dissident artists.
At least six Cuban dissident artists were violently arrested yesterday as they tried to attend an event at an independent art gallery.
Witnesses say Cuban State Security used extreme force during the arrests, sending a large amount of agents and vehicles to detain the artists.
Among the artists arrested and later released were Tania Bruguera, Iris Ruiz, Adonis Milan, Amaury Pacheco, and Yanelis Nuñez.
Dissident artists Lia Villares and Luis Manuel Otero, however, remain imprisoned.
Both are part of the CubaDecide organization calling for free and fair elections in Cuba.
The artists were attending a presentation of British playwright Sarah Kane's Psychosis.
The island slave plantation where 11-million Cubans have been held captive by the same totalitarian dictatorship for nearly 60 years is an irresistible allure to them.
They love to see how people struggling to survive in a closed society will so eagerly and happily dance and sing for them for just a couple of bucks.
They adore how the Castro dictatorship has trapped Cuba in a 1950s time capsule.
They are thrilled to watch old American cars rumble past dilapidated buildings down potholed streets, none of which have been maintained or repaired since 1958.
They come for the day to take pictures of the human animals in their natural surroundings like they were visiting a zoo and thank God they are so much more superior to these quaint yet wild natives.
When they are done, they board their air-conditioned tour buses and head back to their all-inclusive resorts and five-star hotels to enjoy meals and drinks that will cost more than what an average Cuban makes in an entire year.
Until a few years ago the concept ""human rights"" was frowned upon by Cuba's ruling party.
Over time, the island's government understood that it was better — and less scandalous — to adopt not only the language alluding to this concept but also the commemorations around December 10, the day that celebrates the United Nation's adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
In the last decade, the authorities have filled the official media and the squares of the country with slogans alluding to all the rights allegedly enjoyed by Cubans.
In those avalanches of benefits the collective rights are always mentioned, while the individual ones are ignored.
When Cuban dictator Raul Castro was handed the reins of power in 2006 by his brother Fidel, we were told by the ""Cuba Experts"" that Raul would lead the communist nation into an era of substantial economic and political reforms.
More than a decade later and a year after the death of Fidel, all we have seen are a few ""reforms"" that are nothing more than cosmetic.
Essentially, Cuba remains a totalitarian hellhole with no civil liberties, no respect for the rule of law, no real free enterprise, and a state-run economy under the complete control of the military.
Those same ""Cuba Experts"" are now telling us that when Raul ""resigns"" from his post early next year, we will begin to see major economic and political reforms on the island.
For the Cuban people, however, these ""Cuba Expert"" predictions have about as much chance of becoming reality as their prior predictions.
Brain abnormalities have been found in the United States diplomats who were victims of suspected attacks at the United States Embassy in Cuba, according to a new report.
Doctors discovered that white matter in the brains of Embassy workers had ""developed changes,"" The Associated Press reported.
At least 24 United States Embassy officials in Cuba had reported hearing loud, grating noises before experiencing ear issues, hearing loss, dizziness, headache, fatigue, cognitive issues and difficulty sleeping.
Some victims knew immediately that the attack was affecting their bodies, while some developed physical symptoms within 24 hours.
There is frightening new evidence to suggest the Cuban sonic attacks are real.
Mysterious ""sonic"" attacks targeting American diplomats in Cuba are so unlike anything State Department and FBI officials have ever seen that the Cuban government's claim that the high-pitched whirring sounds reported by United States Embassy staff are just cicadas seems almost plausible.
Doctors treating victims of the attacks, though, have now found visible, perceptible damage to patients' brains, marking the first solid evidence that the sophisticated weapon described by embassy staff is entirely real, The Associated Press reports.
The futuristic attacks began last fall when United States diplomats abruptly started to lose their hearing.
The United States pulled approximately 60 percent of its staff off the island as a safety precaution.
He may have seemed a mediocre person to Fidel, without savvy and without charisma, but he was absolutely loyal, a virtue that paranoid people value far above all the others, so Fidel fabricated a biography for him to turn him into his shield bearer.
Made him vice president, and finally bequeathed to him the power, initiating the Castro dynasty.
A group of Cuban exiles and former political prisoners gathered on Capitol Hill to recount human rights abuses that they and their relatives suffered at the hands of the Fidel Castro regime.
In a hearing Wednesday organized by Freedom House and the Justice Cuba International Commission, survivors told gripping stories about friends and family who were imprisoned, tortured, and killed for resisting communist rule in Havana.
Cuba did not have an organized social democratic party but did have populists students and nationalist groups that were resisting the Machado dictatorship.
Gerardo Machado, a brigadier general in the war of independence and later a businessman was elected president of Cuba in 1924 but seized power over all political parties in 1927 and became Cuba's first dictator.
At a critical moment in the struggle against Machado when populists and students called for a general strike, it was the communists who broke the strike and sought an accommodation with the Cuban tyrant.
Days before President Obama left office, he removed asylum protections from Cubans who reach United States soil in a desperate attempt to flee their oppressive country.
This was a strange contrast from the rest of the administration's efforts, which seemed to support granting asylum to any individual who enters the United States by illegal means.
Now, the Trump Administration is left with the job of cleaning up the confusion and fraud the Obama Administration propelled.
Attorney General Jeff Sessions is taking a leading role in combatting asylum fraud, alongside Trump's efforts to limit the number of asylum seekers entering the country.
This is not because these men do not want these people in our country, but because the system was expanded so significantly under the Obama Administration, agencies can no longer handle the load and maintain security.
Castro dictatorship bans dissidents and independent journalists from international travel.
The regime in Cuba prevented independent journalist and writer Víctor Manuel Domínguez from leaving the country for the second time this year.
I've committed no crime, but am being kept here because they say that I'm a counterrevolutionary,"" Domínguez, who had previously been denied from leaving the country on July 15, said.
So far, 22 American diplomats and their family members have been harmed in unexplained attacks in Cuba — the country Barack Obama assured was our new bestie, maybe even more so than Iran.
His personal crusade to restore relations with the communist country was misplaced at best, a national security threat at worst.
A new recording has surfaced that seems to link high-pitched, cricket-like sounds from Havana to the sickening of United States Embassy workers.
The Cuban Affair by bestselling author Nelson DeMille is a realistic portrayal within an action-packed story.
Drawing from this experience, he has created a novel surrounding accurately portrayed facts.
This became evident when President Obama visited Cuba and did the wave during a baseball game, making it appear that this is a fun-loving Caribbean island.
First recording emerges of high-pitched 'sonic weapon' linked to attacks on United States Embassy workers in Cuba.
The first public recording of high-pitched, cricket-like sounds out of Havana could be linked to the attacks on United States Embassy workers, according to a new report.
The recording, first released by the Associated Press on Thursday , is reportedly one of several from Havana that first led investigators to believe a sonic weapon was involved.
Of Americans affected in Cuba, not all of them reportedly heard the sounds.
But some who did said, while not identical, that the recording was relatively consistent with what they heard.
Thousands of Cuban doctors work abroad under contracts with the Cuban authorities.
Countries like Brazil pay the island's Communist government millions of dollars every month to provide the medical services, effectively making the doctors Cuba's most valuable export.
But the doctors get a small cut of that money, and a growing number of them in Brazil have begun to rebel.
The Trump administration will expel almost two-thirds of Cuba's diplomatic corps in the United States after a series of mysterious ""sonic"" attacks that have affected at least 25 American personnel in Havana, according to a report.
The State Department has not censured Cuba over the acoustic attacks by the still unknown device or weapon, per the news organization.
But it has withdrawn many of its own staff from the country and issued a travel warning after receiving several complaints of hearing loss and ""cognitive issues"" from diplomats and their families.
US 'doesn't believe Cuba is responsible' for mysterious sonic attacks on American diplomats in Havana.
There is no word yet as to who the Americans believe is responsible for the attacks.
Robert Mugabe, Zimbabwe's 93-year-old dictator, has been a chief client of Castro, Inc. ever since he assumed power in 1980.
And Castro, Inc. cranks out ""doctors"" from its lousy medical schools faster than bullets from a machine gun.
In fact, it seems that its supply of slave doctors is nearly infinite, given how many of them are constantly being shipped abroad.
But the television report from this town has offered no information about future plans for storm victims, where they will sleep, what they will eat, how they will rebuild their homes.
Cuba was slammed by Hurricane Irma and Cubans have been protesting the failure of the government to give them any assistance after tens of thousands of them lost their shambling homes and all their meager possessions and threw them out on the streets of the already decayed, crumbling capital city.
It didn't take much to blow that shambling rattrap of a city over -and Irma was a monster.
These injuries range from some permanent loss of hearing to brain trauma rising to the level of concussion.
These attacks have occurred since President Obama's decision to both lift sanctions against and normalize relations with Communist Cuba.
The State Department confirmed today that at least 16 United States Embassy employees in Cuba suffered symptoms from an attack with a sonic device.
The State Department earlier this month said Americans serving at the United States embassy in Havana had experienced physical symptoms caused by unspecified ""incidents"" starting as far back as late 2016.
A United States government official said in August that several colleagues at the United States embassy in Havana were evacuated back to the United States for hearing problems and other symptoms.
Some subsequently got hearing aids, said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Some United States diplomats in Cuba diagnosed with serious health conditions, medical records show.
According to medical records reviewed exclusively by CBS News, a United States doctor who evaluated American and Canadian diplomats working in Havana diagnosed them with conditions as serious as mild traumatic brain injury, and with likely damage to the central nervous system.
The diplomats complained about symptoms ranging from hearing loss and nausea to headaches and balance disorders after the State Department said ""incidents"" began affecting them beginning in late 2016.
A source familiar with these incidents says officials are investigating whether the diplomats were targets of a type of sonic attack directed at their homes, which were provided by the Cuban government.
The source says reports of more attacks affecting United States embassy workers on the island continue.
The number of United States government personnel targeted by a mysterious illness in Cuba last year is greater than the Trump administration has publicly acknowledged, according to multiple United States officials who told the Washington Free Beacon the Obama administration may have misled Congress about the full scope and nature of the attack.
United States officials disclosed earlier this month that six Americans were struck by a mystery illness believed to be caused by a covert sonic device in what many think was a clandestine operation targeting United States personnel stationed in the communist country.
The number of Americans impacted is greater than previously disclosed, according to multiple United States officials who told the Free Beacon that those suffering from symptoms of sonic damage appears to be more than 10.
Cuba's assault on United States diplomats proves the foolishness of Obama's outreach.
Several American diplomats have come home from Havana after losing their hearing — victims of a sonic device placed in or near their Cuban residences.
Key House and Senate Committees, as well as individual lawmakers, want to know why they were caught flat-footed by media reports of incidents in Cuba late last year that left a group of United States diplomats ill and reportedly suffering from hearing loss attributed to covert sonic devices.
The members have requested a classified State Department briefing, and one is scheduled for Monday for committee staffers only because members of Congress are on their August recess, according to a Congressional aide.
The lawmakers want to know why the Trump administration has waited so long to publicly say anything about the incidents in Cuba, which the State Department has acknowledged first began at the end of last year, and why the Obama administration also remained silent about it.
Trump in late May expelled two Cuban diplomats from the Cuban embassy in Washington in response to the incidents against the United States diplomats in Havana.
Severe hearing loss of United States diplomats in Cuba blamed on 'covert sonic device' planted in earshot of their homes.
The two-year-old restored US diplomatic relationship with Cuba was roiled Wednesday by what United States officials say was a string of bizarre incidents that left a group of American diplomats in Havana with severe hearing loss attributed to a covert sonic device.
In retaliation for the hearing loss incidents the United States State Department has expelled two Cuban diplomats from the United States over safety concerns of American officials and launched an investigation.
Officials familiar with the probe said investigators were looking into the possibilities that the incidents were carried out by a third country such as Russia, possibly operating without the knowledge of Cuba's formal chain of command.
American tourists have joined the millions of other foreign tourists flooding apartheid Cuba this year with their cash and their radical notions of freedom and liberty.
According to President Obama and proponents of lifting sanctions against the corrupt and brutally repressive Castro regime, this was supposed to make the Cuban dictatorship a kinder and gentler dictatorship.
Like the totalitarian pros they are, it didn't take long for Venezuela's socialist Chavista dictatorship to start rounding up opponents.
The Chavista goon squads swooped down on two leading opposition figures, Leopoldo Lopez and Antonio Ledezma, with a knock on the door and spirited the men off to parts unknown in a SEBIN van.
It was a familiar tactic for an experienced totalitarian state, not amateur hour for a newly minted dictatorship armed with a sham referendum to justify itself and just getting its feet wet.
This points to what is really going on in that socialist hellhole, now that Sunday's referendum, which would have you believe that Venezuelans voted themselves willingly into Cuba-style slavery, is over.
Another horror story about Canadian tourists trapped in Castro, Inc.'s medical system.
They went there to have fun, but their 7-year-old son got sick and ended up in one of Castro, Inc.'s ""wonderful"" and ""free"" hospitals.
Most Canadians probably find it heartbreaking to think of what this family is going through — and it IS heartbreaking — but, normally, they don't stop to think that every Cuban lives in this kind of hell, day in, day out, with no options of any kind.
Fifty Ladies in White arrested in Cuba in another Sunday of violent repression by Castro regime.
Yesterday was the 107th Sunday of the #TodosMarchamos campaign where the opposition group the Ladies in White and other human rights activists come together in a peaceful protest march calling for the release of political prisoners.
By the end of the day, around 50 Ladies in White had been violently arrested by State Security thugs of the apartheid Castro dictatorship.
There is a long list of crimes against humanity committed on the Cuban people by the vicious and murderous Castro dictatorship.
Not only do they murder, imprison, torture, and enslave, they starve the people as well.
President Trump is putting the pressure back on Cuba's odious communist regime, and they don't like it a bit, with Cuba complaining once again about United States intervention.
But Trump really isn't meddling; he's merely undoing President Obama's awful mistake of giving Cuba's Castro regime everything it wanted, while getting nothing in return.
President Trump on Friday reset American and global expectations for communist Cuba.
He boldly promised that communist Cuba, like East Germany, would one day be free.
He envisioned the 60-year yoke of communist oppression, murder and unrepentant violation of all moral norms, ending.
In Miami's ""Little Havana,"" the president reframed American foreign policy in terms that Ronald Reagan, Helmut Kohl and Margaret Thatcher would appreciate.
He defended individual liberty, human rights and the sensibilities of all the long-suffering Cubans and Cuban Americans.
He spoke not of things political, but of things timeless and universal.
President Trump is set to travel today to Miami to begin reversing President Obama's moves toward normal relations with Cuba.
President Trump announced a dramatic reversal Friday of the Obama administration's Cuba policy, restoring restrictions on United States travel to the island and new prohibitions on financial transactions that benefit the communist regime's military.
He declared that the new policy will continue to promote prosperity for the Cuban people while cracking down on human-rights abuses by the government in Havana.
President Trump, speaking at a Miami theater associated with Cuban exiles, announced Friday he is nixing his predecessor's ""one-sided deal"" with the Communist nation — moving to restrict individual travel to the island, crack down on the flow of United States cash to the Cuban military and demand key reforms in Havana.
While stopping short of a full reversal, Trump said he would challenge Cuba to come back to the table with a new agreement.
To hear Ben Rhodes, the mastermind of President Obama's opening to the Cuban regime, tell it, Americans are just pining to go to Cuba.
As Rhodes touts trips to Cuba's communist military dictatorship as somehow something in the line of 'freedom' in his new 'narrative, airline carriers are fleeing the island hellhole, for one and tourists are bailing out.
Having slid into irrelevance, President Obama's ""Mind Meld"" Ben Rhodes has gotten busy touting the virtues of President Obama's one-way United States rapprochement with communist Cuba, which he was largely behind.
On Twitter, Rhodes has started a series of tweets endorsing Castroite propaganda about the wonders of Cuba's medical care system, and how amazingly advanced it supposedly is, citing a new Miami Herald piece that repeats hoary propaganda claims about an overtouted lung cancer vaccine called CIMAvax which had been praised as a panacea previously in 2015 and 2016 during Rhodes' narrative blitz at the time, and still hasn't gotten much traction.
President Trump is set to roll back a series of policies former President Obama put in place toward Cuba, according to a report from the Daily Caller.
The changes regarding the policies will be announced in a June speech in Miami, the U.S.-Cuba Trade and Economic Council said in the report.
President Donald Trump is set to announce a rollback of former President Barack Obama's policies toward Cuba, The Daily Caller has learned.
Two sources told TheDC that the development is due to the behind-the-scenes efforts of Republican Florida Sen.
This information coming from an anti-embargo group, which spoke on the condition of anonymity, was confirmed Sunday by John Kavulich of the nonpartisan U.S. — Cuba Trade and Economic Council.
A homeschooling father who sought to give his children the best education available, by pulling them out of the politicized state schools in Cuba and teaching them at home, has been ordered to spend a year under house arrest.
The sentence was announced by a Cuban court for pastor Ramón Rigal and his wife, Adya, according to the Home School Legal Defense Association.
In a report by HSLDA Director of Global Outreach Mike Donnelly, Rigas said authorities used his three-hour trial this week as a platform for denouncing alternatives to government-controlled education.
Thirty Ladies in White and a foreign journalist arrested in Cuba during another Sunday of violent repression.
Reports from Cuba indicate that 30 Ladies in White were violently arrested yesterday by Cuban State Security forces as they attempted to attend church services and carry out their weekly peaceful protest march.
It is also being reported that a foreign journalist who was attempting to record the Castro regime's weekly violence was also arrested and taken away by State Security.
At Miami college founded by Cubans exiled under communism, officials shut down pro-capitalism club.
After granting the pro-capitalism club Turning Point USA tabling rights on campus last fall, administrators at St.
In an email obtained by The College Fix, Carmen Brown, an administrator at the Miami-based Catholic university, recently wrote to the club's field director Driena Sixto that the organization's ""foul language"" does not align with the school's Catholic principles, thus they are prohibited from promoting their cause on campus.
Cuba, not Muslim nations, has the highest rate of United States visa refusals.
By an almost 10-point margin over the second spot, Cuba sits atop the list of countries with the highest refusal rate for United States visas.
Of course, the left will not utter a word of protest over this because only an insane person would want to leave the Castro-communist paradise of Cuba.
And in the last few days, it has been joined by two other airliners, Silver and Frontier, fleeing for their lives like Marielitos.
The service stinks, the amenities are gross, the place is thick with thieves and woman-gropers, the cost is high, and the alternatives are out there.
In fact, the Caribbean is loaded with pleasant, accommodating destinations well worth a tourist's dollar for a vacation.
Taking a vacation at a communist military-run resort really falls more into the Gulag category.
Which is where I came in with two left feet and our life savings to invest.
My wife Sarah and I, with our four children, went to Cuba because we saw an opportunity to escape our conventional, suburban middle-class lives to have the kind of family experience you cannot buy.
I had been introduced to a client who needed an architect — and decided to stay.
For years, while I helped build multi-millionpound projects like the golf and real estate development Bellomonte in Playas del Este Havana, we lived the dream.
Foreigners could no longer rent private houses so we had to move to a posh suburb with diplomats and other big cheese foreigners.
Castro's regime began a purge on the same people who had been invited in to help build the economy.
The company I worked for and my boss were caught up in something far bigger than me.
Two United States airlines are pulling out of Cuba, ending service to the nation only about six months after regular passenger flights resumed for the first time in nearly 50 years.
Silver Airways is dropping all nine of its planned routes to the nation by April 22.
And low-cost carrier Frontier will do the same, dropping its Miami-Havana route on June 4.
In doing so, both Frontier and Silver — a small regional carrier — blamed overcapacity on the recently allowed service between the nations.
Under the Castro dictatorship, the death tally in Cuba continues to rise.
No amount of ""normalization"" or willful blindness will bring back those who have been murdered by Cuba's apartheid dictatorship or heal the wounds and scars of its victims.
For two years United States policy has coddled and supported the brutally repressive Castro regime and all the Cuban people have gotten out of it is more misery, more pain, and more death.
Twenty times as many people have died trying to escape Castro's Cuba as died trying to escape East Germany.
The President of the United States announced that refugees fleeing persecution by a totalitarian regime would be deported.
Because his last name was Obama and the refugees were Cubans fleeing socialism.
Mexico has returned to Cuba the first contingent of Cuban migrants since former United States president Barack Obama decided Thursday to end a United States policy of granting residency to Cubans who arrive on United States soil.
President Barack Obama announced Thursday he is ending a longstanding immigration policy that allows any Cuban who makes it to United States soil to stay and become a legal resident.
Havana Hails End to Special United States Immigration Policy for Cubans.
Ordinary Cubans worried Friday about the economic problems that could be caused for some people by the sudden end to a once-easy pathway to life in the United States, saying many people who already left the island to take advantage of the earlier American immigration policy could wind up back home with nothing.
President Barack Obama on Thursday ended the possibility of automatic legal residency for any Cuban who touches United States soil.
Those people who were in the middle of trips to get to the United States could be the biggest losers, some Cubans said.
One of Barack Obama's final acts as president will be to end the 'wet foot, dry foot' policy that granted residency to Cubans who arrived in the United States without visas.
How Obama is exposing United States defense information to the world's worst intelligence traffickers.
The deepest and most damaging penetration of the United States Defense Department by an enemy agent in modern history was pulled off by a spy working for the Castro regime.
So they always strive to avoid any stories that might unduly upset the Stalinist apparatchiks who make these ""news"" bureaus possible.
But in a rare hiccup of honesty CNN itself admits to some very important Cuba-sponsored unpleasantness, about which most Americans remain ignorant.
Donald Trump crackdown looms for Cuba as repression continues after Obama outreach.
President Obama's historic move to normalize relations with Cuba hasn't slowed repression by the Castro regime, and the incoming Trump administration is likely to take a tougher stand on restricting tourism, recovering stolen United States assets and demanding human rights reforms by Havana, analysts say.
In the two years since Mr Obama announced a thaw in the United States' half-century policy of isolating the island nation, the administration has paved the way for increased engagement, approving such measures as daily commercial flights, direct mail service, cruise ship ports of call and the reopenings of long-shuttered embassies in Washington and Havana.
The migrants received food, water and medical care before being repatriated to Cabañas Bay.
Under the so-called federal ""wet foot, dry foot policy,"" Cubans who reach United States soil are generally allowed to stay, while those intercepted at sea are usually repatriated to Cuba.
Google's new tech partner in Cuba blocks email accounts of the Ladies in White.
Google is very proud of its new partnership with Cuba's ETECSA, the apartheid Castro dictatorship's telecom monopoly that has complete control over the internet on the island.
They must therefore be very proud that their new tech partners are using all this new technology to continue censorship and the blocking of the free flow of information to and from the island.
To understand why leftists, especially of the Western variety, are weeping upon Castro's death, it is first crucial to grasp the underlying foundation of the progressives' belief system.
This faith is interlinked with the leftist's revulsion of his own democratic-capitalist host society, which he sees as oppressive and unjust — and which he seeks to destroy.
And it is upon the ashes of this intended destruction that the leftist hopes to build, with his other self-appointed social redeemers, the secular socialist paradise.
But the record arrival of nearly 3.5 million visitors to Cuba last year has caused a surging demand for food, causing ripple effects that are upsetting the very promise of Fidel Castro's Cuba.
There was plenty of reason to laugh at the breakdown of Fidel Castro's funeral car as it made its way from Havana to Santiago.
It's always funny when someone known as ""el maximo lider"" gets cut down a peg — with a mundane car breakdown at his supposedly exalting memorial moment.
What's more, Castro had left his country in shambles, creating a metaphor of sorts with the broken-down — or out of gas — Cuban economy matching the state of his funeral car.
Cubans 'fear reprisals' if they don't show grief over Castro's death, dissidents say.
The official picture is one of collective mourning by masses of people over the loss of the founder of modern Cuba.
Immediately after President Raúl Castro announced the death of his older brother, Fidel, last Friday evening, the music in Havana stopped playing.
Bars and restaurants were told to severely restrict the sale of alcohol.
Hundreds of thousands of Fidelistas braved the Caribbean sun to pay homage in Revolution Square.
The Russian-made jeep carrying the ashes of the late Cuban dictator Fidel Castro broke down in the middle of his funeral procession on Saturday , forcing soldiers to push the vehicle until it could be repaired.
Liberals get hysterical over the 'alt-right' but we are living in their 'alt-left' world.
Their mainstream is radical and out of the American mainstream on almost everything.
Some liberals distanced themselves from that love affair, though many have embraced left-wing dictators from Stalin to Chavez.
The death of Fidel Castro, a mass murderer masquerading as a ""president,"" exposed the bizarre romance liberals have with tyrants.
Many world leaders expressed condolences to the Cuban people upon the death of their so-called leader, a man who oversaw the murder of tens of thousands, imprisoned political opponents, gays, anyone who challenged Castro's status quo.
There is no religious freedom in Cuba — there was room for only one god and that was Fidel.
The actual number of those killed by the Castro brothers and their murderous associate Che Guevara can never be known only because of the number of disappeared opponents, gays, academics and the educated.
Imagine taking every man, woman, and child of a major American city and murdering them.
President Obama is sending two senior officials to represent the United States at a service on Tuesday for the late Cuban leader Fidel Castro.
Rene de la Pedraja told Carlson that much of the anger professed by Cuba toward the United States stems from assassination attempts on Castro stretching back to 1959.
Cuban dictator Fidel Castro was always a figure who embodied the political ideology of uber-liberals.
For the American left — whether young or old — it was always supremely cool and non-conformist to espouse solidarity with Castro's revolution.
He was a hero to the counter-culture enthusiasts of the 1960s and a best-selling lefty author like Norman Mailer much as he is to the counter-reality Millennials who now populate our colleges and universities — perhaps only Chinese butcher Mao Zedong attracted more visceral adoration from American leftists — but of course he killed more people.
As his weekend death so well illustrated, Castro continues to cast a long political shadow over the ideological landscape.
Unlike many — Romania's Ceausescu and Libya's Qaddafi come to mind — he wasn't executed by his own people and instead died in bed at age 90.
During the Cuban missile crisis, he wrung a secret promise from the United States that it would never invade Cuba.
He then survived dozens of assassination attempts by the Kennedy administration until a Castro sympathizer named Lee Harvey Oswald put a stop to them and to the life of President Kennedy in 1963.
Castro ruled for another 45 years after that, until his retirement in 2008, persecuting dissidents, jailing gays, and murdering opponents.
Even after he turned power over to his brother Raul, Fidel continued to be feted and admired by world leaders.
Few dictators could have collected the kind of respectful foreign tributes that poured in from Western countries after his death last Friday.
Actually, El Comandante ruled with an iron fist and firing squads — serving himself to all of the island's land, private businesses and media, along with his own private yacht, private island, 20 homes, fleet of Mercedes limos and bevy of mistresses.
Trudeau's ridiculous mash note to the ""legendary revolutionary and orator"" caused the social media backlash of the year.
It is blank of moral judgment, empty of indignation, blind to injustice, dismissive of history and indifferent to injury.
He came to power in a revolution and so violence was probably inescapable.
But he followed it with mass executions — the guilty, the innocent, it hardly mattered.
He imposed a totalitarian system on Cuba even harsher and more homicidal than the one that preceded it.
He persecuted homosexuals, dissidents, critical writers and journalists.
He would not tolerate a free press and his own political party was the only one permitted.
In the end, he ruined his country's economy while at the same time exporting terrorism.
Venezuela today is a quasi-police state run with the invaluable assistance of Cubans.
In the fall of 1962, Fidel Castro urged his Soviet allies to wipe out the United States.
By that he meant destroying the United States of America in a nuclear assault.
Khrushchev flinched from an orgy of death that would have wiped out most of the US, the USSR and Cuba.
Now the dictator who liked to shout, ""Socialism or Death"" is dead and out of power.
Donald Trump threatens to undo Obama's deal as Castro's death resets U.S.-Cuba relations.
Donald Trump will undo the Obama administration's historic diplomatic reset with Havana unless the Cuban government moves swiftly to address human rights abuses and loosen restrictions on freedom of speech and religion on the communist island, the incoming president's chief of staff says.
With Fidel Castro's death fresh in the headlines, Reince Priebus, former chairman of the Republican National Committee, said Sunday that Mr Trump will keep an open mind about future relations with Cuba but demand major changes before embracing the detente set in motion by the outgoing White House.
But wherever that idea originated, the evidence is that Castro advocated striking the United States with Soviet nukes.
Obama, as usual, manages to turn Castro's death into a tribute to himself.
College students in the nation's capital thought it was a ""tough question"" whether former Cuban President Fidel Castro or American President-elect Donald Trump is more favorable.
Many students could not give a clear answer whether they thought Castro, the Cuban dictator who died last week, or Trump was a better leader.
Progressives' and leftists' outpouring of praise for Fidel Castro at his death was to be expected, although it has been more fulsome, tone-deaf, and cloying than I expected.
For just a few examples see President Obama, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, and United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki Moon.
Republican members of Congress from Florida panned President Barack Obama's response to the death of Cuban President Fidel Castro, attacking it as an inadequate response to the demise of a dictator who victimized so many of their constituents.
Castro's death was met with celebrations in the streets of Miami, where Cuban refugees and their families make up a large percentage of the population.
The jubilation felt by many Cuban-Americans was a sharp contrast to the statement issues by the president, which offered condolences to Castro's family and did not directly mention his human rights abuses or the victims of his Communist regime.
Born to wealth and privilege and educated in exclusive private schools — which seems to be the case with all communist fanatics I've ever heard of or have had the supreme displeasure to know in my personal life — the bearded revolutionary finally gave up the ghost on Friday at age 90.
Despite the fact that he was a murderous, dissent-squashing, and presumably very smelly tyrant who turned his nation into the sort of drab, flea-bitten torture chamber that all socialist republics eventually become, he was eulogized up the yin-yang by liberal Western politicians and the establishment leftist press, because they really are all that stupid.
Also I reflected on the Baptist minister who just chose a sorrowful exile to protect his family and of the Catholic priest who might soon have to flee to save his own life, of the Ladies in White beaten each Sunday simply for marching peacefully to advocate for political prisoners, and of the blind lawyer struggling to document atrocities despite so many obstacles.
And I thought of Cubans today, standing in lines to eat whatever is dispensed from an insufficient ration book, of making a salary of less than $25 a month and unable to find aspirin at a clinic, and of so many young people trapped in a life of hopelessness.
Nine Liberal Hollywood Elites Who Normalized Communist Dictator Fidel Castro.
Through the years, a long list of Hollywood elites have been bewitched by Castro, despite his Communist regime's imprisonment of political opponents, homosexuals, and journalists.
Actors like Jack Nicholson and Danny Glover, and Hollywood directors from Steven Spielberg to Oliver Stone, have accepted invitations to the tiny Caribbean island and have showered Castro with praise.
And the race is on to see which world leader can most fulsomely praise Fidel Castro's legacy, while delicately averting their eyes from his less savory characteristics.
Two duly elected leaders of democracies who should know better, Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau and American president Barack Obama, are leading the way.
With his shaggy beard and rumpled, olive-drab fatigues, Fidel Castro presented himself to the world as a modest man of the people.
But Castro's public image was a carefully crafted myth, more fiction than fact.
While every other country in the Western Hemisphere moved towards democracy, Cuba remained a one-party state under dictator Fidel Castro, who held power without free elections from 1959 until health problems forced him to step aside in 2006.
Castro's communist regime executed hundreds of political opponents and drove tens of thousands more into exile; hundreds of dissidents today languish in Cuban prisons.
State Department, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch all listed Castro's Cuba as among the worst violators of human rights on the planet, while the Committee to Protect Journalists condemned the harassment and imprisonment of journalists.
Castro, who was 90, was long a scourge of the United States who brought the Cold War to America's doorstep.
Late Friday evening, Cuban state media reported the death of their former leader, Fidel Castro, at age 90.
But for many others, not even his death will fill the void caused by his life.
For over five decades, Cubans suffered under the tyranny of Fidel and then his brother Raul, now 85.
They watched the regime destroy a country and export the same perverted model of social justice throughout the developing world.
My grandfather would often tell us of how he would hide indoors while Fidel's firing squads would slaughter innocent people nearby.
He denied that he was communist and locked up people like my dad's cousin for publicly saying so.
A bit later, he declared himself a communist but did not release those who called him one.
He leaves political prisons, families crushed, and empty store shelves.
Fidel Castro, who died late Friday night, was a tyrant who oppressed Cubans and brought misery to many for several decades and while much of the breaking news coverage emphasized that reality, journalists on ABC, CNN and MSNBC — matching how too much of the media approached Castro for decades — couldn't resist crediting him for supposed great advancements in education, literacy and health care.
President Obama's and Trump's Statements on the Death of Castro Couldn't Be Any More Different.
As is so often the case with the left-wing press and President Obama, it's often what is not said that is the most revealing.
Oddly enough, some will mourn his passing, and many an obituary will praise him.
Millions of Cubans who have been waiting impatiently for this moment for more than half a century will simply ponder his crimes and recall the pain and suffering he caused.
The emotional trauma that Fidel and Raul Castro have cruelly imposed on generations of Cubans and their children cannot be easily explained.
Thousands of friends and family members have been killed in prison, shot in front of a firing squad, or drowned at sea seeking freedom.
Several hundred patriotic young Cubans, seeking to depose Fidel, were instead killed or wounded at the Bay of Pigs; 1200 more were imprisoned before being freed for ransom.
Fidel Castro's messianic dreams of being the world's revolutionary leader didn't stop at Cuba's shores.
He trained hundreds of PLO and PFLP terrorists and other assassins to wreak havoc in the Middle East and against Western democracies.
He tried to bring his communist revolution to Latin American and other Caribbean countries.
He sent Cuban troops to intervene in Angola and propped up a failing Soviet-led regime.
The apologists might have consulted the various Amnesty International reports, which hardly capture the full picture.
With no apology to Francois Hollande, Fidel Castro allowed the Soviet Union to impose complete domination of Cuba.
That helped Fidel Castro drive a prosperous nation to sub-Haiti levels of poverty.
His repression was such that Cubans flee at the first opportunity, leaving everything behind, at great risk to their own lives.
That is why the Straits of Florida have become a graveyard without crosses.
The social justice crowd might have a look at Orlando Jimenez-Leal's documentary 8A, which captures Castro's show-trial of General Arnaldo Ochoa and other officers.
Their government lawyers pleaded with the court that their clients must receive the death penalty, duly carried out with no appeal.
Castro's death spurs drink specials galore as Cuban-American restaurants celebrate occasion.
With Fidel Castro's passing Friday evening prompting impromptu parties on the streets of Miami, area establishments have announced plans to continue commemorating the dictator's death with a slew of drink specials being offered in celebration.
Bars and restaurants throughout Miami, the city with the largest Cuban population in all of the United States, offered discounted cocktails and other deals on Saturday as news of Castro's passing continued to garner enthusiastic responses among area expats.
Elian Gonzalez, the Cuban castaway boy rescued off the coast of Florida in 1999 by a pair of sport fishermen, spoke fondly of Fidel Castro on Saturday, describing the late former Cuban leader as a father figure who became a friend.
Gonzalez, then five-years-old, was found floating on an inner tube after his mother and other Cubans died while trying to escape communist Cuba for the U.S., where he had relatives.
Interestingly, he was found on November 25, 1999 — exactly 16 years prior to the day of Castro's death.
President Obama and the Mainstream Media are mourning the death of Cuban dictator Fidel Castro — whitewashing his crimes against the Cuban people while comparing him to George Washington.
History will record and judge the enormous impact of this singular figure on the people and world around him,"" the president said in a statement.
It is absolutely sickening to watch the White House and the Mainstream Media mourn the loss of their beloved Castro — a ruthless dictator who was the personification of evil.
Marco Rubio was enraged by President Obama's half-hearted attempt to whitewash Castro's atrocities.
The evidence is mounting that President Obama's overzealous defense of his ""opening Cuba"" gambit cost Hillary Clinton the state of Florida.
That misstep could end up wiping out most of the president's carefully curated ""legacy"" achievements.
For the president and his young Deputy National Security Adviser Ben Rhodes, the establishment of diplomatic relations with one of the world's last communist dictatorships became something they weirdly defended from any criticism.
Even the smallest amendment that watered down coddling the Castros drew fulminating threats of vetoes from the White House.
Then in late October, President Obama went for broke and decided to stick a bigger needle in his opponents' eye.
He lifted limits on the import of cigars and rum, and then ordered our ambassador to the United Nations to abstain from a vote condemning the United States economic embargo on Cuba.
Like ObamaCare, the Iran nuclear deal, or ending Mideast wars, the plan is not working out as promised.
A little noticed Obama administration directive on Cuba, released Oct. 14, instructed the United States director of national intelligence to assist and cooperate with Cuba's intelligence services.
The directive has raised red flags on Capitol Hill, where some lawmakers are concerned that Cuba will pass along critical United States intelligence to the Iranians, who have made moves in recent years to extend their influence in the communist country and other Latin American countries hostile to the United States.
The change is part of the new round of regulations announced last week by the Obama administration.
President Obama quietly changed American policy to allow intelligence sharing with the Castro regime last week, a Senate Republican has learned.
The change was made under the auspices of the Treasury Department, which announced that it would loosen rules pertaining to how much merchandise American travelers could bring back from Cuba.
But the new regulation has much broader applications, according to Florida Sen.
Marco Rubio, because they change the rules that define which Cuban officials face travel restrictions and other bans on entering into contracts with Americans.
Despite Obama's 'Normalization,' The Castros' Cuba Is As Repressive As Ever.
Private restaurants prove successful, so Cuban government cracks down on them.
Cuba's private restaurants, better known as ""paladares"" , are being watched closely these days by the Castro government, which has temporarily suspended the concession of licenses because of alleged rule violations in a booming sector that perfectly represents the island's new economy.
By the time he leaves office in three months, Obama will have substantially re-normalized relations with the Castro regime.
Obama has pressed forward over the opposition of many Cuban-Americans and human rights groups, who note that Washington's gifts to Havana have not been reciprocated with greater respect for democracy and the rule of law in Cuba, as many had anticipated.
In the words of Amnesty International, ""Despite increasingly open diplomatic relations, severe restrictions on freedoms of expression, association and movement continued.
The Obama administration announced Friday a new round of executive actions designed to increase trade and travel with the communist island.
And this is the one many Americans have been waiting for — no more restrictions on the island's famed rum and cigars.
Under the new rules, travelers can purchase unlimited quantities of Cuban rum and cigars in any country where they are sold so long as they are for personal consumption.
You can't order Cuban rum and cigars online and have them shipped to your home.
Donald Trump played to Cuban-American sentiments Friday night in Miami, saying he would reverse all of President Barack Obama's executive actions normalizing relations with the Castro regime — unless the oppressive government in Havana dramatically changes its approach to human rights and political freedom.
Illegal border crossings by Cubans has surpassed last year's record at the same time deportations are at an all-time low, a poisonous formula that is making the United States a huge ""magnet"" for even higher levels of immigration from the communist island, according to a new report.
Cuban immigration has hit 46,635, breaching last year's ceiling of 43,154, according to the authoritative Center for Immigration Studies.
TSA Official Admits No Federal Air Marshals Are Allowed on Non-Chartered US-Cuba Commercial Flights.
At a House Homeland Security Committee hearing Wednesday , a top Transportation Security Administration official admitted that federal air marshals are not currently allowed on non-chartered commercial flights between the United States and Cuba, despite reports to the contrary.
Huban Gowardia, deputy administrator for the Transportation Security Administration, about a draft agreement between the TSA and the Cuban government which would allow federal air marshals on commercial flights.
Although his iconic picture is widespread, especially on college campuses, most people have no idea what he did.
He helped Castro take over Cuba, and fought for Communism in the Congo and Bolivia.
While in Cuba, he lived in a palatial house and gleefully executed hundreds or perhaps thousands of political prisoners.
Best-selling author James Patterson thinks that, unlike Cuba, America is unable to ""take care of the basics"" — education, health care, and food.
Patterson wrote and hosts a new documentary, ""Murder of a Small Town,"" that looks at two rural communities in Florida, Pahokee and Belle Glade.
The towns have been abandoned by industry, are violent, poverty-stricken and offer a contrast to Palm Beach and other affluent coastal communities to the east.
AT&T to provide cellphone roaming, other services for tourists in Cuba.
The Dallas-based telecommunications giant on Monday announced the agreement with the state telecommunications company, Etecsa.
Behind the tourist facade, the real hell of Castro's Cuba that Cuban's live in.
Earlier this year President Barack Obama became the first sitting president to visit Cuba since Calvin Coolidge in 1928.
The trip came one year after the two nations moved to re-establish diplomatic relations.
Congress is considering steps that would ease restrictions on Americans traveling to the island nation.
They're taking advantage of a law that allows them to stay in the country if they get one foot on American soil.
That law is a relic from the Cold War and one that some want to change.
Over the last couple of months, thousands of Cuban migrants were transferred from Central America to Mexico.
And once at the U.S.-Mexico border, under the current interpretation of the Cuban Adjustment Act and the ""wet foot, dry foot"" policy that grows out of it, Cubans without visas are waved into the United States and are given legal status and full access to welfare programs.
During a recent trip to Laredo, Texas, my colleague Jessica Vaughan and I learned that this new wave of Cubans has been building for several years.
The number of new annual arrivals nearly doubled from 2014 to 2015, and is roughly six times higher now than it was in 2009, which marked the most recent low point.
U.S. approves flights to Havana from 10 American cities, via 8 airlines.
The United States Department of Transportation on Thursday approved commercial flights to Havana from 10 American cities.
Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx outlined the department's awarding of tentative approval for eight United States airlines to begin the flights from 10 United States cities this fall.
As Cuban salsa beats pulsate along Obispo Street in the oldest section of this Caribbean capital, bearded men raise their hands to their ears and face east toward Mecca.
The decision means 24 migrants who've been detained for more than a month on a United States Coast Guard cutter will be processed for repatriation back to Cuba, the agency said in a statement.
As the morning light seeps into the chapel of an immigrant shelter here just blocks north of the U.S.-Mexico border, a man sleeps undisturbed on a cot, wrapped in a comforter.
The chapel doesn't normally serve as a bedroom, but for months the rest of the rooms at the Annunciation House shelter have been full.
From February to May, about 4,000 Cubans crossed over the Rio Grande River into Texas' westernmost city.
After making their way to shelters and churches, many have been sleeping in crowded, makeshift quarters on bunk beds, cots, couches and pews.
The others were taken later to be checked out before being turned over to United States Border Patrol.
It's unclear if the migrants will be able to stay in the United States under the ""Wet Foot, Dry Foot"" policy, or if they will be returned to Cuba.
Nearly a dozen Cuban migrants landed ashore with a rickety raft in broad daylight Saturday as beachgoers near Fort Lauderdale, Fla., watched and cheered on the weathered travelers.
Cuba is refusing to approve visa applications for members of the United States House Homeland Security Committee, according to the committee's chairman.
Members were hoping to leave on Friday afternoon to examine lagging security in the country's airports, which are set to begin making flights to the United States this year.
The lawmakers were forced to cancel when their applications were denied that morning.
Cubans in Ecuador turn to Mexican Embassy for help in reaching United States.
Scores of Cubans are camped out in front of Mexico's embassy in Ecuador, appealing for help in reaching the United States.
In 1958 Cuba had the 13th lowest infant-mortality on earth — ahead of France, Belgium, West Germany, Israel, Japan, Austria, Italy, Spain, and Portugal.
Obama Touts Cuba Relations While It Still Appears on U.S Terrorist List Alongside Al Qaeda, Hamas.
Before Obama ""normalized"" relations and lifted economic sanctions, Cuba for decades appeared on the State Department's list of nation's that sponsor terrorism.
Its longtime communist regime is renowned for committing atrocious human rights violations and openly offering refuge to criminals on the run from United States justice.
Among them is a Black Liberation Army leader on the FBI's most wanted list after a prison escape following a conviction for murdering a New Jersey State Trooper.
More recently, Medicare fraud ringleaders have escaped to Cuba after fleecing the United States government out of tens of millions of dollars.
Officials we spoke to explained that prior to the 1996 Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act , Cubans who presented themselves at the land port of entry were not allowed to enter immediately, but were sent to the United States Embassy in Mexico City to make their asylum claim.
Following the implementation of the 1996 act, which established Expedited Removal as a form of deportation processing, they were processed as Expedited Removal/Credible Fear cases, meaning that they would be taken into custody and detained until their asylum claim/fear claim could be reviewed.
In those days, the government did not operate under the assumption that all Cubans have a credible fear of return or persecution, as is the case today.
Cubans were questioned closely about their personal history, and often were determined to be economic migrants and thus unqualified to receive asylum or parole.
Those who failed to establish a credible fear of return were not permitted to enter the United States.
I don't think we should be giving away the kitchen sink without ensuring the dishes are clean.
Why not demand these communist countries, with whom we are ""normalizing"" relations, improve their human rights record.
Unless, we are, as Raul Castro dictated to Obama, guilty of worse violations — after all Obama just stood there and allowed Castro to rant about the United States.
Hmm, perhaps Obama could have brought attention to the fact that Cubans are showing up on our shores, not the reverse.
Feds open border to 4,000 Cubans, interviewed just 1 hour before release.
United States Border Patrol officials are opening up the Texas border to let 4,000 Cubans in, taking about an hour to interview them and check their criminal background, before letting them enter the United States on their own where most will stay for life.
President Juan Carlos Varela said the decision was necessary as Costa Rica and Nicaragua had recently closed their borders to Cubans heading north.
Panama has also agreed to transfer more than 3,500 Cubans hoping to reach the United States to a town in northern Mexico.
President Varela said the flights to Mexico could last two to three weeks.
Historic Cuba cruise returns to the United States with suspected norovirus outbreak on board after 14 passengers fall ill.
The ship returned to Miami a week later — around 6.30am on Sunday — but during the cruise's journey, there were reports that several passengers had fallen ill.
Cuban man arrested for waving American flag as first United States cruise ship arrives.
Before we get too excited about the tide of change in Cuba we should probably consider the case of Daniel Llorente.
When the first United States cruise ship in the living memory of most of us arrived in Castroland, Daniel was pretty enthusiastic.
Some of his fellow observers expressed concern over this overt display of pro-American unity sentiments, but Mr Llorente was not dismayed.
As it turns out, that really didn't work out very well. 1st cruise from a United States port in decades leaves Miami for Cuba.
Passengers have set sail from Miami on a historic cruise to Cuba, the first in decades to depart from a United States seaport for the communist island nation.
There's an old Russian proverb that if you spit in the face of a weakling he will give thanks for the rain.
This should be a Cuban proverb, to describe Barack Obama's not such an excellent adventure to Havana.
Raul Castro, the Cuban president, did everything short of expectoration to make the American president grovel for the regime's affections.
The irony, obvious to everyone, is that the Castro brothers and their regime are on the ropes.
The iconic sugar industry is all but destroyed, with abandoned cropland, rusting refineries and clumsy marketing.
The White House decision to disinvite a Grammy-award winning jazz legend who is a strong defender of democracy in Cuba was nothing short of contemptible.
The fact that it has now embarrassingly backtracked and re-invited him proves it had acted like corporations that are only too happy to ignore human rights violations in exchange for future profits with Cuba until public pressure gets too intense.
In other words, engagement with the Castros is not changing them, as promised, it's changing us — as many of us predicted.
On Monday , Carnival finally appeared to have noticed that it was in the middle of a PR fiasco with its ""Hate Boat"" to Havana cruises that did not permit Cuban-born Americans aboard.
After a weekend of withering criticism, the company announced that it will ""delay"" the trips if the Castro regime refuses to change its policies banning such people from arriving by sea.
Even Secretary of State John Kerry, a champion of President Obama's engagement of the communist dictatorship, thought Carnival was on shaky ground.
Cuban Activist Living in USA for Nearly Half a Century Ordered Deported.
Odd how after slavishly licking the boots of the Cuban dictator that Obama finally gets around to actually deporting someone.
The cocaine was found camouflaged among tanks of cane-sugar syrup, according to the country's National Police , part of operation Caña Brava.
Mario Diaz-Balart fired off a press release blaming the Cuban government and the Castro regime for trafficking cocaine.
Though every world leader is doubtless conscious of the signals that visual props around them subconsciously convey, the handlers responsible for shaping the image of the United States president have taken things to another level.
Take President Obama's recent trip to Cuba — the first such visit by a United States president in 88 years.
Obama's short trek 90 miles from the United States to its Caribbean neighbour in March 2016 was his boldest step yet in advancing his controversial agenda to reset diplomatic relations between the two nations.
Among the more awkward events on Obama's Cuban itinerary was a meeting with a group of political dissidents, many of whom fear the thawing of relations between Washington and Havana will only embolden the repressive tendencies of Cuban president Raúl Castro by legitimising his regime.
Enter Michel Mirabal, a contemporary Cuban artist whose sprawling painting My New Friend provided the striking backdrop to the meeting.
While Cuba is about 90 miles from the Florida Keys, Mr Obama flew at least 1,135 miles in each direction to get from Washington DC to Havana.
President Teddy Roosevelt once told a campaign audience that weakness invites contempt.
Let's just say that those words apply to our new friend Raúl Castro, who keeps going out of his way to show the world that it was President Obama, not he, who really wanted to do the wave at the baseball game.
Second, Raúl Castro watched the president of the United States praise his education and health care system.
Third, Fidel Castro jumped into the act and wrote an op-ed in the state media blasting President Obama.
The Havana Tribune, a state-controlled Cuban newspaper, has added insult to injury following Fidel Castro's scathing criticism of President Barack Obama upon his departure from the island.
The former aid worker who spent who spent over four years behind bars in Cuba said he can't tolerate Democratic president candidate and Vermont Sen.
Bernie Sanders' praise for some of the Cuban government's accomplishments.
Sanders was one of three senators who visited Gross while he was in a Cuban prison after being accused of being a spy and also helped to secure the aid worker's eventual release.
Gross, who was jailed in 2009, was eventually released in December 2014.
Stop by your local post office and you might just see a poster of Rodrigo ""Timochenko"" Londono hanging next to the Most Wanted posters of bank robbers and fugitives.
The State Department is offering a $5 million reward for information about the Communist terrorist leader.
But all the State Department had to do was ask Secretary of State Kerry.
Obama did the wave with the Cuban dictator and Kerry met with Timochenko, the leader of FARC, a Marxist terrorist organization that appears on his own department's list of foreign terrorist organizations a little above Al Qaeda.
The State Department accuses him of ordering the kidnapping of Americans and responsibility for much of the cocaine that is smuggled into the United States.
But none of that bothered Kerry who accepted a signed copy of a memoir by the terror group's former leader which was addressed to ""Senor"" Kerry.
The week after after United States President Barack Obama's visit, things in Cuba have returned to normal.
It is in this particular city and the eastern part of the island where most protesters have been detained.
President Obama's ""historic"" trip to Cuba was prepped and re-prepped so that nothing would go off with a glitch.
Deputy National Security Advisor Ben Rhodes jetted into Havana for the preparations; and, depending on the news report, Secretary of State John Kerry might have made an appearance there, too.
President Obama spouted his treacly niceties, drew his moral equivalences and blended it all out with a sea of banalities about ""the future"" in a not-so-disguised effort to create his own Nixon In China legacy thing.
Never mind that dissidents were being beaten by Cuban security organs and that ""President"" Raul Castro offered no concessions toward human rights.
Obama's was laser-focused on sending the message of ""fun"" for the trip.
As a major terror attack engulfed Brussels, Obama did the ""wave"" with the Cuban dictator.
Many of us warned about Obama's Marxist sympathies before he was first elected president, and we've repeatedly pointed it out during his presidency.
Yet our warnings were met with cries of extremism, irrationality and, of course, racism.
After playing his fiddle in Cuba and paying homage to the romanticized Marxist Castro regime while Belgium was burning, Obama spoke to a group of young people in Argentina.
He praised President Raul Castro in Cuba for his country's universal health care and quality education.
Fidel Castro says Obama's 'syrupy words' were enough to cause a heart attack.
President Obama's ""syrupy"" words about brotherhood and shared history, and his call to leave behind the enmity of the past, were enough to give Cubans ""a heart attack,"" former president Fidel Castro said Monday in his first public response to Obama's visit to Cuba last week.
Obama also missed the irony that, while he had just warmed up to a present-day Cuban dictatorship with blood on its hands, he then blamed his distant predecessors for warming up to a long-gone Argentine dictatorship with blood on its hands.
Argentine General Galtieri and his predecessors, who may have overseen the killing of some 20,000, are long dead; Raul Castro, who may have the blood of about the same number on his hands, is very much alive — and in the back-slapping company of President Obama.
Secretary of State John Kerry met last week in Havana, Cuba with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia , which is listed by the State Department as a terror organization and widely recognized as the deadliest and largest Marxist terror group in the world.
Thus far, the Cuban-sponsored talks have yielded little but one-way concessions to terror.
At the beginning of his presidency, Barack Obama traveled to Cairo, Europe and the United Nations to ""apologize"" for past American actions and attitudes, which he claimed helped create divisions between countries.
With the president's visit to Havana, Cuba, that tour has come full circle.
In response to a question about Cuba's human rights policies during a joint news conference, Cuban President Raul Castro criticized the United States for what he asserted was America's violation of human rights.
President Obama's so-called ""remarks to the Cuban people"" — delivered in Havana and broadcast throughout Cuba on Tuesday the 22nd of March 2016 — were not in the least surprising or remarkable.
Nonetheless, the speech was somewhat memorable, for two reasons, both of which relate to context.
In his Tuesday address to the Cuban people, Obama declared that the communist takeover that led to the Castros' 57-year dictatorship was a ""liberation movement,"" same as America's 1776 revolution.
Obama's well-known for his false equivalencies, but this one stands out for its idiocy.
It must have drawn a stifled horse-laugh from Cuban military dictator Raul Castro.
The president's decision to visit Cuba was a great mistake from the start.
But like his red-line of the use of chemical weapons in Syria, such assurance was clearly just another one of the president's ""red-lines"", and Gen.
Since the thaw began, the Cuban government has doubled down on its repressive tactics, with political and religious persecution levels increasing drastically.
One of the first places I visited on a government-sanctioned ""educational"" tour to Cuba several years back was the Plaza de la Revolucion, a hideous expanse of concrete at the center of Havana that makes, say, Tiananmen Square look positively charming.
It was there that President Obama was featured in that now-infamous photo in front of a giant mural of Che Guevara.
It was unfortunate that the president lent his imprimatur to Guevara, a totalitarian who was responsible for the death of thousands.
Because as we learned on our tour, the building that Guevara's face adorns is home to the Cuban Ministry of the Interior.
Unlike our own Ministry of the Interior, Cuba's is not charged with innocuous tasks like protecting endangered waterfowl.
Rather, it operates the National Revolutionary Police, which, in addition to keeping law and order on the streets, harasses and arrests dissidents, and suppresses ""counter-revolutionary"" activities.
In other words, it's Cuba's version of the Stasi.US tourists seek preserved Cuba — and Cubans seek change.
American Sue Pemberton rushed to Havana to experience authentic Cuba before the communist island gets swamped by capitalism.
Already booming tourism is set to explode in the wake of President Barack Obama's visit to Havana on Sunday, when he'll bury an almost six decades-long conflict that left Cuba the last major undeveloped market in the Caribbean.
The former Philadelphia mayor and his wife, Lisa, were in Cuba visiting their daughter this week at the same time that President Barack Obama and his family visited the island nation on a historic diplomatic, and apparently recreational, mission.
The timing was mere coincidence, Nutter said in an interview Wednesday evening as he waited on a layover at Miami International Airport.
In 1959, Fidel Castro and his communist henchmen put a bullet through the head of freedom.
Proclaiming the era of equality, they threw dissidents in jail or shot them, cracked down on free speech, closed their markets and seized private property.
Over the decades, hundreds of thousands of Cubans left the island any way they could.
Learned men floated battered cars 90 miles toward Florida in the hope that they would reach land; young women smuggled their babies into rickety old boats in the desperate desire to escape perennial servitude.
The president of the world's most powerful country, who refuses to identify ISIS by their own name, and who did 'the wave' with Cuba's communist president, is the one and the same who made no mention at all about the nine Cubans who drowned in waves trying to make it to Florida while he was on the way to the country they gave their very lives to escape.
That the Obama family get away with masquerading as defenders of the world poor is an insult to human intelligence.
The self-styled Obama blue-bloods actually flaunt their riches — paid for from the public purse — as touring royalty.
After the heady excitement of seeing President Barack Obama shatter decades of US-Cuba hostility, Cubans woke up on Wednesday wondering how much will really change on the communist island.
President Obama told the Cuban people this morning the Communist revolution that brought the Castros to power was a ""liberation movement,"" just like America's own revolution.
President Obama's open hand to the Castro brothers in Havana has been met with a clenched fist.
Cubans protesting the most repressive regime in the history of the Western Hemisphere have been beaten and abused in answer to the visit of the president, and on camera.
Several thousand Cubans were thrown in jail on the eve of Mr Obama's arrival, and Raul Castro added a pointed snub of protocol when he would not meet Mr Obama at the airport.
President Obama spoke of a ""new day"" in Cuba Monday, but he chose to ignore the tragic and oppressive past decades of the old Castro regime.
A ""new day"" in Cuba cannot be achieved when the old tyrannical guard still maintains absolute power over its subjugated people.
On his historic trip to the island Obama talked about engagement with the Cuban people, but the Cuban government only allows for strict engagement on their terms and with those who strictly follow and support their communist ideology and its repressive military.
The president's utopian mentality fails to align itself with the realities of a system and government that has suffocated the freedoms of the Cuban people for decades.
Judicial Watch announced today that it filed a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit against the United States Department of Defense to obtain records about American prisoners of war who may have been held captive by Cuban government or military forces on the island of Cuba.
The arrest of more than 50 anti-regime protestors just before President Obama landed in Cuba underscores the fact that the Castro regime is a tyranny.
This reality was also written all over the face of dictator Raul Castro in his press conference with Obama on Monday , when he scolded reporters for asking unscripted questions in public.
He's clearly not accustomed to such things — why should be he be, he and his brother Fidel got rid of them more than half a century ago — and will probably not become so any time soon.
Obama under fire for 'going to baseball games with the Castros' while Brussels burns.
Republicans are already criticizing President Obama for staying put in Cuba instead of coming home or flying to Belgium in the wake of the terrorist attacks this morning in Brussels.
Ted Cruz, who is running for the Republican nomination for president, according to reporting from ABC News' Rick Klein.
President Barack Hussein Obama hit his lifetime apex yesterday by publicly groveling to the communist leader of Cuba.
Openly swearing allegiance to Cuba's 57-year-long communist manifesto, he publicly agreed with Raúl Castro that America is the most hateful member in what they both hope is a dying capitalist world; the nation most responsible for the grinding poverty in Communism's only North American outpost.
President Obama on Tuesday met with more than a dozen political dissidents in Cuba, including some who were arrested just before their historic meeting.
Some dissidents who were able to attend the meeting reported being harassed by Cuban secret police on Monday as they traveled to a silent protest.
That happened just hours after President Raul Castro denied that the communist nation holds any political prisoners.
Smiling Obama ignores calls to cut short Cuban trip and attends baseball game.
President Obama was all smiles this afternoon as he watched an exhibition baseball game between the Tampa Bay Rays and the Cuban national baseball team — just hours after ISIS terrorists killed at least 34 people in Brussels.
Settling down with wife Michelle, daughters Sasha and Malia and Cuban dictator Raul Castro, Obama appeared carefree as he enjoyed the game — ignoring calls to cut short his historic trip to return to Washington and lead the response.
Indeed, despite criticism that he only devoted one minute of his speech earlier in the day to the Belgian atrocities, Obama took the time to give a somewhat surreal 15-minute interview to ESPN about the threat posed by ISIS — keeping his $500 shades on throughout the spot.
This week as another part of his paper tiger legacy (like his failed Hillary Clinton Russian ""reset"" or his Middle East-destabilizing ISIS-flourishing United States troop withdraw from Iraq), Mr Obama is the first United States president to visit this present-day slave state since Calvin Coolidge in 1928.
As usual, the oft-vacationing Mr Obama will enjoy himself with his extended Cuban-background ""selfie"" celebration, but the human rights abuses continue unchanged.
Meanwhile, the current president is in Havana, posing in front of a mural of Che Guevara (a man who put his own friends in front of firing squads.
I'm afraid he does) and agreeing with Raul Castro that America has an income inequality problem.
I have been to Cuba, and except for the elites, every single citizen is in misery and being watched by the secret police.
This revolting spectacle in Cuba is yet another reminder we've got an enemy in the White House.
Obama becomes the first President to set foot in Cuba for Nine Decades.
The Obamas' tour of Old Havana was nearly a washout on Sunday evening as a deluge of rain came down minutes after they landed in Cuba for an historic three-day visit to the communist country.
The first family pressed on, despite the stormy skies, strolling through the Plaza des Armas as they huddled under umbrellas and made their way to the Museo de la Ciudad, the museum of Cuba's capital city, and on to Havana Cathedral.
President Obama's family — particularly his daughter Sasha — looked less than pleased as they perched underneath their blue and black umbrellas.
The same week President Obama makes the first trip to Cuba by an American president in almost 90 years, The Rolling Stones will play a free concert in Havana — the first open-air show there by a British rock band.
But changing times in the Communist country haven't stopped tens of thousands from fleeing the island and saying gimme shelter to American immigration officials at Texas land ports.
He does not respect Obama; and, It was Obama, not Castro, who was desperate to make this trip happen.
Scarcely hours before President Obama landed in Havana, Cuban authorities arrested members of The Ladies in White, a prominent dissident group whose husbands are in jail for speaking out against the Communist regime.
Give me a name, or names, or after this meeting is over you can give me a list of political prisoners and if we have those political prisoners they will be released before tonight ends.
But to watch him stand there today in Cuba, next to a doddering, pompous communist dictator going out of his way repeatedly to insult Obama and the United States, and in response mustering little more than a weak, ""You know, I actually welcome President Castro commenting on some of the areas where he feels we're falling short,"" it is painfully clear that our president is a man long past caring about public humiliation.
It is an island once rich in the faith, only to be annihilated by Fidel and Raul Castro and their war on religion.
Really, I'm sure that in his heart of hearts, Barack agrees with the Castros that America is the side that needs to be forgiven.
America is the aggressor, the sinner that stands in need of reparation.
Cuban authorities have arrested more than 50 anti-government protesters just hours before Barack Obama's plane touched down in Cuba, marring the beginning of a rare three-day visit to the island nation — the first for a United States president in almost 90 years.
Joined by his wife Michelle Obama and daughters Malia and Sasha on board Air Force One, United States President Barack Obama arrived at Havana's airport late Sunday afternoon.
He was greeted by some of the Cuban top officials, including Cuba's foreign minister and United States ambassador, while an official meeting with President Raul Castro is set to take place later during the extraordinary three-day visit.
On Sunday, Obama touched down in Havana, becoming the first sitting U.S. president to visit Cuba since 1928.
On Monday , Obama drew controversy by standing at attention in Revolution Square in front of a giant mural of murderous Cuban revolutionary Che Guevara.
He later held a joint press conference with Cuban dictator Raul Castro, who blasted the United States for its record on race and poverty, demanded the return of the Guantanamo Bay naval base and insisted Cuba held no political prisoners.
Obama has asserted for months that normalizing relations with Cuba is a better way to effect human rights changes, rather than continuing a policy of isolation.
But one of the leading voices against communism says Obama is simply giving cover to the Castros.
For years, Cuban exiles in the United States dreamed that the island's longtime dictator would drop dead one day, ushering a transformational era of greater freedoms on the island and reconciliation among its citizens on both sides of the Florida straits.
Yet, as President Obama visits the island, transfixing Cubans and resetting their expectations about the future, Mr Castro is tucked away, out of sight and largely out of mind.
A once towering figure in hemispheric politics is gradually fading into irrelevance.
During his presidential visit to Cuba, President Obama posed for photographers in front of an image of notorious Cuban revolutionary Che Guevara.
Obama stood with members of the American delegation to Cuba after laying a wreath at the Jose Marti monument in Revolution Square.
The square also features an image Camilo Cienfuegos, another revolutionary who fought with Fidel Castro.
Amid fanfare and Spring Break-style selfies, President Obama's ""history-making"" visit to communist Cuba is no proud moment for America.
Cuban police forcibly broke up a pro-democracy demonstration and arrested several dozen activists on Sunday , just hours before Barack Obama was to arrive in Havana as the first United States president to visit Cuba in almost 90 years.
The protesters, from the Damas de Blanco and other opposition groups, were bundled into buses and police vans after a shouting match with pro-Castro supporters during their usual weekly demonstration near the Santa Rita church.
The police were very violent,"" Glavys Fernández, the mother of leading opposition figure Antonio Rodiles, told the Guardian.
Communist Havana has always been a magnet for the radical chic of the left, drawn like moths to the flame of this western outpost of totalitarian Communism.
Back in the 1960s, the visitors included Angela Davis and Stokely Carmichael, while Che Guevara himself received Jean-Paul Sartre.
On Sunday, President Barack Obama, a retinue of celebrities in tow, is expected to arrive in the Cuban capital to hang out with Raul Castro and his henchmen, all of which will be breathlessly documented by the media mavens along for the ride.
Ahead of his ""historic"" trip to communist Cuba, President Obama has made it clear he won't be calling for regime change in the 57-year totalitarian dictatorship.
So the trip will be little more than a United States endorsement of a detested military police state.
Obama attacked for failing to reveal if he will publicly criticize Cuba and the Castros for harboring American criminals.
His historic trip to Cuba might be underway but President Obama has been slammed for refusing to say whether he would talking to Cuban officials over the harboring of American fugitives.
Several United States criminal have fled the United States and headed for Cuba to find refuge where they are allowed to live free lives.
Among them are convicted killer Joanne Chesimard, who broke out of jail in New Jersey and fled to Cuba after she was found guilty of shooting dead state trooper Werner Foerster in 1973.
President Obama's visit to Cuba includes a meeting with Communist dictator Raul Castro as well as a meeting with Cuban dissidents, and administration officials have said human rights will be on the table during Obama's time on the island.
But according to the State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2014, Cuba is an ""authoritarian state"" responsible for ongoing human rights abuses.
Cuban President Raul Castro told President Obama Monday that the United States must return the Guantanamo Bay naval base and lift the embargo against Havana for the countries to fully normalize relations.
He also said in order for the countries to move forward, ""it will also be necessary"" for the United States to return Guantanamo, which is based on the eastern end of Cuba.
The White House won't yet say which political dissidents President Obama plans to meet with during his upcoming historic visit to Cuba, or whether any of those dissidents include prisoners the Castro regime is holding.
Obama will arrive in Cuba on Sunday , and with less than 48 hours before he leaves, the White House is putting off providing a list of dissidents it invited for a meeting with Obama.
Instead, White House press secretary Josh Earnest told reporters Friday he hasn't seen the list, which the administration plans to release at an unspecified time over the next few days.
President Obama's outreach to communist-ruled Cuba risks ""legitimizing the deeply entrenched Cuban regime,"" Cuban human rights and opposition groups warned Wednesday, days before Obama is scheduled to become the first sitting president to visit the island nation in almost 90 years.
Sixteen months after President Obama's ""historic"" rapprochement with the brutal communist military regime that took power even before Obama was born, the aim of a thaw has gone badly awry.
Obama stated he was normalizing relations to improve conditions for Cubans.
He's instead achieved the exact opposite, with dissident arrests up dramatically to 8,616 in the year following normalization.
Business licenses fell by 10,000 in 2015, too, Mauricio Claver-Carone of Cuba Democracy Advocates told Congress this week.
Some 93,000 Cubans have flooded across the border in the last two years, 26,000 in the past six months, and are mostly given a pass to stay in the United States, according to a border Democratic House member.
Henry Cuellar, discussing immigration challenges at a House Appropriations subcommittee hearing Thursday , urged the director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement to try to stop the flood before the Cubans reach the border.
Elizardo Sanchez, a Cuban anti-government activist who chronicles political detentions month-to-month, said he and most of those invited planned to defy the government order.
Sanchez, speaking by phone from Havana, said United States officials were offering to help the activists get to the meeting with Obama, scheduled for Tuesday.
When President Obama flies to Havana Sunday to cozy up to the Castros, he'll take off from a runway other than the Constitution.
He'll be violating the letter and the spirit of congressional statute, too.
This is one of the underappreciated features of Mr Obama's effort to make Communist Cuba a central part of his legacy.
Even against his record on Iran, it's hard to think of a foreign policy adventure quite like it.
On the one hand, the President is taking along corporate executives in an effort to ""kick start,"" as USA today puts it, a business relationship.
Cuba said it would welcome President Barack Obama to Havana later this month, but the Communist government had no intention of changing its policies in exchange for normal relations with the United States.
President Obama's ""historic"" trip to communist Cuba is showing signs of falling apart.
Far from the beisbol and mojitos junket that the president's PR team is selling, disputes are all over, starting with which dissidents the regime will let the president see.
Nothing is more embarrassing to watch than a suitor pursuing unrequited love.
Over the past year, President Obama has removed Cuba from the list of state sponsors of terrorism, re-established diplomatic relations and opened an embassy in Havana, and now Mr Obama announces that he will be the first American president to visit Cuba in nearly 90 years.
The back and forth over human rights is another sign of how prickly U.S.-Cuba relations remain despite the restoration of diplomatic ties, and the easing of many travel and trade restrictions, over the last year.
It also highlights a potential problem for Obama's planned overnight visit on March 21, the first by a sitting president in nearly 90 years, to the former Cold War adversary.
United States Pays to Feed and Shelter Cuban Migrants Stranded in Costa Rica.
The United States government has been paying to feed and shelter thousands of Cubans trying to migrate to the United States, in what critics consider another sign of the lopsided treatment provided to Cubans under American law.
The Obama administration has tried hard to deter the crush of migrants arriving from Central America in recent years.
It has pressed Mexico to crack down on migrants passing through its territory, while women and children who managed to cross the American border have been held in detention facilities.
Honduran, Salvadoran and Guatemalan refugees are arrested, detained and deported if they fail to make the case — often without legal help in difficult-to-navigate proceedings — that they have a ""credible fear"" of persecution if returned home.
Some can, ensuring temporary permission to stay as their cases are sorted out.
But every fleeing Cuban who gets to this country is put on a fast-track to legal residency, thanks to the decades-old Cuban Adjustment Act, last amended in 1996.
Before taking my trip to Havana, one thing that I was curious about was how a half-century of Communism had affected the built fabric.
While there are obvious disadvantages to economic stagnation, I figured that it would have at least created a charming-looking city.
There are, after all, a handful of United States cities, and numerous European ones, that have resisted growth, modernization, and the automobile, only to remain quaint and historic.
But it didn't take even a 10-minute cab ride from the airport to realize that my assumption about Havana had been naïve — even if it is still held by many of the city's blissfully incurious tourists.
Instead, everything in the city is merely old, and because little gets produced, nothing is replaced.
While exploring Havana's neighborhoods, the thing that jumped out was not the city's poverty , but its scarcity.
Because Cuba's government does not value or comprehend mass production — namely not for agriculture — there are shortages of everything.
In the United States, we take for granted that any basic convenience is but a short drive away.
So they must stick to neighborhood stores with minimal inventory, and even if they did all have cars, there would still be few outside options.
I trust that anyone that even glances at the fruits of Obama's 16-month engagement with the Castro-Family-Crime-Syndicate marvels.
Because never in the course of United States diplomacy has so much been surrendered by so many to so few for so little.
Not a penny of the $7 billion Castro stole at gunpoint from Americans has been compensated — or even acknowledged.
Some of the FBI's most wanted terrorists still live like celebrities in Cuba.
All this after Castro promptly got his murdering terrorists back as a bonus to an economic lifeline from Obama — in the nick of time and much of it at the expense of the United States taxpayer.
Public Schools System is looking to Cuba for lessons to improve literacy in the nation's capital.
Mayor Muriel Bowser and Schools Chancellor Kaya Henderson have toured several schools in Havana during a five-day visit to the communist-run island nation, which boasts a 99.8 percent literacy rate.
Instead of concentrating on literacy per se, they should find out what happens to Cuban school kids who don't do their school work, sleep in class, attack the teachers, cheat on tests with their cell phones, sell drugs on campus, and let their pants droop down to their knees.
President Obama will not visit the troops stationed at Guantánamo Bay Naval Base as part of his coming trip to Cuba.
Mr Obama has not once visited the base, which staffs thousands of United States service members, during his tenure as President.
Ben Rhodes, the President's Deputy National Security Advisor, discussed the President's coming trip, in which he will forgo American troops for the dictatorship in Havana.
The White House announced on Thursday that United States President Barack Obama will make history as he will be the first United States President to visit Cuba in over 80 years.
The state visit is a direct continuation of the Obama's historic achievement from last year when he initiated diplomatic relations between the two countries.
The President announced the news via his Twitter account on the same day. ""14 months ago, I announced that we would begin normalizing relations with Cuba — and we've already made significant progress,"" he tweeted.
It is expected that Obama will meet with Cuban President Raul Castro, as well as various entrepreneurs and VIPs of Cuban society.
Announcing another historic ""first,"" President Obama said he and the first lady would visit communist Cuba to help improve the lot of the Cuban people.
No regime has been showered with goodies the way the White House has heaped them onto the Castro brothers' 57-year military dictatorship.
From cash and trade, to the prestige of a costly United States presidential visit, the Castros have made out like bandits.
President Obama is planning a trip to Cuba some time next month, marking the first time in more than 80 years a sitting United States president will visit the country, according to sources with knowledge of the plan.
A National Security Council official plans to make the announcement tomorrow at the White House briefing.
The move comes roughly 15 months following the president's pledge with Raul Castro to reopen diplomatic channels following a prisoner exchange and the humanitarian release of United States contractor Alan Gross in December 2014.
The network morning shows on Thursday were beside themselves with glee over the White House announcing President Obama would travel to Cuba in March.
While all three broadcasts hailed the upcoming ""historic trip,"" it was ABC's Good Morning America that went the extra mile by proclaiming the President was more popular than singer Beyonce on the island nation.
Removed Cuba from Terrorist List After Hezbollah Opened Base on Island.
A few years before the Obama administration removed Cuba from the United States list of nations that sponsor terrorism Hezbollah established an operational base on the communist island, according to intelligence received by Hillary Clinton when she was Secretary of State.
The information comes straight from electronic mail released by the State Department over the weekend as part of ongoing litigation from several groups, including Judicial Watch, and media outlets surrounding Clinton's use of a private server to send and receive classified information as Secretary of State.
This alarming information has been ignored by the mainstream media, which served as the president's most vocal cheerleader when he established diplomatic ties with Cuba last summer.
After appearing for decades on the United States government's list of nations that sponsor terrorism, the Obama administration officially removed it to lay the groundwork for a full renewal of diplomatic ties.
They are crossing the border here by the hundreds each day, approved to enter the United States in a matter of hours.
The friendly reception given the Cubans, an artifact of hostile relations with the Castro government, is a stark contrast with the treatment of Central American families fleeing violence in their countries.
The Cuban government has returned a missing United States missile sent to Europe for training but inadvertently shipped to Cuba, a State Department official said.
Whether it is a failure, of course, depends on what you think Obama was trying to achieve.
At least 7,000 Cuban refugees are expected to come to the border in the next coming days.
More than 8,000 Cubans who had been stranded in Central America for months have begun arriving in the U.S., according to a statement from the Costa Rican government.
The number of Cubans fleeing the country increased 78 percent from 24,278 in 2014 to 43,159 in FY 2015, according to United States Customs and Border Protection.
The jump was the result of Cubans who fear the Obama administration might end its current ""wet-foot, dry-foot"" immigration policy, which allows any Cuban who reaches the United States the right to stay and receive welfare benefits, after Obama ""normalized"" diplomatic relations between the two nations after a 50-year hiatus.
A United States Hellfire anti-tank missile — a weapon launched from Predator drones in anti-terrorism operations, among other uses — found its way into the hands of Cuba's government in 2014.
But the route it took, twice crossing the Atlantic, was less mysterious than the United States government's public response to the discovery that front-line American military equipment made it to Havana — or beyond.
Transfer out of Costa Rica of Cuban migrants headed to United States begins.
The first flight of Cuban migrants who were stranded in Costa Rica since November took off from the country's Daniel Oduber airport in the northern city of Liberia late Tuesday night as part of a regional agreement to overcome Nicaragua's refusal to let them through by land.
As many as 8,000 Cubans trying to get to the United States have been in makeshift refugee camps for two months in Costa Rica after a decision by Nicaragua to close its border to them.
The Castros remain firmly in power, and we are not helping the opposition.
Worse, the Cuban regime continues to arrest thousands of political dissidents, to cozy up to enemies like Iran and North Korea, and to carry out provocative acts — such as stealing a United States Hellfire missile.
Add to that list Iran, Hezbollah and a long litany of other United States enemies.
Thousands of Cubans flee Castro over fears United States open-door policy will end but are now stuck in Central America.
Thousands of Cubans are caught in a new refugee crisis triggered by President Obama's moves towards ending the embargo on the country, Daily Mail Online can reveal.
As many as 8,000 are living in squalor in Costa Rica where their attempts to reach the United States have stalled, with the central American country facing a growing humanitarian crisis over their presence.
The Cubans are trying to get to the United States land border with Mexico, where they will be able to claim refugee status in America, and a rapid path to citizenship.
Thousands have fled the Communist country since Obama and Raul Castro last year ended more than 60 years of frozen relations.
In search of a legacy and Latino votes for Democrats, the White House says President Obama will likely visit Cuba this year.
So far from this being about United States interests or even Cuban liberty, it's just another ego trip.
Leave aside the obvious question, which is how on Earth could Emanuel have thought that the location of his family vacation would remain private in the middle of controversy.
Raúl Castro urges United States to end broadcasts aimed at Cuba amid diplomatic thaw.
Cuban President Raúl Castro urged the United States government Friday to halt radio and television broadcasts aimed at the island and other programs that Cuba considers harmful while reiterating that he is interested in deepening the thaw in relations with the United States.
President Barack Obama said on Thursday that the economic embargo imposed by the United States on Cuba in 1962 is ""the legacy of a failed policy,"" once again urging Congress to lift it on the first anniversary of the launching of a process of rapprochement and bilateral normalization of relations.
The United States and Cuba are close to a deal on restoring regularly scheduled commercial flights, Cuban and American officials said Wednesday on the eve of the anniversary of detente between the Cold War foes.
The diplomatic advance would help open the way for United States airlines to begin flying to Cuba within months in what would likely be the biggest step toward tighter economic ties since the two countries began normalizing relations last year.
Officials on both sides said they had reached an understanding on key points and hoped to reach a formal deal within hours or days.
Cuba Begins to Re-Imprison Political Dissidents 'Freed' Under Obama Deal.
Cuba announced the release of this prisoners of conscience on January 12, though the government did not give out a list of names.
The prisoners were allegedly released gradually in the month before, following President Obama's announcement that he would seek to warm relations between the United States and the rogue regime.
Shortly after the announcement, Fox News reported that two of the 53 dissidents had been arrested once again.
The dissident group Ladies in White on Thursday called for different opposition groups to join together in the ""We're All Marching"" initiative to stage a demonstration in downtown Havana, but only four women and one man from that group were able to get there, EFE learned.
Upon their arrival at the planned site of the protest, the several dissidents shouted ""Long live human rights"" and ""Freedom for the Cuban people,"" and they were immediately arrested by police as well as having insults such as ""worms"" and ""mercenaries"" hurled at them by government supports on the scene.
Tiny Nicaragua Is All That Stands Between The U.S., Cuba And A Terrorist Mariel Rush.
In any normal nation, leaders would be ashamed if large numbers of their nationals found the country they live in so unbearable, their only wish is to leave.
It lies about its colossal socialist failures and blames it all on Uncle Sam.
Now there are signs the communist country is encouraging great waves of Cubans to illegally migrate to America.
New wave of Cuban immigrants reaches U.S., but through Texas, not Florida.
The number of Cubans arriving at the southern border increased this year after President Obama and Cuban President Raul Castro announced plans last December to normalize relations between the longtime adversaries — a move many Cubans fear could mean the end of the special status that allows them to stay and work here legally if they reach United States soil.
Evidence of Havana's manipulation can clearly be seen in the magnitude of refugee flows.
Cuba is a totalitarian police state, where people are not even allowed to move from house to another without the government's approval.
Cuban migration has skyrocketed on fears that the wet-foot, dry-foot policy will end soon.
Given that most Cubans these days are ferried migrants rather than actual exiles, it's time to end it now or face another Mariel.
When the Mets' slugging outfielder Yoenis Cespedes decided in 2011 that he wanted to leave his country to play baseball in the United States, he did what dozens of Cuban baseball players have done since the Castro government came to power more than 50 years ago.
Risking arrest as well as their lives, Mr Cespedes and 10 members of his family fled the island in the middle of the night on a small boat.
Since the 1970s, the birthrate has been in free fall, tilting population figures into decline, a problem much more common in rich, industrialized nations, not poor ones.
Chris Christie wants the bistate agency that controls the state's airports to reject any efforts to launch flight service between Newark and Cuba until a woman convicted of killing a state trooper is returned to the United States.
The Cuban street artist known as El Sexto was freed Tuesday after spending 10 months behind bars for attempting to set free in a public park two pigs painted with the names of the country's highest leaders.
Bernie Sanders making favorable statements regarding Cuban dictator Fidel Castro when Sanders was mayor of Burlington, Vermont.
The statements took place during an Aug. 8, 1985 interview on the CCTV Center for Media & Democracy's Channel 17/ Town Meeting Television, Chittenden County's local government access station.
The result has been the opposite, with more repression of dissidents, and the Castro regime cranking up the goon squads overtime to beat and jail dissidents.
Some 6,000 arrests have been announced since the opening, hardly a sign of a more open Cuba leading to a freer Cuba.
More Cubans are coming to Florida in their golden years to retire, able to tap United States government assistance even though they never lived or worked here.
The number of Cubans arriving over the age of 60 grew fivefold since 2010, according to state refugee data.
Unlike most other immigrants, Cubans qualify immediately for food stamps and Medicaid.
Cuban Dictator Castro Thanks United States With Insults And Grievances.
From Oct. 1, 2014, to Aug. 31, 2015, a total of 36,497 Cubans arrived, while during the 2014 fiscal year there were 22,162.
Following the departure of Pope Francis, the streets of eastern Holgu'n, Cuba, have been flooded with dozens of homeless people that residents say had ""disappeared as if by magic"" in the week before the Pope's arrival.
Independent journalist Yusnaby Pérez has published a report from Holgu'n, where residents notes the city, typically home to a significant number of homeless beggars, was cleaned up for the Pope's visit.
Most of these homeless were taken away by state police, though there is no evidence of where they were hidden until the Pope left the country.
The pope is spending four days in a country whose Communist dictatorship has remained unrelenting in its repression of free speech, political dissent and other human rights despite a warming of relations with the Vatican and the United States.
Yet by the end of his third day, the pope had said or done absolutely nothing that might discomfit his official hosts.
Pope Francis met with 89-year-old Fidel Castro, who holds no office in Cuba, but not with any members of the dissident community — in or outside of prison.
The Castro regime showed its worst face on the arrival of Pope Francis in Cuba, hauling out its goons and showing how risky this papal visit is to the Marxist dictatorship.
Some 60 dissidents were arrested and beaten across Cuba by security agents.
Wanting to attend Mass with the visiting pontiff, who had reached out to them with formal invitations.
The Obama administration may allow the United Nations to condemn America's economic embargo against Cuba without a fight, The Associated Press has learned, an unprecedented step that could increase pressure on Congress to end the 54-year-old restrictions.
U.S. announces sweeping changes easing restrictions on business, travel to Cuba.
The United States Departments Treasury and Commerce on Friday issued new regulations further easing restrictions on Americans travelling to and doing business in Cuba.
United States companies will be able to open offices on the island and engage in joint business ventures there, while individuals with relatives in Cuba will have more travel opportunities for people and the limit to the amount of money that can be sent people on the island are being eliminated.
The new rules, which go into effect on Monday, September 21st, are the latest steps taken by the White House and President Barack Obama to weaken the United States trade embargo and normalize relations with the communist island.
Mr Obama, who eased some trade and travel restrictions with Cuba Friday, ""underscored the importance of the United States and Cuba re-establishing diplomatic ties and the reopening of embassies in our respective countries,"" the White House said.
The opposition Human Rights and National Reconciliation Commission said Friday that the Cuban government has rounded up thousands of beggars and indigents as part of a ""social cleansing"" operation ahead of Pope Francis's visit to the island.
The government, according to the commission, wants such people ""out of sight of pilgrims, foreign journalists and others visitors who will be in Cuba"" during the papal visit that begins Saturday.
Barack Obama speaks with Raul Castro as United States eases travel restrictions with Cuba.
The United States further eased restrictions on business and travel with Cuba on Friday , as it presses forward in rebuilding long-frozen relations with its former Cold War foe.
Two months after formally restoring diplomatic relations with Havana, the United States made it easier for Americans to establish and operate businesses in Cuba, removed remittance limits and widened travel opportunities to the Caribbean island nation.
Obama Urges United States Businessmen to Exert Pressure for Lifting Cuba Embargo.
United States President Barack Obama on Wednesday urged businessmen to pressure Congress to lift the Cuban embargo, emphasizing the ""significant economic opportunities"" created by the process of normalizing bilateral relations.
After delivering a speech at the Business Roundtable Headquarters in Washington at which he responded to several questions from the audience, Obama also said that the imminent visit of Pope Francis to Cuba will be ""an opportunity"" to broaden the ""conversations"" that are already occurring on the communist island.
When Pope Benedict XVI visited in 2012, nearly 3,100 were let go from Castro's dungeons.
Like a Roman prefect, Cuban generalissimo Raul Castro decides who stays jailed and who goes free — at the flick of a hand.
Hard to think of any time when it's ever been rosier for the Castro brothers in their 56 years as absolute overlords of Cuba.
In the rubble of their failed communist system, President Obama has extended normal relations — and asked nothing in return.
Pope Francis is paying a visit to Cuba this month, complete with a mass to be held under the godlike image of bloodstained revolutionary Che Guevara.
U.S. congressional delegations — at least 20, notes the Capitol Hill Cubans blog — have been paying tribute to the ""achievements"" of Castro's revolution and hobnobbing with Cuban officials, mojitos in hand.
Tourists from the United States are rolling in, too, legal or not, fattening the coffers of the Cuban military that runs the hotels.
Chilean congressman reports being beaten, arrested during 'Ladies in White' protest in Cuba.
A right-wing Chilean congressman just back from a private visit to Cuba complained Monday that he was beaten, handcuffed and held for nearly three hours by Cuban authorities for participating in a peaceful demonstration by the Ladies in White dissident organization in Havana.
Baptized as Roman Catholics and educated by Jesuits, Fidel and Raul Castro turned against the Church by declaring Cuba an atheist state, chasing out priests and shutting down religious schools after seizing power in a 1959 revolution.
After the American flag was raised over the reopened embassy in Havana last month and the Obama administration's plans to significantly ease travel restrictions by the end of 2015, more Americans are looking to see what they've been missing for more than half a century.
My father's killer roams free in Cuba, harbored by Mr Obama's new friends.
With much fanfare, the United States embassy in Havana opened for the first time in 54 years.
Instead of Kerry demanding Cuba returns fugitives from American justice, the Obama administration unilaterally handed legitimacy and the hard currency of international acceptance to a regime that has sponsored terrorists for half a century and even today harbors convicted terrorist fugitives including BLA cop killer Joanne Chesimard and William Morales.
Morales' Armed Forces for National Liberation murdered my father Frank Connor.
Travel to Cuba could soon be nearly as easy as travel to any other part of the world.
The Obama administration plans to unilaterally ease the travel restrictions to Cuba, sources told ABC News.
The new measures would bypass limits on travel imposed by Congress by changing regulations at the executive level.
If all those future generations have to rely on for a complete and accurate picture of the life of Julian Bond are the musings and disinformation transmitted by the national media, they will be ill-informed indeed.
Missing from eulogies following his death was any mention of Bond's trips to Cuba to celebrate the communist takeover in 1959, and then again in 2006, to confirm his initial suspicions.
On Aug. 14, in a ceremony replete with pomp and circumstance, Secretary of State John Kerry presided over the formal re-opening of the United States Embassy in Havana, Cuba.
The occasion marked the culmination of nearly two years of quiet diplomacy between the White House and the Castro regime.
Secretary of State Kerry traveled to Havana to raise the flag at the United States Embassy there last week.
As has been noted here in this blog and in many news articles and columns, no dissidents or human rights activists were invited to the ceremony.
The fear would be that it expresses a lack of interest in, or at least a refusal to give much priority to, how the Castro regime treats those struggling peacefully for democracy and human rights in Cuba.
He has made it possible for the family, and Castro Inc., to stay in power.
Not bad for Ra਀l Castro, a man drowning last fall but now firmly in control after the Obama lifeline.
Friday , at the United States embassy in Cuba flag-raising ceremony celebrating the re-establishment of diplomatic relations, Secretary of State John Kerry said he felt ""very much at home"" in the country ruled by the authoritarian Castro regime.
With the raising of the Stars and Stripes over a new embassy in Havana — a regime second only to North Korea in totalitarian oppressiveness — the United States becomes merely one of the herd, its leaders talking only to each other in the crony-like coziness of the world's ruling classes, with only lip service paid to their purported values and the people they represent.
Kerry and his media toadies might have touted Friday's embassy opening as a new era.
Cuba's Repression Pushed 24,000 to Risk Trip to United States in Eight Months.
United States Customs and Border Patrol is reporting that 23,978 Cuban refugees arrived in the United States between October 2014 and May 2015, with another 3,564 Cubans attempting and failing to reach United States shores.
Most of those arriving successfully crossed the southern border with Mexico or crossed the straits of the Caribbean separating Florida from Cuba.
The United States is back, or at least the United States flag is up at the new embassy in Havana.
It was a very nice building on Malecón Drive, the avenue around Havana Bay.
As a naturalized United States citizen born in Cuba, and uniquely aware of the tragedy in the island, I was open to negotiations with the Castro regime.
In other words, I was open to a conversation — not the monologue that has taken us to this post.
Fidel Castro marked his 89th birthday Thursday by insisting the United States owes Cuba ""many millions of dollars"" because of the half-century-old American trade embargo.
Fidel Castro kicked off his long-sought United States embassy opening by announcing that we owe Cuba millions in reparations.
Lois and Roy Schechter's life in Cuba ended at gunpoint when Fidel Castro's soldiers barred them from their 13,000-acre farm.
The communist government seized property from the wealthy including hundreds of Americans.
The Schechter's had been on the island for 60 years and lived in a 17 room home.
It is now in a guarded diplomatic enclave, and occupied by Chinese officials.
Cuban dissidents not invited to United States embassy flag ceremony in Havana.
Cuban dissidents will not be invited to the United States embassy flag-raising ceremony in Havana, which will be attended by representatives from both governments including Secretary of State John Kerry.
So Secretary of State John Forbes Kerry will be in Havana this morning for the raising of the Stars and Stripes over the newly reopened American embassy.
The only way it could possibly be sweeter for America's Gigolo would be if he were lowering the flag, followed by a hasty flight off the embassy roof with the United States ambassador in a military helicopter.
It's always been Liveshot's fondest dream to some day unconditionally surrender to a Third-World Communist dictator — and now it's finally reality.
Cuban security forces rounded up marchers — about 50 with the Ladies in White dissident group and around 40 other activists, some wearing masks with the image of United States President Barack Obama, according to an AFP reporter.
The decision to suspend the celebration comes from ""the need to increase the hygiene and sanitary campaign to palliate the complex epidemiological situation in the municipality,"" Ahora newspaper said, citing a source in the Holguin provincial parliament.
Obama officials overruled experts to remove Cuba, others from human trafficking list.
The 2015 United States report on human trafficking has come under fire amid allegations that senior State Department officials ignored experts' recommendations and took Cuba and Malaysia off its blacklist of countries failing to combat modern-day slavery.
According to an investigation by the news agency Reuters, United States government analysts that independently grade global efforts to fight human trafficking were repeatedly overruled by senior State Department officials and also forced into inflating assessments of 14 strategically important countries in this year's Trafficking in Persons report.
It's not enough that Washington has made a deal with a bankrupt Cuban regime, throwing them a life line of support just when their last sugar daddy, Hugo Chavez of Venezuela has gone to his just reward and his heirs can no longer afford to give the Cubans oil.
At the very moment he was concluding a deal with President Obama, Raul Castro, the aging dictator-in-chief once removed, was throwing new political prisoners in jail.
As tourism flourishes in Cuba the island is emerging as a destination for the LGBT community and a travel agency specializing in packages for those customers is already in operation.
Democratic presidential hopeful Hillary Clinton this week will ask Congress to lift the embargo on Cuba during a scheduled visit to South Florida, where she will participate in two public events, her campaign office announced Wednesday in a communique.
Dissidents are still sent to jail, but they don't spend as much time there.
Instead they are released earlier and sent home to live under total surveillance.
It's an improvement, I guess, but the nature of the regime hasn't changed an iota.
It's not going to change as part of American-Cuban normalization, either.
The United States normalized relations with Vietnam despite the lack of political freedom there, and it normalized relations with China back when Mao was still in charge.
Nothing bad happened to the United States because of it, and nothing bad will happen to the United States as a result of normalizing relations with Cuba.
Normalizing relations with Cuba isn't being done for the benefit of the United States, it is being done for Cuba's benefit, by an America-hating socialist president.
Even if it is true that ""nothing bad will happen"" to us after lifting trade and travel restrictions — a dubious claim at best — it isn't about us.
Police in New Mexico hope diplomatic thaw ends cop killer's Cuban exile.
Charlie Hill, now 65, is one of an estimated 70 United States fugitives who escaped American justice by fleeing to Cuba, and Pete Kassetas, commander of the New Mexico State Police, says he is more than willing to fly him back to face the music.
Hill was one of three black militants who killed a state trooper in 1971, in a case similar to that of the better-known Joanne Chesimard.
Secretive White House meeting reveals Obama's plan to visit Cuba in 2016.
A secretive White House meeting on Cuba last week revealed that President Obama plans to visit the island nation early next year, and also discussed the controversial idea of the Cuban government opening consular offices in Miami.
After hailing embassy openings in Washington and Havana last week, the White House held an off-schedule, private meeting on Thursday with United States officials involved in the administration's Cuba policy.
Nearly 80 activist members of the Cuban-American community from Florida and across the United States — mostly Democrats — were also there.
Cuba tones down antiUnited States rhetoric on revolution's main holiday.
Cuban leaders pledged to keep socialism alive but toned down the antiUnited States rhetoric at Cuba's first national holiday since re-establishing diplomatic relations with the United States on July 20.
A GOP-controlled Senate panel has voted to lift a decades-long ban on travel to Cuba, giving a boost to President Barack Obama's moves to ease travel restrictions and open up relations with the Castro-governed nation.
The political activists, both members of the Christian Liberation Movement, died in a car crash in Cuba's eastern Granma province on July 22, 2012, under controversial circumstances.
As to the latter, the Times has fronted for the Castro regime for a half-century and counting.
A report prepared by the Human Rights Foundation and published Wednesday says that evidence gathered to date in the case of Cuban dissident leader Oswaldo Paya ""suggests"" the ""direct responsibility"" of the Cuban government for his death.
The report, compiled by lawyers for the non-governmental human rights defense organization, comes on the third anniversary of Paya's death in a car crash, an accident in which fellow dissident Harold Cepero also died.
Cuban-American lawmakers this week criticized the Cuban government for subjecting many of its people to starvation conditions on the island, while Fidel Castro's son Antonio gets to live the life of a playboy during a vacation on the Mediterranean Sea.
The lawmakers were reacting to recent reports that show Antonio Castro hanging out with his friends on a yacht and in a posh hotel in Turkey.
Secretary of State John Kerry will visit Havana on August 14 to inaugurate the first United States embassy in Cuba in 54 years.
That's some relationship President Obama has begun with the brutal regime.
Former ambassadors, murderous guerrilla icons, and even folk singers have descended upon Washington, D.C. today to celebrate the raising of the Cuban flag over the newly-minted embassy of the communist dictatorship in America.
Cuban state media is treating the event, which has no analog at the American embassy in Havana, as a victory over the American people.
More than a half century of Cold War and lingering enmity came to an abrupt but quiet end on Monday as the United States and Cuba restored full diplomatic relations.
The new era began with little fanfare when an agreement between the two nations to resume normal ties on July 20 came into force just after midnight Sunday, and the diplomatic missions of each country were upgraded from interests sections to embassies.
The United States and Cuba restored full diplomatic relations on Monday , opening embassies that have been shuttered since 1961.
Kerry's trip to Havana will be the first for a United States secretary of State since 1945, CNN reported.
The State Department will hang the Cuban flag in the lobby of the State Department building on Monday in recognition of the imminent reopening of the communist nation's embassy in Washington.
President Eisenhower had the Cuban embassy closed in January 1961 and severed diplomatic relations with the communist government of Fidel Castro.
President Obama announced in December 2014 that he is setting a ""new course"" with Cuba.
Just days away from the historic reopening of the United States embassy in Havana, the Cuban regime shows no sign of slowing down on the number of human-rights activists they arrest.
For 13 consecutive Sundays, Cuban authorities have arrested members of the Ladies in White dissident group either before or after traditional mass at the Santa Rita church in Havana.
Joanne Chesimard killed a New Jersey state trooper named Werner Foerster during a traffic stop.
Though she received a life sentence, Chesimard fled to Cuba where she has been taking refuge from the American legal system ever since.
She joined Charlie Hill who, in 1971, killed a state trooper in New Mexico then hijacked a plane to Cuba.
These two cop killers join almost seventy other American murderers, bank robbers, and others sought by the FBI who have taken up residence in Cuba to avoid the American legal system.
When Barack Obama struck a deal with Cuba, Cuba got everything it wanted, but the United States did not get back a single felon.
Former IMF chief Dominique Strauss-Kahn to advise Cuba on United States business relations.
Despite having criminal charges dropped against him and settling a civil suit out of court, and, in a separate incident, being acquitted in France of ""aggravated pimping"" charges last month, Strauss-Kahn's name and reputation aren't exactly spotless.
Raúl Castro says he hopes Obama uses executive authority to ease embargo.
Cuba's Raúl Castro insisted Wednesday that ""it's not possible to conceive of"" normal relations with the United States as long as the ""blockade"" of the island remains in place and said he hopes that President Barack Obama uses ""his executive authority"" to dismantle aspects of the 53-year-old economic embargo.
From January of this year (less than two weeks after Obama's announcement in December the United States would unilaterally surrender to the Castro regime's demands) to June, Cuba's totalitarian dictatorship has amassed nearly 3,000 violent arrests of dissidents.
This is the Cuba the propagandists want you to believe exists but it doesn't.
This month the United States Coast Guard deported 38 Cuban rafters, after they attempted to reach the Florida coast.
But these unlucky ones pale in comparison to the 9,371 Cubans who made it to United States shores in the first quarter of 2015, as reported by United States Customs and Border Protection.
A shaky United States policy regarding deportation may well be driving the surge.
The Cuban tyrant's greeting ought to terrify the Greeks, given his game for the past 50 years — a long record of default, deadbeatery and corruption unmatched in the hemisphere on a per capita basis.
Castro, remember, is a totalitarian communist committed as ""a revolutionary"" to destroying the capitalist system.
For all the attention there has been on his long record of human rights violations, his efforts to make economic warfare on the West and destroy the capitalist system is equally notable.
His own record of attempting to create a ""debtor's cartel"" to rise up against the Western powers, particularly the United States, and collectively default on all the billions owed to its banks.
I have to wonder how many who work at the NY Times will forgo their own trips to the beach, either down at the Jersey Shore or along the Long Island coastline.
Oh, and they forget about the deplorable environmental conditions in other Communist countries, such as the Soviet Union and China.
They also do not seem too concerned over the environmental degradation caused by ""green"" companies like Solyndra.
JetBlue started round-trip service from JFK Airport to Cuba on Friday — the first major airline to offer a weekly connection from the city since JFK, the president, restricted travel to the Caribbean island more than 50 years ago.
That's just as well because in the first six months of Mr Obama's normalization of relations with the Communist regime, most indicators of human rights on the island have moved in the wrong direction.
President Obama's much hailed ""normalization"" of ties with Cuba is anything but normal.
For decades the American left has done its best to convince us that Cuba is a benign, progressive paradise that just needs to be unshackled from our tyranny.
The Castros are running a murderous dictatorship 90 miles south of Key West that has exported violence around the world.
Yesterday he took to the White House Rose Garden to celebrate normalized relations with the most despotic regime in the Western Hemisphere.
It is meant to be his crowning foreign policy accomplishment, which is appropriate, because it's every bit as ill-conceived as everything else Obama has done overseas.
President Obama formally announced on Wednesday that the United States and Cuba have both agreed to open embassies in each other's capitals following more than a half-century of hostilities between the two nations.
The United States Embassy in Havana is scheduled to open on July 20, the Cuban Foreign Ministry said.
The United States and Cuba formally agreed on Wednesday to restore diplomatic relations on July 20, setting up a trip to Havana by John Kerry, who would become the first United States secretary of state to visit the country in 70 years.
It wouldn't surprise me to learn someday that Mr Kerry has already been there this year, working out the details of this deal.
Cuba Demands Return Of Guantanamo, End Of United States TV Broadcasts In Return For Diplomacy.
While President Obama described the embassy as ""not merely symbolic"" and a move representing the liberation of the American people from ""the past"" in a speech this morning , the Cuban government issued a statement refusing to reestablish full diplomatic relations with the United States until America gifted the territory of Guantánamo Bay to Cuba and ceased broadcasting radio and television news reports into the island, which constitute the only way many Cubans have of receiving trustworthy international news.
Some Republican leaders are sharply criticizing the Obama administration for establishing official diplomatic ties with Cuba, the Caribbean island nation that has been under the control of Communist dictator Fidel Castro and his brother Raul since 1959.
A number of GOP presidential candidates and the speaker of the House of Representatives have noted the continued oppression of the Cuban people under the Castros.
President Obama on Wednesday announced a major step toward ""diplomatic relations with the Republic of Cuba"" by saying the United States and Cuba would reopen embassies in each other's countries.
United States and Cuban government officials will announce on Wednesday that the two countries have reached an agreement to re-establish formal diplomatic relations and open embassies in Washington and Havana, a senior administration official told ABC News.
It is unfortunate that the discussion about U.S.-Cuba relations remains so focused on the embargo.
It obscures developments within Cuba and excludes considerations on what should be done to free Cubans to choose their own destiny.
Cubans aspire to live in a democracy and with a free-enterprise economy that allows them to improve their lives.
So far, the beneficiaries of economic reforms beyond filling cigarette lighters, making paper flowers or working as a barber and such, have been the military and their relatives.
For seventeen years, as Castro's chief bodyguard and trusted factotum, [Juan Reinaldo Sÿnchez Crespo] was close to the Cuban throne.
He witnessed and recorded sensitive conversations, was ordered to compile obsessively detailed records of Fidel's activities, coordinated his security and travel, vacationed with him, and accumulated a remarkably textured understanding of the commander in chief.
Sÿnchez worshipped Fidel, even after being demoralized by the trial and execution of general Arnaldo Ochoa and three others in 1989.
He says it was only because Castro no longer trusted him after a brother fled Cuba on a raft to Miami.
After two years in prison and ten unsuccessful attempts to do the same, Sÿnchez boarded a smugglers' boat and fled.
United States frees hundreds of Cuban criminals because Havana won't take them back.
Hundreds of Cuban criminals are released onto the streets of the United States every year because that nation won't take them back — even though the Obama administration is trying to broker a more open relationship with the communist island nation.
It's a quirk of immigration law known as ""Zadvydas cases,"" after a 2001 Supreme Court ruling that said the government cannot detain immigrants indefinitely if their home countries won't take them back.
Cubans take United States journalism classes, risking harassment and even arrest.
To their government, however, they are taking part in criminal activity.
President Obama's efforts to normalize relations with the Castro dictatorship in Cuba — most recently seen in his administration's decision to remove Cuba from its list of state sponsors of terrorism — have obscured questions over what should be done to help Cubans be free to choose their own destiny.
Cubans aspire to live in a democracy and within an economic system that would permit them — and not just those associated with the military or the Castro family — to improve their lives by engaging in economic activities independent from the government.
Cuba removed from state sponsors of terrorism list, State Department says.
The United States State Department announced Friday that it has officially removed Cuba from the list of state sponsors of terror, a designation the country has had since 1982, as part of the continuing thaw in relations between the two Cold War foes.
Last year's increase compares with rises of 1 percent and 2.4 percent, respectively, in the two preceding years.
The communists celebrated after President Obama announced his decision to remove Cuba from the list of countries that support terrorism.
The lifting of Cuba from the list of nations that support terrorism was a farce that may well come back to the haunt the United States.
Quotation marks are now required around the term ""State-Sponsor of Terrorism"" when referring to Cuba because just this morning, as the 45 day notification period to Congress expired, President Obama officially removed Cuba from the State Department's list of State Sponsors of Terrorism, where President Reagan had placed it in 1982.
United States travel to Cuba is booming, despite an official ban on tourist travel.
President Obama is looking to travel to Cuba's capitol city of Havana before his tenure ends, White Press Secretary Josh Earnest told reporters Thursday , the same day a Florida bank announced that the State Department has given them permission to make diplomatic transactions between the two nations.
This one took on extra special meaning for 20 couples who ""symbolically exchanged"" wedding vows, even as same-sex marriage remains illegal in Cuba, but obviously not for long.
If this can happen under the dictatorial nose of despots Fidel and Raul Castro, then it's already permissible.
The truth is that Cuba today is the poorest country in the Americas, poorer than Haiti.
Its per-capita income is less than that of Honduras, the small Central American country that has the world's highest murder rate.
Cubans today would be suffering from mass starvation if the country were not receiving upwards of $7 billion per year from their allies in the Venezuelan government.
Cuba manufactures nothing and produces nothing, except cigars and small quantities of rum.
Its once vaunted sugar industry, the world's largest before the communist takeover, has been completely destroyed, to the extent that Cuba has become a net importer of sugar.
There is not even enough sugar produced in Cuba for its own meager, and rationed, domestic consumption.
For the first time in five decades, the United States is allowing ferry service between Florida and Cuba.
At least four companies said they were notified Tuesday of approvals by the United States Treasury and Commerce departments, the first since Washington imposed a trade embargo on Cuba.
While the figure is lower than that registered in March, April saw other forms of political repression increase, especially against dissident group Ladies in White.
I realized that the man for whom I had long sacrificed my life, the Líder whom I worshipped like a god and who counted more in my eyes than my own family, was caught up in cocaine trafficking to such an extent that he was directing illegal operations like a real godfather.
The Comandante, with his talent for dissimulation, went back to work as if nothing was amiss.
For him, drug trafficking was, above all, a weapon of revolutionary struggle more than a means of making money.
Florida's Ros-Lehtinen says Republicans won't challenge removing Cuba from terror sponsors list.
Republican congressional leaders have admitted defeat in their effort to thwart President Barack Obama's plan to remove Cuba from the list of state sponsors of terrorism.
Ileana Ros-Lehtinen met with a number of her fellow lawmakers last week to strategize way to prevent the de-listing of Cuba in a bill she planned to introduce this week, but the lawmaker was told that Congress legally can't prevent the White House from removing Cuba from the list.
The Monday visit, which had been announced in January, will be the first of its kind since United States and Cuban authorities last December made public their intention to normalize diplomatic relations between the two nations.
The list of participants, announced Sunday by Cuomo, also includes top officials from educational and research institutions and several politicians.
Hillary's Campaign Logo And The Left's Love Affair With Communist Cuba.
But we'd agree with those who say it looks as though it was inspired by the Cuban flag.
Not just because of the visual similarities — the blue stripes and red arrows pointing right — but because it doesn't take a big or surprising leap to make a connection between the two.Obama Says Cuba Doesn't Sponsor Terrorism.
But Havana is like a Star Wars cantina of Cold War radicals — including some of the FBI's Most Wanted Terrorists.
Day After Obama Removes Cuba from Terror Sponsor List, Terror Group Sponsored by Cuba Kills 10.
Yesterday , President Barack Obama announced that the United States would be removing Cuba from the United States State Sponsors of Terror list as part of his push to normalize relations with the communist dictatorship.
But just hours later, a terror group long fostered by Cuba — even today, the Castro brothers are harboring several wanted members of the group — murdered 10 Colombian soldiers and wounded 17 others in a terror attack on a military base.
President Obama recommended today that the United States government reverse its long-standing policy designating Cuba a state sponsor of international terrorism.
The White House issued a statement declaring the administration's ""intention to rescind Cuba's State Sponsor of Terrorism designation"" several days after the president returned from the Summit of the Americas in Panama where he met with heads of state from across the region, including for the first time with Cuban President Raul Castro.
President Barack Obama will remove Cuba from the list of state sponsors of terrorism, the White House announced Tuesday , a key step in his bid to normalize relations between the two countries.
Cuban leader Raúl Castro has no interest in visiting the White House but would like to come to Miami, according to a report in a television station in Panama.
Castro spoke to reporter Glenda Umaña, formerly of CNN en Español, in a hallway at the Summit of the Americas over the weekend.
Still, there's no reason for President Obama to do buddy-buddy sitdowns with Raul Castro (we can trade with them, as we do with other nations, without becoming BFFs) except to rub it in the face of his critics.
Cuban imprisonment and torture of American servicemen was confirmed by surviving airmen who were repatriated in 1973.
Even more disturbing and perhaps more important was the transport of 17 of these men to Cuba for medical experiments in torture techniques.
Some were held in Havana's Los Maristas — a secret Cuban prison run by Castro's intelligence service — while other Americans were sent to the Mazorra Hospital, where they functioned as human guinea pigs to develop improved methods of inducing prisoners to cooperate and extract information through torture and drugs.
Turning the page on a half-century of hostility, President Barack Obama signaled Thursday he will soon remove Cuba from the United States list of state sponsors of terrorism, boosting hopes for improved ties as he prepared for a historic encounter with Cuban President Raul Castro.
Cuban Foreign Minister Bruno Rodriguez told ABC news in an exclusive interview hours after the famous handshake between Raul Castro and Barack Obama that the United States president should use executive action to remove parts of the embargo immediately.
President Obama officially closed a chapter in U.S. history that has guided presidents since nearly beginning, indicating the United States will no longer act to resist overseas influence in the Hemisphere.
Obama, who spoke Friday during a ""civil society"" forum in Panama City, Panama, disparaged past efforts by the United States to forestall the spread of Communism in Latin America and suggested similar missions would no longer be undertaken.
Sometime during this weekend's Summit of the Americas in Panama, President Obama is expected to grant one of Cuban President Raul Castro's top demands and remove his country from the Unites States' list of governments that sponsor terrorism.
Robert Menendez warns, not only flies in the face of all evidence, but removes critical leverage in Washington's efforts to bring scores of fugitive American terrorists to justice.
United States President Barack Obama met Cuban President Raul Castro on Saturday in the highest-level talks between the two countries in nearly 60 years, and the two men agreed to push ahead on improving relations after decades of hostility.
The remark came at a summit in Panama where leaders from countries in North, Central and South America are meeting discuss a range of issues and where Obama is expected to meet with Cuban President Raul Castro.
Prior to comments from Obama, Ecuadorian President Rafael Correa directed some criticism at the United States He said the embargo against Cuba, which was recently loosened up to a large extent, is ""illegal"" and that Guantanamo Bay should be given back to the island country.
President Obama held a historic formal meeting with Cuban President Raul Castro Saturday , the first between United States and Cuban leaders in over half a century, pledging to 'turn the page' and develop a new relationship between the two countries.
The two leaders shook hands Friday at the start of the summit and met Saturday on the sidelines of the a Panama City convention center.
As heads of state gather this week in Panama for the Summit of the Americas, expect a celebration, a confrontation, and lots of lies.
The gathering will be celebrating the restoration of relations between the United States and Cuba.
Barack Obama and Raul Castro will shake hands, signaling the start of a new era for the two countries.
The dawn of U.S.-Cuba rapprochement has come with a dreary reminder of what we're dealing with — as Cuban agents beat up dissidents at a hemispheric summit in Panama, just as they do back home in Havana.
United States Secretary of State John Kerry and Cuban Foreign Minister Bruno Rodriguez have held talks, in the highest level meeting between the two countries in more than half a century.
The two held closed-door discussions after arriving in Panama for a summit.
Meanwhile, the United States state department has reportedly recommended that Cuba be removed from its list of states said to sponsor terrorism.
Such a move could pave the way for the two countries re-opening embassies.
Raul Castro's tough demands raise doubts, but Obama remains optimistic for U.S.-Cuba relations.
At a town hall in Kingston, Jamaica — the president's last stop before heading to the Summit of the Americas in Panama — Mr Obama praised the ""extraordinary"" Cuban people and said it's time for the two nations to put the Cold War behind them.
In making the recommendation, the State Department has certified Cuba has not provided support to terrorist groups within the last 6 months.
Poll Finds Informed United States Voters Dead Against Cuba Normalization.
A survey by InterAmerican Security Watch challenges the notion that normalization with Cuba will enjoy popular support.
ISW acknowledges that right now a slim majority of United States citizens agree with President Barack Obama's move to restore diplomatic ties.
Their findings, however, suggest that support evaporates as the same individuals learn of the Castro regime's foreign-policy record and human-rights violations.
President Barack Obama arrived in Kingston, Jamaica, Wednesday night on the first leg of a journey that will take him from an historic meeting with 48 leaders of Caribbean nations in this teeming capital city to the Summit of the Americas in Panama and a likely encounter with Cuba's Raul Castro.
The presence of Cuba at the 7th Summit of the Americas will allow progress to be made on other key matters for the hemisphere, Sen.
Tim Kaine , one of the United States legislators most involved in Latin America, told Efe in an interview.
Cuba has never attended the hemispheric gathering, which has been held since 1994, but that is a situation that will change this weekend at the summit hosted by Panama.
Cuban President Raul Castro's expected appearance this week at a regional summit for the Organization of American States has alarmed critics of his regime who say the autocratic leader's presence will undermine the group's professed support for democratic values.
Castro is slated to make his first appearance at the OAS' Summit of the Americas on Friday and Saturday in Panama.
The group's Inter-American Democratic Charter, adopted in September 2001, states that members can be suspended if they take actions that undermine democracy.
President Barack Obama said Tuesday he would act fast to take Cuba off the list of terrorism-sponsoring countries once he gets a State Department recommendation.
Cuba has made it clear that it will not move on certain negotiations until it is removed from the list.
A poll of Cuban-Americans shows support for the White House's new Cuba policy has risen in the three months since it was announced, with 51 percent now in favor of closer engagement with Cuba, up from 44 percent in December.
The United States and Cuba are set to mark an historic milestone next week with President Obama and Cuban President Raul Castro poised to share the stage at the upcoming Summit of the Americas in Panama.
It will be the first scheduled meeting between leaders of the two countries in nearly 60 years.
President Barack Obama imposed sanctions Monday on Venezuelan officials accused of violating the human rights of political opponents, even as his administration seeks closer ties with Cuba, Venezuela's staunchest ally.
Obama's executive order places sanctions on seven Venezuelan government and military officials who the administration says have undermined democracy in the country, overseen the abuse of anti-government protesters, curtailed freedom of expression, or engaged in corrupt activities.
Even though tourism remains illegal for Americans in Cuba, it doesn't stop B-List celebrities from going to Havana, partying hearty, snapping and posting selfies, popping flashbulbs, swigging mojitos and buying cigars by the cartload, as Hilton's Instagram pictures showed.
So it wasn't the locals partying down, but the communist elites — such as Fidel's son, Fidel Castro Diaz-Balart, with whom Hilton and model Naomi Campbell posed for selfies.
Over six decades rolling premium cigars with his small, wrinkled hands, Arnaldo Alfonso has taken pride in seeing his ""habanos"" sampled by visiting heads of state and other dignitaries.
United States Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi, who is heading an official delegation of Democratic representatives visiting Havana, met with Cuba's National Assembly vice president Ana María Mari Machado and other Cuban deputies, in the first dialogue between members of congress and parliament, since diplomatic relations were restored on Dec.
Che Guevara's daughter Aleida is in Canada this week whooping up president Obama's opening to the Stalinist regime her father co-founded, and saying he'd certainly approve.
Aside from her father, few people knew from first-hand experience how easily United States officials can be snookered.
House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi is leading a delegation to Cuba on Tuesday while Congress is out on recess.
It is the first official House delegation trip to Cuba since President Obama announced lifting certain restrictions on Cuba in December.
The United States and Cuba will hold a second round of talks in Washington nest week aimed at restoring diplomatic relations, the State Department said on Tuesday , as United States Democratic senators visiting Havana said there may be enough support among Republicans to lift a trade embargo on Cuba.
A strain of HIV that could develop into AIDS before patients realize they are infected has been identified in Cuba.
The aggressive variant was seen in patients who developed AIDS within three years of contacting the virus, according to a new study.
A new HIV strain in some patients in Cuba appears to be much more aggressive and can develop into AIDS within three years of infection.
Researchers said the progression happens so fast that treatment with antiretroviral drugs may come too late.
Soon after President Obama announced plans to normalize relations with Cuba, Sen.
As soon as Obama made his announcement, it became clear he'd pretty much given up the store and gotten nothing in return.
Cuba didn't have to make any concessions on freedom of speech, democratic elections, a market economy.
It didn't have to turn over United States fugitives, including a convicted cop killer, whom it's been protecting for years.
Republicans and Democrats on Capitol Hill declared Cuban President Raul Castro's latest demands to return the United States base at Guantanamo Bay back to Cuba dead on arrival, but the move sparked a heated debate over the motivation behind Obama's new Cuban détente.
Ted Cruz, a Texas Republican and outspoken Cuban-American opponent of normalizing relations with Cuba, said Castro's new insistence that America hand over Gitmo and lift the trade embargo entirely come as no surprise.
While senators such as Marco Rubio and Robert Menendez have vehemently opposed the Obama administration's rapprochement and concessions toward Cuba, some Republicans have banded together to let President Obama know that they have an eye on lifting the decades-old embargo.
Cuban President Raul Castro demanded on Wednesday that the United States return the United States base at Guantanamo Bay, lift the half-century trade embargo on Cuba and compensate his country for damages before the two nations re-establish normal relations.
Retired Cuban leader Fidel Castro on Monday appeared to lend his support to talks with the United States in his first comments about his longtime adversary since both countries agreed last month to restore diplomatic ties.
But Castro, 88, stopped short of an enthusiastic endorsement of the rapprochement, announced on December 17 by his younger brother and Cuba's current president, Raul Castro, and President Obama.
In the view of the United States, Cuba forfeited the sovereign immunity that protects it from civil suits in United States courts when it embraced terrorist groups in Latin America three decades ago.
Holder on Friday to explain the administration's policy for United States fugitives in Cuba, including a convicted cop killer, following President Obama's announced normalization of relations with the communist island nation.
After the United States agreed to restore relations with Cuba, a deal that included the involvement of the pontiff himself, the Vatican's secretary of state emphasized Francis' ambitions for making the Holy See a bigger player in international diplomacy.
Former deputy national security adviser Tony Blinken told a congressional panel Wednesday that he ""regrets"" not consulting lawmakers more during the White House negotiations last year to normalize relations with Cuba.
Marco Rubio pressed Blinken, who is now the deputy secretary of State, on comments he made in November asserting that White House would consult Congress when changing its Cuba policy.
Cuban refugees have been surging toward Florida since President Obama's mid-December executive action on relations with Havana, but neither the United States nor Cuba has made significant changes to policies governing immigrants fleeing the communist dictatorship.
United States Assistant Secretary of State for Western Hemisphere Affairs Roberta Jacobson will travel to Cuba Wednesday to open discussions between the two countries.
The trip would likely be the first by a major United States public official to the communist nation, after the Obama administration began to relax embargo restrictions around the country.
According to independent media sources in Cuba, Ronaldo Reyes Rabanal and Luís Enrique Labrador — along with other activists — were arrested while attending a meeting of the opposition group, Movement for a New Republic.
Lazara María Borrego Guzmán, a member of the Ladies in White opposition movement, was also allegedly arrested during the meeting and Cuban officials allegedly broke her arm.
Nineteen-year-old twin brothers Bianco and Diango Vargas Martin were turned out of a Cuban prison last week.
They are two of 53 dissidents released by the government of Raul Castro as part of an agreement with the Obama administration for ""normalized"" relations between Washington and Havana.
Best of all, just as sugar-daddy Venezuela struggles to keep the sugar flowing (oil, actually, 100,000 essentially free barrels daily to Cuba) Obama comes to the rescue.
The Obama administration announced sweeping measures Thursday that will ease sanctions against Cuba, opening up the Communist-ruled country to expanded travel and trade by Americans.
The 54-year-old United States embargo on Cuba will remain in place, but the rules from the Commerce and Treasury departments that go into effect Friday will allow more trade in the areas of agriculture and telecommunications.
Although tourism by Americans still is officially prohibited, the new regulations also will enable more United States residents to travel to the island without first obtaining a license.
Cuban prisoner release overshadowed by a rumour of Fidel Castro's death.
Human rights activists welcomed an announcement on Friday that 38 political dissidents had been released.
Any euphoria was tempered, however, by concerns that they could be rounded up again at any moment, especially if they resumed anti-government protests.
It also appeared that most had been incarcerated for minor offences while higher-profile detainees remained behind bars.
Cuban dissidents, their relatives and supporters said Friday that the island's government this week has freed at least 38 people on a United States list of imprisoned opposition members.
United States denies Cuba resisting release of several prisoners on list.
A White House official on Wednesday denied that the Cuban government was resisting freeing some of the 53 people listed for release as part of a thaw in U.S.-Cuba relations on the grounds they had been linked to violence.
White House Unsure If Cuba Has Released 53 Political Prisoners as Promised.
When President Obama announced his plans to ""normalize"" relations between the United States and Cuba just before Christmas, he did so with few pre-conditions.
However, one the conditions of normalizing relations with the communist country was for the Castro regime to release 53 political prisoners.
When asked about their release yesterday , White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest could not say for certain if that release had occurred and said the Cuban government would be working on their own timeline.
State Department Spokeswoman Jen Psaki gave a similar answer during her daily briefing yesterday.
President Obama's drive to normalize ties with communist Cuba is raising new concerns among security officials and experts that the administration will give up the strategic naval base at Guantanamo Bay in deal with Havana.
White House, Pentagon, and State Department officials offered assurances that the Obama administration currently does not plan to negotiate the return of the base, leased by the United States since 1903.
Some low comedy yesterday at the State Department press gaggle, as spokesperson Jen Psaki couldn't say whether Cuba has released the 53 political prisoners it promised when it struck a deal to normalize relations.
The Cuban government hasn't exactly been a model for transparency the last half century.
Included in his deal with Cuba, Obama announced two weeks ago that the United States government had released three Cuban spies.
The lack of progress in freeing the Cuban political prisoners increases the scrutiny on that White House decision.
The scion of the man who was responsible for the Cuban blockade is full of awe for the Cuban dictatorship.
Sure, it's a dictatorship, but other than that, it's just ducky, apparently.
Any deal between the United States and Cuba ought to aim at maximizing economic freedom, handing the communist regime only the political benefits that are inevitable, and facilitating the growth of the still embryonic civil society on the island.
Unfortunately, President Barack Obama's ""normalization"" of relations with Cuba will have only a tiny economic impact on the people and bring the Castro dictatorship political and financial benefits.
These ""solidarity movements and committees"" have been active on American soil for many years.
I covered one of their conferences last year at a Baptist church just a few blocks from the White House.
It is time for hearings into these activities and their role in the change in Obama's Cuba policy.
If Cuba is given a full-fledged embassy in Washington, D.C., we can anticipate more spying and subversion on American soil.
Most of you quickly figured out how Obama's new amnesty plan creates more Democratic voters.
Instead he further loop holed it with executive orders, a process that started when he first took office.
The Helms-Burton Act of 1996, you see, codified some of the vital economic sanctions against Cuba into United States law so a full and genuine ""lifting of the embargo"" requires a Congressional vote.
Day after day for four months, Roberto Pizano was marched from inside a prison to a pond holding human waste from a tuberculosis hospital nearby.
As punishment for his crimes against the revolution of Fidel Castro, Pizano was held face down until he nearly drowned.
For him, it was an introduction to the 18 years he would spend in Cuban prisons.
Except for the United States, Cuba has had normal relations with the rest of the world for decades.
Tourists, trade, investment from Canada, France, Britain, Spain, everywhere.
An avalanche of nylons — and not an inch of movement in Cuba toward freedom.
In fact, one could argue that this influx of Western money has helped preserve the dictatorship, as just about all the financial transactions go through the government, which takes for itself before any trickle-down crumbs are allowed to reach the regime-indentured masses.
Despite the sudden thaw in relations between the United States and Cuba, the base here remains a sore point for Cubans, a deeply felt grievance that the Castros, first Fidel and now his brother Raúl, have long pointed to as a stinging symbol of American imperialism.
A senior State Department official in Washington said that Cuban negotiators had raised their government's oft-repeated demand for the return of the base during the secret talks that culminated in last month's surprise announcement that the two countries would re-establish full diplomatic relations.
Gross works for a subcontractor of the United States Agency for International Development.
He went to Cuba to distribute cellphones and laptops to civil-society groups and to individuals.
Obama's wide-ranging order wipes out the restriction that limited Cuban Americans to one trip every three years to the island.
Also under the new policy, Cuban Americans can send unlimited amounts of money to relatives in Cuba.
The Obama administration is pushing to protect Antarctica's fragile environment by imposing mandatory limits on the size of cruise ships sailing there and the number of passengers they bring ashore.
Obama administration stung by Cuban crackdown on dissidents, complicating detente.
The Obama administration has responded harshly to the Cuban government's arrest this week of political dissidents planning a protest in downtown Havana, casting an uncomfortable shadow over the historic detente announced just weeks before between the United States and the Castro regime.
President Obama claimed his move to normalize relations with Cuba was a means of nudging the military dictatorship toward democracy.
Two weeks after the United States and Cuba agreed to thaw decades of icy relations, the United States State Department blasted the Cuban government for reportedly arresting at least six dissidents.
There was no comment from Cuban authorities on the arrests that were reported by other dissidents and the United States State Department.
If only there were some handy location which happened to be chock-a-block with docs that would jump, say, a 90 mile stretch of water just to see some patients.
Barack Obama has made a geopolitical irrelevancy suddenly relevant to American presidential politics.
Some conservative criticisms of Obama's new Cuba policy — which includes normalizing diplomatic and commercial relations, to the extent that presidential action can — seem reflexive.
They look symptomatic of Cold War nostalgia and 1930s envy — yearnings for the moral clarity of the struggle with the totalitarians.
Cuba's regime, although totalitarian, no longer matters in international politics.
As bankrupt morally as it is economically, the regime is intellectually preposterous and an enticing model only for people who want to live where there are lots of 1950s Chevrolets.
A United States official told CBS News that the United States Agency for International Development has made a $3.2 million payment to Alan Gross.
Gross has a separate arrangement to work out payment with his former employer Development Alternatives Inc. to settle legal costs related to his imprisonment.
He was working as a USAID subcontractor hired by DAI when he was arrested and imprisoned by the Cuban government.
Vidal's comments in a Monday interview were the clearest sign yet that Cuba has no intention of extraditing America's most-wanted woman, Joanne Chesimard, following a historic detente announced by last week by President Barack Obama and Raul Castro of Cuba.
United States Senate Republican leader McConnell opposes Obama on Cuba.
Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell said on Monday he opposed President Barack Obama's move to normalize relations with Cuba, and spoke of steps lawmakers could take to try to rein in the new policy.
Paleo-lib columnist Eleanor Clift was in fine fiddle on The McLaughlin Group yesterday and did not disappoint when the conversation turned to Cuba.
Clift served up what is arguably her most asinine observation since she claimed that Ambassador Chris Stevens wasn't murdered in the September 2012 attack on the United States consulate in Benghazi because he died of smoke inhalation from fire set ablaze during the siege.
A less charitable description might use the words ""deceit"", ""amateurism"" and ""bad faith"" to characterize the White House's efforts.
Hillary Clinton was the main architect of the deal reached with Cuba and her advocacy toward opening a new relationship with the Castro regime began almost immediately when she became secretary of state, according to a report from Bloomberg's Josh Rogin.
Barack Obama has long believed United States Cuba policy should change; he so when he first ran for president in 2008.
Obama stressed that the United States should hold Cuba to a number of stringent conditions before even beginning to normalize relations.
The first of those conditions was freedom for Cuba's political prisoners.
White House Allowed Cuban Spy Convicted of Murder Conspiracy to Artificially Inseminate Wife.
President Obama announced last week that the White House would reestablish diplomatic relations with Cuba, while demanding of the communist nation no concessions.
Opponents have objected that this negotiation would benefit the Castro regime at the expense of the Cuban people, and that, in freeing the three remaining members of the murderous 'Cuban Five' spy ring, President Obama was dishonoring the lives of United States citizens.
Liberals were in a near euphoric state on Wednesday after President Obama announced that the United States and Cuba are on a path to normalizing relations between the two nations, a move that will pave the way for a United States Embassy in Havana, and may eventually lead to lifting a 50-year-old American trade embargo.
As the United States and Cuba begin to normalize relations for the first time in half a century, some Americans are already roaming the streets of Old Havana, attending dance exhibitions and talks on architecture as they take part in scripted cultural tours that can cost more than a decent used car back home.
Christie tells Obama to demand return of cop killer Chesimard to start Cuba talks.
Chris Christie is urging President Obama to demand that Cuba return convicted police-killer Joanne Chesimard before he proceeds with efforts to improve diplomatic relations with that country.
Chesimard was found guilty of killing New Jersey State Trooper Werner Foerster in 1973 before escaping from prison and fleeing to Cuba.
The 67-year-old Chesimard has since been provided safe haven by the Cuban government.
Cuba's Coast Guard sank a boat carrying 32 Cubans who were trying to reach the Florida coast, according to a woman who survived and whose husband is missing.
Masiel González Castellano told reporters in a telephone conversation from Matanzas, Cuba, that her husband, Leosbel Díaz Beoto, is missing after falling from the boat that was repeatedly charged and hit by a boat manned by the Cuban Coast Guard.
Cuba's Coast Guard sinks boat carrying 32 refugees who were trying to reach Florida.
So perhaps President Obama should stop insulting the intelligence of Cuba-watchers by claiming to speak and act on their behalf.
After fifty-some years, and eight presidents later, United States policy of relative isolationism towards Cuba all came to an end when President Barack Obama declared a ""new day"" in U.S.-Cuba relations.
The President's core message is that after fifty years, our policies towards Cuba have not worked.
Cubans celebrate President Obama, Raul Castro's decision to normalize relations.
Throughout Havana, Cubans sang the praises Friday of President Obama and Raul Castro's decision to reestablish diplomatic ties, saying it would lead to a better life for all.
To many exiles and their allies, President Raul Castro is a brutal dictator who locks up dissenters in gulag-like jails, snuffs out political discourse and condemns his people to socialist poverty.
Some say the definition of insanity is continuing to do the same thing and expect different results.
So with that being said, some are applauding President Obama's unilateral change in policy towards Cuba — by way of opening up diplomatic relations.
Extradition of Cop Killer from Cuba May Not Be in 'Best Interest' of Americans.
Joanne Chesimard was serving a life sentence for the execution-style murder of New Jersey State Trooper Werner Foerster in 1973.
She escaped from prison in 1979 and sufficed in Cuba in 1984, where she is believed to still be living.
A reward of up to $1 million is offered for information leading to her capture.
Colonel Rick Fuentes, superintendent of the New Jersey State Police, said in a statement that they ""continue to work closely with the FBI towards the capture"" of Chesimard.
President Barack Obama unveiled a new United States policy toward Cuba on Wednesday as part of a deal that brought American Alan Gross home in exchange for three convicted Cuban spies.
As he has done so often in the past, Obama tried to channel the perspective of America's enemies and critics, as if his job were to act as a neutral mediator instead of defending United States interests and values.
On Wednesday, President Barack Obama announced that the United States would be changing its policy toward Cuba, opening a Havana embassy and expanding travel.
The president negotiated the deal between the United States and Cuba over the course of 18 months.
A United States visit by Cuban President Raul Castro is a possibility, the White House said, a day after he and United States President Barack Obama announced a historic bilateral rapprochement.
Wednesday also saw the Obama administration move to normalize relations with the abnormal regime 90 miles south of the Florida Keys.
The president traded three Cubans jailed in America for one jailed American in Cuba.
Unfortunately, 11 million remain imprisoned on the island penitentiary.
I'm trying to figure out what exactly the supposed flaw has been in the policy of isolating a brutal regime diplomatically and imposing a trade embargo on it — one that is a lot more like a screen than a wall — in order to pressure it to reform.
President Obama got a whiff of Havana when a guest at a White House Hanukkah reception handed him a Cuban cigar.
Obama — who only hours earlier paved the way for normalizing relations with Cuba — seemed amused by the still-embargoed tobacco, which was given to him by a Colorado man at the Wednesday party.
If there was a theme to 2014, it was Obama's persistence in bailing out dictators and theocrats from political scrapes and economic hardships, his tenacity in pursuit of engagement with America's adversaries no matter the cost to our strength, principles, credibility, or alliances.
In this president the thugs in Havana and Caracas, Damascus and Tehran, Moscow and Naypyidaw and Beijing have no better friend.
For these bullies, these evildoers, these millenarians and sectarians, Barack Obama is more than a dupe.
We got back Alan Gross before his Communist jailers killed him, along with an American spy, in exchange for three members of a Cuban espionage ring.
Isolating Cuba during the last 30 years of the Cold War helped bankrupt and bring down the Soviet Empire, which had to carry Cuba on its back.
President Obama's announcement that he is reestablishing diplomatic relations with Cuba is not a cause for celebration, and it is not a success for the president.
The United States can do a lot more for Cuba than Cuba can do for the United States.
The Castro brothers' control of the country has ensured that Cuba has been a malignant actor in the region and elsewhere for decades, and that is not changing.
The backlash against a deal for the United States to reopen its embassy in Havana and thaw its relations with Cuba is underway in Florida, where Republicans are threatening to use their control of the Senate to sabotage the plans.
While the President's political opponents are unable to stop him from formally restoring United States ties with its communist neighbour, they can throw up practical hurdles to slow down or even derail the détente.
The Obama administration's normalization of relations with Cuba has handed the Communist government an economic lifeline, critics say, just when its traditional foreign patrons are suffering from their own domestic troubles.
President Obama announced on Wednesday that the United States would loosen travel and commercial restrictions on Cuba as part of its efforts to reestablish diplomatic relations.
The measures could provide some initial relief to the country's largely state-controlled economy, which is afflicted by massive debts and unemployment thought to be twice as high as the official rate of 4.3 percent in 2013.
Obama said in remarks that ""50 years have shown that isolation has not worked"" in displacing the regime of Fidel Castro and his brother and current president, Raul.
Obama becomes first President since JFK to savor a Cuban cigar after historic deal.
Barack Obama's historic peace-deal with Cuba after 50 years of cold war hostility was a breakthrough not to be sniffed at.
But that didn't stop the United States president having a try, when he got close and personal to a Cuban on Wednesday ... not a citizen, but a cigar.
Kennedy stockpiled a secret stash of his favourite Havanas in the hours before he imposed a trade embargo on the Communist state in 1962.
If Obama Goes to Cuba For Golf, He Should Bring Back Cop Killer Joanne Chesimard.
It is rumored President Obama could be taking a trip to Cuba next year to golf.
If the president ends up going, Fox News' host, comedian and author Greg Gutfeld wants Obama to bring back cop killer Joanne Chesimard, also known as Assata Shakur, upon his return to the United States.
Just one day before President Obama announced sweeping changes that would allow potential American investment in Cuba, the Cuban government apparently had begun preparing itself by announcing new measures that would allow Cubans who work for foreign companies to keep only 8% of their salaries.
Let's Talk About Obama's Imaginary 'Winning Streak'. s you've no doubt have heard, Obama has been on a roll since the midterms.
To be fair, there is a rather narrow sample size for that kind of declaration.
The Cuba issue, while a good talker, probably isn't the kind issue that most Americans are exceedingly concerned about.
As we see how that shakes out, there are other wins that exist only in the imagination.
President Obama continues to embrace low-tier, go-it-alone executive actions to pad the last two years of his mistake-filled, empty-agenda presidency in a hopeless hunt for a legacy.
His arrogant decision this week to re-establish diplomatic relations with communist Cuba is the latest example of a president desperately searching for something do without having to deal with Congress.
In Miami's Little Havana, Versailles Restaurant hosted hard-line Cuban exiles railing against President Obama's decision to establish full diplomatic ties with the Cuban government.
They waved placards and hurled insults bilingually, putting on the show they've been rehearsing and staging for half a century.
The pontiff began Wednesday with prayers and a birthday celebration with tango dancers near St.
His day ended with a historic diplomatic breakthrough between Cuba and the United States — and the disclosure that the Argentine pope played a key role as broker.
Barack Obama apologized to Cuban president Raul Castro during their phone conversation after the American commander in chief's opening remarks.
Speaking to reporters at his final White House press briefing of 2014 Friday afternoon, Obama gave more details about his phone call with the communist leader of Cuba earlier this week before the announcement of a change in United States policy on the Caribbean island nation.
This issue is in his wheelhouse, not only as a conservative Cuban-American pol from Florida but as a guy who's looking to distinguish himself as the cream of the hawkish crop in 2016 if he runs for president.
Ted Cruz might feel obliged, just to make sure there's no one in the field next year that's to his right on any issue that the base is paying attention to.
The answer is nothing, unless you are one of those who believes that the Castro regime is about to reform the economy, allow an independent media, and hold multi-party elections.
Let us take the moment of President Obama's betrayal of Free Cuba to step back a bit — back to say, May 19, 1895.
That's when the tribune of Cuba Libre, Jose Marti, was killed in combat against the Spanish Royalists at the Battle of Dos Rios.
Castro Brothers Join Line of Anti-American Tyrants to Receive Obama's Largess.
You knew that, with all of the national elections that will take place during his presidency behind him, Barack Obama would do everything in his power — broadly defined — to assist the Castro regime.
President Obama was a good friend to Mohammad Morsi, the Muslim Brotherhood's man in Egypt.
He has made nice with the mullahs in Iran, bailing their country out of serious economic woes under the pretense of slowing Iran's nuclear weapons program.
He ""reset"" relations with Russia on terms highly favorable to Putin and would have done more to help the autocrat, as he promised to do after he gained ""flexibility"" following the 2012 election, had Putin not set out to dismember Ukraine.
It's been two years since the sultry and suave music power couple of Beyonce and Jay-Z were publicly humiliated across the globe after they realized it's not ""cool"" to visit countries like Cuba run by totalitarian regimes that sponsor terrorism, steal private property, jail people for no reason and freely make critics disappear without a trace.
No, it's not ""cool"" to travel to places like Cuba, financially support the regime's tourism industry and pose in a massive ad campaign broadcast to the ends of the earth showing the world's most beautiful couple enjoying all the tiny streets and bright colors and spicy foods of Cuba, as presented to you by one of the world's nastiest and most brutal totalitarian governments.
Obama stresses freedom of Gross from Cuba at Hanukka candlelighting ceremony.
Presiding over the White House Hanukka ceremony on Wednesday United States President Barack Obama wasted no time connecting the 8-day Jewish holiday to the historic Cuba policy changes he announced earlier in the day, which led to the release of jailed Jewish-American Alan Gross.
Intel concerns about Russia-Cuba ties preceded Obama's deal to dismantle sanctions.
Months before President Obama announced on Wednesday that he is seeking to do away with decades of U.S. economic sanctions against the communist regime in Cuba, Russia concluded a security deal with Havana aimed at bolstering intelligence and military ties to the island dictatorship.
The Russia-Cuba agreement was announced May 16 when a memorandum was signed in Moscow establishing a joint working group between Russia's Security Council and the Cuban Commission for National Security and Defense.
It turns out that a cabal of left-wing extremists helped to make Gross's release happen.
There, the president not only made clear that this change has been on his bucket list for some time, but also that his knowledge of Cuba comes straight out of the international Left's playbook.
Candidate Barack Obama said that, as president, he would talk to anti-American dictators without precondition.
He didn't mention that he would also give them historic policy concessions without precondition.
His surprise unilateral change in the United States posture toward the Castro dictatorship came without even the pretense of serious promises by the Cubans to reform their kleptocratic, totalitarian rule.
Just hours after Obama announced that a prisoner swap with the Cuban government for two Americans was the start of a new relationship with the communist country, Republicans began informally kicking around ideas to stop any changes to the U.S.-Cuba relationship.
From 2009 until her departure in early 2013, Clinton and her top aides took the lead on the sometimes public, often private interactions with the Cuban government.
According to current and former White House and State Department officials and several Cuba policy experts who were involved in the discussions, Clinton was also the top advocate inside the government for ending travel and trade restrictions on Cuba and reversing 50 years of United States policy to isolate the Communist island nation.
Repeatedly, she pressed the White House to move faster and faced opposition from cautious high-ranking White House officials.
America's Cuban-American senators threaten to block Obama's Cuba shift.
Barack Obama's move to open relations with Cuba brought an official weather forecast from Havana's state news agency that it would rain flower petals, but Cuban-Americans serving in the United States Senate unleashed a stormy tempest on the White House Wednesday.
The president made his shocking and historic announcement armed with a new budget that seems to cement the State Department's ability to fund an embassy and pay salaries in Havana.
But while two Republicans threatened action when the new GOP-led Congress convenes, they were led by a Democrat who has backed the White House on nearly everything for the last six years.
During the press briefing , Earnest pointed out that President Obama had welcomed leaders from countries with questionable human rights records such as China and Burma.
The release of Alan Gross, the American contractor imprisoned in Cuba for more than five years, ""set a price on the head of every American abroad,"" Sen.
It is a brutal dictatorship,"" Rubio, who is a Cuban-American, told ABC News' Jeff Zeleny.
Former President Jimmy Carter on Thursday praised President Barack Obama's ""political courage"" in reestablishing relations with Cuba.
Rangel, who was in Havana for some reason, said the Cuban people were ecstatic.
Cigar-loving travelers won't have to hide their Cubans in their luggage anymore.
Tobacco products from Cuba are among the goods allowed under new trade normalization rules that President Obama announced Wednesday.
The eased restrictions mean that approved travelers will be able to bring home $100 of cigars.
From the Bay of Pigs to the Baltimore Orioles, 50 years of U.S.-Cuba relations.
Three months after taking office in 2009, President Obama brought up Cuba at the Summit of the Americas.
In the five years since, long-standing restrictions on travel and trade have been loosened and rhetoric has continued to focus on improving relations.
This week, an American held by Cuba for five years was brought home, and the White House announced plans to open an embassy in Havana.
Mr Rangel said he was in the country with a medical association ""to exchange advancements that have been made"" on treatment for diabetes.
The spin from Valerie Jarrett's White House is that the pope supposedly had something to do with what progressives have wanted to do for decades Raul Castro Urges Obama To Use 'Executive Action' To Overrule Congress.
In a speech held at the same time as President Barack Obama's televised speech announcing a normalization of relations with Cuba, Cuban dictator Raul Castro urged Obama to use ""executive action"" to bypass Congressional policy on Cuba.
Joanne Chesimard was convicted in the shooting death of a New Jersey state trooper in 1973 but later escaped from prison and fled to Cuba.
The White House on Wednesday said President Obama would have no reservations about visiting Cuba following the resumption of diplomatic talks between his administration and the Castro regime.
Conservative columnist Charles Krauthammer lamented the Obama administration's decision to open formal relations with Cuba on Wednesday, pegging it as part of a broader trend and wondering whether there's any tyrannical or anti-American regime to whom he won't grant one-sided concessions.
On Fox News's Special Report, Krauthammer explained how even President Obama himself once understood that the embargo against Cuba was designed as leverage to push Cuban democratization.
On Wednesday, the Castros suddenly obtained a comprehensive bailout — from the Obama administration.
President Obama granted the regime everything on its wish list that was within his power to grant; a full lifting of the trade embargo requires congressional action.
Full diplomatic relations will be established, Cuba's place on the list of terrorism sponsors reviewed and restrictions lifted on United States investment and most travel to Cuba.
That liberalization will provide Havana with a fresh source of desperately needed hard currency and eliminate United States leverage for political reforms.
President Obama's decision to reestablish full diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United States for the first time since 1961 reflects the president's conviction — laid out in his first inaugural address — that engagement with foreign adversaries is better than isolation.
Mr Obama's historic decision means that two longtime antagonists — who have what the president himself described Wednesday as a ""unique history"" — will establish embassies in each other's capital and exchange ambassadors.
Marco Rubio responded to Obama's announcement on Cuba today calling it 'just another concession to a tyranny' and saying it will do nothing but tighten the Cuban regime's grip on power for decades to come and significantly set back the hopes and dreams of the Cuban people that they may live in freedom and democracy.
Shepard Smith reacts to Obama's Cuba decision, asks if United States will 'ruin' Havana.
Fox News anchor Shepard Smith reacted to news that the United States was restoring diplomatic relations with Cuba by asking if American capitalism would ""ruin"" the nation with fast-food restaurants and home improvement businesses.
NBC Hails 'Momentous Day' of Obama Opening United States Relations With Cuba.
Obama Is Worst Negotiator Since Carter, Maybe in Modern United States History.
Senator Marco Rubio slammed President Obama's decision to normalize United States relations with Cuba on Wednesday, calling him ""the worst negotiator"" since Jimmy Carter.
Networks Barely Mention Brutality of Castro Regime or Cuba Being Communist.
Following the trend set when news broke early Wednesday , the major broadcast networks continued their praising of the move by President Obama to seek normalized relations with Cuba on their Wednesday night newscasts.
The journalists of Good Morning America on Thursday cheered Barack Obama's efforts to ""help thaw a Cold War"" and offered little in the way of criticism for the President's actions to normalize relations with Cuba.
Mark Levin Brilliantly Exposes Obama's Blatant Undeniable Indisputable Hypocrisy On Cuba.
Mark Levin gave a brilliant monologue today on Obama seeking to normalize relations with Cuba, exposing the blatant hypocrisy in how Obama deals with evil dictatorships versus how he deals with America.
Obama essentially released the three remaining Cuban spies in exchange for American Alan Gross, who had been held hostage by the Cuban regime for over five years.
Gross was a foreign aid worker imprisoned by the Castro regime for trying to help ordinary Cubans communicate with the outside world.
President Obama confirmed the role of Pope Francis, a vocal critic of Western-style capitalism, in the deal.
Once again, we are treated to a display of secret and deceptive government by the Obama administration, in this case designed to bolster an anti-American regime.
The announcement was made after Congress adjourned for the legislative session.
President Barack Obama announced Wednesday at the White House that the United States will move swiftly toward normalizing diplomatic relations with the isolated communist country of Cuba, following more than a half-century of icy stares.
Cuba released American aid worker Alan Gross in the morning after five years in captivity, in a prisoner exchange with Havana that started a day of unprecedented United States action that will include, eventually, a lifting of America's cold-war trade embargo.
Few could have predicted that communist regimes would win the day on December 17, 2014.
But Barack Obama, promising to fundamentally transform America, has done so.
His mentor, communist activist Frank Marshall Davis, would be proud of him.
To make the world more prosperous, the United States must be less prosperous.
Assisting Barack Obama in this are the Washington technocrats, bureaucrats, and numerous party apparatchiks of both parties who have decided America is in decline and the decline should be managed instead of overcome.
Republicans lawmakers reacted with outrage Wednesday over the Obama administration's move to normalize relations with Cuba, with some casting it as appeasement and the product of extortion by the communist Castro government.
Marco Rubio, the son of Cuban immigrants and a likely 2016 presidential contender, was perhaps the most ardent voice to denounce the administration.
He and other Republicans promised to try to derail the White House's efforts through their leverage in Congress, even as at least one GOP-leaning group, the United States Chamber of Commerce, welcomed the news of improved ties with Cuba.
Pope Francis and the Vatican were involved in the negotiations with Cuba, according to a senior administration official who briefed reporters on background.
As President Obama announced his dramatic changes to United States relations with Cuba, he explained to Americans that they'll be able to send more money to the country in the future.
Marco Rubio fiercely criticized President Barack Obama on Wednesday for moving to ease US-Cuba relations.
Rubio, a potential presidential candidate in 2016, was reacting to the White House's decision to beginning normalizing relations with the Cuban government following a prisoner swap between the two countries.
Kerry also noted that at Obama's request the State Department will review its designation of Cuba as a terror state.
And now, you turn on the TV and see the announcement about the change in American policy in Cuba.
Lots of changes in the embargo that will mean plenty more cash for the Castros.
In exchange, the Castro brothers have pledged to let 53 political prisoners out, free one American spy, and free the American hostage Alan Gross.
As to real changes in the regime — changes in its foreign or domestic policies — none.
So, you conclude that in the long struggle between the United States and the Castro regime since 1959, the Americans have finally blinked.
First Bergdahl, now Gross — Obama 'worst negotiator' since Jimmy Carter.
Bowe Bergdahl, now he swapped three Cuban spies for Alan Gross — moves that drew criticism slamming him as the 'worst negotiator' as president since Jimmy Carter.
Marco Rubio, Florida Republican, made the declaration Wednesday in the wake of an announced deal that will free Mr Gross, an American, from imprisonment in Cuba in exchange for three Cubans convicted of espionage.
News of Gross's release and the administration's change to United States policy toward Cuba has swept through the streets of Little Havana.
Cuban-Americans have flocked Cafe Versailles, a political hotspot to trade opinions on the news.
The Obama administration is moving to normalize diplomatic relations with Cuba, after American Alan Gross was released from the communist country Wednesday following five years in prison.
Sources say President Obama plans to announce the opening of a United States embassy in Havana and call on Congress to lift the long-standing embargo.
Senior administration officials said Obama spoke with Cuban leader Raul Castro for more than 45 minutes on Tuesday, the first substantive presidential-level discussion between the United States and Cuba since 1961.
Obama is building his legacy as a communist sympathizer and an enabler of petty tyrants and dictators.
United States President Barack Obama does not have concrete plans to visit Cuba after restoring diplomatic relations with Havana, but a White House spokesman said on Wednesday he would not rule out a presidential visit.
President Obama extended a hearty handshake to Cuba's iron-fisted dictator Raul Castro just as the latter was beating up dissidents back home on the eve of Human Rights Day.
Cuba remains the ACLU's ""Fantasy Island,"" where — to hear them tell it — happy Marxist children play together in perfect harmony, and the state makes sure its citizens are cared for from cradle to grave.
At least that's the glorious depiction in a book titled Vamos a Cuba that the ACLU wanted to keep on the bookshelves of a Florida school.
But as it did on the TV show Fantasy Island, illusion in Cuba quickly gives way to harsh reality.
While most of the nation focused on the stimulus bill winding through Congress, nine representatives introduced a bill calling for an end to the 46-year-old ban on travel to Cuba.
The Freedom to Travel to Cuba Act introduced in the United States House of Representatives on Feb. 4 would allow American citizens unrestricted travel to Cuba for the first time since 1963.
President Barack Obama is poised to offer an olive branch to Cuba in an effort to repair the US's tattered reputation in Latin America.
The White House has moved to ease some travel and trade restrictions as a cautious first step towards better ties with Havana, raising hopes of an eventual lifting of the four-decade-old economic embargo.
The very week Obama proposed cozying up to Castro by dropping some economic and travel sanctions, the biggest political shake-up in twenty years rattled Cuba's regime.
The most prominent among the purged were the youngest and most reform-minded , and they've all been replaced by diehard Stalinist septuagenarians with military and secret police backgrounds.
Not since Ann Margaret's reaction to Conrad Birdie's kiss has anything been recorded to match these United States legislators' reaction to these meetings.
The Castro regime is one of the most brutal, ruthless and amoral regimes of our time.
While little mention of it is offered by the world media, due to their soft spot for murderers and thugs everywhere, the cruelty it embodies is no less true.
After all, the only time the media sees fit to heap scorn on anyone is when conservatives enact policies that defend innocents against terror or brutality.
Former Cuban leader Fidel Castro described a meeting with United States lawmakers in an opinion article on Wednesday as ""magnificent"", and urged Washington to take the initiative to improve ties with Havana.
And when even those who dare to whisper a word of dissent to your absolute rule find themselves harassed, beaten, humiliated, and imprisoned.
Fresh from a secretive trip to Havana to meet Raul and Fidel Castro, Rep.
If anyone's thinking toward the communist state is stuck in the Cold War past, it is Ms.
The Lost City not only is a loving tribute to Havana and Cuban art and music, it is also a loving tribute to liberty, democracy and capitalism.
In Castro's Cuba, it is a crime to meet to discuss the economy, to write letters to the government, to report on political developments, to speak to international reporters, to advocate human rights, to visit friends or relatives outside your local area of residence without government permission.
Jimmy Carter is the self-appointed globetrotter on behalf of human rights.
Veneration of evil. continues to be a symbol of freedom and revolutionary fervour and purity for people who can't read or think.
Despite the fact leftie morons from Pierre Trudeau to Michael Moore venerate the Cuban totalitarian state, it is just a prison masquerading as a nation.
He failed miserably, thus consigning Cuba to a future as a colony of the Soviet Union, exchanging sugar for fighter planes.
To depict Havana streets on New Year's Eve 1958, Coppola cast more people than stampeded through a battle scene in Braveheart.
But the reality, up close, is that it's the longest-running failure in the New World.Filmmaker Brings Back Shocking Tale of Cuban Prisons.
Some are held captive in tiny, windowless cells; others are confined in over-crowded and squalid dormitories.
Most go without basic health care and food staples; a few undergo regular beatings.
All are denied basic religious freedoms, and none has been visited by members of the International Red Cross.
Fidel Castro likes to boast of his country's 70,000 doctors, but admits ""tens of thousands"" of them have been sent abroad.
Last week, seven members of the Congressional Black Caucus ... returned from a visit to Cuba where they met with the dictators of Cuba, Fidel and Raul Castro.
They were quite impressed with Fidel Castro, the longest reigning dictator in the world, the man who deprived an entire generation of Cubans of the most fundamental human rights.Now Open Cuba's Prisons.
President Obama's decision this week to ease some parts of the embargo against Cuba is being hailed as a first step toward altering a United States policy that has prevailed for a half-century without unseating Fidel Castro.
President Barack Obama wants Havana to make the next move to improve U.S.-Cuba relations, saying Thursday that he needs to see signs of changes on the island before he makes any more overtures.
At a press conference on April 7, Illinois Representative Bobby Rush extolled Raul Castro —a man with the blood of hundreds on his hands —for his ""sense of humor"" and the way he ""laughed at himself"" and how ""down-to-earth"" and ""kind"" he was.
When a reporter asked about Cuba's human rights record, Rush snapped that he was engaging in a ""double standard"" and called it ""good business sense"" not to let human rights get in the way of increased trade.Comrade Barbara.
The Congressional Black Caucus's recent trip to Cuba was utterly expected.
Now there's nothing wrong with visiting Cuba and nothing sacrosanct about America's economic embargo.
But you can rationally question United States Cuba policy without cozying up to Castro.
The CBC did the latter — failing to meet with a single dissident on an island with a record of making dissidents disappear and handing El Jefe his best press in years.Arlen Specter, Castro's Dupe.
Arlen Specter has visited Cuba and met with Fidel Castro three times in the past 9 years, and seems quite proud of the record.
His second visit was shortly after the 9/11 terrorist attack, where Specter made a big show of presenting Fidel Castro with a FDNY cap.
Celebrities, journalists, and other illuminati have long gushed with admiration for Cuba's communist despot.New Dem.
What's also interesting about Muñoz, though Politico omitted this fact, is that he at least once dined with Cuban dictator Fidel Castro.
I have written a fair amount about Fidel Castro, over the years, and a fair amount about Jimmy Carter, too.
In the months that followed, Carter slashed the defense budget, scrapped the B-1 bomber, welcomed the Sandinista coup in Nicaragua, and launched diplomatic relations with Cuba's dictator, Fidel Castro.
We've discussed Jimmy Carter's legacy of friendship and warm support for the world's dictators many times already, notably on Venezuela, but a return to Carter's Cuba legacy may be an even worse experience, because of an unmistakable whiff of treason.
For decades, journalists and celebrities have showered Cuba's despot with praise, extolling his virtues so extravagantly at times that if sycophancy were an Olympic sport, they would have walked off with the gold.
Barack Obama's call for action on climate change and his admission that rich nations have a particular responsibility to lead has received strong praise from an unusual source — United States nemesis Fidel Castro.
Listen up to the words of the second most dedicated Marxist in our Hemisphere.
Everyone else seems to be bailing on Barack Obama these days, but not the Castro regime.
In a memo to CNN anchors, CNN brass laid down the line that should be taken when talking about the resignation.
Yet liberals in the United States media — who have rightly condemned such abuses when perpetrated by dictators such as Chile's Augusto Pinochet — inexplicably remain enchanted with Castro and his socialist revolution.
For more than half a century, positive profiles of Castro have appeared in United States papers.
CBS's 60 Minutes has run a segment on Elian Gonzalez, five years after the Clinton administration sent him back to the communist prison island.
He had come to America as a refugee, without his father, who was back in Cuba and under pressure from the communist regime to demand him back.
The Clinton administration complied, seizing the little boy at the point of a gun.
It made a mockery of America's reputation as a free society open to refugees fleeing persecution.
To many Cuban Americans, CNN is the ""Castro News Network"" an organization that lends legitimacy to a corrupt regime and sneers at the exile community in Miami.
Journalism is never more amoral than when dictators are the mandatory ""get"" for a news puff piece.
Castro's fiefdom wins the price ""for most journalists jailed per-capita on earth.
Reporters Without Borders, Cuba today holds 20 percent of the world's jailed journalists.
A few words about Elian Gonzalez April 22, 2000, is a date that has been flushed down the news media memory hole.
The Clinton administration used the executive branch's broad power over immigration to send a 6-year-old boy back to a communist dictatorship.
Let the record show that most Americans approved of the Clinton-Castro shanghaiing of Elian Gonzalez.
A 60 Minutes ""interview"" of Elian's father Juan Miguel by Dan Rather played a key role in this expert snookering of America.
On the April 6th 2000 edition of 60 Minutes, America saw a bewildered and heartsick father pleading to be allowed to have his motherless son accompany him back to Cuba, his cherished homeland.
It was the best thing they could find in this surreal island without boats.
Like a scene right out of Hollywood, a storm hit, waves began crashing, the motor failed, the escapees profusely bailed water, and Elian's mom clutched her son as the boat sank.
Elian was placed in some sort of inner tube before passing out from exhaustion.
He was brought safely to American shores, vindicating the sacrifice his mother made.
Elian Gonzalez, who made headlines 14 years ago when his mother died while journeying from Cuba to the United States — sparking an international custody battle — said America was to blame for his loss.
Elian Gonzalez would like to return to the United States, he tells ABC News in an exclusive interview.
Gonzalez was found floating off of Florida's coast in 1999, after the boat he was in with his mother capsized.
Gonzalez stayed with his uncle in Miami, but the 6-year-old boy soon found himself at the center of a tug of war between Cuba and the United States over whether he should remain in this country or be returned to his father in Cuba.
Given all the genuinely weighty events of the intervening years, from 9/11 to the Iraq War and the election of our first black President, it's hard to imagine that a decade ago I and so many other journalists, as well as millions of rapt readers and viewers around the world, spent five months outside a modest house in Miami's Little Havana watching a six-year-old Cuban boy named Elián González.
His media code name, we can reveal now, was The Rabbit — as in, ""The Rabbit's out!"" — which jaded television cameramen shouted whenever Elian stepped into the yard.
As we count down Eric Holder's greatest hits, the first image that comes to the mind of many Americans isn't that of Brian Terry, or of Black Panthers outside polling places, but of a screaming child staring down the barrel of a rifle.
On April 22, 2000, just before dawn, U.S federal agents executed a full-blown raid on the home of five year old Elian Gonzalez, seizing the child and setting in motion procedures to send Elian and his father back to Cuba.
In a nation where there is a scarcity of good news, hearing Eric Holder give a farewell speech upon his announcement that he will be leaving as the Attorney General was surely welcome in some circles.
I was never a fan of his because he was in my opinion always more of a politician than someone with the responsibility to enforce the laws of the nation.
I first took notice of Holder when, in the pre-dawn hours of April 22, 2000, as the deputy attorney general serving under Janet Reno, he oversaw the seizure of Elian Gonzalez, a seven-year-old whose mother had died in an effort to escape Cuba and find sanctuary in the United States.
Holder was doing what he had to do after a court ruled that Gonzalez be returned to his father in Cuba, but I thought then and still do that Gonzalez should have been allowed to remain with his United States relatives.
The United States government, which has refused to act decisively to control the horde of children entering the US via Mexico from Central America certainly had no compunctions about expelling a helpless child back to terrible conditions in the case of Elian Gonzalez back in 1999 during the Clinton regime.
In that case, the Feds were wrong to send a child back to a communist dictatorship, where he lives today, a member of the Union of Young Communists, propagandist for the regime, and personal ""friend"" of Fidel Castro.
Thirteen years ago, a Stalinist regime that our State Department condemns as an official ""state-sponsor of terrorism"" asked the United States government to deport a 7-year-old immigrant named Elian Gonzalez.
The United States Justice department snapped to attention and acted upon Fidel Castro's request.
Elian Gonzalez's family — as demonstrated for over a decade — is completely law-abiding.
The militarization of the police does not occur instantaneously, but is the cumulative result of each military tool amassed, each protester silenced based on his political views, or each wrongful search that goes unchallenged.A young boy serves a life sentence.
If the normal, average, typical 12-year-old boy has the world's longest-reigning dictator drop by every year for his birthday, that is.
Elian Gonzalez was shipped into the waiting arms of Fidel Castro in 2000.
The delivery man was Bill Clinton, who used a SWAT team armed with submachine guns to assure everyone's compliance.Elian Gonzalez joins Cuba's youth Communists.
The Cuban boy at the center of an international custody battle eight years ago has joined Cuba's Young Communist Union.
Elian Gonzalez said he will never let down ex-President Fidel Castro and his brother Raul Castro, according to the Communist youth newspaper Juventud Rebelde.Elian Gonzalez back in news again.
Now comes the news that the 14-year-old has joined Cuba's Young Communist Union, according to the Associated Press.Janet Reno's Show of Force.
This is barely enough time to wake up and gather your wits in order to deal with a threatening, armed contingent wearing body armor and banging at the door.
Lazaro Gonzales, Elian's effervescent uncle, who came into our lives nearly 10 years ago, at the start of the 21st Century.
Told that Janet Reno's federal agents were on their way to his town outside Miami to seize young Elian, Lazaro famously said he wouldn't hand over the kid.
Cuba has released photos of one-time exile cause celebre Elian Gonzalez wearing an olive-green military school uniform and attending a Young Communist Union congress.Anniversary of an Outrage.
The timing of the photo-release may coincide with the 11th anniversary of Elian's shanghaiing from the U.S., which hits on the 22nd of this month.Bill Clinton in Miami compares Elian case to kidnapping.
Former President Bill Clinton said Saturday he had no regrets over sending Elian Gonzalez back to live with his father in Cuba, and would order a federal raid on Little Havana all over again.When Eric Holder Earned his Spurs.
Then on Dec 5th, 1999, Castro clapped his hands and his MSM minions snapped to attention.
Within weeks Clinton's INS had turned its initial decision on its head.
Within months this same INS was kicking down Lazaro's door, pummeling camera men and elderly ladies to the ground with jackboots and wrenching a screaming Elian from his legal custodians in a blaze of pepper gas and machine guns.
Nearly twelve years have passed since he was pulled from a closet by a masked machine gun wielding United States agent.
Now Elian Gonzalez, the Cuban boy who survived a perilous raft journey that killed his mother and became a symbol of troubled relations between the United States and Cuba, is an adult.Here's why you don't remember Elian Gonzalez.
I looked down at a little Easter basket the inn hostess had made and I was reminded this was Easter day.
The sky was dark where they were broadcasting because in a shrewd move on the part of the United States military, the extraction of this child by brute force happened at an hour when most Americans were asleep.
But a more revealing accomplishment was his role as point man in the kidnapping of Elian Gonzalez.
After applying for a court order to seize the boy from his legal guardian, Holder went ahead with the operation without one, then baldly denied that Elian was seized at gunpoint.
The Sequel ""Elian II,"" the sequel we hoped never to see, is what fathers' groups are calling a Miami case that once again highlights our confusion about paternal rights in child custody battles.
This time, the dispute revolves around a 5-year-old Cuban girl, her biological father in Cuba, her mentally unstable mother in the U.S., a passel of relatives, therapists, guardians ad litem, activist attorneys and, finally, a wealthy, influential Cuban-American foster family.
