Blog Search Blog Milestone The Big Day 12th Anniversary of VIDUR's BlogMarch 29, 2021The big day is here.
United States reconnaissance photograph of soviet missile sites on Cuba, taken from a Lockheed U-2 spy plane following the Cuban missile crisis.
CIA reference photograph of Soviet medium-range ballistic missile in Red Square, Moscow.
After provocative political moves and the failed United States attempts to overthrow the Cuban regime , in May 1962 Nikita Khrushchev proposed the idea of placing Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba to deter any future invasion attempt.
During a meeting between Khrushchev and Raúl Castro that July, a secret agreement was reached and construction of several missile sites began in the late summer.
These preparations were noticed, and on 14 October an United States U-2 aircraft took several pictures clearly showing sites for medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic nuclear missiles under construction.
These images were processed and presented on October 15, which marks the beginning of the 13-day crisis from the United States perspective.
While this was taking place, several Soviet ships attempted to run the blockade, increasing tensions to the point that orders to United States Navy ships to fire warning shots and then open fire were sent out.
On 27 October a U-2 was shot down by a Soviet missile crew, an action that could have resulted in immediate retaliation from the Kennedy crisis cabinet, according to Secretary of Defense McNamara‘s later testimony.
However, in the event itself, Kennedy stayed his hand and the negotiations continued.
Publicly, the Soviets would dismantle their offensive weapons in Cuba and return them to the Soviet Union, subject to United Nations verification, in exchange for an United States public declaration and agreement never to invade Cuba.
Secretly, the United States agreed that it would dismantle all US-built Jupiter IRBMs deployed in Turkey and Italy.
Adlai Stevenson II shows aerial photos of Russian missiles in Cuba to the United Nations Security Council in the presence of USSR ambassador Valerian Zorin.
May this auspicious festival usher in the spirit of love, brotherhood and harmony.
Klartext TranslatedThis WordPress.com site is about Health and Wellbeing and Klartext Translated Background journalism instead of court reporting.
