The other, secret oneBy Joe Matthews Journalist12 October 2012 Last updated at 21:18 ET | BBC News Contrary to popular belief, the Cuban missile crisis did not end with the agreement between the United States and Soviet Union in October, 1962.
In November 2011, aware that the 50th anniversary of the most dangerous few weeks in history was less than a year away, my Russian colleague Pasha Shilov and I came across several new accounts that changed our perspective on the Cuban missile crisis and how much we thought we knew about it.
Growing up in Berkshire, England, through the nuclear paranoia of the 1980s, with Ronald Reagan's Cruise and Pershing missiles stationed only 30 miles away from my family home, I was inculcated with a keen awareness of Cold War brinkmanship.
Pasha grew up in Moscow and described how it was from the Soviet point of view equally frightening by his account.But what we've now learned about the chilling events of October and November 1962 has put our own experiences into perspective and maybe given rise to a few more grey hairs along the way.
Our investigations took us to St Petersburg and the Soviet Submariners Veterans' Society via the National Security Archive in Washington DC, where Svetlana Savranskaya, the director of the Russian archives, told us an incredible story.
There had been a second secret missile crisis that continued the danger of a catastrophic nuclear war until the end of November 1962.
Khrushchev concluded that because the Americans hadn't listed the missiles on their list of demands, the Soviet Union's interests would be well served by keeping them in Cuba.
Kremlin number two, Anastas Mikoyan, was charged with making the trip to Havana, principally to calm Castro down and make him what seemed like an offer he couldn't refuse.
Mikoyan, whose wife was seriously ill, took the assignment knowing that the future of relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union were on the line.
Shortly after arriving in Cuba, Mikoyan received word that his wife had died, but despite this, he pledged to stay in Cuba and complete negotiations with Castro.
In the weeks that followed, Mikoyan kept the detail of the missile transfer to himself while he witnessed the mood swings and paranoia of the Cuban leader convinced that Moscow had sold Cuba's defence down the river.
Castro particularly objected to the constant flights over Cuba by American surveillance aircraft and, as Mikoyan learned to his horror, ordered Cuban anti-aircraft gunners to fire on them.
Knowing how delicate the state of relations were between the United States and Russia after the worst crisis since World War II, United States forces around the world remained on Defcon 2, one short of global nuclear war until 20 November.
He then extricated Moscow from a seemingly intractable situation which risked blowing the entire crisis back up in the faces of Kennedy and Khrushchev.
This story has illuminated a chapter in history that has been partially closed for the past 50 years.
Jupiter W W.G.Ewald Defence Professionals/ DFI member of 2 Professional Joined Sep 28, 2011 Messages 14,139 Likes 8,587 Oct 19, 2012 #7 Lies My Textbooks Told Me: Cuban Missiles and Kennedy's Resolve | NewsBusters.org sesha_maruthi27 Senior Member Joined Aug 15, 2010 Messages 3,963 Likes 1,802 Oct 19, 2012 #8 sayareakd said: building nuke is easy part, not to mis use this great power is most difficult part.
The president and Pentagon feared a surprise attack, and that's exactly what the missile rocketing toward Tampa appeared to be.
The report was false; controllers were using a software tape to simulate an attack at the same time that the radar, reconfigured to warn of missiles approaching the United States from the south, had detected an unidentified space object.
But as the non-attack of Oct. shows, it was often enlisted men, pilots or low-ranking civiliansmaking tough calls.
Numerous events and now-declassified documents show the critical role that unsung low-ranking military and civilian participants played in averting disaster.
Facebook Twitter Reddit WhatsApp Link Latest Replies DRDO, PSU and Private Defence Sector News India Super Power A moment ago Russia Ukraine War 2022 Love Charger 2 minutes ago Failed Terrorist State of Pakistan: Idiotic Musings Butter Chicken 3 minutes ago Pictures of soldiers of the People's Liberation Army L1551L 3 minutes ago V Ashdoc's movie review--The Kashmir files Varoon2 19 minutes ago LCA TEJAS MK1 & MK1A: News and Discussion Super Flanker 19 minutes ago Developement bihar and jharkhand mega thread.
