This article reveals the role of RFK to have been far more complex, fluid and essential in the successful resolution of the crisis than such rigid demarcations can encompass.
Quite apart from their individual contributions, taken collectively these amount to an idiosyncratic and unique role.
This article argues that it was a role that could not have been fulfilled by any other individual, and without which the crisis may not have been averted.
Introduction On a Tuesday morning in October 1962 United States Attorney General Robert F Kennedy received an urgent phone call from his brother, President Kennedy, informing him that the Thank you to the editor and anonymous reviewers whose generous and honest criticism made this a better article.
Thank you to Mum and Dad, who first set me on this path with our passionate dinnertable debates and to whom I owe so much.
Thank you to my wife Abigail for her loving support and patience throughout, and all in our beautiful daughter Cora’s first year.
The weeks that followed remain the closest the world has ever come to nuclear war.
Nuclear missiles now lay in place merely 90 miles off the United States coast, contrary to the express assurances of Soviet Premier Khrushchev to the contrary, and in the face of repeated warnings from President Kennedy in preceding months.
Politically and strategically, President Kennedy and his administration had no option but to respond – triggering a stand-off between two nuclear superpowers, each with their own just cause.
The stakes involved, and the richness of the primary source material available, make the study of the resolution of this crisis one of the most fascinating and instructive periods in modern history.
His unique and particular judgement and counsel to the President throughout the crisis was essential to its successful resolution, and indispensable to the President.
Second, RFK acted as de-facto Chief of Staff, Presidential Agent and Intermediary for his brother.
As President Kennedy’s trusted proxy, RFK enabled the President to circumnavigate the often opaque and invariably sluggish formal channels of government but also to gather, organise and relay frank assessments and advice from others, unhindered by presidential deference.
They have justly criticised the Kennedy administration’s antagonistic policies toward Cuba – the products of a confrontational mind-set fuelled by binary, Cold War ideologies – observing that events such as the Bay of Pigs served only to drive Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev and Cuban premier Fidel Castro to desperate measures3.
They have decried, albeit with the benefit of hindsight, the mistaken assumptions made of each other by both United States and Soviet administrations – including Khrushchev’s breath-taking underestimation of likely United States reaction to the placement of nuclear weapons in Cuba.
They have criticised the secrecy of the Jupiter trade and the resulting impact this had on United States foreign policy for decades after.
All these insights, and more, are important contributions to our understanding of the crisis.
But they have failed to fully or fairly assess the scope of RFK’s contribution to the handling of the crisis.
Few crises can be so neatly constrained to such a precise timetable – certainly the crisis had its roots far before than October 16th and was not conclusively resolved until several months later.
We know for example that overflights to ensure the missiles were removed and not replaced continued well after October 28th, and that negotiations to resolve the crisis also continued.
Furthermore, RFK’s critical role in the crisis rested upon relationships built long before these thirteen days.
The EXCOMM enlarged the regular membership of the National Security Council, which included, among others, National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Director of Intelligence John McCone and Secretary of State, Dean Rusk.
The additional members brought into the EXCOMM included RFK, White House counsel Theodore Sorensen and former ambassador to the Soviet Union, Llewellyn Thompson. 4 including RFK and eleven other key advisors across senior government, met regularly over the thirteen-day period.
The tapes of this period, enabled by President Kennedy’s placement of recording devices in key rooms in the White House, reveal much about the management of the crisis and RFK’s role within it.
Despite potential reservations about the EXCOMM tapes, no evidence yet points to RFK being aware of them in 1962.
Furthermore, were he to have been aware of them there is little sign of him self-censoring.
Subsequently, historians have dismantled the myths around President Kennedy and his administration, including one of its principal moments of glory.
Some are not directly relevant to the central argument of this article, but it is worth addressing them at the outset as they are useful context.
The first charge, effectively summarised by Mark White, is that the ‘heroic interpretation of Robert Kennedy’s contribution’ is ‘rooted’ in RFK’s own apparently self-serving memoir, 12 Schlesinger Jr., Robert Kennedy and His Times, 531.
A useful overview can also be found in Dylan Matthews, ‘Americans think John F Kennedy was one of our greatest presidents.
White’s contention is that, as an insider’s account of this most famous of Cold War dramas, early historians took their lead from its chief claims.
Writing before the crisis had even begun, and barely a year after President Kennedy had assumed office, reveals a contemporary view of RFK not incompatible with the leading role revealed in the Thirteen Days memoir.
Secondly, the view that RFK was himself the chief propagator of his predominant and crucial role – in fact, others had spoken to that effect far earlier, and several key participants corroborated his perspective.
With this context in mind, neither RFK’s memoir, nor the crisis dynamics it describes, can or should be completely disregarded.
Stern, for example, continues to quote a second-hand exchange between RFK and Kenneth O’Donnell, JFK’s special assistant and confidante during the crisis, to undermine the veracity of RFK’s memoir Thirteen Days.
Thus the post-revisionist view should be treated with as much caution as the revisionist and heroic narratives.
To address the post-revisionist view this article argues for a reappraisal of RFK’s central role in the resolution of the crisis, one which acknowledges the unique and indispensable support he provided the President as brother, administration member and confidant.
Quite apart from the individual contributions involved in these three elements, taken collectively these amount to an idiosyncratic and unique role – more a Presidential partner than advisor.
The Evolving American Presidency Series. 9 complex, fluid and essential in the successful resolution of the crisis than the rigid demarcations of either early historiography or post-revisionist perspectives.
RFK as an indispensable advisor in his own right In assessing RFK’s performance as an advisor in his own right during the crisis, we are really talking about his unique and particular judgement and counsel as events transpired; not the skill with which he aggregated and articulated the views of EXCOMM, nor the success with which he was an intermediary or agent for his brother, but rather his own analysis and instinct for managing the crisis to resolution.
As long as there have been articles written about JFK, writers have observed the intimate role of his brother Robert – not merely as a close family member, but as a close advisor and even partner.
Contemporary newsmen and commentators first heralded the younger brother’s role in JFK’s political campaigns 24 – a role which grew in stature with each successive campaign, manifestly in recognition of RFK’s successful qualities.
For their working relationship was by no means a familial certainty,25 but one earned in the crucible of political endeavour.
Of course, the exact breadth and nature of these qualities was debated then and remains a source of debate now.
What can be concluded with some confidence is RFK’s tenaciousness and his dogged pursuit of his brother’s ambition.
By 1960, it had 24 For an early article on the collaboration of the two brothers, see ‘The Rise of the Brothers Kennedy’ in Look, 6 August 1957.
His Life, 59. 10 become clear that RFK was the ‘only choice’ as campaign manager for JFK’s presidential bid.
And although contemporary commentators were surprised at his appointment as Attorney General, they cannot have been surprised that the new President ensured his younger brother had a central role in his subsequent administration.
The appointment had cemented a progression from family member, to supportive campaign manager, to political collaborator and finally to a central advisor of his Presidency.
Precisely because of his familial intimacy with the President, RFK could speak truth to power.
There was a consensus amongst presidential advisors that RFK’s voice was a uniquely personal one, able to cut through to the President where others could not.
White House Press Secretary Christine Camp described RFK’s position as being in the innermost circle of Presidential advisors, privileged above all others as JFK’s ‘close friend and confidante’ 27.
In 1961, RFK could raise the spectre of nuclear emplacement on Cuba mere days after the President had suffered the greatest blow of his Presidency at the Bay of Pigs, a time when JFK least wanted to hear it.
Prior to April 1961, RFK was an important but not an indispensable part of his brother’s Administration.
Briefly put, JFK learnt from the Bay of Pigs fiasco of the limits to, and dangers of, organisational reliance.
Brother Protector, , 417. 12 comprehensiveness of their intelligence, their playbook-approach to Soviet ‘aggression’ and their failure to anticipate likely Soviet responses.
Second, his dogged questioning of proposed courses of action to ensure JFK heard everything he thought he needed to, loudly and clearly enough.
Third was his innate understanding of the crisis as more a political struggle than a military one, with its own limitations.
On first receipt of the famous U-2 photographs revealing the placement of Soviet missiles in Cuba, the JFK administration was united in shock.
This was because the bureaucracy around them had concluded that, strategically, the Soviets would not do so.
As the President himself would remark on the first day of the crisis, ‘not many of us thought that he was going to put MRBMs on Cuba’35.
This should be known and understood by those who are planning a project.
RFK was not one to close the book on an issue merely because the ‘experts’ had.
He had learnt the hard way that departmental experts should not be followed blindly.
Specifically, as his private notes on the Bay of Pigs indicate, he judged ‘underestimation’ by the United States of Castro’s forces as a key cause of the fiasco 38.
RFK’s prescience on this issue continues to be overlooked in recent histories of the crisis, which consistently emphasise the intelligence community’s failure in predicting the deployment of Soviet nuclear forces in Cuba, whilst ignoring the voice of RFK, a highly involved member of the intelligence community.
Correcting this oversight is important, as left unchallenged it is in danger of perpetuating itself.
It also means that inferences are made by historians on the crisis which ought to be more qualified – namely that United States reaction could have been different had there been greater foresight and preparedness.
RFK’s concern not to underestimate his opponents also led him, five months before the crisis, to instruct officials from the Departments of State and Defense, as well as the CIA, to investigate possible responses to the establishment of a military base in Cuba.
This 1961 letter to the President and his undaunted exchange with Bundy a month before the crisis, also illustrates RFK’s proactive character and confidence.
RFK continuously sought to probe issues – to get the facts, to look at all options for handling an issue.
The President is so confident in RFK’s advice that he is prepared to effectively hand over the meeting to his younger brother.
Reflecting on this counsel, he then proactively seeks additional advice from him.
First, that RFK was already providing the President with unique advice on Cuba-related issues well before the crisis.
This meant that RFK had at his disposal months of thought and analysis on Cuba-related issues, both his own and others45, that he could refer to the President’s benefit throughout the crisis.
The Blockade Decision Scholars have disagreed about RFK’s role in the decision to blockade Cuba.
RFK neither claimed to have originated the blockade route, nor did he actually do so.
RFK’s frank admission (‘not from a deep conviction’) does not diminish the importance of his role – quite the opposite in fact.
It reveals an individual who did not solely view his role as an advisory one, only throwing up alternative options for President Kennedy’s decision or vehemently advocating his own approach without recourse to debates with other advisors or the movement of events.
It reads instead as the words of a highly reflective individual, influenced by others but still wary of the chosen option.
This touches upon both the Chief of Staff and intermediary roles discussed later.
It also shows how the primary source material often marshalled by RFK’s critics can be reconciled with the more flattering contemporaneous accounts.
Critics such as Stern, far from viewing RFK as a leader of the doves (through his support for the blockade route), point to the primary source material and advocate his role as a dangerous hawk advocating invasion from the outset.
Now whether it wouldn’t be the argument, if you’re going to get into it at all, whether we should just get into it, and get it over with, and take our losses.
And if he wants to get into a war over this…Hell, if it’s war that’s gonna come on this thing, he sticks those kinds of missiles in after the warning, then he’s gonna get into a war over six months from now, or a year from now on something.
In analysing RFK’s contribution here we must remember that this quote comes from the first day of the crisis, the evening of Tuesday 16th October, at a time when the EXCOMM group was endeavouring to lay out all options and when no sensible participant could yet profess to a final, resolved view.
Consider for example that most eminently sensible of participants, McNamara, who qualified when first outlining the blockade route in that same meeting, ‘I don’t 51 Ibid, 212.
Taking RFK’s quote in the round, therefore, it can be seen not as a belligerent exhortation, but a qualified question – effectively placing invasion on the table as another alternative.
As will be seen later, RFK took a very different approach when directly advocating a position and certainly did so without such qualification.
In prodding and probing the EXCOMM members, in ‘seeking alternatives for his brother,’58 RFK helped to broaden the President’s range of alternatives, which was precisely what was required on the first day of the crisis, as all participants continued to reserve final judgment, cognisant of the need for any mooted options to be thoroughly conceived and evaluated, inside and outside EXCOMM, before any decisions were to be made.
In constructing their invasion plans, the Chiefs were focused on military efficacies.
RFK knew that reducing the invasion lead-time could be a key factor in ensuring the invasion was still a practicable option in the face of world opinion.
As the meetings progressed, and his support for the blockade route solidified, he also knew that there was a significant likelihood an invasion would be necessary – if the blockade proved ineffectual.
It should also be noted that JFK actually explored such a role with RFK after the Bay of Pigs.
See Robert F Kennedy, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, March 1 1964, John F Kennedy Oral History Program, John F Kennedy Library, 58.
A Life at the Edge of History, , 399. 22 matters of their own expertise.
That RFK continued to question this issue, even whilst his support for other courses of action solidified, underscores that neutrality – that sense that RFK’s agenda was not departmental, but rather Presidential.
This was indispensable to the President throughout the crisis, ultimately ensuring its successful resolution by providing the President with an advisor that continued to question and probe and to do so with the President’s interests always superseding narrow departmental concerns.
A further assertion from revisionist critics such as Stern is that RFK’s approach was in ‘sharp contrast to his brother’68.
On the first day of the crisis, RFK held a Mongoose meeting in the afternoon.
In this hypothesis the missile crisis represented an opportunity for RFK’s long-held ambitions to reclaim Cuba from communism.
RFK’s questions in the Mongoose meeting, whilst further underscoring his probing and poking quality, also illustrates that far from these ‘provocative’ questions about an invasion representing a personal agenda they were informed by a keen understanding of JFK’s requirements.
However, in the early stages of the crisis President Kennedy was faced with an air strike option which was far from surgical (the military could not guarantee all missiles would be hit and advised extensive sorties to even get close), or a blockade route with highly uncertain outcomes.
As President Kennedy himself recalled in an interview later that year, ‘whatever action we took had so many disadvantages to it, and each action that we took raised the prospect that it might escalate’72.
The notion of resolving the threat from Cuba altogether, with some form of invasion, was therefore an entirely logical option73, particularly when one considers that these Soviet missile emplacements represented the realisation of the administration’s worst fears.
To the judgment of President Kennedy and his brother it showed that doing ‘nothing’ for the 18 months after Bay of Pigs had failed to deter the introduction of nuclear weapons.
Prime Minister Harold Macmillan’s initial reaction was to argue that the President ought ‘to seize Cuba and have done with it’, given doubts on the blockade achieving its objectives and its legal basis.
RFK’s indispensable role ensured that a range of alternatives were brought to the table and fully considered before the Administration acted in such a volatile situation. ii.
The Blockade Decision As the days progressed, a recurring theme in RFK’s personal contribution to the deliberations was his insistence on portraying a tough stance to the Soviets while remaining, as George Ball described, ‘a force for caution and good sense’ within the White House.
As ever, RFK’s pursuit of this stance was unique in its energy and resolve but rooted in a keen awareness of the President’s own instincts.
And few others were able to bridge the hawk/dove divide in this way, and to do so in a way which had a pivotal impact on the President, his advisors, and the resolution of the crisis.
President Kennedy continuously tasked his brother to convey his resolve to the Russian Premier75, paranoid about appearing weak after Khrushchev’s dominating turn at the Vienna Summit of 1961.76 But JFK’s stance in public also sprang out of a conviction, as the President 74 Hilty, Robert Kennedy, 445.
Measures taken to ready the American military, navy and air force for war – including those preparations required to reduce invasion lead-time – were being closely watched by the Soviet Union and heightened ‘tension’ in Moscow.
Khrushchev’s memoirs emphasise this aspect when referencing Dobrynin’s meeting with RFK on October 27th, tellingly highlighting ‘that the military men were putting heavy pressure on ’ and extolling RFK for being ‘frank and open’ about this.
Bernstein and others have observed that such recollections were published well after the crisis and may not be entirely honest.
Trading the Jupiters in Turkey?’, Political Science Quarterly, 95,1 , 123. 26 does dramatise the original tone, even talking up the possibility of JFK’s military overthrow.
This sense of impending military action, and the pressures behind it, had a profound effect on the Soviet assessment of the situation.
A report six months earlier from a GRU officer in Washington, Colonel Georgi Bolshakov, who held repeated back-channel meetings with RFK, reported RFK telling of the power and independence of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 84.
It is also clear that this message carried unique credibility appearing, as it did, consistent with previous RFK/Soviet interactions and underscored by the highly personal tone of RFK’s delivery.
As noted earlier, we also know that this had an impact on Khrushchev, informing the actions he subsequently took to help resolve the crisis.
This is another illustration of the uniqueness of RFK’s contribution, given the weight carried to his messages as Presidential brother and intimate, but also his successful delivery of them.
At the same time, in private RFK continued to advocate a balanced approach, passionately advocating the blockade route.
In a decisive meeting on October 20th, RFK advocated a ‘combination of the blockade route and the air strike route’, arguing for an initial blockade to be followed by an air strike in the event the Russians ‘did not halt the development of the missile capability’88.
When RFK reiterated this compromise approach the following morning, McCone agreed.
Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon also attributed RFK for persuading him to drop his support of the air strike but credited his ‘intense but quiet passion’ and the force of the Pearl Harbor analogy he made.This analogy was to liken America’s possible strike on Cuba, which would precede any Cuban or Soviet attack on the US, to Japan’s bombing of Pearl Harbor in 1941.
Likewise, Bundy must have been moved in part by a shared language of resolve.
To the ‘doves’ within EXCOMM, RFK’s passionate urging of the blockade route must have reassured them of a shared sensibility and like-minded caution.
In short, RFK represented a ‘middle-way’ figure able to empathise with both blocs, backed with the aura of being the President’s brother, suspected to reflect JFK’s own preferred course of action.
The strategy was to accept Khrushchev's first proposal while barely acknowledging receipt of the second.
Early historiography extolled the ploy as a clever ruse by RFK94, while later revisionism has revealed other advisors to have been just as responsible.
In reviewing the primary source material, it is certainly clear that RFK was not the first to touch on the beginnings of this stratagem.
It is here where RFK’s indispensable role becomes clear, for debates on who did or did not conceive the Trollope ploy are a distraction.
Both men were in the room for the preceding conversation, yet for some reason they still felt it important, in finally endorsing the Trollope ploy, to qualify it as ‘Bobby’s idea’ – even Bundy, who had technically first broached it.
First, that whether he conceived the ideas or not, his voice was one that counted – and it invariably became recognised as the predominant one.
The second aspect revealed is that RFK’s voice was seen as an influential factor in influencing the President – supporting the view of RFK’s essential role as privileged personal confidant.
Through this element of RFK’s contribution, we again see the unique value RFK was able to bring to the President through their brotherly intimacy.
The nature of the brothers’ family bond is invariably pushed to the margins of studies on the crisis, but it is essential in understanding the full extent of RFK’s contribution to the President during the crisis, and why this was indispensable in its successful resolution.
It afforded the President a trust in RFK that he simply could not give to other advisors, and which therefore placed RFK in unique positions.
His legal training was no doubt advantageous, providing those skills of synthesis and advocacy that enabled him to brief his brother in the quick asides they shared throughout the crisis – some of which we have a record for, others we can only surmise.
When Dean Acheson called EXCOMM a ‘leaderless, inhibited group’107 he unwittingly conferred on this body its most perceptive compliment.
With many meetings taking place without the President, participants could speak freely and openly, uninhibited.
This helped the administration avoid the tacit consensus that proved so damaging in the Bay of Pigs operation and silenced frank assessments of that plan’s viability.
In addition to such organising capabilities, RFK became the channel to refer these discussions back to the President.
Such a President, absent either an official or de-facto Chief of Staff, would have had to rely on memoranda or those departmental leaders that, as we have seen, carried particular objectives of their own.
As it was, with RFK acting as de-facto Chief of Staff he could convey the views of others that did not make the formal record or did so but with insufficient force and needed drawing out.
We know that RFK’s use of this capability had an impact on the President.
It is no wonder that Ball was circumspect in advocating the argument amongst such colleagues; the President was fortunate that RFK was infinitely less so.
It was essential that the administration present a consensus to the world once a decision was made, to present a united front to the Soviets with no weakness to probe and exploit.
One can feel this in the highly suggestive memorandum for a key EXCOMM meeting on October 19th, where Bundy and Acheson argued forcefully for the strike option.
Indeed, another suggestive memo is that of Leonard Meeker, a legal advisor to the State Department during the crisis.
Indeed, historians have criticised Bundy, the closest on paper to this role during the crisis, for failing to adequately prepare JFK for the EXCOMM meetings.
Without such support, or the Chief of Staff role JFK eschewed from the outset of his Presidency, in such large and complex meetings this ability of his brother to support his objectives must have been indispensable.
Yet he also acted as the President’s agent, saying things the President could not, conscious as JFK was that the President must reserve judgment so as not to lead discussions.
Yeah, you might as well get that over with because I think we’ll probably need John McCone, who’s got … Robert Kennedy: The question that I’ve heard raised rather extensively is why this was not uncovered sooner…why we didn’t know about it…135 JFK was anxious to ensure one voice from his administration as to how and when the missiles were discovered, and the protocols that were in place to identify this at the earliest opportunity.
McCone had given JFK cause to doubt that the administration had done all it could, and that there had been no oversights, so JFK wanted this probed further.
Just as the President used his brother as an agent for himself, so too was this role recognised by his wider group of advisors, in and out of EXCOMM, and called upon as required.
Former Ambassador to the Soviet Union, Averell Harriman, wrote a memo to RFK on the morning of October 20th writing of his own experience of profound Soviet discomfort at the ‘encirclement’ they felt the missiles in Turkey represented.
Later that week RFK conveyed a confidential assurance of their removal on behalf of his brother.
An additional example came later that evening when the President had essentially made the crucial decision for blockade.
Nor was McCone an exception by virtue of the close working relationship the two men had built up through Operation Mongoose.
We have seen earlier a moment in an October 25th EXCOMM meeting where RFK explicitly called for Thompson’s opinion, prodding JFK to follow suit.1 McCone’s 20 October memorandum encapsulates RFK’s interactions with all these advisors and is a rich vein of instruction.
RFK’s personal files on the crisis, declassified in 2012, hold as many as 3,584 documents directly reviewed by him.
We cannot be sure, but the proactive pursuit of independently corroborated detail is extraordinary and validates Evan Thomas’ assessment.
RFK’s intertwined roles of de-facto Chief of Staff and Agent were indispensable to the President and his successful handling of the crisis.
Consider the failings of President Johnson’s Tuesday Lunch Group, which was composed of many of the same advisors as EXCOMM and built around a similar idea of frank discussion.
JFK was keenly aware of these failings throughout his administration, most strikingly after the failure of the Bay of Pigs.
While the professional diplomat Dean Rusk appeared ‘clearly in a state of nervous tension’ in an early crisis meeting with Dobrynin152, RFK’s adept handling of this channel, balancing indignation and resolve with measured conciliation, was the right approach at the right time.
RFK’s tendency to direct communication and heated exchanges worked well as an effective foil to the national course of action chosen which, while dramatic, was not the military strong-arm it could have been.
The distinction is surely in Dobrynin being able to communicate RFK’s offers as the direct voice of the President, including worrying concerns of military pressures on the President.
For his part, Dobrynin believed that RFK’s words ‘rather correctly reflected the tense mood inside the White House’, including the idea that there were some, in particular the military, ‘spoiling for a fight’, concluding that the sober picture such ideas depicted was subsequently decisive in Moscow.
Whether conferring privately or during EXCOMM deliberations, the brothers appeared to have an uncanny empathy with one another.
It is telling that a handwritten note made by RFK on October 16th, which splits the Hawks and the Doves in two columns, does not list himself.
RFK considered himself apart from the other advisors, an agent of JFK’s objectives.
In RFK he had someone who had sat with him on a remote Pacific island while close to death.
Behind this was that deep fraternal empathy, the shared outlook, and an overriding willingness for RFK to make his own objectives subservient to that of his brother.
It is hard to envisage anyone being more attuned to the President as RFK was to JFK during the crisis.
In a telephone conversation on 2 March 1963, the President actively sought his brother’s advice on the Stennis Committee’s review of the Bay of Pigs Invasion.
It is likely this was confirmed by previous, privately held discussions.
This confidence was an indispensable support to the President’s burden of decision.
Consider the case of Vasili Arkhipov, a senior officer on a Soviet submarine involved in the blockade confrontation who mercifully refused permission to launch its nuclear torpedo.
Consider the outdated Jupiter missiles in Turkey and that they had not been withdrawn earlier, thus providing an ‘escape hatch’ during the crisis.
It was fortunate, too, that the missiles were detected in mid-October before they were fully operational.
These, and many other aspects besides, were indispensable factors in the peaceful resolution of the crisis.
In repeating his brother’s frustrations on the matter, RFK complained at the time and in his memoir on the crisis that earlier directives to remove the Jupiter missiles in Turkey had not been implemented.
Bernstein and others have since observed this to have been ‘foolishly optimistic’, given both the timing of such directives and their indirect manner.
These missiles became fundamental in resolving the crisis – far from being a hindrance, they were a helpful tool.
Both RFK and his brother talked of Khrushchev’s possible responses during the crisis, but they failed to see his need, matching their own, for a modicum of success in any resolution.
Far from bemoaning them, RFK should have been rejoicing at their usefulness.
That this did not happen was a testament to both President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev.
He ensured all options were considered and considered with all the rigour that this unprecedented crisis demanded.
He held the administration together in a united front, ever conscious of the need to show resolve to Khrushchev and the world.
When he had resolved upon the right course of action, he advocated it courageously and with the utmost passion.
