Chronology 1823 President James Monroe outlines the policy that becomes known as the Monroe Doctrine, which warns that the United States will use military force to prevent foreign powers from claiming new territory in the western hemisphere.
July 16 – The United States successfully tests the world’s first atomic weapon.
August 1 – Leaders of the United States, Great Britain, France, and the Soviet Union sign the Potsdam Agreement, which divides defeated Germany and its capital city of Berlin into military occupation zones.
Stalin places a military blockade around West Berlin to prevent people and supplies from reaching the Allied side of the city.
The Allies launch the Berlin Airlift, a year-long effort to deliver supplies to West Berlin by plane.
October 7 – The German Democratic Republic, or East Germany, is formed in the Soviet occupation zone.
Chronology 1952 March 10 – Fulgencio Batista launches a military coup and takes control of Cuba.
The Korean War ends when the two sides sign a cease-fire agreement reinstating the original borders of North and South Korea.
Americans Julius and Ethel Rosenberg are executed for espionage after being convicted of providing nuclear secrets to the Soviet Union.
July 26 – Fidel Castro leads a group of revolutionaries in an attack on Cuban military facilities; although he is captured and arrested, his passionate speeches make him a hero to many Cubans.
The United States intervenes to prevent communist North Vietnam from taking over South Vietnam.
The Red Scare dissipates when the United States Senate votes to censure Joseph McCarthy.
May 14 – The Soviet Union and its allies form the Warsaw Pact for their mutual defense.
Khrushchev issues the famous threat “We will bury you” in a speech to Western diplomats.
Castro and his rebel followers return to Cuba and launch the Cuban Revolution.
April 15 – Castro visits the United States, but President Dwight D Eisenhower refuses to meet with him.
October 28 – The United States forges an agreement to place Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
May 7 – The Soviet Union and Cuba establish diplomatic and trade relations.
May 16 – Khrushchev denounces the United States and storms out of a summit meeting in Paris.
September 27 – Castro denounces United States policy toward Latin America in a four-hour-long speech before the United Nations.
January 20 – John F Kennedy is inaugurated as president of the United States.
April 17 – The CIA-backed Bay of Pigs Invasion fails to unseat Castro’s government in Cuba.
June 4 – Kennedy and Khrushchev have their only face-to-face meeting at the Vienna Summit.
July – Soviet freighters secretly begin transporting nuclear missiles to Cuba.
August 22 – CIA director John McCone receives reports of suspicious Soviet military shipments to Cuba.
September 13 – Kennedy warns Khrushchev that he will use military force if necessary to prevent the Soviets from placing offensive weapons in Cuba.
October 14 – American U-2 spy planes capture photographic evidence of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Chronology 25 – United States ambassador Adlai Stevenson confronts Soviet ambassador Valerian Zorin at a meeting of the United Nations Security Council.
November 5 – Soviet freighters carry the disassembled missiles away from Cuba.
June – Kennedy and Khrushchev agree to establish a “hot line” to speed communications between Washington, D.C., and Moscow.
August 5 – United States and Soviet officials negotiate the Limited Test Ban Treaty.
Warsaw Pact forces invade Czechoslovakia to install a pro-Soviet government.
United States military involvement in the Vietnam War peaks at more than five hundred thousand American combat troops.
Republican candidate Richard M Nixon wins the presidency by promising to end the Vietnam War.
The Moscow Summit results in the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.
August 1 – Ford and Brezhnev sign the Helsinki Accords, which are intended to reduce tensions and promote peace between NATO and Warsaw Pact countries.
November 7 – Castro angers the United States by sending Cuban troops to support communist forces in Angola.
Castro is elected leader of the Non-Aligned Movement , a group of nations not formally aligned with either of the Cold War superpowers.
Chronology 1981 President Ronald Reagan takes office and adopts an aggressive stance in U.S.-Soviet relations.
December 8 – Reagan and Gorbachev sign the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces Treaty, which eliminates an entire category of nuclear weapon from the superpowers’ arsenals.
Gorbachev declares that the Soviet Union will no longer intervene to protect communist regimes.
Poland holds free elections and installs the first non-communist government in Eastern Europe.
November 9 – The fall of the Berlin Wall signals the end of communism in Germany.
August – Hard-line communists stage a coup that temporarily removes Gorbachev from power in the Soviet Union.
December 25 – Gorbachev resigns and the Soviet Union dissolves into twelve independent republics.
Boris Yeltsin becomes president of the newly formed Russian Federation.
Fidel Castro steps down as leader of Cuba after forty-eight years and is succeeded by his younger brother Raul Castro.
United States president Barack Obama is photographed shaking hands with Cuban president Raul Castro.
Russia sends military forces to Ukraine and annexes the disputed region of Crimea.
The United States and Cuba reach an agreement to resume normal diplomatic relations.
