The United States had “contributed to the retention of power by the traditional oligarchy” and “destroyed” a Brazilian program to modernize the political structure of the Northeast.
Its “laudable social goals” encouraged political instability, yet their achievement demanded an 80 percent private investment “which cannot be attracted amid political instability.
That the Alliance for Progress was a Cold War policy was never a subject of dispute.
What presumably distinguished the Latin American policy of John F Kennedy was the belief that the key to stability and anti-communism was democracy, economic growth and development, and social change.
Through its recognition policy, internal security initiatives, and military and economic aid programs, the Administration demonstrably bolstered regimes and groups that were undemocratic, conservative, and frequently repressive.
The short-term security that anti-Communist elites could provide was purchased at the expense of long-term political and social democracy.
The Bay of Pigs, Missile Crisis, and Covert War Against Castro THOMAS G PATERSON “My God,” muttered Richard Helms of the Central Intelligence Agency, “these Kennedys keep the pressure on about Castro.
President Kennedy spent as much or more time on Cuba as on any other foreign policy problem.
Cuba stood at the center of his Administration’s admitted greatest failure, the Bay of Pigs, and its alleged greatest success, the missile crisis.
Looking back at the early 1960s, he wondered if we did not pay a very great price for being more energetic than wise about a lot of things, especially Cuba.
They always wanted to get moving on Cuba, and Castro dared m W tr0 because he’d had the effrontery to thumb his nose at us,” recalled lj '* one American diplomat.
The popular, intelligent, but erratic Cuban * J, li • 1 ^ them to “ 7 Some Europeans thought that “we kept slapping at Castro because he’d had the effrontery to thumb his nose at us,” recalled I X'wUa' 0ne America n diplomat.
The popular, intelligent, but erratic Cuban I 1 u /ufoU’/ttc i ea< fer, whose barbudos came down from the Sierra I h Mount ains in January 1959 to overthrow the United States ally Fulgencio Batista, hurled harsh words at Washington and defiI antly cha,Ien 8 ed the Kennedy model of evolutionary, capitalist develI °P ment so evident in the Alliance for Progress.
Kennedy harbored a “deep feeling against Castro,” and the Cuban thought the American “an intelligent and able leader of American imperialism,” and, after the Bay of Pigs invasion, he branded him a new Hitler.
As a senator, Kenned y had initially joined many Americans in welcoming the Cu^ v ba n Revolution as a decided advancement over the “oppressive” BaV lib’l $ tista dictatorship.
Linking Castro to the legacy of Bolivar, Kennedy k ur g e d a “patient attitude” toward the new government, which he did/J 1 y\ ' W/not see as Communist.
I Yankeeism, postponement of elections, jailing of critics, and national-^ ization of property.
The President rejected the idea that intense United States hostility to the Cuban Revolution may have contributed to Castro’s tightening political grip and flirtation with the Soviet Union.
Nor did Kennedy and other Americans wish to acknowledge the measurable benefits of the revolutionimprovements in education, medical care, and housing, and the elimination of the island’s infamous corruption that once had been the American Mafia’s domain.
Instead, Kennedy officials concluded that Cuba’s was a “betrayed revolution.”"" $ iJ IWi(A Richard N Goodwin, the young White House and State Department official with responsibilities for Latin America, provided another explanation for the Kennedy fixation with Cuba.
As Cuban-American relations steadily deteriorated, Cuban-Soviet relations gradually improved.
Not only did Americans come to believe that a once-loyal ally had jilted them for the tawdry embrace of the Soviets; they also grew alarmed that Castro sneered at the Monroe Doctrine by inviting the Soviet military to the island.
When Castro, in late 1961 , declared himself a Marxist-Leninist, Americans who had long denounced him as a Communist then felt vindicated.
American leaders began to speak of Cuban membership in the “Sino-Soviet bloc,” thus providing Communists with a “spearhead” to penetrate the Western Hemisphere.
Castro’s revolutionary mission happened to coincide with Nikita Khrushchev’s alarming statement that the Soviet Union supported wars of national liberation worldwide.
It mattered little to Americans that the two appeals appeared independently or that Havana and Moscow differed markedly over the best method for promoting revolutionary change— the Soviets insisted on utilizing Communist parties within political systems, whereas the Cubans espoused peoples’ rebellions.
Cuba came to represent the Cold War in the United States’s backyard, and, as such, one senator explained, it became a “target for our national frustration and annoyance with Moscow and the whole Communist conspiracy.
In addition to the Kennedy style and the Cold War, American politics influenced the Administration’s Cuba policy.
A i^v<» presidential campaign, Kennedy had seized the Cuban issue to counter Richard Nixon’s charge that the inexperienced Democratic candidate would abandon Quemoy and Matsu to Communism and prove no match for the hard-nosed Khrushchev.
Apparently unaware that President Dv^ht D Eisenhower had initiated a clandestine CIA program to(trair^ Cuban exiles for an invasion of the island, candidate Kennedy^IuotlpSlIe d for just such a project. fivCu After exploiting the Cuban issue, Kennedy, upon becoming President, could not easily have retreated.
Hardly a press confer• r , , v .. ence went b y without an insistent question about Cuba.
Republicans and Democrats alike peppered the White House with demands for \5 l V action against Castroism.
The vocal, burgeoning Cuban exile commu-V'C^ n ‘ ty * n ^ or ^ da never let the issue rest.
Businessmen protested that the Cuban government nationalized American-owned property worth a billion dollars, and they grew apprehensive that the practice would V(\W 'J become attractive in the hemisphere.
George Meany, the cantankerous head of the AFLCIO, decried the communization of the Cuban labor federation.
Everyone seemed eager to know when Kennedy would knock Castro off his perch, and many expected the President to act before the next election.
The strong currents of decolonization, anti-imperialism, revolutionary nationalism, and social revolution, sometimes in combination, undermined the instru* Urk l P % n)[t ^ > luba , 1*7 ments the imperial nations had used to maintain control and order.
In the 1950s France was driven from Indochina, and Great Britain’s position in the Middle East receded dramatically after the Suez crisis, to cite two prominent examples.
The Cuban Revolution exemplified this process of breaking up'and breaking away.
American leaders reacted so hostilely to this revolution not simply because Castro and his 26th of July Movement taunted them or because domestic politics and the Cold War swayed them, but because Cuba, as symbol and reality, challenged United States hege/l , ^Cmony in Latin America.
Cuba sought independence and radical social change which would necessarily come at the expense of the United States, and the latter, not unexpectedly, defended its interests against revolutionary nationalism.
After the United States helped expel Spain from Cuba in 1898 and imposed the Platt Amendment on the island in 1903, Americans gained influence through military interventions, occupations, . threats, economic penetration, and political manipulation.
The United States also stationed a military mission in Cuba and sent arms to Batista’s forces.
The CIA infiltrated political groups and helped Batista organize an anti-Communist police unit.
After having underestimated Castro’s 26th of July Movement and the depth of the nation’s unrest, the Eisenhower Administration tried to manipulate Cuba once again on the very eve of Castro’s victory.
With the President’s blessing and CIA instructions, William D Pawley, owner of Cuban lands and former Ambassador to Brazil, traveled to Havana to press Batista to resign in favor of a military junta in order to prevent the 26th of July Movement’s imminent triumph.
The Cuban President balked at this exercise of “Plattism,” and Pawley’s mission aborted.
In 1959-1960, with Ambassador Philip Bonsai thinking that Castro suffered “mental unbalance at times” and Eisenhower concluding that the Cuban leader “begins to look like a madman,” Havana and Washington traded punch for punch.
In November 1959 the President decided to encourage anti-Castro groups within Cuba to “check” or “replace” the revolutionary regime, and thus end an antiAmericanism that was “having serious adverse effects on the United States position in Latin America and corresponding advantages for international Communism.
The CIA, as well, hatched assassination plots against Castro and staged hit-and-run attacks along the Cuban coast.
As Cuba undertook land reform that struck at American interests and nationalized Cuba I29 y ^ Q /[\ ) ^ C[/$ "" American-owned industries, the United States suspended Cuba’s sugar quota and forbade American exports to the island, drastically cutting a once-flourishing commerce.
On January 3, 1961, fearing an invasion and certain that the American embassy was a “nest of spies” aligned with counter-revolutionaries who were burning cane fields and sabotaging buildings, Castro heatedly demanded that the embassy staff be reduced to the small size of the Cuban delegation in Washington.
Eisenhower failed to topple Castro, but American pressure accelerated the radicalization of the revolution and helped open the door to the Soviets.
Moscow bought sugar, supplied technicians, armed the/ militia, and offered generous trade terms.
Althoug h the re volution’s radicalization was probably inevitable, ^Uwas^not inexorable that Cuba would end up in the Soviet camp.
Kennedy greatly exaggerated the Cuban threat, attributing to Castro a capability to export revolution that the Cuban leader never had and lavishing on him an attention he did not deserve.
Castro was “an affront to our pride” and a “mischief maker,” Walter Lippmann wisely wrote, but he was not a “mortal threat” to the United States.
He thus helped generate major crises, including the October 1962 missile crisis.
The new President actually made his first important policy choice on Cuba before he entered the White House.
On the day Cubaiv, American relations were severed, Secretary of StateChn§ telephoned Secretary-designate Dean Rusk and reaction.
The United ’States lost an embassy which had served as a first-hand listening post; now Washington would have to rely upon a fast diminishing number of CIA informants and deep-cover agents or upon often exaggerated information from exiles.
Most important, with economic coercion having failed to bring down Castro and diplomacy now impeded, the rupture in relations elevated covert action — especially an invasion by Cuban exiles — as one of the few means left to resolve the contest with Cuba.
The questions of whether and under what conditions to approve an exile expedition dominated the President’s discussion of Cuba in his first few months in office.
National security adviser McGeorge Bundy later said that the President “really was looking for ways to make it work ... and allowed himself to be persuaded it would work and the risks were acceptable.
He listened to but rejected the counsel of doubting advisers, and he never revealed moral or legal qualms about violently overthrowing a sovereign government.
In questioning aides, the President worried most about which methods would deliver success and whether the guiding hand of the United States could be concealed.
Kennedy sought deniability of an American role, but never the demise of the project.
On March 11, Kennedy’s chief advisers gathered in a critical National Security Council meeting.
CIA Director Allen Dulles and Deputy Director for Plans Richard Bissell explained plans for an invasion at the town of Trinidad, on Cuba’s southern coast near the Escambray Mountains, where CIA-backed rebels were already operating.
The President criticized the plan as too much like a spectacular World War II amphibious landing.
He asked for something quieter, / and he instructed planners that no American forces were to be used.
Great embarrassment would beset Washington if the exile brigade, training in Guatemala, were to disband and its members return to the United States to bellow their anger.
After several high-level meetings and Dulles’s assurance that the prospects for Operation Zapata were even greater than they had been for the successful CIA plot in 1954 against Guatemala, Kennedy set April 17 as D-Day.
On April 15, D-Day minus 2, the brigade pilots destroyed several parked planes of Castro’s meager air force.
That same day, as part of a pre-invasion ploy, a lone, artificially damaged B-26 flew directly to Miami, where its pilot claimed that he; had defected from the Cuban military and had just bombed his country’s airfields.
Snooping journalists noticed that the nose cone of the B-26 was metal; Cuban planes had plastic noses.
The President; still insistent upon hiding American complicity, decided to cancel a second D-Day air strike against the remnants of the Cuban air force.
CIA officials protested, because they believed the invasion force could not succeed unless Castro’s few planes were knocked out.
Shortly after midnight on April 17, more than 1400 commandos motored in small boats to the beaches at Bahia de Cochinos.
The invaders immediately tangled with Castro militia* Some commandos py yo LyvM AXjv-L \\) ic-t$ r :< v vV THOMAS G PATERSON never made it, because their boats broke apart on razor-sharp coral reefs.
In the air, Castro’s marauding airplanes shot down two brigade B-26s and, in the water, sank ships carrying essential communications equipment and ammunition.
Fighting ferociously, the brigade nonetheless failed to establish a beachhead.
Kennedy turned down CIA appeals to dispatch planes from the nearby USS Essex , but he did permit some jets to provide air cover for a new B-26 attack from Nicaragua.
Manned this time by American CIA pilots, the B-26S arrived an hour after the jets had come and gone.
Kennedy asked an assistant^ 8 Stupid or not, Kennedy knew the answers to his own question.
First, he dearly sought to oust Castro and score a victory in the Cold War.
Always driven to win, Kennedy believed “that his disapproval of the plan would be a show of weakness inconsistent with his general stance.
None of the President’s advisers wants it said of him by his colleagues . . . that he . . . loses his nerve when the going gets hot.
The Harvard intellectuals are especially vulnerable, the more so from being new on the scene.
They are conscious of the fact that the tough-minded military suspect them of being soft-headed.
They have to show that they are he-men too, that they can act as well as lecture.
Told to disband, brigade members might have refused to give up their arms or even have mutineed.
In any case, Republicans would have scorned a weak-kneed Administration.
Kennedy approved the operation, finally, because he felt a sense of urgency.
Delay would permit the Soviets to strengthen the Cuban military, perhaps with MIG fighters, and the rainy season was about to begin, making military maneuver difficult.
The Guatemalan president, facing awkward questions about Cuban trainees in his country, was also beseeching Washington to move the exiles out by late April.
Although Bissell and Dulles have staunchly denied ^■'i\ u that they ever told the President that the invasion would ignite an eyVr island-wide rebellion against the Castro regime and thus ensure the ascendency of Miro’s provisional government, Kennedy decision^ m akers nonetheless believed that the invasion would stimulate a popu* Aft 1 ' ar revo ' t against an unpopular government.
But the CIA did not WaC’V coordinate the invasion with the anti-Castro underground in Cuba, . ’ because the agency feared leaks and the likely infiltration of opposiY tion groups by Castro’s security forces.
But, because the invasion site had been YSi shifted, the mountains now lay some 80 miles away, with impassable swamps between.
The guerrilla option, which, like the belief in a rebellion, probably led Kennedy to suppress doubts about the operation, was actually impossible. k ^ vv CIA planners failed in other ways.
If they overestimated Cuban ti/v v JV discontent with Castro, they underestimated the effectiveness of his military.
They anticipated that he would crack; in fact, he expertly led his forces at the Bay of Pigs, where he had vacationed.
CIA-issued equipment malfunctioned; crucial communications gear was concentrated in one ship that sunk; paratroopers did not drop far enough inland to cut off causeways.
The CIA had been attempting since i960 to kill Fidel Castro, even employing Mafia thugs for the task.
It seems likely that assassination was part of the general Bay of Pigs plan.
Bissell has admitted that he was hopeful “that Castro would be dead before the landing.
Castro and Bissell have agreed that Cuban ’V w 0 t air supremacy was important to Cuba’s triumph.
A pre-emptive strike on D-Day against the Cuban air force 1 would not have delivered victory to the invaders.
La brigades 1400 men would have had to face \o^ v Jj,l , ^Castro’s army of 25,000 and the nation’s 200,000 militia.
The commantljji dos most likely would not have survived the overwhelming power of 1 1 , V the Cuban military.
Bissell 1 and Dulles were too emotionally committed to the project to see the (j J ‘ 1 y ' ‘ ^ shortcomings in their handiwork.
CIA planners were less than candid Am . >vith the President, for fear that he would terminate the project.
Had they been asked to assess the jM^chances for national rebellion, for example, they probably would have \ l;vreported negatively, pointing out Castro’s continued popular appeal^ 8 CIA officials also contributed to the Presidentsthinking that American participation could be hidden and plausibly denied.
Although the generals and admirals had serious reservations, they always evaluated the operation favorably.
Sworn to secrecy, they did not seek close staff analysis of the CIA plan.
A good soldier” who went along with the apparent consensus, he seemed to believe that he sould preside over debate rather than influence it.
But I wasn’t a colonel of infantry; I was sitting there in a very special cubicle.
I failed President Kennedy by not insisting that he ask a question that he did not ask.
By the time the Joint Chiefs had come in with Cuba '135 their sustained and prolonged bombing, their several divisions, a massive fleet, and their big air force, it would have become obvious to the President that that little brigade didn’t have a chance at all.
Rusk also kept departmental intelligence and Cuban specialists in the dark.
Kennedy encountered a good deal of dissenting opinion and he rejected it.
Schlesinger, for example, wrote several memoranda to the President, arguing that time was actually not on Castro’s side and that the Cuban leader, at least for the moment, remained popular.
In making his decision, Kennedy also bypassed Congress, further ensuring that he received limited advice.
Only Senator J William Fulbright, Foreign Relations Committee chairman, was let into the inner circle, and, at that, only once.
Picking up rumors of a forthcoming invasion of Cuba, Fulbright sent the President a memorandum that strongly disapproved invasion— it was “of a piece with the hypocrisy and cynicism for which the United States is constantly denouncing the Soviet Union . . . ,” he wrote.
Kennedy thereupon invited the Arkansas senator to attend an April 4 meeting.
Fulbright spoke forthrightly to the assembled top-level advisers, chiding them for exaggerating the Cuban threat.
Well-armed Castroites, including Fidel’s brother Raul and Che Guevara, would probably have initiated a protracted guerrilla war against the American-created regime.
The Soviets might have helped these rebel forces, and volunteers from around the world might have swelled the resistance — like the Spanish Civil War of the 1930s, Schlesinger had warned.
The United States would have had to save its puppet government through military aid, advisers, and maybe even troops.
While a secret presidential panel investigated the disaster, Kennedy and his advisers huddled.
Robert Kennedy became especially agitated, and “there was an almost frantic reaction for an action program which people would grab onto.
In familiar words, Kennedy declared that “the complacent, the self-indulgent, the soft societies are about to be swept away with the debris of history.
When the Attorney General growled that Moscow would now judge America weak, Walt W Rostow commented that “we would have ample opportunity to prove we were not paper tigers in Berlin, Southeast Asia, and elsewhere.
Cuban security forces, before and after the landing, rounded up, jailed, killed, or converted thousands of anti-regime subversives, most of whom were surprised because the CIA had not forewarned them about D-Day.
In the United States the Cuban Revolutionary Council splintered, as the demoralized and angry Cuban community descended once again into fierce factionalism.
Castro triumphantly exploited patriotic nationalism to strengthen his regime.
Instead of driving the Soviets out of Cuba, the botched Bay of Pigs operation drew Havana and Moscow closer together.
Understandably fearing another invasion, perhaps with American troops, Castro sought Soviet military assistance.
The Soviets shipped small arms, machine guns, howitzers, armored personnel carriers, patrol boats, tanks, surface-to-air missiles, and, ultimately, nuclear missiles that could reach into the United States itself.
Encouraged by the White House, the CIA created a huge operations station in Miami called JMWAVE to recruit and organize Cuban exiles.
CIA-handled saboteurs burned cane fields and blew up factories and oil storage tanks.
In a December 1961 raid, for example, a seven-man team blasted a railroad bridge, derailed an approaching train, and torched a sugar warehouse.
Myriad exile groups, from Alpha 66 to the Revolutionary Student Directorate, left the Florida Keys to stage hit-and-run attacks along Cuba s coast.
Poisonous cigars, pills, j\4 l 7 and needles were directed Castro’s way, but to no avail.
Robert Kennedy learned about them in mid-1962, and his biographer claims that the Attorney General ordered an end to assassination projects.
John Kennedy said at the time that in general he disapproved of the killing of foreign leaders.
But, of course, the word “assassination* was never uttered in the presence of the President or committed to paper, so that he could be protected by the principle of plausible deniability.
So bespoke Bissell’s replacement, Richard Helms. w President Kennedy may or may not have known about the assassination plots, but he did set the general guidelines.
Intensified economic coercion joined assassination and sabotage as methods to undermine the Castro government.
American officials did not expect the economic denial program alone to force Castro’s fall.
But they did seek to inhibit the island’s economic development, thereby decelerating socialization, spurring Cuban discontent, and diminishing Cuba’s appeal as a model for Latin America.
Cuba was forced to pay higher freight costs, enlarge its foreign debt, and suffer innumberable factory shut-downs due to the lack of spare parts once bought in the United States.
Cuba’s economic woes also stemmed from the flight of technicians and managers, a decline in tourism, high worker absenteeism, the drying up of foreign capital investment, hastily conceived policies to diversify the economy, and suffocating government controls.
By 1962, 82 percent of Cuba’s exports flowed to Communist countries, and 85 percent of its imports came from them.
Diplomatic contact between Cubans and Americans also virtually ceased, with two exceptions.
When in May 1961 Castro offered to trade the Bay of Pigs prisoners for American farm tractors, the White House encouraged a private committee of distinguished Americans to negotiate with Cuba.
But the Tractors-for-Freedom Committee could not reach terms and disbanded.
In December 1962, in exchange for food and medicine, Castro released the brigade members.
Che first thanked Goodwin for the Bay of Pigs it had thp cnliHifv its nower.
In a frank yet reasonable manner Che asked for a modus vivendi with Washington and urged talks on trade, compensation for nationalized property, and Guantanamo.
Cuba would even be willing to discuss its ties with the Soviets anB Cuban activities in the hemisphere.
Goodwin carried the promising August 17 overture to Kennedy, who, smoking one of Che’s cigars, listened to his aide’s appeal for further exploration of the “below ground dialogue” with the Cubans.
After all, some Washington politicians were shouting for invasion and Kennedy officials spoke frankly about getting rid of Castro.
It may be plausibly argued that, had there been no exile expedition, no destructive covert activities, and no economic and diplomatic boycott — had there been no concerted United States vendetta to quash the Cuban Revolution— there would not have been an October missile crisis.
The principal source for that frightening crisis lay in Kennedy’s unvarnished hostility toward Cuba and in Castro’s understandable apprehension that United States invasion was inevitable.
The origins of the missile crisis, then, derived largely from United States-Cuban tensions.
To stress only the global dimension of SovietAmerican competition, as is commonly done, is like saying that a basketball game can be played without a court.
Nikita Khrushchev would never have had the opportunity to begin his dangerous missile game if Kennedy had not been attempting to ( ^xpungfeX astro and his revolution from the hemisphere This interpretation does not dismiss but incorporates the view predominant in the scholarly literature, that the emplacement of nuclear missiles in Cuba served the Soviet strategic goal of catching up in the nuclear arms race.
Castro and other Cuban olficials made repeated, consistent, and compelling statements that their nation faced an American onslaught.
They did not say so publicly, of course, for such would have acknowledged their own responsibility for generating the fear.
In September 1962, CIA analysts concluded that “the main purpose of the present military buildup in Cuba is to strengthen the Communist regime there against what the Cubans and Soviets conceive to be a danger that the United States may attempt by one means or another to overthrow it.
But the Cubans “felt progressively \ more secure as the work [Soviet installation of military equipment) advanced.
Perhaps the Cubans were confused about the types of missiles they would receive.
During the 1958 Middle East crisis, when American troops landed in Lebanon, Khrushchev and Gamal Abdul Nasser discussed “rockets” and “missiles” for Egypt.
Nasser betrayed considerable ignorance about the details of these weapons — as perhaps Castro did later.
The Cubans may not have paid much attention to missile type, because to them more powerful weapons simply meant more deterrence.
Or they may have assumed that impressive surface-to-surface missiles (42 MRBMs arrived; the IRBMs never arrived) were necessary for true deterrence against an aggressive United States.
One thinks here of a similar American assumption at the end of the Second World War that the fanatical Japanese would surrender only under threat of annihilation from the atomic bomb.
On October 14 an American U-2 plane photographed missile sites in Cuba, thus providing the first “hard” evidence, as distinct from the “soft” reports of exiles, that the island was becoming a nuclear base.
The President convened his top advisers shortly before noon on October 16.
His first questions focused on the firing readiness of the missiles and the probability that they carried nuclear warheads.
The tentative answers were negative, although he was advised that the missiles could become operational in a brief time.
McGeorge Bundy urged consideration not only of military plans but of a “political track” or diplomacy.
When McNamara mentioned that diplomacy might precede military action, the President immediately switched the discussion to another question.
Conspicuously absent j from this first meeting was a serious probing of Soviet and Cuban j motivation.
Bundy then posed a question now central to the history of the missile crisis.
Not liking j the sound of a double standard, Kennedy lamely answered, Yeah, but that was five years ago.
For the next several days, Kennedy’s group of advisers, named the Executive Committee or Ex Comm, met frequently in tight secrecy.
McNamara persistently argued this alternative against the generals, Dillon, CIA Director John McCone, and Dean Acheson, all of whom urged an air strike.
In other words, some missiles in Cuba would remain in place for firing against the United States.
In any case, the Attorney General insisted, there would be no “Pearl Harbor type of attack” on his brother’s record.
The chief decision was to quarantine Cuba to prevent further military shipments and to impress the Soviets with American resolve to force the missiles out.
If the Soviets balked, other, more drastic, measures would be undertaken.
The second decision was to inform the Soviets of United States policy through a television address rather than through diplomatic channels.
Former Ambassador to the Soviet Union Charles Bohlen advised that Moscow would have to retaliate against the United States after its technicians were killed by American bombs.
A stern letter to Khrushchev should be “tested” as a method to gain withdrawal of the missiles.
Kennedy’s evening television speech on October 22 sounded familiar themes in American diplomatic history.
He recalled the special United States relationship with the Western Hemisphere, and he reminded Americans that 1930s lessons taught them to resist aggression and surrender.
The President lectured the Soviets to reverse their “deliberately provocative” decision by dismantling their “strategic” missiles in Cuba, and he announced the Caribbean quarantine as an “initial” step.
The United States Information Agency beamed his words around the world in thirty-seven languages, including Spanish for Cuba itself.
Strangely, the Soviets did not mobilize or redeploy their huge military, nor did they take measures to make their strategic forces less vulnerable.
On the 26th, Kennedy and some Ex Comm members, thinking that the Soviets were stalling, soured on the quarantine.
Kennedy also approved a State Department message to Brazil that invited its ambassador in Havana to talk with Castro about the “great jeopardy” in which the Soviet missiles had placed his government.
Indeed, the Cubans could expect to suffer “desperate hand-to-mouth existence” under an expanded American quarantine.
For the first time in the Kennedy presidency, as nuclear war threatened, Washington was suggesting an accommodation of Cuban-American differences.
This overture, however, may have represented no more than a ploy to divide Moscow and Havana, for the President himself “doubted that it would do any good . . . .” m The “first real blink” in the crisis came in the afternoon of the 26th.
A Soviet embassy officer, Aleksander Fomin, called ABC corresponTHOMAS G PATERSON \ \S * h U^u'/' ■''• Vv'' dent John Scali and asked for a meeting.
Scali scurried to Rusk, who sent the unusual emissary back to Fomin with the reply that American leaders were interested in discussing the proposal.
The way out of the crisis, Harriman said, was to let Khrushchev save face through an agreement to withdraw the Jupiters.
Such a bargain would also permit Khrushchev to gain politically on his tough-minded military and “swing” toward improved relations with the United States.
Moscow no doubt calculated differently — that Washington would attempt to halt shipments of missiles — and thus tried to sneak them in.
An American U-2 plane overflew the eastern part of the Soviet Union, probably because equipment malfunctioned.
Soviet fighters scrambled to intercept it, and American jets from Alaska took flight to rescue the errant aircraft.
Although the spy plane flew home without having sparked a dog fight, Moscow might have read the incident as provocative.
Cubans, after having fought Soviet soldiers for control of the SAM sites, may have brought down the U-2.
A distressed McNamara now thought “invasion had become almost inevitable. ” m But Kennedy hesitated to retaliate, surely scared about taking a step in the direction of nuclear war.
Upon brother Robert’s advice, the President decided to ignore Khrushchev’s second letter and answer the first.
Just in case this unusual style of diplomacy failed, the President ordered the calling up of Air Force reservists.
But the crisis had passed — just when the nuclear giants seemed at the brink.
The IL-28 bombers were also crated and shipped back to the Soviet Union.
And, when the commander of the Strategic Air Command issued DEFCON 2 alert instructions, he did so in the clear, instead of in code, because he wanted to impress the Soviets, os Alerts serve to prepare American forces for war, but they also carry the danger of escalation, because movement to a high category might be read by an adversary as American planning for a first strike.
Under such circumstances, the adversary might be tempted to strike first.
Finally, the Navy’s antisubmarine warfare activities carried the potential of escalating the crisis.
Soviet submarines prowled near the quarantine line, and, following standing orders, Navy ships forced several of them to surface.
Ex Comm members represented considerable intellectual talent and experience, and the policy they urged upon the President ultimately forced the Soviets to back down.
But a mythology of grandeur, illusion of control, and embellishment of performance have obscured the history of the committee.
In an example of “promotional leadership,” Kennedy picked his advisers, directed them to drive the missiles out, and used his brother as a “policeman” at meetings.
Asked if failing health produced this condition, Vice Admiral Charles Wellborn answered that the “emotional state and nervous tension that was involved in it had this effect.
Robert Kennedy remembered that the Secretary of State “frequently could not attend our meetings,” because “he had a virtually complete breakdown mentally and physically.
PATERSON ^ ^ and Rusk, both of whom recommended diplomacy and compromise, been steadier, the option of negotiations a/ star/ might have received a better hearing and the world might have been spared the grueling confrontation.
Contemporaries and scholars have debated Kennedy’s shunning of formal, private negotiations and traditional, diplomatic channels and his opting instead for a public showdown through a surprise television speech.
It does not appear that he acted this way because he thought the Soviets would protract talks until the missiles had become fully operational — even before his television address he knew that many of the missiles were ready to fire, and Ex Comm worked under the assumption that the SS-4S were armed with nuclear warheads.
Politics does not explain his decisions; indeed, thesnost popular political position most likely would have been an air strike and invasion to rid the island of both the missiles and Castro.
Kennedy seems to have leaned toward McNamara’s argument that the missiles in Cuba did not make a difference, given the fact that the Soviets already possessed enough capability to inflict unacceptable damage on some American cities.
President Kennedy eschewed diplomatic talks before October 22 because his strong Cold War views, drawing of lessons from the past, and personal hostility toward Castro’s Cuba recommended confrontation.
His conspicuous style of boldness, toughness, and craving for victory also influenced him, and he resented that Khrushchev had tried to trick him by stating that no offensive weapons would be placed in Cuba and then clandestinely sending them.
Kennedy had warned Moscow not to station such weapons on the island; if he did not force the Soviets to back down, he worried, his personal credibility would have been undermined.
O 1 lA .y; v markedly change the strategic balance, the new missiles in Cuba gave A'd'% the appearance of doing so.
One Ex Comm member remarked that * \v ■vkV vA bd* id the question is “psychological,” and Kennedy agreed that the matter was as much “political” as “military.
Finally, with other tests in Berlin and Southeast Asia looming, the United States believed it had to make emphatic its determination to stand \N V\<' 4 mT 4 ““ ""‘■X NJ iM'S j Cuba ,151 firm in the Cold War.
Then he reacted to the crisis by suspending diplomacy in favor of public confrontation.
In order to postpone doomsday, or at least to prevent a high-casualty invasion of Cuba, he moderated the American response and compromised.
He and Ex Comm gave little attention to a proposal that Brazil had offered in the United Nations to denuclearize Latin America.
This proposal also sought to guarantee the territorial integrity of each nation in the region.
Thus Great Britain could hold American missiles, but Turkey and Italy could not.
Looking beyond the crisis, Harriman presented his scheme “as a first and important step towards disarmament,” but Kennedy officials only briefly discussed the question of denuclearization.
In short, under this provisions, both American and Soviet militaries would leave Cuba, Latin America would become off-limits to nuclear weapons, Cuba’s territorial integrity would be guaranteed, and Moscow and Washington would make a modest nod toward arms control.
Given his extreme anger with Moscow after the Soviets disengaged the missiles, Castro may well have grasped an opportunity to begin a process toward improved relations with Washington.
Such a bargain, of course, would have required Cuban-American discussions.
The Soviets, exposed as nuclear inferiors, vowed to catch up in the arms race.
At the same time, perhaps the “jagged Judges” of Kennedy's Cold Warriorism were smoothed.
The nuclear war scare during the missile crisis also nudged the superpowers to conclude the longstanding talks on a test ban treaty.
Although some analysts have trumpeted the treaty as a major accomplishment because it started the superpowers on a path toward arms control, the agreement did not prevent a plethora of underground nuclear detonations or slow the cascading arms race.
The President showed some interest in accommoda/li° n at the same time that he reinvigorated anti-Cuban programs. ‘* l ^ The Administration created a new State Department office, the Coordinator of Cuban Affairs, and put more economic pressure on the island, including an unsuccessful attempt to block a United NationsJ funded crop diversification project.
After the missile crisis, Castro had sought better relations with Washington, and he made gestures toward detente.
He sent home thousands of Soviet military personnel and released some political prisoners, including a few Americans.
The CIA quickly cranked up new dirty tricks and revitalized its assassination option by making contact with a traitorous Cuban official, Rolando Cubela Secades.
In Florida, American officials intercepted and arrested saboteurs heading for Cuba, but they seldom prosecuted and usually released them.
Alpha 66 and Commando L raiders hit oil facilities, sugar mills, and industrial plants.
Through contact with a member of Stevenson’s United Nations staff, William Attwood, the Cuban government signaled once again its interest in improving relations.
The President authorized an eager Attwood to work up an agenda with the Cubans.
In late October, when Kennedy met with the French journalist Jean Daniel, the President spoke in both hard-line and conciliatory tones about Cuba.
Aware that Daniel was journeying to Havana to interview Castro, Kennedy asked the reporter to return for another White House discussion.
Castro later claimed that Daniel carried a “private message ^ from Kennedy, who asked about the prospects for a Cuban-American ^ dialogue.
Yet, on November 18, Kennedy sounded less the concilia; ;> o tor and more the warrior.
On November 22, while discussing chances for Cuban-American detente, the news of the assassination in Dallas arrived.
Several official investigations have concluded thafCuban officials played no part in the assassination, but conspiracy theories persist.
For Kennedy and Castro to have reached detente, each would have had to suppress his strong ideological biases.
It does not seem likely that either Kennedy, had he lived, or Castro could have overcome the roadblocks that they and their national interests had erected.
The Cuban-American confrontation was and is a question of the Cold War, domestic American politics, and personalities.
But it has been primarily a question of faltering United States hegemony in the hemisphere.
In the end, he failed— he did not achieve his well-defined and ardently pursued goals for Cuba.
Office of Assistant Secretary of Defense, International Security Af' fairs, “ United States Policies Toward Latin American Military Forces,” February 25, 1965, Vol.
The Kennedy Administration actually discouraged Bosch from purging his security forces of Trujillist elements.
See also Ruth Leacock, “JFK, Business, and Brazil,” Hispanic American Historical Review LIX (No^65.
The Recent Latin American Policy of the United States,” Yale Review LV , 175See also Abraham J; L ° wen ' thal, “United States Policy Toward Latin America: ‘Liberal, Radical, and ‘Bureaucratic’ Perspectives,” Latin American Research Review VIII (Spring Chapter 5.
Richard 7 Bissell in Peter Collier and David Horowitz, The Kennedy’s ^ 3.
See, for example, Ernest R May, “Writing Contemporary International History,” Diplomatic History VIII , i<>57.
Theodore Draper popularized the bdrajai theme in his Castro’s Revolution and Caslroi Y °i2 k ’ Richard N Goodwin, The American Condition (Garden City.
Quoted in Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., A Thousand Days (Boston 1965), 224.
United States Responses to Revolutionary Change in Latin America , 185.
William D Pawley, “Memoirs” (unpublished manuscript, Coral Gables, FL,d.), ch.
Philip W Bonsai, Cuba, Castro, and the United States (Pittsburgh PA I 97 i), 192.
How the CIA Waged a Silent War Against Cuba,” Harper’s Magazine CCLI * 50.
Lee Lockwood, Castro’s Cuba, Cuba’s Fidel , 224; Mankiewicz and Jones, With Fidel, 152.
Barton J Bernstein, “Bombers, Inspections, and the No Invasion Pledge,” Foreign Service Journal LVI , 8-12.
Raymond L Garthoff, “The Cuban ‘Contras’ Caper,” Washington Post, October 25, 1987.
Alexander L George, “The Impact of Crisis-Induced Stress on Decision Making,” in Frederic Solomon and Robert Q Marston, eds., The Medical Implications of Nuclear War , 541.
Department of State to American Embassy, Paris, May 11, 1963, DSR ; Foy Kohler to Secretary of State, July 31, 1963, ibid.
Speech to Zionists of America, August 26, i960, in United States Senate, Committee on Commerce, The Speeches, Remarks, Press Conferences, and.
