In 1959 Fidel CASTRO over through a corrupt dictator called BATISTA in a communist revolution.
Castro took over the American run industries and did not provide compensation for their owners. 1 of 7 The Bay of Pigs The Eisenhower government had come up with a plan to over throw Castro.
America had trained a force of 1400 anti-Castro Cubans for an invasion of the Island.
They were met by 20000 Cuban troopsarmed with tanks and modern weapons which were supplied by Russia.
The USA was humiliated and Castro sought closer co-operation with Russia.
Th Bay of Pigs taught Kennedy to be cautious of simply accepting advice of military experts.
It convinced Khrushchev that he was dealing with a weak and indecisiveleader in Kennedy.
Russia began to adapt a more aggressive attitude towards America. 2 of 7 The Missiles June 1962 shipments of ""defensive"" weapons were shipped into Cuba from the soviet union.
However U2 spy planes photographed medium range offensive missiles capable of reaching most of the major United States cities on 14 October 1962.
USA had greater nuclear power than the USSR and could destroy it, therefore the USSR would never use the missiles.
The Soviet Union could retaliate by blocking Berlin as they did in 1948.
USA had a strong navy and could still take on other options if this did not work.
Tuesday 23 OctoberKennedy receives a letter from Khrushchev saying that the Soviet Ships will not observe the blockade.
At 10:32am the 20 closest Soviet ships to the zone turn around or stop.
Thursday 25 OctoberDespite this intensive Ariel footage show that work on the missile bases is still proceeding rapidly.
Friday 26 OctoberKennedy receives a long personal letter from Khrushchev claiming that the missiles are purely defensive.
Khrushchev said he would also remove the missiles if Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba and called off the naval blockade.
Saturday 27 OctoberKhrushchev send a second letter saying He would only remove the Cuban missiles if Kennedy removed his from Turkey.
The President is advised to send an immediate attack on Cuba but Kennedy delays the attack.
He also ignours the second letter and agrees to the term of the first letter and says that if the Soviet Union does not withdraw an attack will follow.
Sunday 28 October Khrushchev agreed to Kennedy and started removing missiles on the 3rd November from Cuba. 5 of 7 Why did the Soviet Union place Nuclear Missiles on The USSR made no attempt to camofloug the sites and even allowed missiles to travel on open deck.
To test the USA In the strained atmosphere of the Cold War politics the missiles were deisnged to see how strong the USA really was whether they would face off or back off.
To get the Upper hand in the Arms race khrushchev was so concerned about the missile gap between te USA and USSR that he siezed the opportunity.
To trap the USA Khrushchev wanted the USA to find the missiles and be drawn into a nuclear war.
Kennedy came out of the crisis with a greatly improved reputation in his own country and throughout the west.
Instead his role of a responsible peacemaker, willing to take the first role towards peace, was highlighted.
Both leader saw how close they came to nuclear war and were more willing to take steps to prevent the outbreak of nuclear war.
A permanent 'hot line' phone link was set up directly between the White House and Kremlin.
