It is the gateway to your future; it is the means to enter tertiary institutions; it is your opportunity to create the career of your dreams.
It is not easy to accomplish but it can be done with hard work and dedication; with prioritising your time and effort to ensure that you cover as much content as possible in order to be well prepared for the examinations.
I cannot stress the importance and value of revision in preparing for the examinations.
Once you have covered all the content and topics, you should start working through the past examination papers; thereafter check your answers with the memoranda.
If your answers are not correct, go back to the Mind the Gap Series and work through the content again.
It has been developed to assist you to achieve a minimum of 40% in the examinations, if you work hard and follow the advice and guidance provided in the book.
Use this valuable resource which has been developed especially for YOU, work hard, persevere, work every day, read and write every day to ensure that you are successful.
The purpose This booklet is to guide you through these levels and equip you with skills to respond to these questions.
STRUCTURE OF THE BOOKLET This booklet is a guide that should be used in conjunction with textbooks and other resources.
SOURCE – BASED QUESTIONS • Every Section starts with a mind map to give you an overview of content covered in the topic.
SOURCED-BASED ANSWERS • This section gives you the opportunity to check whether you have addressed the questions correctly.
ESSAYS QUESTIONS • You are given three types of essays with approaches to answer the question.
MEMORANDA TO THE ESSAYS • Please note the guidelines provided before attempting to answer the essays.
Tibet, India, Vietnam, Taiwan • China as a superpower • China’s economic liberalisation on relations with the rest of the world since Mao’s death 2.
USA of missiles discovered the CUBAN MISSILE Soviet missiles Cuba / Turkey.
KEY CONCEPTS / TERMS: 3.1.2 ACTIVITY 1: KEY CONCEPTS / TERMS: CONCEPT EXPLANATION CONCEPT Cold War EXPLANATION An ideological war between USA and the Cold War Soviet Unionwar An ideological over the control between USA of Cuba and the Soviet Union Capitalism over the control of Cuba An economic system driven by personal freedom of Capitalism choice, investment An economic of capital system driven andfreedom by personal the useof of labour choice, and investment of capital and the use resources to make profit of labour and resources to make profit 1.
The source will be contextualised it will indicate what the source is about, why it was written, who wrote the source, when it was written and where the event took place.
THE COLD WAR: CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS THE CRISIS UNFOLDS, 1962 DATE EVENT April 1961 • The Bay of Pigs Castro sought and received support from USSR 1962 • United States spy planes observed weapons in Cuba.
August September • Khrushchev secretly started to send nuclear weapons to Cuba.
Khrushchev had cleverly orchestrated his arms buildup in Cuba to disguise the inclusion of offensive missiles and nuclear weapons.
In May 1962 he had sent a high-level delegation to Cuba to propose the placement of nuclear weapons on the island.
Over the next few months both countries worked out the details of a treaty to deploy the nuclear weapons, under Soviet control.
Interestingly, the Cubans initially proposed that the deployment be made public as a way of preventing an American attack.
Khrushchev wanted to confront the Americans with an accomplished fact… On September 25, 1962, Castro proudly announced that the Soviets would build a new fishing port for the Cuban just north of the American-occupied Guantanamo Bay base.
American intelligence experts were not convinced of the projected port’s peaceful mission.
Eyewitness reports from refugees and agents on the ground in Cuba continued to provide additional information about newly arrived missiles.
Based on the knowledge previously assembled about Soviet shipping crates, they identified the contents as IL-28 Beagle bombers, capable of carrying nuclear weapons from Cuba to targets in the United States.
IMPACT ON INVOLVEMENT ANGOLA IN SOUTHERN (Soviet THE COLD WAR AFRICA Union,Cuba, USA,SA) 3.
Propaganda: An Information, economicespecially system ofdriven a biasedbyorpersonal misleading freedom nature, usedoftochoice, promote investment a political of cause capital andofthe or point use of labour and resources to make profit. view.
A coup in Portugal where the army removed the Caetano government by pro democratic military junta that was ready to offer independence to Angola in 1974.
Portugal led the liberation movements to the Alvo Agreement, 15 January 1975.
The Alvo Agreement led to the establishment of a tripartite transitional government.
Liberation movements were to share power until the elections on 11 November 1975.
SOURCE 4A The following letter was sent by Jonas Savimbi, leader of UNITA, to President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia, after the MPLA attack on Huambo , in 1976.
The machine of war that Cuba and the Soviet Union have assembled in Angola is beyond imagination.
To prevent the total destruction of our forces we have decided to revert immediately to guerrilla warfare.
The friends (the CIA and United States) that have promised to help us did not fulfil their promises and we must face our own fate with courage and determination.
I am sending with this my mother, who is seventy-one years’ old, so that she will be able to die in Zambia.
Accompanying them are the wife of the Secretary General with two children and the wife of our commanding General with four children.
The Political Bureau of the Central Committee of UNITA joins me to thank you once more for everything.
I have always tried to the best of my ability and courage to serve the interests of Angola and Africa.
I am not a traitor to Africa and the hard days that we expect ahead will prove to the world that I stand for my principles.
In Angola, might has made right, but I will remain in the bush to cry for justice.
Read Source 4A 4.1.1 Explain the historical term guerrilla warfare in the context of the Angolan civil war.
SUCCESSES PHILOSOPHY AND OF THE CHALLENGES BLACK OF THE BLACK POWER POWER MOVEMENT MOVEMENT THE BLACK POWER MOVEMENT 3.
By the time he was elected national chair of Student Non-violence Coordination Committee in May 1966, Carmichael had largely lost faith in the theory of non-violent resistance, that he and the SNCC had once held dear.
It is a call for the Black people to define their own gaols, to lead their own organisation.
Black Power also represented Carmichael’s break with Martin Luther King’s doctrine of nonviolence and its end of goal of racial integration.
Identify two visual clues that shows the two activists were proud of their African heritage 5.2.
Identify two visual clues that shows the two activists were proud of their African heritage 5.2.3 5.2.3 Explain why,Explain why, you think youphotograph this, think this, photograph was taken. was taken.
Communism A political and economic system in which all property is publicly owned and wealth is divided among citizens equally or according to individual needs 1.1.
Brinkmanship A strategy to push a rival to the verge of war with the intension to withdraw from the conflict 1.1.
Answers 5.1.1 May 1966 5.1.2 • It is a call for Black people in this country to unite • To recognize their heritage • To build a sense of community • It is a call for the Black people to define their own gaols • To lead their own organisation.
Malcolm X and Maya Angelou 5.2.2 • Both activists are wearing traditional African attire • The afro hairstyle by Maya Angelou • African beads worn by Maya Angelou 5.2.3 • To show the activists were proud of their heritage • To highlight the influence of the philosophy of Black Power Movement on African Americans • Any other relevant response 29 SECTION 5 ESSAY QUESTIONS 5.
Critically discuss… Give your verdict as to what extent a statement or findings within a piece of evidence are true, or to what extent you agree with them.
Provide evidence taken from a wide range of sources, which both agree with and contradict an argument.
Come to a final conclusion, basing your decision on what you judge to be the most important factors and justify how you have made your choice.
Underline the instruction verb, question focus, direction given to the content focus and timeframes.
You are expected to take a stance and use evidence to support your stance.
In the body of the essay you should use the evidence mentioned in your introduction to further elaborate your stance.
The effort fails for the most part because of administrative weakness aggravated by bad weather.
Eats Education • Education in the South was still segregated • In Little Rock 9 African-American students were chosen to enter a white school to start desegregation Outcome/ • Governor supported the parents who did not want to have mixed schools.
You need to highlight whether Mao Zedong’s policies of the Great Leap Forward and Cultural Revolution were a dismal failure or not and indicate how you would support your line of argument.
You should take a stance by explaining to what extent various forms of protests by the civil rights activists were successful in ensuring that all Americans regardless of race were treated equally in United States of America.
On 10 May 1963 the city’s businesses and municipality announced that municipal facilities would be desegregated.
The TRC Question focus: Negotiated settlement • Various forms of justice and the Government of National Unity • Reasons for the TRC hearings • Beginning of negotiations 1990 – 1991 • The debates concerning the TRC • Breakdown of negotiations • Positive aspects of the TRC • Multi-party negotiation process resumes • Amnesty and reparations • Final road to democracy 1994 • Responses of political parties to the TRC and the final report of the TRC 3.
BLACK CONSCIOUSNESS MOVEMENT PLEASE NOTE: You need to prepare thoroughly on all aspects mentioned in the mind map below.
You are advised NOT to spot certain sections that you think will be examined.
KEY CONCEPTS / TERMS CONCEPT EXPLANATION Black Consciousness Non – racialism 3.1.
Mamphela Ramphele, co-founder of the Zanemphilo Community Health Centre ‘Black man, you are on your own’, a rallying cry coined by Barney Pityana and popularised by Steve Biko, used the gendered language of the time.
ACTIVITY 1 SOURCE 1A The extract below focuses on the reasons for the emergence of the Black Consciousness philosophy and its subsequent impact.
In the late 1960s the philosophy of Black Consciousness began to gain influence.
The organisation set out to win black communities to its cause and attracted thousands of followers eager to break out of the mould of their parents’ resignation.
In 1972 SASO, together with leaders from other African educational and religious bodies, came together to form the Black People’s Convention , a political wing of the Black Consciousness Movement which aimed to mobilise South Africans around the Black Consciousness ideology.
SUMMARY REASONS FOR THE STRUCTURE AND WORK OF Evaluating the work of the TRC FORMATION THE Truth and Reconciliation Committees To reconcile South Africa from • Healing and Reconciliation • Successes its divided past Committee • Criticisms • Amnesty Committee • Limitations • Reparation and Rehabilitation Committee CONCEPT EXPLANATIONS Reparations/ Payment to someone who had suffered a loss/victims who suffered from human rights Compensation violations Pardon Offer forgiveness for political crimes committed during the apartheid era.
Amnesty Official pardon or forgiveness granted to those guilty of committing political crimes during apartheid era Reconciliation Bringing together former enemies in a manner that promotes forgiveness and healing Perpetrators Wrong doers/people who committed the crimes Restorative A form of justice that is about healing and reconciliation (not about punishment or justice revenge) between the victim and perpetrator.
The intention was to help South Africa move into the future as one nation.
You are required to use the summary in 2. above as a base from which you can add more information.
YouYouwill are required to be expected to use theyour apply summary in 2.1toabove knowledge the caseas astudies base from which examined. you can add more information.
Various TRC public hearings and subsequent articles, representing various testimonies will be used as sources of information for this question.
ACTIVITY You will2 be expected to apply your knowledge to the case studies examined.
ACTIVITY 2 This source focuses on the role that the Truth and Reconciliation Commission played in attempting to establish the reasons for the disappearance of anti-apartheid activist, Nokuthula Simelane.
Five white men applied for amnesty relating to Nokuthula’s abduction, torture and disappearance, Willem Helm Johannes Coetzee, Anton Pretorius, Frederick Mong, Frederick Williams and Jacobus Ross.
At the TRC a former commander of the Soweto Intelligence Unit , Willem ‘Timol’ Coetzee, the man responsible for the disappearance and death of Nokuthula, stated that Nokuthula was alive when he last saw her. the unit had turned her into a spy and redeployed her back to Swaziland.
Coetzee’s argument was countered by his colleague, Nimrod Veyi, who confessed that she was tortured and brutally murdered and was buried around the Rustenburg area.
The TRC further awarded amnesty to the other four men for torturing her.
On 28 November 2009 a life-size statue of Nokuthula was erected and unveiled in Bethal by the Mpumalanga government to honour her legacy and contribution towards the liberation struggle.
Furthermore, a documentary on the life and disappearance of Simelane, entitled ‘Betrayal’, produced by Mark Kaplan, was televised on SABC 1 on 10 April 2006.
Using the information in the source and your own knowledge, explain why Willem Coetzee and Nimrod Veyi’s evidence regarding the disappearance of Nokuthula Simelane contradicted each other.
GLOBALISATION: The end of the Cold war and a new world order 1989 to the present 7.
GLOBALISATION: The end of the Cold War and a new world order 1989 to the 7.3.
GLOBALISATION Balance of power and impact Dominance of global capitalism on Africa 7.3.2 Key concepts/ terms: 7.3.
ACTIVITY 3 SOURCE 3A The source below focuses on globalisation and its impact on developing countries.
It appeared in an article entitled ‘The Negative Effects of Globalisation on South Africa’ and was published on 14 April 2014.
Globalisation refers to the process of the integration of economic, political, social and cultural relations among people, companies and governments of different nations and countries.
It is a process aimed at improving international movement of goods, services, labour and capital.
This process also directly affects the environment, culture, political systems, economic development and prosperity and human physical wellbeing of societies in the world.
Globalisation supports internationalism and support between countries, as opposed to nationalism and protectionism, which have negative characteristics.
Over the past 30 years the globalisation of the economy led by the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and transnational entities has happened at a very quick pace.
Decisions by international organisations ensure that the odds are stacked against nations of the South because of power imbalances; rules are made to disadvantage poor nations.
This has pressured governments of developing countries, such as South Africa, to remove its trade barriers to the cross-border flow of capital and products, such as the poultry industry.
Quote THREE ways from the source that suggests that globalisation affected the physical wellbeing of societies in the world.
Using the information in the source and your own knowledge,explain why internationalism was regarded as more successful than nationalism in the context of globalisation.
Identify the TWO international monetary institutions that supported the process of globalisation.
QUESTION 4 PAPER 2 The Topic The Crisis of Apartheid International Response The question Explain to what extent various forms of international protests by the Anti-Apartheid Movement activists successfully put pressure on South Africa to end apartheid during the 1970s and 1980s.
Take a stance Content direction Paragraph 2 Sports Boycotts Success Paragraph 3 Cultural Boycotts Success Paragraph 4 Academic Boycotts Success Paragraph 5 Consumer Boycotts Success Paragraph 6 Disinvestments Success Paragraph 7 Sanctions Success Paragraph 8 Release Mandela Campaign Success: Paragraph 9 Conclusion Link your conclusion to the introduction and question 54 TOPIC 5: THE ROAD TO DEMOCRACY As you can see you need to mention the process of negotiations and the violence on the road to democracy was not an easy or smooth sailing one.
The coming of democracy to South Africa and coming to terms with the past.
Negotiated settlement and the Government of National unity SECTION 9 .1: A Timeline: The Coming of Democracy in South Africa 1990-1994 Date Negotiation Process Events occurring while negotiations were taking place Feb 1990 Nelson Mandela released.90-1993: ANC and other black political movements were unbanned.
NP allowed the carrying of Zulu ‘Traditional weapons’ Rent, school and consumer boycotts renewed by ANC supporters.
IFP attack on ANC stronghold at Sebokeng NP agreed to release political prisoners.
NP revoked Separate Reservation of Amenities Act Aug 1990 Pretoria Minute: November 1990: Alleged Third Force attacks on informal at Zonkizizwe township outside Germiston ANC agreed to suspend armed struggle (An act of ‘good faith’ to show commitment to peaceful negotiation process) NP agreed to suspend State of Emergency in Natal March 1991 De Klerk revoked Land Act, Group Areas Act, Pop.
May 1992 CODESA II NP wanted CODESA II replaced by representative of all political parties + minority veto Agreement reached that SABC to present a neutral view of negotiation ANC wanted an interim govt of no longer than 18 months and simple majority rule. process.
Rumours spread of white men handing weapons to Third Force agents to spread violence and chaos In response to Boipatong massacre ANC walked out of negotiation process.
CODESA ended, MK disbanded Oct 1992 NP Government agreed to ban the carrying of traditional weapons in public Concerned South African Group formed (NB: An alliance between ‘Homeland’ leaders and the and to release more political prisoners. far right-wing): Lucas Mangope , OupaGqozo , Mangosuthu Buthelezi , Afrikaner Volksunie and Afrikaner Freedom Foundation.
Joe Slovo suggested a 5 year Govt of National Unity a ‘power sharing’ compromise – accepted by NP. 100,000 attended Hani’s funeral st Date set for 1 democratic election. reps to be voted for.
Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging and Volksfront stormed the World Trade Centre 1993 where negotiations were taking place, vandalised the entrance and threatened the delegates.
AWB and Constand Viljoen attempted and failed to defend Mangope’s dictatorship in Boputhatswana against huge opposition from students and worker demonstrations.
St James Church Massacre. threw grenade and opened fire in St James Church Kenilworth. killed, 58 wounded.
PLANNING FOR THE ESSAY Refer to the timeline and complete the table under the headings indicated.
PAPER 2 Discuss to what extent leadership, compromise and negotiations among various political organisations led to the birth of a democratic South Africa in 1994.
PAPER 2 THE END OF THE COLD WAR AND A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE EVENTS OF 1989 The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1989 served as a major catalyst for the political transformation that occurred in South Africa.
Substantiate your line of argument by referring to relevant events that shaped the political landscape in South Africa between 1989 and 1990.
THE END OF THE COLD WAR AND A NEW WORLD ORDER: THE EVENTS OF 1989 You need to indicate to what extent you agree with the statement.
You need to indicate to what extent the collapse of the Soviet Union was largely responsible for the political changes that occurred in South Africa after 1989.
You need to take a line of argument and support your response with historical evidence.
ELABORATION In agreeing with the assertion, you could include the following points in their answer.
