The crisis is generally regarded as the moment in which the Cold War came closest to turning into a nuclear conflict and is also the first documented instance of mutual assured destruction being discussed as a determining factor in a major international arms agreement.
More After the United States had placed nuclear missiles in Turkey and Italy, aimed at Moscow, and the failed United States attempt to overthrow the Cuban regime, in May 1962 Nikita Khrushchev proposed the idea of placing Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba to deter any future invasion attempt.
These preparations were noticed by the Defense Intelligence Agency, which on October 14 tasked an Air Force-operated U-2 aircraft with scanning the suspected areas in Cuba, securing clear photographic evidence of medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic nuclear missiles on the ground.
Read more 1962 United States Military Plans Operation Ortsac to Disrupt Castro's Rule in Cuba Operation Ortsac was the project name of a possible invasion of Cuba planned by the United States military in 1962.
Read more Oct 17 1962 U-2 Photograph of First IRBM Site Under Construction is Taken U-2 flights identify the first of three Soviet SS-5 missile sites.
Read more Oct 18 1962 Kennedy Meets with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko On October 18th the President ordered a build up of arms along the southern border of the United States, just in case war breaks out.
Read more Oct 21 1962 John F Kennedy Decides to ""Quarantine"" Cuba in Response to Nuclear Threat On October 21st, ExComm, and President Kennedy decided that a quarantine was the best course of action.
Read more Oct 26 1962 John A Scali of ABC Surreptitiously Meets with KGB Station Chief, Aleksandr Fomin At 1:00m., John A Scali of ABC News had lunch with Aleksandr Fomin at Fomin's request.
Read more Oct 26 1962 Fidel Castro Writes Letter to Khruschev in which he Urges the Soviet Union to Attack the United States if it Invades Cuba I would like to briefly express my own personal opinion.
Read more Oct 27 1962 Rudolf Anderson, Jr., USAF Pilot, is Shot Down Over Banes, Cuba While the meeting progressed, at 11:03m. a new message began to arrive from Khrushchev.
