According to documents publicly released for the first time to coincide with the 50th anniversary of the moment when the world stood at the precipice of World War III, Fidel Castro's Cuba nearly became a nuclear power after the crisis was thought to have passed.
In exchange for withdrawing their nuclear missiles from Cuba, the Soviets were promised that the United States would not invade the communist-controlled island nation.
The standoff has been called the most dangerous moment in recorded history.
But in reality it was even worse, according to the newly released information.Advertisement HPGam.cmd.push{ return HPGam.render; }); Based on a new timeline of events, the crisis did not end with the deal on October 28, 1962 but secretly continued until December.
The book was written by Sergo Mikoyan, the son of the Soviet official at the center of the story, and Archive researcher Svetlana Savranskaya, who completed the work after the author died in 2010.
Advertisement HPGam.cmd.push{ return HPGam.render; }); It began the moment that Khrushchev told Kennedy he would remove the “weapons which you call offensive” from Cuba, nuclear warheads capable of reaching United States cities as far as 1,550 miles away.
Officials in Washington knew about the Luna missiles but wouldn't learn until 1992 that they carried nuclear warheads.While the world breathed a sigh of relief as the Soviets began removing the long-range missiles, Castro fumed.
Set on keeping the Hiroshima-sized nuclear warheads, he began to chafe at his handlers in Moscow.
Concerned the cigar-chomping revolutionary might do something to ruin the agreement, Khrushchev dispatched his number two, Soviet Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan, to Havana to calm Castro down.Although he would learn soon after arriving that his wife of 43 years had died, Mikoyan had little time to grieve.
In sensitive negotiations that would remain secret for decades, Mikoyan initially told Castro he could keep the tactical nukes that had escaped United States notice.
But on Oct., one day before the public crisis would end, Castro cabled Khrushchev to urge a preemptive nuclear strike on United States targets.
Weeks later, on Nov., the Cuban leader instructed his United Nations ambassador to tell the world that Cuba possessed tactical nuclear warheads.
Advertisement HPGam.cmd.push{ return HPGam.render; }); All this -as well as Castro's orders to shoot at United States surveillance planes -convinced Mikoyan that ""the Cuban tail was quite capable of wagging the Soviet dog,” Savranskaya would write in her book with the official's son.
Mikoyan decided on his own that Castro could not be trusted and that the missiles must be removed from the island.
Ironically, if the Cubans were a little more pliant, and a little less independent, if they were more willing to be Soviet pawns, they would have kept the tactical nuclear weapons on the island,"" researcher Svetlana Savranskaya wrote in Foreign Policy.
Realness delivered to your inbox HPGam.cmd.push{ return HPGam.render; }); HPGam.cmd.push{ return HPGam.render; }); What's HotChief Justice John Roberts Confirms Leaked Draft Opinion On Abortion Is AuthenticMy 11-Year-Old Patient Was Pregnant.
Describe the error here."",""SUGGEST_CORRECTION_FORM_MESSAGE_FIELD_PLACEHOLDER"":""i.e. a name was wrong in a recent story..."",""SUGGEST_CORRECTION_FORM_NAME_FIELD_LABEL"":""Your Name"",""SUGGEST_CORRECTION_FORM_NAME_FIELD_PLACEHOLDER"":""Pat Smith"",""SUGGEST_CORRECTION_FORM_SUBMISSION_ERROR_TEXT"":""There was an error in processing your submission.
