January 1962 January 1 Western Samoa becomes independent from New Zealand.
SEAL Team One is commissioned in the Pacific Fleet and SEAL Team Two in the Atlantic Fleet.
January 2 – NAACP Executive Secretary Roy Wilkins praises United States President John F Kennedy's ""personal role"" in advancing civil rights.
January 10 – An avalanche on Nevado Huascarán in Peru causes 4,000 deaths.
January 12 – The Indonesian Army confirms that it has begun operations in West Irian.
January 13 – Albania allies itself with the People's Republic of China.
January 15 – Portugal abandons the United Nations General Assembly due to the debate over Angola.
January 19 – A counter-coup occurs in the Dominican Republic; the old government returns except for the new president Rafael Filiberto Bonnelly.
January 22 – The Organization of American States suspends Cuba's membership.
January 26 – Ranger 3 is launched to study the Moon; it later misses the Moon by 22,000 miles.
January 27 – The Soviet government changes all place names honoring Molotov, Kaganovich and Georgi Malenkov.
March 8–12 – In Geneva, France and the Algerian FLN begin negotiations.
March 15 – Katangan Prime Minister Moise Tshombe begins negotiations to rejoin the Congo.
France and Algeria sign an agreement in Évian-les-Bains ending the Algerian War.
Un premier amour, sung by Isabelle Aubret , wins the Eurovision Song Contest 1962 for France.
March 19 – An armistice begins in Algeria; however, the OAS continues its terrorist attacks against Algerians.
March 23 – The Scandinavian States of the Nordic Council sign the Helsinki Convention on Nordic Co-operation.
March 26 France shortens the term for military service from 26 months to 18.
The United States Supreme Court rules that federal courts can order state legislatures to reapportion seats.April Main article: April 1962 April 20 – New Orleans Citizens Co gives free 1-way ride to blacks to move North.May Main article: May 1962 May – The Hulk debuts with The Incredible Hulk #1 by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby.
May 1 Norwich City wins the English League Cup, beating Rochdale in the final.
Dayton Hudson Corporation opens the first of its Target discount stores in Roseville, Minnesota.
May 14 Juan Carlos of Spain marries the Greek Princess Sophia in Athens.
Milovan Djilas, former vice-president of Yugoslavia, is given further sentence for publishing Conversations with Stalin.
May 22 – Continental Airlines Flight 11 crashes near Unionville, Missouri after the in-flight detonation of a bomb near the rear lavatory.
Raoul Salan, founder of the French terrorist Organisation armée secrète, is sentenced to life imprisonment in France.
May 26 – Acker Bilk's Stranger On The Shore becomes the first British recording to reach number one in the United States Billboard Hot 100.
May 29 – Negotiations between the OAS and the FLA lead to a real armistice in Algeria.
Frank Morris, John Anglin and Clarence Anglin, with apparent success, escape from the Alcatraz Island prison.
Although the men were never heard from again, there is evidence that they survived the attempt and there was to be sightings of them over the years.
June 15 – Students for a Democratic Society complete the Port Huron Statement.
June 17 The OAS signs a truce with the FLN in Algeria, but a day later announces that it will continue the fight on behalf of French Algerians.
The United States Supreme Court rules that photographs of nude men are not obscene, decriminalizing nude male pornographic magazines.
June 28 – The United Lutheran Church in America, Finnish Evangelical Lutheran Church of America, American Evangelical Lutheran Church, and Augustana Evangelical Lutheran Church merge to form the Lutheran Church in America.
July 2 Charles de Gaulle accepts Algerian independence; France recognizes it the next day.
The first Walmart store, then known as Wal-Mart , opens for business in Rogers, Arkansas.
July 6 – Irish broadcaster Gay Byrne presents his first edition of The Late Late Show.
Byrne goes on to present the talk show for 37 years, making it the longest running in the world.
July 9 – American artist Andy Warhol premieres his Campbell's Soup Cans exhibit in Los Angeles.
July 10 – AT&T's Telstar, the world's first commercial communications satellite, is launched into orbit and activated the next day.
July 13 – In what the press dubs ""the Night of the Long Knives"", United Kingdom Prime Minister Harold Macmillan dismisses 1/3 of his Cabinet.
July 19 – The First Annual Swiss & Wielder Hoop and Stick Tournament is held.
July 23 Telstar relays the first live trans-Atlantic television signal.
International Agreement on the Neutrality of Laos signed in Geneva, Switzerland July 31 Algeria proclaims independence; Ahmed Ben Bella is the first President.
The South African government arrests Nelson Mandela in Howick, and charges him with incitement to rebellion.
August 10 – Marvel Comics publishes Amazing Fantasy#15, which features the first published appearance of the superhero character of Spider-Man, created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko.
August 16 The Beatles drummer Pete Best is fired and replaced by Ringo Starr.
August 17 – East German border guards kill 18-year-old Peter Fechter, as he attempts to cross the Berlin Wall into West Berlin.
August 22 – A failed assassination attempt is made against French President Charles De Gaulle.
August 24 – A group of armed Cuban exile terrorists fire at a hotel in Havana from a speedboat.
September 8 – Newly independent Algeria, by referendum, adopts a constitution.
September 19 – Atlantic College opens it doors for the first time, marking the birth of the pioneering UWC educational movement.
September 21 A border conflict between China and India erupts into fighting.
Rachel Carson's book Silent Spring is released, giving rise to the modern environmentalist movement.
September 28 – Prime Minister Ahmed Ben Bella founds the first government in Algeria.
September 29 – The Canadian Alouette 1, the first satellite built outside the United States and the Soviet Union, is launched from Vandenberg AFB in California.
October 1962 October 14: Pictures of Soviet missile silos in Cuba, taken by United States spy planes.
Johnny Carson takes over as permanent host of NBC's Tonight Show, a post he would hold for 30 years.
October 5 The French National Assembly censures the proposed referendum to sanction presidential elections by popular mandate; Prime Minister Georges Pompidou resigns, but President de Gaulle asks him to stay in office.
October 8 The German magazine Der Spiegel publishes an article about the Bundeswehr's poor preparedness; the Spiegel scandal erupts.
October 9 – Uganda becomes independent within the Commonwealth of Nations.
October 10 The Sino-Indian War, a border dispute involving two of the world's largest nations , begins.
A U-2 flight over Cuba takes photos on Oct. of Soviet nuclear weapons being installed.
October 22 – In a televised address, United States President John F Kennedy announces to the nation the existence of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
First confrontation between United States Navy and Soviet cargo vessel.
The fact that this deal is not made public makes it look like the Soviets have backed down.
A referendum in France favors the election of the president by universal suffrage.
October 31 – The UN General Assembly asks the United Kingdom to suspend enforcement of the new constitution in Southern Rhodesia , but the constitution comes into effect on November 1.
November 1962 November 1 The Soviets begin dismantling their missiles in Cuba.
November 3 – The term ""personal computer"" is first mentioned by the media.
November 5 Franz Josef Strauß, the West German defense minister, is relieved of his duties over the Spiegel scandal, due to his alleged involvement in police action against the magazine.
Saudi Arabia breaks off diplomatic relations with Egypt, following a period of unrest partly caused by the defection of several Saudi princes to Egypt.
The Norwegian government is forced to resign in the aftermath of this accident in August, 1963.
November 17 – In Washington, D.C., United States President John F Kennedy dedicates Dulles International Airport.
In response to the Soviet Union agreeing to remove its missiles from Cuba, United States President John F Kennedy ends the blockade of the Caribbean nation.
Mies Bouwman starts presenting the first live TV-marathon fundraising show , which lasts 23 hours non-stop.
November 27 – French President Charles De Gaulle orders Georges Pompidou to form a government.
November 29 – An agreement is signed between Britain and France to develop the Concorde supersonic airliner.
December 1962 December 2 – Vietnam War: After a trip to Vietnam at the request of United States President John F Kennedy, United States Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield becomes the first American official to make a non-optimistic public comment on the war's progress.
December 7 – Rainier III, Prince of Monaco revises the principality's constitution, devolving some of his formerly autocratic power to several advisory and legislative councils.
The North Kalimantan National Army revolts in Brunei, in the first stirrings of the Indonesian Confrontation.
December 9 – Tanganyika becomes a republic within the Commonwealth, with Julius Nyerere as president.
It will skip a telecast in 1963, so beginning in 1964, first on CBS, then on NBC, and finally again on CBS, it will nearly always be telecast during the early part of the year until Turner Entertainment buys the rights to the film in the 1990s.
December 10 – David Lean's epic film Lawrence of Arabia, featuring Peter O' Toole, Omar Sharif, Alec Guinness, Jack Hawkins, and Anthony Quinn premieres in London.
December 11 In West Germany, a coalition government of Christian Democrats, Christian Socialists, and Free Democrats is formed.
December 14 United States spacecraft Mariner 2 flies by Venus, becoming the first probe to successfully transmit data from another planet.
The Mona Lisa by Leonardo da Vinci Mona Lisa was assessed for insurance purposes at US$100 million, before the painting toured the United States for several months.
However, the Louvre chose to spend the money that would have been spent on the insurance premium on security instead.
December 19 – Britain acknowledges the right of Nyasaland to secede from the Central African Federation.
December 24 – Cuba releases the last 1,113 participants in the Bay of Pigs Invasion to the U.S., in exchange for food worth $53 million.
December 30 United Nations troops occupy the last rebel positions in Katanga; Moise Tshombe moves to South Rhodesia.
An unexpected storm buries Maine under five feet of snow, forcing the Bangor Daily News to miss a publication date for the only time in history.
The same day, also the Netherlands are covered with several feet of snow.Date unknown American advertising man Martin K Speckter invents the interrobang, a new English-language punctuation mark.
As with this Familypedia wiki, the content of Wikipedia is available under the Creative Commons License.
