This article explores and evaluates the activities of the CIA in the crisis.
It examines how intelligence-gathering and analysis were conducted and how assessments and information were provided to decision-makers.
The significance of CIA covert action against Cuba prior to October 1962, for example, is explored.
Another important focus is the mistaken assessment of the United States intelligence community that the Soviets were not going to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The nature and significance of this conclusion is considered, along with the views of the Director of Central Intelligence, John McCone, who contrary to his analysts, believed Khrushchev would deploy nuclear missiles.
The view that the CIA played a successful part in monitoring the Soviet military build-up after the discovery of mediumrange ballistic missiles is analysed.
The lack of success in identifying Soviet tactical nuclear weapons is also considered.
Research into the crisis extends to Soviet and other decision-makers and thus helps facilitate a more genuinely international intelligence history of the Cold War.
The article proffers a reflective and nuanced assessment that underlines the achievements as well as the shortcomings of the CIA at this most crucial moment in the Cold War.
Although the intelligence community’s inquiry into its actions during the Cuban missile crisis revealed certain areas where shortcomings existed and where improvements should be made in various areas of intelligence collection and processing, the intelligence community operated extensively and well in connection with Cuba.
Every major weapons system introduced into Cuba by the Soviets was detected, identified, and reported (with respect to numbers, location and operational characteristics) before any of these systems attained an operational capability.
I am grateful to Chikara Hashimoto for comments on an earlier draft of this article.
Understanding intelligence in the crisis is pivotal to understanding key decisions.
The focus of this article is the Central Intelligence Agency – the most significant intelligence organization in the crisis.
The aim is to explore the role and significance of the CIA in the American handling of the crisis.
I Many writers on intelligence see secret intervention in the affairs of other states as an intrinsic part of intelligence.
In the United States this reflects the practices of the CIA, where covert action has been a prominent mission since the agency’s creation.
By the early 1960s, covert action was embedded in American statecraft, and there was little evidence of moral qualms about such practices in Washington.
As a valued instrument of foreign policy it was seen to play a decisive role in regime change in Iran and Guatemala, and despite the fiasco of the Bay of Pigs, no attempt was made to revisit assumptions about how the Cold War should be waged.
The scale and scope of these operations are extraordinary in hindsight.
Operation Mongoose, launched in November 1961, involved an annual budget of $50 million.
Activities ranged across poisoning sugar exports, destroying oil refineries, blowing up railway bridges, and sabotaging chemical plants.
Covert action, moreover, was part of a broader and coordinated approach to weakening and intimidating Cuba, which included diplomatic isolation, economic sanctions and military threats.
Cuba was suspended from the Organization of American States in January 1962.
And a series of military exercises were conducted, including those designed to rehearse United States contingency plans for an invasion.
In October 1962, a Marine Corps amphibious assault exercise was planned for the island of Vieques near Puerto Rico.
The covert side of covert action was preserved through plausible deniability.
For Havana, American plausible deniability added hypocrisy as well as insult to injury.
Perhaps the most controversial aspect of the CIA’s role was its attempts to kill Fidel Castro.
And the most controversial aspect of the controversial aspect was its outsourcing of the endeavour to the American mafia.
The Sabotage of the United Nations in the Cuban Conflict and the Missile Crisis of 1962 , 73.
The Church Committee ‘found concrete evidence’ of at least eight plots to assassinate Castro involving the CIA from 1960 to 1965.
The Director of the CIA, John McCone testified to the Church Committee that he was not made aware of the assassination planning.
Various authors have pointed to an assassination track in Operation Zapata that could have rendered the Bay of Pigs operation more credible in hindsight.
Whether the President was aware of, or more importantly sanctioned, CIA assassination planning hinges on how far the CIA was acting as ‘a rogue elephant’.16 The balance of probabilities strongly suggests that it was not.
The more closely CIA activities are examined, the greater the sense of ridicule they generate.
One example is the case of a CIA operative who describes how he used bags of inflammable material tied to the tails of cats to set fire to fields of sugar crops.
The Church Committee solemnly recorded the plans of agency toxicologists to use thallium to cause Fidel Castro’s beard to fall out.
When the CIA’s nefarious activities are interwoven with salacious tales of mistresses and lovers the story resembles a spoof of a James Bond film.
From the perspective of the agency and its political masters, the more important consideration was that covert action did not succeed.
Crucial questions, moreover, remain about the unintended consequences of the CIA’s operations.
The suggestion that the defence of Cuba was paramount in Khrushchev’s thinking gained ground in the 1980s and 1990s as western academics gained access to former Soviet officials.
Whether the CIA’s covert actions provided context or pretext for Operation Anadyr is therefore part of a broader debate about Khrushchev’s motives.
Opinions nevertheless differ over the primary motive for Khrushchev’s actions.
William Taubman suggests that Khrushchev saw the deployment as ‘a cure-all’ for a range of problems.
Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali invoke Agatha Christie’s Murder on the Orient Express, wherein a dozen suspects are all guilty of murder.
Initially, among western historians, a consensus developed after the crisis that emphasized Soviet inferiority in the strategic nuclear balance as the driver in Khrushchev’s action.
And in 2006, Fursenko and Naftali argued that Khrushchev’s action was precipitated by warnings from the Soviet General Staff that their InterContinental Ballistic Missile programme was in disarray and their existing missiles vulnerable to pre-emption.
How far the American threat to Cuba drove the Soviet missile deployment thus remains a matter of debate.
That it contributed to Cuban fears of attack, and thus to Cuban receptivity to Soviet missile bases, is another matter.
American action between the CIA-organized invasion of the Bay of Pigs in April 1961 and the crisis in October 1962 led the Cubans to believe the threat of invasion was very real.
Yet, Soviet missiles in Cuba could also increase the risk of American attack, as well as exposing Cuba to the accusation that it was a Soviet satellite.
Castro, on the other hand, declared in 1992 that his motive in accepting the missiles was to contribute to the international socialist cause.
II The build-up of Soviet forces in Cuba was monitored by the US intelligence community during the summer and autumn of 1962.
The CIA identified V-75 Surface-to-Air Missiles , Ilyushin-28 medium-range bombers, MIG-21 fighters, and Sopka coastal-defence cruise missiles.
United States public concern focused on whether the Soviets were deploying ‘offensive’ nuclear-armed surface-to-surface ballistic missiles and President Kennedy issued public and private warnings to Moscow of the potential consequences.
As between these two, the establishment of a submarine base would be the more likely.
The development of a Soviet naval base, including facilities for nuclear missile-carrying submarines, was part of the original Soviet plan of deployment, but was dropped by Khrushchev in September.
III One curious aspect of the CIA’s role is that while agency analysts were convinced that Khrushchev would not deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba, the Director of Central Intelligence , John McCone, was convinced that he would.
With the discovery of Soviet SAMs in August, McCone pressed his views on senior colleagues and on the President.
Yet, having told Kennedy he believed the Soviets were deploying nuclear missiles in Cuba – which would inevitably precipitate a major crisis in Soviet–American relations – McCone went off to the south of France for his honeymoon, and was away for a crucial month, from 23 August to 23 September.
While the DCI did spend some of his honeymoon communicating with the agency, he was absent when the Special National Intelligence Estimate was issued.
More significantly, he was unaware until his return that there had been no direct U-2 overflights of Cuba since 5 September.
When SNIE 85-3-62 was completed, Sherman Kent, Chairman of the Board of National Estimates, assembled staff from the Office of National Estimates, together with members of the Board, and asked each of them whether they agreed with the DCI.31 None of them did.
The discovery of the Medium-Range Ballistic Missiles , of course, vindicated McCone.
In a way our misestimate of Soviet intentions got an ex post facto validation.
The SAMs, per se, were not a warning indicator of MRBM deployment, though particular SAM deployments did help alert officials to identify possible Soviet missile bases.
McCone’s linkage between the SAMs and the MRBMs may have been mistaken.
If I were Khrushchev, I would put MRBMs in Cuba’, he told Maxwell Taylor and his colleagues.
Yet, although his reasoning about the SAMs was incorrect, the hunch behind his thinking reflected a clearer intuitive grasp of the importance Khrushchev attached to the strategic nuclear balance.
They are those of Sherman Kent, writing in Studies in Intelligence, the in-house CIA journal, in a 1964 analysis of the SNIE 85-3-62 of 19 September 1962.43 The judgement of the CIA and the American intelligence community was wrong.
Whether the mistaken estimate was of any great significance in the conduct of the American government is a different question.
Kennedy was thus able to plot his course of action, and to draw back from his initially bellicose reaction to their discovery on 16 October, when he was adamant that they would be removed by force.
Thanks to studies of Soviet decision-making47 we can now attempt to map assessments and actions of the United States government and the CIA against Soviet assessments and actions.
In so doing, we can seek to create a genuinely international intelligence history of the crisis.
Thanks to American declassification, we can also explore with some precision how intelligence was presented to United States decision-makers.
Although the CIA hunted for Soviet nuclear warheads, it found none, though its advice to policymakers was based on the assumption that warheads had arrived.
Michael Dobbs has shown, however, that the CIA failed to identify the nuclear warhead storage depot at Bejucal because the Soviets made no attempt to provide additional security.
Moreover, he recounts how eight nuclear warheads arrived at the MRBM site at Calabazar de Sagua on the afternoon of 27 October.
If the SNIE was seen as CIA’s failure, its subsequent performance was judged a success.
While gathering intelligence on Cuba involved various forms of intelligence, the most prominent were the high-altitude aerial reconnaissance operations of the U-2s.
The Eisenhower administration’s idiosyncratic procurement practices had enabled the CIA rather than the Pentagon to develop and operate a military reconnaissance aircraft, though concern at the possible shooting down of CIA pilots led to the decision in October 1962 that Strategic Air Command planes would replace those of the CIA in the overflights over Cuba.
The U-2 programme owed much to the organizational efforts of Richard Bissell, CIA Deputy Director for Plans.
Of equal importance was the development of the National Photographic Interpretation Center whose expertise in analysing and processing U-2 photography was vital to the timely exploitation of the intelligence.
Here, the Director of the NPIC, Art Lundahl, played a crucial role, as he did in presenting the photographic evidence to the President and his senior officials during the crisis.
If development of the U-2 was a departure from the CIA’s traditional roles, human intelligence remained a core business for the Agency.
In Washington, various liaison services also provided information, including from their embassies in Havana.
Gauging the accuracy of the intelligence from sources in Cuba was a formidable challenge.
Many of those who believed they spotted Soviet ballistic missiles had indeed seen ballistic missiles but not ‘offensive’ ones.
After the crisis McCone concluded that, of the 3,500 refugee and agent reports, ‘only eight in retrospect were considered as reasonably valid indicators of the deployment of offensive missiles to Cuba’.53 This remains an exemplar of the problem of signals and noise in analysis of warning intelligence identified by Roberta Wohlstetter.
Yet several reports were instrumental in targeting U-2 flights on the San Christόbal area in western Cuba, where the first MRBM site was photographed on 14 October.
Here, the Defense Intelligence Agency played a role (even though DIA analysts had earlier signed up to the conclusions of SNIE 85-3-62), in particular, Colonel John Wright, who, along with CIA officers attached to the Mongoose team, became suspicious of the configuration of SAM deployments that correlated with human intelligence.
At the beginning of October, he persuaded Defense Secretary McNamara that the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance should be asked to authorize direct U-2 overflights of the San Christόbal area.
Detecting the missiles illustrated the importance of all-source analysis, not just aerial reconnaissance.
The significance of signals intelligence is much less clear, though it was conducted on an extensive scale.
Oleg Penkovsky was a colonel in Soviet Military Intelligence, run jointly by the British Secret Intelligence Service and the CIA from April 1961 to the autumn of 1962.58 Penkovsky did not provide warning of the missiles in Cuba and was arrested on 22 October 1962, the day the crisis went public.
However, he had previously provided western intelligence with technical information, including the field manual for the R-12/ SS-4.
Richard Helms, then CIA Deputy Director of Plans, believed this information enabled American decision-makers to know exactly when the missiles would become operational, which in Helms’s view was crucial.
Helms’s argument that Penkovsky’s intelligence gave the President three extra days, between 16 and 19 October (by when CIA estimated two MRBM sites were operational), is central to the case that Penkovsky’s intelligence was vital during the crisis.
This implies that Kennedy might have launched a military attack on Cuba had he not understood the state of readiness of the missiles.
Certainly, the President’s initial reaction on 16 October reflected anger at Khrushchev’s behaviour, though this quickly gave way to a more pragmatic disposition in the following days.
Some senior officials believed that the operational status of the missiles would determine when a decision to destroy them had to be taken.
On 28 October, after Khrushchev publically announced that the MRBMs would be withdrawn, the Joint Chiefs argued in favour of air strikes the following day unless there was ‘irrefutable evidence’ that dismantling of the missiles had begun.
Very different views of Penkovsky’s intelligence in the crisis have also emerged.
Moreover, notwithstanding JFK’s angry rhetoric on 16 October, everything we have learned of how Kennedy behaved during the crisis strongly suggests he would not have acted with such belligerence.
V McCone’s assertion to Kennedy after the crisis that every major Soviet weapons system was ‘detected, identified, and reported’ was mistaken.
In 1992, it was first revealed that short-range Luna battlefield nuclear missiles had been deployed, when it was also erroneously suggested that Soviet commanders in Cuba had pre-delegated authority to fire them.
Most historians believe that Washington was unaware of these Soviet tactical nuclear weapons, though David Coleman suggests that American leaders and officials were aware of battlefield nuclear missiles after a Luna/FROG was photographed by a low-level reconnaissance aircraft on 25 62 May and Zelikow, Kennedy Tapes, 635.
Coleman argues that the President not only knew of their capabilities but factored them into his calculations and was in consequence deterred from invasion.
McNamara, on the other hand, expressed surprise at the 1992 revelations.
Subsequently, details also emerged about eighty Meteor FKR-1 cruise missiles.
United States analysts misidentified these as conventionally armed Sopka coastal-defence missiles.
More recently, Michael Dobbs has provided a graphic account of how FKR-1s were deployed to their designated launch sites within range of the United States Naval base at Guantanamo Bay.
Finally in Cuba, the Soviets had dispatched a squadron of nine Ilyushin-28 jet bombers, capable of carrying nuclear bombs (six of which arrived).71 All told, there were forty-two Ilyushin-28s, comprising thirty-three maritime and nine air force planes.
According to Brugioni, Ilyushin-28s were photographed en route to Cuba on 28 September, though the United States intelligence community did not identify them until 9 October.
May and Zelikow state that ‘These bombers, though capable of carrying nuclear weapons, were being phased out of the Soviet air force as obsolete.
It was only on 22 October when Kennedy publically insisted on the withdrawal of the bombers that they became significant in Washington and later complicated the negotiations to conclude the crisis in November.
The bombers actually configured to carry nuclear ordnance remained in their crates at Holguin airfield, while CIA and United States intelligence remained oblivious to their capability.
The debate about how close we came to nuclear war, and in particular inadvertent nuclear war, has been informed by revelations from Soviet as well as American sources, in particular concerning tactical nuclear weapons.
Greater understanding of Soviet operations, however, has illuminated significant gaps in American identification of Soviet conventional forces.
The CIA underestimated the numbers of Soviet combat troops on Cuba and failed to realize the nature of the Soviet expeditionary force.
Garthoff recounts how estimates of overall Soviet military personnel rose from 8,000–10,000 on 22 October to some 12,000–16,000 by 19 November.
The actual figure stood at 41,902.79 The possibility of tactical nuclear deployments was not the subject of systematic estimative scrutiny, even though American military planners were exercised about possible Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in preparing the invasion.
Much is still unknown about how the United States intelligence community reached assessments of the different types of Soviet nuclear deployments.
And the significance of the intelligence (or lack of intelligence) about the tactical nuclear weapons is inextricably bound up with counterfactual questions about whether, or rather under what circumstances, Kennedy would have invaded Cuba.
Moreover, Garthoff argued in 1998 that unless intelligence was presumed to be capable of knowing everything about an adversary, on the basis of what had been declassified, the US 77 Garthoff, ‘New evidence’, 252.
If Washington believed there were a hundred or so tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba, this would have complicated, and perhaps stymied, an agreed settlement on the Soviet withdrawal.
It has now also emerged that the Soviets and Cubans were engaged in fraught negotiations over the transfer of tactical nuclear missiles to the host country.
The suggestion that Cuba under Castro was on the verge of becoming a nuclear weapons state would almost certainly have scuppered the deal that Kennedy and Khrushchev had struck.
We know of one area where the inability to understand the capabilities and intentions of the adversary may have come close to precipitating inadvertent nuclear war.
In September, Khrushchev abandoned the plan to develop a naval base in Cuba but decided to persevere with the deployment of four diesel-electric submarines.
Each was equipped with a single nuclear torpedo with a yield comparable to the bomb dropped on Hiroshima.
The United States Navy sought to surface these boats by using ad hoc Submarine Surfacing and Identification Procedures devised within the Pentagon and communicated to the Soviet government on 23 October.
The procedures were discussed in ExComm on 24 October, when, despite misgivings, Kennedy accepted McNamara’s actions.
Yet, accounts suggest that several captains believed they were under attack and dramatic claims have been made that on one boat the captain was close to firing his nuclear torpedo.
Yet, none of the discussions in the Executive Committee of the National Security Committee suggest that consideration was given to the possibility that submarines were carrying nuclear weapons that their commanders might consider using.
The gap between the carefully calibrated threat of force in Washington and the operational reality at sea is striking.
How we interpret the risks depends in part on how we interpret the accounts of what occurred on the Soviet submarines.
Whether we determine that American actions represented a failure of intelligence or a failure of policy is a matter for adjudication.
Covert action against Castro’s Cuba clearly failed to achieve its aims while assassination attempts against Castro ended in failure and, later, opprobrium and ridicule.
Most historians believe that Khrushchev’s motives reflected various objectives, and many have long believed Soviet strategic inferiority (publically revealed by the Kennedy administration in October 1961) was a central Soviet concern.
Yet defending Cuba was a factor, and the CIA’s sabotage and subversion, along with other coordinated activities including contingency planning for an invasion, were, for Moscow and Havana, evidence of malign American intent.
The CIA’s role restored confidence in the agency and its leadership within Washington after the shooting down of Gary Power’s U-2 in May 1960, the debacle of the Bay of Pigs in April 1961, and the failure to anticipate deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Ray Cline, then Deputy Director for Intelligence, noted that in the summer and autumn of 1962 the ‘CIA co-ordinated a comprehensive interagency intelligence collection and analysis programme aimed at discovering what kind of military weapons the USSR was sending to Castro’.88 In other words, this was the agency’s founding principle of ‘central intelligence’ in action, though the intelligence in question very much concerned military capabilities.
McCone’s bullish representation of the intelligence community’s achievements to Kennedy circumnavigated SNIE-85-3.
Moreover, in retrospect, the various revelations about Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in and around Cuba point to potentially serious failures.
The lack of systematic analysis of possible tactical deployments suggests a further ‘failure of estimative empathy’ to the one Garthoff ascribes to SNIE-85-3.
If Kennedy had opted for invasion, the likelihood of nuclear weapons being used would have been higher 87 Brugioni, Eyeball to Eyeball, 386.
Furthermore, the actions of the United States Navy could have precipitated Soviet nuclear use.
How Khrushchev would react to military action or the blockade of Cuba was critical.
How much attention was paid to the SNIEs is unclear, though McNamara quoted from one on 20 October in support of his argument for the blockade.
The impression is that when it came to Khrushchev’s reactions, the intelligence community was one voice among a number.
In addition to his participation in ExComm, the DCI met regularly with the President during the crisis.
He is generally labelled a hawk in Kennedy’s administration as he supported military action.
However, as the crisis reached its denouement he was drawn to some form of trade on the Jupiters in Turkey.
Yet, when it came to crafting a response to Khrushchev’s public call for the removal of nuclear missiles from Turkey, Kennedy consulted a group of his closest advisers.
McCone was not present at the meeting on 27 October when a secret offer to Khrushchev was designed to withdraw the IRBMs from Turkey behind NATO’s back.
Subsequent CIA analyses of how the crisis ended were not privy to this information.
McCone’s willingness to speak truth unto power, while fully recognizing the right of his analysts to do the same, earned him plaudits.
Yet his awareness of the domestic political needs of the Kennedy administration was apparent.
Barrett and Holland have demonstrated how he was ‘economical with the truth’ in explaining the suspension of direct overflights over Cuba in September/October, which he disingenuously attributed entirely to the weather.
Barrett and Holland also infer from comments by the President to his brother that McCone received little gratitude for these actions.
For historians, the missile crisis illustrates that indisputable facts, knowns and unknowns can mutate with new sources and interpretations.
It is clear that the CIA made errors, some of which emerged in recent years concerning tactical nuclear forces.
The significance of the estimative failure in September was limited, but the agency and the US intelligence community did succeed in subsequently detecting and monitoring the MRBMs, most importantly before Khrushchev realized that they had been discovered.
The Cuban missile crisis is a study in the value and limits of intelligence.
It was the moment in the Cold War when we came closest to nuclear war, and where we have learned of episodes that suggest the risks were much greater than was recognized.
