Focusing co-authors of six previous books on the nearness to doomsday can provide an engine for paralyzed on the Cuban missile crisis.
One Smallto Mediumsized Nuclear War (or an The CIGI-BSIA Policy Brief Series presents the Equivalent) research findings of leading BSIA scholars, developing information and analysis, including Herman Kahn was one of the most eminent nuclear recommendations, on policy-oriented topics that strategists of the early Cold War period.
But Kahn himself always said he was merely being realistic, facing directly the terrifying new reality created by the existence of the ultimate weapon.
Kahn also described the only way, as he saw it, that nuclear weapons might be abolished.
According to Kahn, the resulting collective Innovation. horror and grief might provide the psychological The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the engine needed to push leaders and institutions to move authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of The Centre for International Governance Innovation or its Operating Board of safely and swiftly to embrace the goal of zero nuclear Directors or International Board of Governors. weapons.
Waiting longer than that, he said, would to motivate the human race to achieve zero nuclear result in recriminations, pressure on leaders to avenge weapons.
A possible outcome of this process, Kahn The information that permits us to reconstruct the suggested, might well be a final nuclear spasm that Armageddon mindset in Cuba on the last weekend of finishes off the human race once and for all.
Whether he enjoyed it or not, he certainly the island during the crisis. earned it.
A Psychological Engine for the Cold War does little to discredit Kahn’s hypothesis. the Zero Narrative While some gains have been made by the United States Delete “What-if,” Enter “What and Russia, global governance mechanisms remain Actually Happened” catatonically paralyzed because, as Kahn implied, the radical objective of zero nuclear weapons is In October 1962, human civilization came very close unachievable without a powerful psychological engine. to being destroyed.
There is no longer any room for What is needed — but remains absent — is an optimal reasonable doubt on this subject, once so intensely quotient of fear and loathing that motivates people, their debated among scholars and journalists.
Armageddon leaders and the mechanisms of global governance to was a hair’s breadth away in October 1962.
Lamm’s essay describes a 20-detonation nuclear exchange “we should wipe them off the face of the earth,” as Fidel between India and Pakistan, initiated for reasons that are never made clear.
Lamm, who was at the time he 2 Much of the data supporting the claim that the world nearly ended in submitted the essay the sitting governor of Colorado, was one of the winners October 1962 derives from our research and that of our team over the last in a contest mounted by the Christian Science Monitor in September 1984.
October 2012 The Centre for International Governance Innovation 4 The Balsillie School of International Affairs Robert S McNamara and James G Blight working at the authors’ living room table in 2000, Milton, MA, United States.
And Armageddon was also avoided because Fidel Castro that would have been only the beginning. agreed, with profound reluctance, to allow the Soviets Luck was essential to the great escape of October 1962. to remove the strategic nuclear weapons from Cuba In The Fog of War , Errol Morris’ Academy Award— which John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev winning documentary film, Robert S McNamara, who had agreed to independently, without consulting or served as secretary of defense under John F Kennedy, even informing him.
It was luck that believed constituted the Cuban Revolution’s last, best prevented nuclear war.
We came that close to nuclear hope for survival in the face of unrelenting American war at the end.
Kennedy was rational; Khrushchev was If the Americans had invaded, we now know what rational; Castro was rational.
And the United States expeditionary force, bracing to storm Cuban that danger exists today.
The next time the world finds United States President John F Kennedy delivers a radio and television address to the nation regarding the Soviet Union’s military presence in Cuba.
John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston) time — it will likely be the last.
If Armageddon occurs, millions will likely be killed, maybe tens of millions; it Soviets refused to remove them, and warned that any may even, in the most extreme circumstances, destroy attack by the Russians on any country in the Western entire nations — possibly all nations.
We now know that privately, Kennedy was On October 22, 1962, John F Kennedy made the scariest already committed to a diplomatic solution to the crisis speech ever given by an American president.
He and resisted enormous pressure from the hawks in the announced the presence of Soviet nuclear missiles in military, the Congress and even among his own civilian Cuba and his intention to remove them by force if the advisers.
But in his speech announcing the crisis, Kennedy was very tough and very scary.
On September 22, 1962, exactly one month before without nuclear weapons was shattered by Kennedy’s Kennedy’s speech, Bob Dylan first performed “A assassination in November 1963 and by Khrushchev’s Hard Rain’s a-Gonna Fall” at Carnegie Hall.
Even Fidel Castro, is thought by many to be Dylan’s epitaph for the once the firebrand who made a contingent request human race in the wake of an imagined nuclear war. to Moscow to destroy the United States in a nuclear When Dylan wrote “where black is the color, where attack, has become, in his retirement, an advocate of none is the number,” he got it right.
Zero remains exactly the right and Khrushchev in the wake of the Cuban missile number of nuclear weapons the world should possess. crisis.
Great fear led to great learning in the immediate 5 Fidel Castro’s current views on nuclear weapons are discussed in Blight aftermath of the crisis.
On October 15, 2010, Castro posted a video 4 There are many versions and covers of Dylan’s song.
The version that, of a short comment on YouTube that is remarkable in many ways, not least to us, best conveys the surreal weirdness and terror is a 1973 performance of which is the connection he sees between the Cuban missile crisis and the by Bryan Ferry, the former front man for British rock band Roxy Music.
Three Takeaways and Three Recommendations Recommendations On the last weekend of October 1962, the world teetered • Armageddon must be made impossible. on the edge of irreparable destruction.
Leaders felt they Armageddon must be made not merely improbable were on the brink of catastrophe.
Now that we know — based on subjective judgments of highly fallible more about what actually happened in Cuba by October human beings — but impossible, based on the 1962, the escape seems even more miraculous and the abolition of nuclear weapons, as swiftly and safely drive to rid the world of nuclear weapons is even as possible.
Global governance mechanisms to achieve zero nuclear weapons Takeaways exist in abundance, but the political will to make adequate use of them is absent.
A catastrophic nuclear what-ifs driving the argument are regarded as either war nearly happened in October 1962.
We know implausible or monumentally improbable. this is not science fiction, because it is now a matter of historical record.
To rev up 1962, Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro feared the the engine of global public opinion for zero nukes, world would be blown to smithereens before they the United Nations, along with its constituent and could act to prevent it.
And it almost happened. associated agencies devoted to the abolition of nuclear weapons, should establish October 27, the • Armageddon is possible, even if no one wants it. anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis, as a global A nuclear catastrophe will likely be inadvertent. day of meditation.
The United Nations should invite It will involve a series of conscious decisions that artists — filmmakers, poets, painters, sculptors, were unthinkable prior to a crisis, such as the Cuban composers, musicians, playwrights and others — to missile crisis.
As the crisis deepens, time will seem create works they believe capture what happened, short, the stakes sky-high and the pressure to attack and what did not happen , on the first may become impossible to resist. last weekend of October 1962.
The indefinite outdoor pieces should be placed conspicuously combination of nuclear weapons and human in Washington, Moscow and Havana.
Above all, fallibility will eventually result in the destruction of artists must continue to search for ways to portray entire nations — possibly all nations.
A Debate, edited by George it is hard for large countries to focus on security Perkovich and James Acton.
About the BSIA Devoted to the study of international affairs and global governance, the Balsillie School of International Affairs assembles extraordinary experts to understand, explain and shape the ideas that will create effective global governance.
He is a specialist in the fields of international human rights, contributors. civil society movements and fragile • Responders must search for ways to provide urgently needed public goods without states, and has written extensively undermining public authority. on these issues.
INTRODUCTION The international community has become adept at responding to disasters.
Through its publications program, CIGI informs decision When a disaster hits — whether natural or as the consequence of human activity — humanitarian relief can be on the ground almost anywhere in the Andrew S Thompson and David A Welch David A Welch is CIGI chair of world in less than 24 hours.
An awardof international agencies, humanitarian relief organizations, national winning author and scholar, David is an expert in foreign policy decision governments and concerned individuals.
It is natural, inevitable and desirable to look to past disasters in order to international governance issues. improve responses to future ones, but lesson-drawing, in such cases, is rarely to the recent disasters in Haiti and systematic, as responses to disasters are, by their very nature, typically ad hoc.
Japan, this policy brief identifies neglected dimensions of disaster response preparedness and offers suggestions for improvement.
The Surprising and Unambiguous policy Relevance of The CIGI Junior Fellows program at the BSIA provides students the Cuban Missile with mentorship opportunities from senior scholars and policy CIGI PaPers Crisis makers.
Opportunities for the International the prospects of reform of the international monetary system Donor Community and in the context of the ongoing euro area financial crisis, Chris Jones, Sharon Kennedy, Siobhan Kerr, exploring the challenges that must be met in attempting to Joseph Mitchell and Daniel Safayeni reform the current international monetary system and euro area policies.
Susan Schadler John M Curtis A CIGI and INET conference brought This paper examines extraordinary together global experts on sovereign changes in intellectual property law debt crises.
This paper expands on and policy over the last 20 years, many the ideas put forward during the discussion, highlights relevant as the result of their intersection with international trade and recent history and research, and proposes an action plan. numerous international trade agreements brought into force during this period.
Paul Blustein Louise Fréchette with the assistance of Amanda Kristensen Based on interviews with policy makers involved with the Financial Stability The end of the Cold War opened a new Forum, and on thousands of pages of chapter in UN peacekeeping.
This paper previously undisclosed documents, the reviews key reforms implemented by paper illuminates regulators’ delayed the UN, concluding that real progress recognition of the severity of the global fiancial crisis and lack of has been achieved.
Serious weaknesses appropriate, well-timed action, and contributes to the debate on remain, however, and the UN must make every effort to continue current international financial regulation. to improve its performance.
Paul BlusteIn CIGI PaPers no. — December 2011 Fiscal asymmetries anD the survival oF the euro Zone Paul Blustein Paul masson Paul R Masson The need for economic cooperation To contain interest costs and protect the among major powers is greater than solvency of some banks, the European ever, and a well-coordinated plan Central Bank has acquired large aimed at shrinking imbalances is amounts of government debt of the seen as highly desirable.
This paper a detailed account of the initiatives, led by the IMF, to address presents a model of a dependent central bank that internalizes the imbalances prior to the 2008 global financial crisis. government’s budget constraint.
