JFK AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS Rhodri Jeffreys-Jones Robert Weisbrot.
Maybe it is inviting dismissal, but it is only honest to confess to one’s prior impressions at the start of a review on a controversial topic.
Generally, it was a light-hearted affair, with everyone looking forward to the ritual speech by “Treffynnon,” an advocate of Welsh independence who always orated on that theme regardless of the evening’s announced topic.
Though we reflexively disbelieved what the London government told us, we subliminally heeded the imperatives of the “four-minute warning” the government told us we would have of a Soviet nuclear attack.
With the Cuban quarantine in effect, various four-minute plans had been laid for getting laid , getting drunk or painting windows with stale milk.
That was the evening when I gave an impassioned speech denouncing President John F Kennedy for unwarranted aggression, and the day when I decided to study American history.
Since 1962, we have learned more about the Cuban missile crisis, and events have taken place that have modified perceptions of it, perhaps helping to change or eradicate previously held beliefs.
The author of a previous book on the 1960s, he is aware of the need to place others’ perceptions, and thus his own, in a proper context, the procedure that is so necessary to any serious pursuit of that historical chimera, objectivity.
Weisbrot is impeded in this task by the thus-far underdeveloped state of historiography on the crisis.
Relatively speaking, no clear pattern of this type has hitherto been delineated regarding the missile crisis.
Perhaps its historians instinctively gravitate to the view that linear progressions in historiography are simplistic.
Indeed, even in the case of the Vietnam War, an event that has inspired a strong historiography, there is a case for standing back from the time-line approach—as Gerald J DeGroot has indicated in a provocative essay on that conflict, its historiography may be intelligently discussed outside the framework of a temporal progression of viewpoints.
Or perhaps time has stood still in the case of missile crisis historiography, with historians mastering more detail but within the framework of enduring assumptions— in a review of books published in the late 1990s, Mark J White observes that they are “descendants” of those written by earlier generations of historians.
Nevertheless chronology, wherever one can find it, is a useful compass to the great wilderness of opinion.
In the first chapter and in the epilogue of his book Weisbrot does chart a chronological progression, if with broad and tentative brush strokes.
He notes that the first phase of writing took place in the 1960s, when authors basked in American triumphalism and portrayed President Kennedy as a Cold War hero for having stood up to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
With the Cold War crisis at least temporarily on the wane and with patriotic postures no longer at a premium, Kennedy came to be portrayed, variously, as a compulsive risk-taker who thrived psychologically and politically on real or imagined crisis, and as a person who felt his manhood was under challenge and had to respond with a display of chauvinist aggression on two stages, world politics and the bedroom.
A third phase of writing in the 1980s reflected the new openness associated with the ending of the Cold War.
A deluge of declassification caused JFK to be regarded with renewed sympathy, as light fell on his moderation in the face of Soviet provocation, and on the effective nature of his clandestine diplomatic maneuvers.
Finally, Weisbrot hints at an even more recent historiographical phase.
In the Hollywood movie Thirteen Days, the president and his attorney general brother Robert Kennedy appear, once again, as leaders of Arthurian stature—perhaps, Weisbrot writes, because America once again feels the need for greatness in the White House.
Weisbrot does not explicitly place himself within any of these schools of thought.
In common with the first, third, and fourth phases of historical thinking but not with the revisionists, he admires President Kennedy.
In office, he had to strain to be a man of the people in order to win the support to enable him to operate effectively and to stand a chance of future electoral success.
He satisfied the hawks in order to secure the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba without risking a catastrophic nuclear war.
Weisbrot sets himself the task of explaining how he did this and argues that it was a brilliant achievement.
But if the preceding chapters are a mise en scene, they nevertheless form an essential backdrop to the author’s argument.
The Soviets’ launch of the Sputnik satellite in 1957 raised the specter of a missile-launched nuclear attack on the United States.
As civil defense instructors taught children to hide under their desks to protect themselves from Nikita’s atom bombs, their parents demanded tough-guy tactics from the White House.
Weisbrot states that Kennedy was a reluctant Cold Warrior who only talked tough because he had to.
Kennedy’s campaign demands that America should stand up to Fidel Castro were, of course, controversial because the senator knew his adversary Vice President Richard Nixon did have plans to cut down the Cuban leader but for national security reasons could not admit this in public.
In good measure, JFK was forced into retaliatory hyperbole by the rampantly blustering style of his Soviet counterpart.
Khrushchev mocked the Monroe Doctrine and pronounced it “dead”, asserting that it “should best be buried . . . so that it should not poison the air by its decay” (p.
Aficionados of American-Cuban relations will not be uniformly impressed by Weisbrot’s grasp of the historical background to the missile crisis.
While Weisbrot is right in saying that America propped up Castro’s predecessor Fulgencio Batista, it is a pity he does not mention that, by the late 1950s, President Dwight D Eisenhower and his CIA director Allen Dulles were desperate to get rid of that appalling dictator.
These lapses do not, however, undermine the consistency with which Weisbrot pursues his theme.
Rumors were rife of missiles in Cuba well before the materialization of dramatic photo-reconnaissance proof, and sections of the press excoriated the president’s restraint.
When Kennedy showed a conciliatory face to Castro, respondents to a San Francisco Examiner poll punished him with a 62 percent negative rating— a point duly noted by White House adviser Theodore Sorensen.
The Kennedys may not have been far from the mark in fearing impeachment.
When Kennedy finally imposed his blockade on Cuba, a Gallup poll indicated 84 percent approval, with only 4 percent against.
All this suggests to Weisbrot that Kennedy responded to opinion and was a man of the people.
In Chapter 6, Weisbrot maintains that the key to President Kennedy’s success lay in his handling of the problem of American missiles in Turkey.
These intermediate range missiles were able to hit targets in the Soviet Union and were meant to serve as a deterrent in the interval between bomber obsolescence and the anticipated deployment of intercontinental ballistic missiles.
However, there was widespread concern in United States military and diplomatic circles that the missiles were obsolete, inaccurate and a gratuitous provocation to the Kremlin.
It would have been quite sensible to scrap them, but there were arguments against this.
First, there was no need to surrender a bargaining chip without getting something in return.
Second, the Turkish government wanted the missiles as a defense against possible Soviet attack—and some of America’s key European allies felt the same way.
Third, the unilateral surrender would have fanned criticism within the United States.
Moscow would withdraw its missiles from Cuba, and Washington its missiles from Turkey.
However, the details of this deal would be kept secret at the time, preserving Kennedy’s image as the man of the people.
A critique of Weisbrot’s book may be offered on two levels, that of argument and that of evidence.
On the level of argument, any two people who lived through the crisis are likely to disagree, and here I offer just indicative examples of difference between the author’s views and my own.
Weisbrot seems to accept at face value the idea that European leaders wanted American missiles in order to protect their countries.
But, as those of us involved in the British Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament pointed out, the United States missiles actually put one’s country at risk by inviting a first-round demonstration of Soviet firepower.
Instead, the United States president telephones the Soviet premier, pronto, and works out, quite literally, a modus vivendi.
This is not the place to pursue the topic, but, given its author’s emphasis, Maximum Danger should have been.
Although Weisbrot has made some use of the Kennedy presidential library and of some of its microfiche derivatives, his evidence on public opinion is of poor quality.
There is nothing wrong in using secondary sources—Philip Nash’s book on the Turkish missiles is quoted with particular frequency in Chapter 6—but it is a pity that Weisbrot did not make more use of primary evidence, especially the White House press files.
This kind of analysis is problematic, because politicians do not like to admit that they react to public opinion, for fear of appearing to be weakly driven by it—a concept that Weisbrot does not try to address.
It may validly be inferred from the voluminous nature of the press files kept by every administration since Woodrow Wilson’s that they do care, but the paper trail to the president’s own desk is rarely strong, though it may be indicative.
It may not be easy to divine what a given president thinks of opinion on an issue, and how much weight he attaches to the press as distinct from polls, letters, congressmen, or demonstrations is not easily divined.
Surely, however, an historian with Weisbrot’s agenda should make the effort.
It is quite possible that some evidence does exist, for Kennedy did sometimes record his reactions to public opinion.
For example, he said he respected the Women’s Strike for Peace march outside the White House in January 1962, and later justified the nuclear test ban treaty with the Soviet Union as an outcome of the parental values of WSP mothers.
It is not clear what qualitative value or interpretation Weisbrot places on the relationship between presidential leadership and public opinion.
All this said, Robert Weisbrot has raised an interesting question about domestic influences on Kennedy’s foreign policy.
Weisbrot asks how the American people may have influenced presidential actions in the Cuban missile crisis.
He has not supplied a convincing answer, but is to be commended for posing the question.
