This study is based on the assumption that no crisis can be understood without considering also the forces and policies which preceded and which flowed from it.
Consequently, in addition to analyzing the role of strategic power during the Cuban missile crisis itself, we shall attempt to show in what way the interaction of United States and Soviet strategic policies in the early 196os served to precipitate, the crisis and how the crisis affected in turn the subsequent strategic policies of both sides and ultimately influenced the current strategic balance.
Kennedy administration officials took office in the genuine belief that the United States might soon be placed in an unfavor* This article is based on a study of United States strategic arms policy being conducted under the joint sponsorship of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and The Brookings Institution.
The interpretations and conclusions presented here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the staff, officers, or trustees of The Brookings Institution, the Carnegie Endowment, or the organizations that support their research.
Even though intelligence estimates had been revised downward steadily during 1960, the new administration found that it could not dismiss the possibility that the Soviet Union had acquired an ICBM force and that it might be in the midst of a substantial missile-production program.
This prospect endangered United States SAC bombers, then the cornerstone of U.S. strategic power, and, on a political level, threatened to undermine the credibility of the United States deterrent.
Thus, President Kennedy immediately acted to rectify the deficiencies as he perceived them of the United States deterrent posture.
In his initial defense plan, the president accelerated the missile programs-tripling the rate of construction of Polaris submarines and doubling the production capacity of Minuteman rockets.
Later, when the missile-gap myth was officially exposed, the administration did not modify its strategic program.
Despite Khrushchev's claims, by the early 196os, the Soviet Union had deployed only a handful of ICBMs and, as a consequence of the Kennedy administration's strategic program, faced a sizeable and growing United States strategic missile force.
Moreover, with the exposure of the missile gap, the Soviets realized that the United States was not only able to count but to locate the Soviet small and ""soft"" missile force as well as their vulnerable bomber bases.
Kremlin leaders began to fear that the United States was moving, as it had in the mid-t95os, toward a first-strike doctrine or at least was acquiring a substantial counterforce capability which could endanger the Soviet deterrent.
Public pronouncements of United States superiority added to Soviet concerns.
When Secretary of Defense McNamara articulated the ""no-cities"" doctrine in June 1962which called for attacking only military targets in the event of nuclear war-Soviet fears that the United States actually planned to initiate a nuclear strike were further exacerbated.
Aside from real or perceived security risks, the dramatic reversal of the nuclear balance raised serious questions of policy for Moscow.
Although in the Berlin crisis Kennedy' did not play brinksmanship in the style of John Foster Dulles, the stakes in Berlin were apparently thought to be high enough to warrant risking nuclear war.
Rather than accede to Khrushchev's demands, President Kennedy did not hesitate to bring the newly found strategic power of the United States to bear in an attempt to influence Soviet actions.
The Berlin crisis also coincided with official United States exposure of the nonexistent missile gap.
In fact, one particularly timely and crucial reason for informing the Soviets that we knew their missile claims were false was the unsettled situation in Berlin.
Although plans had been made to reverse Eisenhower's nuclear-oriented defense posture, United States conventional capabilities in 1961 were grossly inadequate.
Therefore, President Kennedy had no choice but to protect ""vital"" Western interests by bringing the nuclear dimension into the picture.
There was no need to spell out the implications of this remark, for in his first budget message, President Kennedy had implied that the United States would be prepared to use nuclear weapons if necessary to defend Western Europe in general and Berlin in particular.
Going one step farther, in the midst of his Berlin speech, the president explicitly alluded to the ""possibilities of nuclear war"" and requested additional funds for civil defense; ibid., 536.
With the strategic balance shifted against them, Soviet leaders feared that they might be unable to protect their vital interests in diplomatic dealings with the West and unable to maintain their worldwide image as a power comparable to the United States and as leader of the Communist bloc.
Planned improvements in United States nonnuclear capabilities even threatened to deprive the Soviets of their longstanding superiority in conventional weapons which had been viewed as a partial counterweight to the United States nuclear advantage in the 1950s.
Khrushchev clearly appreciated the danger posed by nuclear war and the limited utility of nuclear weapons.
It is possible, therefore, that the Soviets were prepared to settle for parity.
But, by mid-1962, the prospect of overwhelming United States military superiority gave the Soviets a strong political as well as military incentive to redress the balance of intercontinental strategic forces.
It was not enough to rely on their large medium-range missile and bomber capacity to threaten Western Europe.
Long-range strategic missiles had become the most relevant measure of overall strength.
Indeed, during the late 1950S, Khrushchev's Sputnik diplomacy had enhanced the value of these systems as political currency.
To attempt to overtake the United States in numbers of intercontinental systems, however, would entail a massive Soviet effort, for the United States already had a considerable lead in ICBMs and SLBMs, in addition to its lead in long-range bombers.
Furthermore, the existing Soviet technology of large ""soft"" and slow-reacting missiles would make a crash program especially costly, while yielding marginal security benefits.
In any event, Khrushchev remained unwilling to commit his nation to an enormously expensive program which would detract from other needs.
It also seems reasonable to conjecture that the administration believed that emphasizing United States strategic superiority could exert a coercive effect on Moscow, for the October speech by Deputy Defense Secretary Gilpatric went beyond mere exposure of the missile gap to underscore the U.S. massive retaliation advantage.
The Soviets had a foothold on this island and had been supplying Castro for some time with arms of all types, including SAMs.
By installing mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles within range of the U.S., the Soviets could gain more quickly and at less cost many of the benefits of a program of ICBM construction.
The large-scale deployment of MR/IRBMs against Western Europe suggested that these systems were reliable and could be produced easily.
Clearly, the missiles would be vulnerable to nuclear, and even conventional, strikes from the U.S., but their existence would complicate a United States attack and thereby strengthen the Soviet deterrent, at least until a survivable intercontinental force became available.
The Missile Crisis The primary motivation behind Khrushchev's decision to install missiles on Cuba, in our opinion and in the opinion of most other analysts, was the Soviet's desire to rapidly rectify the strategic balance.
The Kennedy administration itself, from the initiation of the crisis, perceived this as a possible motive.
From the Soviet standpoint, however, a number of important ancillary objectives would also be served by emplacing missiles in Cuba, and these considerations undoubtedly contributed to Moscow's final decision.
For over a decade the Soviet Union had been ringed by United States SAC bases and, in the late 1950s, by missiles deployed in Turkey, Italy, and England.
The Soviet Union had never before stationed nuclear systems outside its borders.
Michel Tatu, Power in the Kremlin: From Khrushchev to Kosygin , 231; Hilsman, 201; Horelick and Rush, 141; Elie Abel, The Missile Crisis , 28.
The unfavorable strategic balance had twice before prevented the Soviets from attaining any real degree of success in Berlin.
If the Soviets could succeed in Cuba, perhaps they might be able to launch a new and successful offensive against that city.
The Kennedy administration itself felt strongly that a weak United States response to the Soviet provocation in Cuba would allow the Soviets to move on Berlin.
Apparently, President Kennedy felt this to be the most immediate danger raised by the Cuban adventure, if not the dominant reason for Khrushchev's decision to install the missiles.
In his speech of October 22, the president made explicit references to possible Soviet moves against Berlin; and during the naval blockade of the island, Kennedy ordered final poreparations for the defense of Berlin.
Many analysts argue that the Cuban undertaking can be attributed to politics within the Kremlin.
Khrushchev had been severely critized for his international policies and his overambition in exploiting the missile gap.
By emplacing missiles in Cuba, thus degrading American strategic power, Khrushchev perhaps hoped to repair his own prestige.
More specifically, establishing a major Soviet offensive nuclear base in the Western Hemisphere might not only cast doubt on the willingness of the United States to defend its interests and demonstrate to the world the strength of Soviet military and foreign policy, but it might give the Soviets a greater foothold in Latin America.
Perhaps Khrushchev hoped, by the Cuban gamble, to encourage potential Castros elsewhere in Latin America.
Horelick and Rush, 141; Arthur M Schlesinger Jr., A Thousand Days: John F Kennedy in the White House , 796.
The Bay of Pigs attempt to depose Castro also played a role in this objective.
In his first letter to the president, Khrushchev claimed that the Bay of Pigs affair had forced him to emplace missiles on the island.
Thus, the introduction of IR/MRBMs would contribute to deterring a United States attack on Cuba and generally help solidify the Soviet presence.
In any event, Castro would permit deployment and Soviet leaders could-and did-claim that the missiles were there for defense purposes, a measure to which the world could not legitimately object.
Whatever specific mixture of motivations lay behind Moscow's decisions, once the secret Soviet missile buildup was discovered, the next move was up to the United States A wealth of material has been written about the subsequent thirteen days.
United States officials were clearly concerned over the strictly strategic implications of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
It was difficult to ignore the fact that the Soviets had suddenly doubled their capacity to deliver nuclear warheads against the United States via ballistic missiles.
This posed an increased threat to the United States population as well as to United States strategic forces.
The fact that the missiles were at close range and could bypass the United States warning net presented a particular danger to the survivability of United States bombers.
Finally, the Soviet missiles did pose a new threat to Latin American cities, which had been considered beyond the effective range of Soviet ICBMs.
On the other hand, the president and his advisers knew that the Soviet deployment could not seriously endanger the United States deterrent.
Polaris submarines and ""hardened"" ICBMs would remain secure, and countermeasures could be taken to minimize the danger to United States bombers.
Furthermore, they were aware that the Soviets already had the ability to deliver nu1 ear weapons against the United States with ICBMs, SLBMs, and bombers.
If the Soviets had increased their long-range missile force rather than emplaced shortrange missiles in Cuba, the effect would have been essentially the same.
Administration officials were reacting to the possible adverse political consequences of the sudden visible increase in Soviet ""strategic"" power provided by having possibly hundreds of IR/MRBMs based in Cuba.
More worrisome may have been the prospect that Khrushchev might again adopt the policy of ""rocket rattling"" which, as a minimum, could involve the United States in crises and weaken the Western alliance.
Nevertheless, as important as it might have been, concern that the strategic balance might shift back toward the Soviet side does not in itself fully account for the administration's determination to remove the missiles.
What appears to have triggered the strong United States response, as much as any of the foregoing factors, was the way in which the Soviets went about redressing the balance, combined with the geographic and political uniqueness of Cuba.
The administration considered Soviet deployment of offensive missiles in the Western Hemisphere to be a direct challenge to the U.S., running counter to long-established policies and precedents.
Equally disturbing, the Soviet government had ignored President Kennedy's warning not to install offensive missiles in Cuba, while assuring the United States that it had every intention of complying, even going to the extreme of denying that missiles were being installed.
In the view of President Kennedy and his advisers, the flagrant defiance of the U.S., together with Soviet secrecy and deceit, made a strong response imperative.
If the United States acquiesced under these circumstances-and with the issue of security against nuclear attack at stake-administration officials feared that United States prestige and credibility would be impaired.
If the Soviets were allowed to succeed in this move, the United States was likely to face serious problems around the-world, in Europe, and, most notably, in Berlin.
The president made a special point of warning Khrushchev not to underestimate the American determination and will, as if to avoid projecting an image of weakness.
But again, if the Soviets had simply increased their ICBM forces rapidly or even stationed short-range missiles in Eastern Europe as part of a declared policy, the administration would almost surely have been less upsetand, of course, less able to take feasible actions to eliminate the buildup.
Most notably, the president refused to accept suggestions made early in the crisis that the United States offer to ""trade"" its IRBMs-still based in Turkey and Italy despite an earlier decision to have them removedas a quid pro quo for Soviet withdrawal of missiles from Cuba, and he subsequently rejected Soviet proposals to negotiate such an agreement.
Essentially, the administration applied the principles of ""flexible response,"" starting with a ""mounting sequence of threats"" short of nuclear war.
All of the military options discussed by Ex Commn, for example, were nonnuclear-naval blockade, conventional air strike against the sites, and invasion-as might have been anticipated.
Kennedy administration officials advocated this approach as the most effective way to manage crises and had attempted to follow this course in Berlin.
Cuba, 807. m Even though it was recognized that United States MRBMs were strategically useless and their removal would represent ""no loss"" to the United States or its allies, the president apparently feared that such an arrangement would both legitimize the Soviet action and display weakness on the part of the United States The president also believed that attempts to negotiate such a deal-or indeed to rely completely on any negotiated solution-would take time and could lead to a situation in which all Soviet missiles were operational.
In such a circumstance, the U.S. would run a greater risk in the event military actions against Cuba were later required, and the Soviets would be in a stronger bargaining position.
However, since the proposal was, in Robert Kennedy's words, ""not unreasonable,"" while still rejecting a formal trade and refusing to negotiate under ""threat or pressure,"" the president later informed the Soviets that our missiles would be removed once the Soviets removed their missiles; Robert Kennedy, Thirteen Days ,;105-io and passim.
Despite overwhelming United States nuclear superiority, President Kennedy knew that nuclear war would be catastrophic.
If the Soviets launched first, their relatively small ICBM and SLBM forces combined with their long-range bomber force would have been able to cause tens of, millions of United States fatalities.
To be sure, the United States could have launched first and destroyed an appreciable part of Soviet strategic power. -But there was no guarantee that the entire Soviet force would be destroyed on the ground or that the USSR would not fire some of its missiles on warning.
Moreover, an enormous force of Soviet medium-range missiles and bombers held Western Europe hostage.
Even a few nudear weapons landing on United States or European cities would be incredibly destructive.
Not surprisingly, the president at once rejected the idea that the United States be the first to use nuclear weapons and avoided overt nuclear threats.
Similarly, Presi18 As an immediate response to the Cuban crisis, the United States had readied massive conventional power in addition to calling for a general strategic alert.
These forces could support the blockade and provide for the air strike and invasion contingencies.
A large United States naval presence was established in the area, tactical aircraft wings were deployed within range of Cuba, and reserve forces were increased.
Clearly, President Kennedy did not have to remind the Soviets that a nuclear attack against the United States-whether launched from Cuba or the USSR-would bring a retaliatory response.
President Kennedy was concerned that events might go out of control and ultimately lead to nuclear war.
Thus, the president kept United States actions tightly under control and tried to avoid decisions which would be likely to push the crisis past the point of no return.
The president was convinced that the Soviet Union also wanted to avoid nuclear war over Cuba, but was concerned that, if care were not taken, Khrushchev might be forced into an ""irrational"" nuclear response.
Kennedy therefore sought to give Khrushchev room to maneuver and to find a graceful way to withdraw, rejecting actions which might push the Soviets into a corner.
While bringing military pressure to bear, through such means as intensifying aerial overflights, direct and early armed confrontations were avoided, and diplomatic avenues were pursued in parallel-in the UN, with the OAS, and directly with the Soviet government.
The president's critical decision to impose a blockade, rather than launch an air strike or an invasion, as the first serious U.S. move was typical of his approach.
Once the blockade was institerrent policy also applied to Soviet nuclear attacks against any nation in the Western Hemisphere.
In fact, explicitly placing the United States strategic umbrella over all nations in the Western Hemisphere was not a radical departure from overall policies, given the precedent of United States commitment to Europe and Japan.
Despite the fact that a blockade would not, in itself, prevent the completion of missiles already delivered, it would signal United States seriousness, give the Soviets time to deliberate, preserve future United States options, and minimize the likelihood and consequences of armed conflict.
Even the term quailrantine was selected in part because it sounded less belliger-ent than blockade.
Later in the crisis, even after the downing American reconnaissance plane over Cuba and the receipt of ""tougher"" letter from the Soviet foreign ministry, the pre still rejected military recommendations for an air strike, re to attack and expressing the desire to find less risky alternatives.
Yet, despite all the cautious behavior to avoid nuclear war, to ensure removal of the missiles, Kennedy seemed prepared to take actions which may well have had this result.
All important United States officials recognized that an air strike, alone or followved by an invasion, would increase the risk of nuclear war.
The Soviets might retaliate from Cuba with surviving missiles, undertake reciprocal action against United States missiles in Turkey, or launch a major move against Berlin.
Secretary McNamara proposed that depth charges be used to force the submarine to surface.
President Kennedy saw the danger of an exchange with a Soviet submarine, but agreed that there was no other choice.
In the president's judgment, the United States had to run the risk of triggering a series of escalating moves and enforce the quarantine.
Later in the crisis, however, when it became clear that the blockade was not going to prevent the Soviets from completing work on the missiles already present, the president, despite the risks, was willing to consider seriously an air strike and to convey this highly threatening possibility to the Soviets.
On October 2 , the difficult decision had been made to respond to Khrushchev's ""first"" letter and to agree to accept his offer to withdraw the missiles in exchange for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba.
United States overflights indicated that the missile sites would soon be operational.
The earlier letter, asking for a United States promise not to invade Cuba, was clearly from Khrushchev.
The later letter was apparently prepared by the Soviet Foreign Ministry; it demanded that the American bases in Turkey be removed as a quid pro quo for the Soviet bases in Cuba.
They state that the message conveyed to Dobrynin stipulated a time limitimmediately-as well as a threat of punishment for noncompliance-that the United States would remove the missiles if the Soviets did not.
A case can be made that United States nuclear superiority played an important role in generally strengthening the administration's resolve and, as the crisis progressed, in its willingness to take actions which ran an appreciable risk of leading to nuclear war.
Although the president made no direct threats to use nuclear weapons or specific references to United States strategic advantage, he may well have concluded that United States nuclear power would have a restraining and possibly a coercive effect on the behavior of Soviet leaders.
President Kennedy apparently believed that United States strategic superiority would reliably deter the Soviets from initiating a nuclear war.
At the same time, President Kennedy seemed to believe that United States nuclear superiority, when coupled with United States conventional superiority, would compel Khrushchev to withdraw the missiles.
Perhaps the president was somewhat more willing to contemplate risking a nuclear exchange because the United States would be in a better position than the Soviets to limit damage through counterforce attack.
It is clear that the United States acted with determination in forcing the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
But the ultimate outcome of the crisis hinged upon the Soviet Union's perceptions and the motives which influenced Kremlin leaders to eventually agree to United States demands.
Despite their public stance, however, it seems clear that the Soviets were frightened by the prospect of a nuclear war over Cuba.
In the early 196os, Kremlin leaders were aware that a nuclear conflict would be catastrophic for the Soviet Union and the world.
During the crisis, Khrushchev continually pointed to the danger of nuclear war.
As a result, Soviet leaders were extremely wary of pressing their policies to the point that use of nuclear weapons seemed inevitable.
The Soviet strategic position during the crisis was highly unfavorable-as noted, this was perhaps the single most important motive for the decision to put missiles into Cuba.
Later, in a personal conversation with a private United States citizen, Khrushchev admitted that Soviet missiles were indeed in Cuba and threatened to use them if necessary.
Even after Kennedy's strong speech of October 22, the Soviets continued to take a hard line as they maintained their speedup on completion of the MR/IRBMs.
In point of fact, these bombers were not removed from Cuba until November 20.
Contrary to United States fears, the Soviets did not move against Berlin during the course of the Cuban crisis.
More to the point, despite Khrushchev's threat to defy the United States blockade at the risk of war, he did not do so when faced with the actual choice.
And Khrushchev, too, feared that a United States air strike or invasion against Cuba would bring both sides dangerously close to the brink.
Khrushchev could have stood firm and refused to remove the missiles on the assumption that the United States would back down rather than risk nuclear war.
It is interesting to contemplate the outcome of the Cuban crisis if Khrushchev had indeed decided to carry the game of ""nuclear chicken"" further.
Even though United States calculations demonstrated the difficulty of mounting a successful counterforce attack against the Soviets, from the Kremlin's vantage point, the possibility that the United States could do so could not be ruled out.
A nuclear exchange would have resulted in considerably greater damage to the Soviet Union than to the U.S., and the Soviets had neither the forces nor the doctrine which would have enabled them to play by the rules of ""limited"" strategic war.
If not in strictly military terms, the strategic balance seen through Soviet eyes probably placed Kremlin leaders at a psychological disadvantage41 and lent credence to United States threats.
Buttressed by a real and acknowledged edge in nuclear weapons, U.S. leaders would be less likely to compromise and more prone to take conventional military action on the assumption that the Soviets would be reluctant to respond with a nuclear strike.
President Kennedy's statement of October 22, in which he referred to the United States ""full retaliatory response"" policy was clearly a reminder of United States power and may have even been taken as a threat to launch a preemptive attack against the Soviet Union if it did not comply.
United States strategic superiority, however, was obviously not the only factor influencing Soviet behavior.
The overwhelming United States conventional superiority in the area added to Khrushchev's apprehensions and contributed greatly to the Soviet decision to acquiesce.
Indeed, it was apparently the combination of United States con40 If some of the approximately seventy missiles stationed in Cuba had become operational, the Soviet position would have been improved, but the extreme vulnerability of these weapons would have made this contribution marginal.
He states that it is logical to assume that since the Soviets so clearly felt the strategic balance to be a factor when they put the missiles in Cuba, they were very aware of U.S. superiority during the crisis -and, in turn, very cautious in taking them out of Cuba.
Although he feels the United States did not have sufficient numerical and vulnerability advantages over the Soviet Union to prevent real damage from being done to the U.S., from the Soviet viewpoint, their own forces were too limited.
United States nuclear and conventional forces served to complement each other.
While American nuclear power neutralized Soviet nuclear power, United States conventional superiority discouraged the Soviets from a conventional confrontation.
The Soviets could not, without the use of nuclear weapons, prevent the United States from invading Cuba or destroying the missile sites with conventional air attacks.
At the same time, United States strategic power more than negated Soviet strategic capabilities, making the use of nuclear weapons on the part of the Soviets irrational and heightening the risks of a U.S.-Soviet military conflict over Cuba.
In the end, he was not prepared to run a serious risk of nuclear war over the missiles in Cuba.
The United States pledge not to invade Cuba and the eleventh-hour offer to remove U.S. missiles in Turkey did give Khrushchev the opportunity to make some policy gains and avoid further embarassment.
But the prime influence behind Khrushchev's decision was United States military power.
As McNamara put it, ""Khrushchev knew.. . that he faced the full military power of the U.S., including its nuclear weapons .. that is the reason, and the only reason, why he withdrew those weapons.""45 terms of their total withdrawal.
To ""remove"" the missiles without Soviet agreement would have required a United States air strike which could have had nuclear repercussions.
From another point of view, however, it can be argued that Moscow's-missile gambit pressed this nation to the point where, rightly or wrongly, the next steps were liable to lead inevitably to global war.
Many observers-and almost all the participants in the United States government's decisions-argue that the president exhibited great restraint in his efforts to obtain removal of the missiles.
They emphasize his use of ""graduated responses"" and his display of sensitivity to the danger of nuclear war as well as the masterful way in which, in order to avoid military clashes, he gave Khrushchev room to maneuver.
Others claim that the president acted irresponsibly by bringing the world too close to nuclear war.
Therefore, had the United States decided to invade, the consequences would have indeed been serious.
Some commentators have claimed that the president was strongly influenced by domestic politics.
The Republicans had already begun to use the buildup of Soviet arms in Cuba as an election issue, and the president finally took a strong public position warning the USSR that he would not tolerate the introduction of ""offensive"" weapons because of the political risk at home.
Other critics feel that, because of the Berlin situation and the abortive Bay of Pigs incident, the president personally felt the need to adopt a' strong position against Khrushchev-at all costs.
He contended that Kennedy made a grandstand play by delivering his ultimatum to Khrushchev on television rather than privately to Gromyko and that Kennedy's motives were at least partly political.
Not necessarily . . . considerations of high strategy and party politics reinforced one another and convinced Kennedy that the Russian withdrawal had to be complete, unilateral, and secured by the end of October""; Steel, ""The Kennedys and the Missile Crisis,"" 15-i6.
To these charges, Hilsman rebutted that Kennedy was being pressured by hardliners from the military, the State Department, and the CIA, as well as both Republicans and Democrats in Congress.
The foreign policy consequences of a rapid increase in Soviet nuclear power and of the way in which the USSR ignored previous warnings and acted with deceit could have raised serious security problems for the West and ultimately led to other crises with nuclear risks-in Berlin, for example.
Moreover, it could also be argued that the presence of a large number of ""soft"" Soviet missiles in Cuba would have introduced seriQus instabilities in the strategic balance.
In a time of tension, the high vulnerability of these systems to a United States counterforce attack would have greatly increased the ""reciprocal fear of surprise attack"" and possibly resulted in an unwarranted launch by the USSR of a preemptive strike upon this nation.
Against these risks must be weighed the danger that United States actions to remove the missiles might have led to nuclear war.
Since the predictions of the potential nuclear risk were quite uncertain, the United States did not have to overreact.
Chances are, agreement could have been reached before the missiles were fully operational; but even if this were not the case, the United States would still have been in a position to force them to be withdrawn.
In any event, if successful, whatever loss that might have been associated with this U.S. ""concession"" would have been far outweighed by never having Khrushchev had perceived Kennedy's reluctance to wage war over Berlin as a loss of nerve.
He felt some day he might have to run the ""supreme risk"" in order to convince Khrushchev of his strength; when Cuba occurred, Kennedy felt that the time had arrived.
He believes that Kennedy felt personally inferior because of Berlin and the Bay of Pigs.
Therefore, Kennedy was determined, on a purely personal level, to stand ""eyeball to eyeball"" with Khrushchev.
Stone feel that politics was a dominant motive in Kennedy's refusal to ""trade"" the Turkish missiles for the Cuban.
Stone feels that the United States risked World War Three, which could have been avoided by negotiations.
Steel claims the White House was disturbed by the Turkish issue because of its fairness.
However, if the administration accepted the trade, they feared accusations of weakness from the Republicans; Steel, ""The Kennedys and the Missile Crisis,"" 17.
The Cuban episode has been the source of speculation on the general problem of the relationship of the strategic balance to the management and outcome of crises.
But U.S. decisions throughout the crisis were strongly influenced by the overwhelming United States conventional superiority.
Moreover, other characteristics unique to the Cuban crisis gave momentum to the United States while undermining the Soviet position.
United States interests, for example, were apparently more dominant than Soviet interests and the United States was in a strong diplomatic position as a result of the USSR's deceitful and clandestine behavior.
We might hypothetically ask whether the management or outcome of the crisis would have been different if the strategic balance had been ""reversed"" to favor the USSR, or, more plausibly, had reflected a situation of nuclear parity.
In this circumstance, United States nuclear power would still have been sufficient to cancel Soviet nuclear capabilities.
United States conventional superiority would have given the United States an advantage.
Thus, it is doubtful that the United States would have acquiesced and permitted the USSR to station missiles in Cuba or that the Soviets would have run a nuclear risk and refused to comply.
But it is plausible that President Kennedy would have been less likely to contemplate and threaten actions which ran a nuclear risk, such as the air strike, and more prone to seek a negotiated solution, simply because he might have concluded that his bluff might be called.
We may also question the outcome of a situation in which the United States lacked conventional superiority.
As Kennedy did in the Berlin crisis of 1961, the United States might then have looked to its strategic forces as the prime security tool.
In that case, United States nuclear advantage would have seemed important.
This led to a period of detente and rapid progress in reaching agreement on the limited test ban and other arms control measures.
Even more significantly, since that time, both nations have tended to avoid engaging each other in serious situations which might risk nuclear war.
Impact of the Crisis on Later United States and Soviet Strategic Policies In its impact on the U.S.-Soviet strategic arms race, however, the results of the Cuban crisis were not altogether desirable.
Although the failure in Cuba demonstrated once more the futility of Khrushchev's policy of attempting to intimidate the United States with strategic threats and dramatized for Kremlin leaders the dangers associated with nuclear-related crises, the basic problem of U.S. superiority still remained.
Indeed, the Cuban setback not only confirmed but reinforced Soviet interest in redressing the strategic balance.
Soviet leaders believed that nuclear superiority enabled the United States to practice ""coercive diplomacy"" in Cuba and to force Khrushchev to retreat.
Ironically, this United States ""victory"" vindicated Moscow's view that strategic power conferred political importance.
Moscow apparently felt it did not have sufficient nuclear power to deal diplomatically with the West and maintain its position as a world power.
Khrushchev could not avoid drawing the conclusion that the balance must be corrected in a legitimate and straightforward way.
But Khrushchev still refused to undertake the massive and expensive missile deployment program being advocated by many leaders in the Kremlin.
In the long run, he saw a gradual buildup of Soviet strategic strength aiming toward parity or perhaps even superiority.
For the immediate future, Khrushchev turned once again to diplomacy to provide a substitute for weaponry-only this time, the course was one of restraint, not rocket-rattling.
Although Khrushchev was genuinely interested in finding ways to reduce the risk of war and to control nuclear arms, the Soviet leader's post-Cuban policy of detente was also designed to buy time for Soviet missile deployments while slowing down United States programs, minimizing the possibility of another nuclearrelated confrontation and generally blunting the embarrassing effect of the Cuban experience.
After Khrushchev's departure, however, the Soviets finally launched a major effort to redress the balance.
The new Kremlin leaders were more motivated than Khrushchev to accomplish this objective and were willing to allocate the resources necessary for this purpose and to improve Soviet defenses.
Indeed, it is well known that Khrushchev's decision to postpone major missile construction and his general unwillingness to increase military spending-along with his Cuban misadventure-were among the key factors which contributed to his downfall.
In early 1965, Brezhnev and Kosygin, drawing upon the R & D programs initiated under Khrushchev, decided to upgrade sub' Among the writers who corroborate this theory are Horelick and Rush, 155.
At that time, the decision was made to deploy the SS-9 and SS-ui ICBMs and to acquire a Polaris-type missile-launching submarine system.
Construction of the Moscow ABM system was continued, but this defensive program was only partially completed as increased priority was placed on offensive missiles.
By 1968, the Soviets were approaching parity in, numbers of ""hardened"" ICBMs and had begun to deploy Polaris-type submarines.
As the USSR began to close the gap, however, the United States took counteractions to maintain its position of strength.
In 1965, decisions were made to procure the advanced Minuteman III and Poseidon missiles which carried multiple warheads or MIRVs.
These programs were pursued primarily as a means of maintaining the United States deterrent capability in the event the Soviets mounted a massive ABM effort, but MIRVs were also considered a means of ensuring that United States superiority in numbers of nuclear warheads and damage-inflicting potential would remain unchallenged.
On the defensive side, in 1967, the United States decided to deploy the ""thin"" Sentinel ABM system as a counter to the potential Chinese ICBM threat.
But this system also had anti-Soviet capabilities and provided a base for expansion to a large ABM network.
As it turned out, the Soviets built a substantially larger strategic force during the years 1966 to 1969 than ""worst case"" U.S. estimates had predicted.
To be sure, Soviet decisions to sustain their offensive program past parity in ICBMs and to develop multiple warheads stemmed from a variety of internal bureaucratic factors and may well have been influenced by a desire to seek a counterforce first-strike capacity.
An equally plausible explanation centers around the perceived Soviet need to maintain a credible deterrent.
Projecting. ahead to the early seventies, Soviet analysts saw that ' It is difficult to reconstruct the details of Soviet decisionmaking during this period, and, in particular, to assign responsibility for specific strategic-armsprogram decisions to either Khrushchev or his successors.
And, as they had in the early 196os, U.S. daims of superiority in warheads added political pressure to the Soviets.
The increasing risks and costs of the strategic arms competition in the late 1960s gave the United States incentive to attempt to initiate strategic arms limitation talks.
But the Soviet Union refused to enter into negotiations until it had attained a position of parity -not merely in terms of military capabilities but also in terms of the more political indices of numbers of missiles.
Thus, progress in other arms control areas during the 196os was not matched by progress in curtailing the strategic arms race.
And, by the time the so called SALT talks began in November 1969, many possibilities for effective strategic arms control had been foreclosed, and the Moscow agreements signed in May 1972, while imposing stringent restrictions on ABM systems, placed only minimal constraints on -offensive weapons.
Policy Implications The Kennedy administration's early emphasis on superiority can be said to have helped cause the Cuban crisis by tilting the nuclear balance so far against the Soviets that they were ""forced"" to emplace missiles in Cuba in order to rectify the strategic relationship.
Had the United States been more sensitive to the Soviet need -both political and military-for equality, it might have not pressed its advantage as far as it did, and, consequently, might have avoided the risks of the Cuban confrontation.
Further more, as we have seen, the Soviet setback in Cuba heightened Moscow's interest in redressing the balance and ul ' The interim agreement limits the number of ICBMs and SLBMs to those currently operational and under construction, but does not control multiple warheads , bombers, or medium-range nuclear delivery systems.
For a complete description of the offensive and defensive accords, see The ABM Treaty and the Interim Agreement, Message from the President of the United States, 92nd Cong., 2nd Sess., June 1972.
This perhaps indicates United States insensitivity to the Soviet dilemma which, as indicated, the United States helped to precipitate.
Thus, while the Cuban crisis underscored the danger of nuclear confrontations, the United States should also have learned that mutual stability, rather than a stress on unilateral superiority, should be the primary strategic policy objective of the United States.
Although the United States can no longer boast of strategic superiority, a situation of parity-in the light of other political and psychological factors-may not prove to be stabilizing in itself.
With the potential of new weapons technologies, it will take a deliberate effort on the part of both sides to maintain a situation of actual and perceived mutual stability.
Similarly, the presence of parity will not automatically prohibit nations from turning once again to nuclear threats to obtain foreign policy objectives.
Therefore, if there is one overall lesson to be learned from the Cuban crisis, it is that United States policy makers must take into account not only the effect of their policies on the other side at any given time, but the overall and long-term consequences for global stability.
