Aspects of international relations and Russia, 1905–1941 General Certificate of Secondary Education Mark Scheme for June 2017 Oxford Cambridge and RSA Examinations OCR is a leading UK awarding body, providing a wide range of qualifications to meet the needs of candidates of all ages and abilities.
OCR qualifications include AS/A Levels, Diplomas, GCSEs, Cambridge Nationals, Cambridge Technicals, Functional Skills, Key Skills, Entry Level qualifications, NVQs and vocational qualifications in areas such as IT, business, languages, teaching/training, administration and secretarial skills.
It is also responsible for developing new specifications to meet national requirements and the needs of students and teachers.
OCR is a not-for-profit organisation; any surplus made is invested back into the establishment to help towards the development of qualifications and support, which keep pace with the changing needs of today’s society.
This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and students, to indicate the requirements of the examination.
It does not indicate the details of the discussions which took place at an examiners’ meeting before marking commenced.
All examiners are instructed that alternative correct answers and unexpected approaches in candidates’ scripts must be given marks that fairly reflect the relevant knowledge and skills demonstrated.
Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the published question papers and the report on the examination.
OCR will not enter into any discussion or correspondence in connection with this mark scheme.
Use details of 7 This is an example of a top level response that may be used as guidance, the cartoon and your knowledge to explain your demonstrating evidence of all three AOs. answer.
They interpret the cartoon, by explaining the could have caused a nuclear war, Kennedy by reacting with aggression to the cartoonist’s main message and produce a sound response in USSR placing missiles on Cuba, and Khrushchev by forcing his way through context. the United States naval blockade.
They seem relieved Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding and exhausted by the effort of ‘shutting war down’ in the cartoon which of the period.
They interpret the cartoon, by explaining the highlights the last minute and quite desperate attempts to negotiate by letter cartoon’s main message and produce a sound response in and even using the President’s brother. context.
Yet the cartoon also shows some approval and optimism that the future will be less dangerous.
Both leaders are shown working together and agreeing that Level 3 3-4 together they must prevent war in the future by finding ‘a lock’ for the chest.
As Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding it was produced only a month after the crisis ended the cartoonist is aware that of the period.
They interpret a valid sub–message of the both sides made concessions and agreements to prevent war breaking out, cartoon and produce a response in context. and he clearly believes this air of cooperation will continue.
Kennedy and Khrushchev have worked together to prevent nuclear war in the CMC OR Kennedy and Khrushchev risked nuclear war Level 1 1 Sub Message: Kennedy and Khrushchev are working together/nuclear war is Candidates describe the cartoon and produce a very limited a terrible thing/nuclear war almost got out of control/neither President response. wanted a nuclear war Level 0 0 NB: CK needs to support the message given No response or no response worthy of credit.
Level 3 One reason the USA took action was that they were concerned at the Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge to explain why the 6-8 changes Castro was making in Cuba.
When he seized power from Batista he USA took action against Cuba in the years 1959 to 1961.
They nationalised US-owned agricultural businesses and gave away their land to produce a multi-causal response that demonstrates thorough his peasant supporters.
This created powerful opposition to Castro in the USA understanding of the past through explanation and analysis of and the government responded by banning sugar imports from Cuba, which the relevant key concepts and features of the period. was vital to Cuba’s economic survival.
The whole situation escalated when Castro nationalised US-owned oil refineries without compensation, so the US Level 2 responded with a full scale trade ban.
The USA wanted to disrupt Cuba’s Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding 3-5 trade to weaken its economy and in turn, weaken Castro’s hold on power, to explain why the USA took action against Cuba in the years which they saw as dangerous to its own economic and political interests. 1959 to 1961.
Level 1 Another reason they took action was that they were concerned about the 1-2 developing relationship between Khrushchev and Castro.
When he first came Candidates demonstrate limited knowledge of United States action to power it was not clear that Castro was a communist, however by the against Cuba in the years 1959 to 1961. summer of 1960 he had allied Cuba with the Soviet Union and signed a trade Level 0 deal.
The Cold War was hotting up, and any advance of No response or no response worthy of credit. communism could damage the USA, so Kennedy broke off diplomatic relations with Cuba in January 1961.
He also gave the go-ahead for the Bay of Pigs invasion with Cuban exiles in an attempt to remove Castro from power.
Level 3 Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding 5-6 One reason was that Berlin was deep in the heart of Soviet controlled East of the reasons why Berlin was a cause of tension between Germany and Stalin resented that a large part of it was being run by the 1945 and 1949.
Berlin had been split into sectors at the end of the war in the demonstrates thorough understanding of the past through same way that Germany had been split into zones, as it was the capital city. explanation and analysis of the relevant key concepts and Stalin disagreed with the West’s ideology of democracy and free-market features of the period. capitalism, and did not want people in his zone to be attracted by the fruits of capitalist system.
It would also make his own exploitation of East Germany Level 2 3-4 more evident, as the West was not stripping its zones of resources as Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding reparations for war. of why Berlin was a cause of tension between 1945 and 1949.
In retaliation to the West unifying its zones and reforming the currency in 1948, Level 1 Stalin prevented the Allies accessing West Berlin by land and sea.
He closed Candidates demonstrate only limited knowledge about Berlin 1-2 off all roads, canals and railways forcing the Allies to come up with a plan to between 1945 and 1949. resource their 2 million people.
They did, the Berlin Airlift, but the blockade massively raised the tension between the two sides and meant that one Level 0 aggressive move could have resulted in military conflict.
The following were equally to blame for increasing 10 This is an example of a top level response that may be used as guidance Cold War tensions in Europe before 1950: demonstrating evidence AOs 1 and 2.
The USSR increased Cold War tensions by expanding the Truman doctrine and Marshall Aid.
Stalin had been allowed a ‘sphere of influence’ in Europe according to the Yalta conference, and he was determined to surround the USSR with ‘friendly’ countries.
Explain as countries that were under his influence, and from 1945 to 1948 he made your answer referring only to and . sure that these countries were run by communists.
At times communists seem to have won elections honestly, at other times they gained power with the helping hand of the Red Army and underhand methods.
Whichever way, 10 the West was shocked and alarmed that eastern Europe should fall so Level 5 Candidates demonstrate comprehensive knowledge and completely under Stalin’s influence, which is what motivated their actions in understanding of the events in the Cold War before 1950 to introducing containment.
Stalin’s desire for control and security frightened the explain how far they agree.
They produce a fully developed USA and increased tension massively. response that demonstrates thorough understanding of the However, the USA did not have to respond in the way it did, and you could past through detailed explanation and analysis of the relevant argue that the Truman doctrine and Marshall Aid provoked Stalin.
In 1947 key concepts and features of the period, to justify a valid President Truman announced that the USA would help any country at risk of conclusion. a communist takeover.
This was the Truman doctrine and was the start of the United States policy of containment.
The government did not keep this policy a secret Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation and it not surprisingly raised tensions with the USSR who saw it as a direct are accurate.
Meaning is communicated very clearly. attack on their ideology and threat to their security.
Stalin could see that it worked too, as it led to the communists losing the civil war in Greece Level 4 7-9 because the Americans funded the monarchists.
Equally, when the USA Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding offered money for rebuilding Europe through the Marshall Plan Stalin was of the events in the Cold War to 1950 to explain how far they suspicious, as he felt that the USA was trying to buy loyalty and discredit him agree.
They produce a developed response that demonstrates to his allies because he had nothing to offer.
The United States attitude was understanding of the past through explanation and analysis of provocative and bound to antagonise the Soviets, increasing tension. some relevant key concepts and features of the period, to reach a conclusion.
It is very difficult to argue one of these is more important than the other as both were motivated by the same reasonable goal of achieving security for a Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation nation and way of life, but both knowingly made the other side feel are accurate.
Answers must first reach L4/9 in order to be credited as L5/10 explaining one side of the argument.
They produce a response that demonstrates some understanding of the past.
Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation are mostly accurate.
Level 2 3-4 Candidates use some relevant knowledge to identify events that show Soviet expansion AND/OR describe the Truman doctrine and Marshall Aid.
Written work contains mistakes in spelling, grammar and punctuation, which sometimes hinder communication.
Section A The Cold War, 1945-1975 Q Answer Marks Guidance 3 4 Q: Describe the anti-Vietnam War protest movement 4 Answers could include: in the USA after 1965.  included many civil rights campaigners opposed to the money spent and so many blacks being drafted One mark for each relevant point; one additional mark for  supported by famous singers and celebrities including supporting detail.
Level 3 Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding 5-6 One way it was a turning point was that after the Tet Offensive the government of how the Tet Offensive was a turning point in the Vietnam decided to negotiate for peace and withdraw its troops from Vietnam.
They produce a response that demonstrates thorough point, it had told the people of America that it was winning the war in Vietnam, understanding of the past through explanation and analysis of and would continue to fight until the Vietcong were crushed.
However, the Tet the relevant key concepts and features of the period, offering Offensive showed that the VC was still strong enough to attack in more than more than one explanation. places at the same time, and this convinced the government that the war was unwinnable.
As a result, Johnson decided to negotiate and make plans to Level 2 withdraw troops.
Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding 3-4 Another result was that the media seems to have turned against the war. to explain one way in which the Tet Offensive was a turning Before Tet, when most newspapers and the TV reported the war they point in the Vietnam War. concentrated on United States successes and what they were being told by the military.
However, Tet seems to have changed that because it showed that the war Level 1 1-2 was not going as well as official sources said.
This made journalists less Candidates demonstrate only limited knowledge about the Tet willing to believe what they were told by the military, and made them more offensive and/or how it can be seen as a turning point. critical, concentrating on more negative aspects of the war.
Section A The Cold War, 1945-1975 Q Answer Marks Guidance 3 10  This question also carries 3 additional marks for spelling, punctuation  and grammar; use the separate marking grid on page 42 to allocate SPaG marks.
Throughout the your answer.50s and 1960s the USA was involved in a Cold War against the USSR, in an attempt to prove its superiority and contain the spread of communism.
Level 5 10 Anywhere there was a risk of the spread of communism, the USA saw it as its Candidates demonstrate comprehensive knowledge and duty to help the anti-communists.
It was worried about a domino theory understanding of the reasons the USA got more involved in happening, and believed that after China had become communist in 1949 that the war in Vietnam to explain how far they agree.
As a result, throughout the produce a fully developed response that demonstrates 1950s it helped the South Vietnam government led by Diem, as he tried to crush thorough understanding of the past through detailed communist rebels.
His own army, the ARVN, was weak and unable to defeat explanation and analysis of the relevant key concepts and them itself.
In the 1960s the situation in South Vietnam got worse as the rebels features of the period, to justify a valid conclusion. in the South were strengthened by support from Northern Vietnam’s communist Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation leader Ho Chi Minh who sent supplies and troops.
United States Presidents had their 7-9 Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding reputation to think about, and they knew that if they appeared tough on of the reasons the USA got more involved in the war in communism, then that would get them a lot of support and votes from the US Vietnam to explain how far they agree.
Kennedy in particular talked tough on communism in his election developed response that demonstrates understanding of the campaign and increased United States involvement massively.
There were also lots of past through explanation and analysis of some relevant key short-term triggers in 1964 and 1965, which led to Johnson increasing concepts and features of the period, to reach a conclusion. involvement.
For example in the Gulf of Tonkin incident the United States believed their ships were fired on by a North Vietnamese patrol boats, which allowed Johnson Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation to pass the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution to increase involvement.
Meaning is communicated very clearly. airbase at Pleiku was attacked, which was the final straw for Johnson, and led to him sending in the first ground troops.
Level 3 5-6 Having said that, neither of these short-term triggers would have happened if Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding the USA had not been involved in Vietnam already, helping the South against to argue that the Cold War OR another factor was the main the communists, because of the Cold War.
Also, the political gain for the reason the USA got more involved in the war in Vietnam, Presidents if they talked tough on communism only gained votes because of the explaining one side of the argument.
As a result, I have to conclude that the Cold War was the response that demonstrates some understanding of the past. most important reason.
Level 2 3-4 Candidates use some relevant knowledge to identify or describe the reasons the USA got more involved in the war in Vietnam, and they produce a basic response.
Level 1 Candidates demonstrate limited knowledge of the war in 1-2 Vietnam and the USA’s involvement.
Use the details of the cartoon and your demonstrating evidence of all three AOs. knowledge to explain your answer.
The cartoonist’s message is criticising the leaders’ approach to Berlin as it is a very dangerous situation yet neither President seems prepared to back down.
Both are Level 5 7 shown as determined to get what they want, arguing with their fists clenched.
The Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding danger is clear from the thoughts they are having about bombing the other with nuclear of the period.
They interpret the cartoon, by explaining the weapons, shown by the mushroom clouds in their thoughts.
The caption makes it cartoonist’s main message and produce a sound response in seem as if they are putting each other to the test to see who will give in, which is context. exactly what was happening at the time.
Berlin was a city still divided between the capitalist and communist powers which was creating huge tension as many East Level 4 Germans were using it as an escape route to the capitalist West.
Khrushchev was Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding 5-6 under pressure from the East German leader to use force to prevent this movement, of the period.
They interpret the cartoon, by explaining the and at the same time thought he could bully the young new United States President and prove his and communism’s superiority.
As a result, he insisted that the West withdraw United States troops cartoon’s main message and produce a sound response in from the city.
When Kennedy refused, tension grew, shown clearly in the cartoon, and context. there was a risk that the crisis could escalate and result in military aggression.
The cartoonist believes that they are acting irresponsibly, and that they should be more Level 3 aware of the risks they are running by confronting each other in this way.
Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding 3-4 of the period.
NB Do not credit CK about building of wall as that was August 1961; the cartoon is about the build-up of tension.
Explain why the Soviet Union crushed the This is an example of a top level response that may be used as guidance Hungarian Uprising of 1956. demonstrating evidence of AOs 1 and 2.
Level 3 The main reason the USSR crushed it was because they were concerned that Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge to explain why the 6-8 Hungary would leave the Warsaw Pact.
This was a military alliance just created in Soviet Union crushed the Hungarian Uprising of 1956.
They 1955 which would help protect the Soviet Union should they be attacked by the West.
The Soviet Union could not allow a hole in their protective frontier of buffer states so produce a multi-causal response that demonstrates thorough stepped in when it became clear that the new Hungarian leader Nagy wanted to understanding of the past through explanation and analysis of remove his country. the relevant key concepts and features of the period.
Another important reason is that Khrushchev wanted to send a message to Eastern Europe that there were limits to the changes the Soviets were prepared Level 2 3-5 to accept.
Since Khrushchev himself had attacked Stalin’s memory earlier in the Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding year, there had already been demonstrations against the Soviet-backed government to explain why the Soviet Union crushed the Hungarian in Poland.
Next in Hungary popular uprisings led to the fall of two communist leaders.
When Nagy came to power he wanted much greater political freedoms, including free elections.
It would be very dangerous for the Soviets to allow this, for fear they would Level 1 lose control over the government, and it would also encourage other East European Candidates demonstrate limited knowledge of the Hungarian 1-2 countries to demonstrate for similar freedoms.
This is an example of a top level response that may be used as guidance Explain your answer using examples from terrorist demonstrating evidence of AOs 1 and 2. groups you have studied.
Many of the people who resort to terrorism do so because they feel they do not have a voice.
They feel powerless and have concluded that no one will listen to them Level 3 5-6 unless they use force.
For example, the Provisional IRA believed that even though Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding they lived in a democratic country, the government was biased against them.
They produce Catholics Republicans were also in a permanent minority in the North compared to a multi-causal response that demonstrates thorough understanding of the past through explanation and analysis of Protestant Unionists they also felt the electoral system did not represent them.
As a the relevant key concepts and features of the period. result the British government would not listen to their demands for an independent, united Ireland, and the Northern Irish government would not listen either because it Level 2 was full of Unionist politicians.
They saw violence as the way to get what they wanted 3-4 as it would get the attention of the governments and pressurise them.
Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding to explain one reason why some people resort to terrorism.
One of the reasons the PLO resorted to violence was because of the strength of their enemies.
They were fighting against Israel for control of a homeland in the Middle Level 1 1-2 East, but the USA was supplying Israel with weaponry, so the PLO had little chance of Candidates demonstrate only limited knowledge about why success in a conventional war, even though it was supported by Arab states.
As a some people resort to terrorism and terrorism in general. result some Palestinians turned to terrorist attacks as a way of weakening their enemy, disrupting their lives and business because they were too strong to defeat in Level 0 any other way.
Bitterness and resentment against the Israelis was also bred in the No response or no response worthy of credit. poverty of the refugee camps the Palestinians lived in while they were trying to regain land Israel had claimed.
This anger was channelled by the PLO who gave idle and restless refugees status and recognition if they joined their ranks.
Other IDs possible a) PLO are aggrieved because they have lost land b) The IRA felt they were powerless c) Al Qaeda feel they are opposed by an over mighty enemy.
Al Qaeda terrorists did not ‘resort’ to terrorism in the same way as PLO and IRA so can accept that they thought this would buy them a route to Jannah/Heaven as they had been radicalised.
Explain your answer using examples from demonstrating evidence of AOs 1 and 2. terrorist groups you have studied.
In 1971, the British government introduced Internment in Northern Ireland to disrupt IRA activities.
This meant they could arrest and hold anyone suspected of terrorism without charge.
Not Level 5 (Both sides exp + only did it fail to catch the IRA’s key leaders, it also increased support for the IRA in conc) Ireland and the USA, because it was only used against nationalists and was often Candidates demonstrate comprehensive knowledge and accompanied by torture.
Equally, when Israel got tough understanding to analyse how successfully governments have with the PLO they often created bad publicity for their own cause.
They produce a fully developed 10 launched a full scale invasion of Lebanon to destroy the PLO’s bases there, which they response that demonstrates thorough understanding of the achieved.
However, there were around 19,000 civilian casualties, including a massacre past through detailed explanation and analysis of the relevant in 2 refugee camps, which massively damaged support for Israel around the world, key concepts and features of the period, to justify a valid even with their ally the USA. conclusion.
On the other hand at times they have successfully limited terrorist’s freedom of action.
Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation For example in 1985 the British signed an agreement with the Republic of Ireland to are accurate.
Meaning is communicated very clearly. increase co-operation between the two countries’ security forces.
This made it much more difficult for the IRA to move people, arms and equipment between the North and Republic of Ireland.
The USA has also had success against Al Qaeda, destroying their Level 4 (Both sides training camps and heavy weapons in Afghanistan, finding and targeting Bin Laden and exp) setting up Special Forces bases all over the world to target the organisation.
Even in Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding 7-9 the Middle East, the Israeli government’s ‘Get tough’ approach may be considered to to explain how successfully governments have responded to be part of the reason Arafat was willing to compromise some of the PLO’s aims in the terrorism.
They produce a developed response that Oslo Accords. demonstrates understanding of the past through explanation and analysis of some relevant key concepts and features of the Terrorism is very difficult for governments to handle effectively as the terrorists are period, to reach a conclusion. often versatile and skilled propagandists, and governments are criticised for negotiating with them.
However the main reason for this is Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation usually more to do with changes in the terrorist organisations themselves, eg the are accurate.
Meaning is communicated very clearly. emergence of Sinn Fein as the political wing of the IRA, rather than because they have successfully prevented terrorists actions.
As a result, I conclude that overall they have Level 3 (One side not always responded well enough. exp) 5-6 Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding of explain how governments have OR have not successfully responded to terrorism, explaining one side of the argument.
They produce a response that demonstrates some 18 A012/01 Mark Scheme June 2017 Q Answer Marks Guidance understanding of the past.
Other IDs Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation  The British Government tried to starve the IRA of publicity are mostly accurate.
Level 1  Oslo Talks Candidates demonstrate limited knowledge of governments’  ‘War on Terror’ in Afghanistan 1-2 responses to terrorism.
Written work contains mistakes in spelling, grammar and  Guantanamo Bay detention camp punctuation, which sometimes hinder communication.
This is an example of a top level response that may be used as guidance demonstrating evidence of AOs 1 and 2.
Level 3 Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding 5-6 One international impact was the damaged reputations of both America and of the international impact of the Iraq war.
Many suspected the motives of the Bush Administration in getting response explaining multiple impacts that demonstrates involved in the war, and when it became clear that most of the big rebuilding thorough understanding of the past through explanation and contracts went to United States or non-Iraqi firms it made it even easier to criticise analysis of the relevant key concepts and features of the Western involvement in Iraq as being self-serving.
The coalition also seemed period. unable to control the insurgency, which made it look weak and made people question United States military might, damaging its reputation further.
Level 2 A connected and equally important consequence was that the war increased Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding 3-4 support for militant Islam around the world.
To many in the Arab world the of the international impact of the Iraq war.
They explain one war seemed to be a Crusade against Muslims and the large loss of civilian consequence. life was evidence of the West’s careless attitude.
Terrorist cells and attacks in the United States and UK often claim to be revenge for Western involvement in Iraq, Level 1 and Intelligence reports believe the Iraq war has had a key role in increasing Candidates demonstrate only limited knowledge about the 1-2 the threat of terrorism in the West. international impact of the Iraq war.
Other IDs possible Level 0 0  Created a humanitarian crisis with refugees No response or no response worthy of credit.
I believe this was the pretext for the invasion, but not the root cause.
After the First Gulf War in 1991 the Iraqis were forced to accept UN inspections to ensure they had Level 5 destroyed all chemical weapons and other weapons sites.
However, Saddam Hussein Candidates demonstrate comprehensive knowledge and 10 resented this because he did not want to appear to be pushed about by the USA and understanding of the reasons for the invasion of Iraq to explain the West, or appear weak to his enemy Iran when the inspectors confirmed no WMDs, so in the late 1990s and 2001 he refused access to these inspectors.
They produce a fully developed response USA and the UK pushed the UN Security Council for a resolution on the issue, so that demonstrates thorough understanding of the past through they could take action, because they were concerned about the growing threat detailed explanation and analysis of the relevant key concepts Saddam represented.
He treated his own people brutally, and there was a strong and features of the period, to justify a valid conclusion. chance that he had WMDs, intelligence sources said.
When they got this resolution they Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation convinced themselves they had the right to take action against Saddam, and coalition are accurate.
However, if this is all Saddam had done, it is unlikely there would have been an Level 4 invasion.
Just as important was the leadership of the USA at the time, and what had Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding 7-9 happened in September 2001.
George W Bush was the son of the President who had of the reasons for the invasion of Iraq to explain how far they led the USA during the first Gulf War, when Saddam led Iraq to invade Kuwait, and agree.
They produce a developed response that demonstrates many felt he wanted to complete his father’s ‘unfinished business’ in the region by understanding of the past through explanation and analysis of removing Saddam from power.
He was impatient that Hussein was still in power, some relevant key concepts and features of the period, to despite all United States efforts to undermine his support in the years that followed the first war. reach a conclusion.
He was also surrounded by neo-cons who believed in regime change in Iraq to secure United States access to Middle Eastern oil and support their ally Israel.
Without this Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation leadership which already had Iraq in its sites, it is much less likely Iraq would have are accurate.
After 9/11 this became even more likely, as there was a suspicion or excuse that Iraq was involved with Al Qaeda’s actions, and as the war on terror had Level 3 had such early success in Afghanistan, the USA was confident of success in Iraq.
Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding to agree OR disagree with the statement, explaining one side Saddam’s lack of co-operation with the UN gave the United States the excuse they wanted to of the argument.
They produce a response that demonstrates ask the UN for a resolution to take action against Iraq.
But in reality, Saddam’s lack of some understanding of the past. co-operation was only the final straw, and the opportunity for the invasion.
The war had much deeper roots, and most of them lay in the USA and with its leaders.
They produce a basic response, only  Iraq’s oil wealth identifying or describing factors.
Level 1 1-2 Candidates demonstrate limited knowledge of the reasons for the invasion of Iraq or Saddam Hussein’s lack of co-operation with UN weapons inspectors.
Use the source and your knowledge The source shows that this was the case.
Trotsky explains that after Lenin’s to explain your answer death he had limited influence on the leadership of the communist party and was side-lined into roles he had little influence over.
This of the period, and sound evaluation of the source, to evaluate shows Stalin’s political skill in isolating Trotsky.
Stalin also out-witted him in effectively the interpretation that Trotsky failed to become other ways, for example telling him the wrong date for Lenin’s funeral.
As a leader of the USSR because Stalin was a more skilful result Trotsky missed it and Stalin was made to look like he was Lenin’s politician. closest ally instead of Trotsky.
This shows Stalin’s devious and skilful actions Level 3 which helped his rise to supremacy.
Trotsky ignores his own weaknesses here, for example we of the USSR because Stalin was a more skilful politician. know that he was arrogant and offended many senior party members which lost him their support.
He also failed to take Stalin seriously and did not do Level 2 enough to attack him and his ideas.
Trotsky’s ideas about international 2-3 Candidates demonstrate basic knowledge and understanding revolution also worried people who did not want to see the USSR in new of the period, and basic understanding of the source, to conflicts abroad.
None of these are mentioned as reasons for Stalin’s comment on the interpretation that Trotsky failed to become victories, maybe because the extract is too short, or perhaps because leader of the USSR because Stalin was a more skilful Trotsky’s arrogance blinded him to his own weaknesses. politician.
Bottom of level if no use of source 1 Candidates demonstrate very limited knowledge and evaluate the source superficially.
This source is useful because it shows the personality cult that Stalin had created around himself to increase his popularity and control.
This developed Level 4 after 1929, and often involved him being shown in photographs or posters with Candidates demonstrate sound understanding and 6-7 children, as here, and built up his image as the ‘father’ of the nation.
Songs evaluation of the source and sound knowledge and and poems were written praising him for giving all good things to the people. understanding of the period.
They interpret the source, This proved remarkably successful, as despite all the hardships and assess its utility and produce a fully developed response in punishments of the 1930s many Russians still held him in high regard.
The context. children here are wearing the neck-scarfs of the Young Pioneers so this poster is also promoting them and tells us of the importance the youth had in Stalin’s Level 3 Soviet Union.
Candidates demonstrate some understanding of the source However, this source is obviously propaganda to brainwash the people, so it is and some knowledge and understanding of the period.
They 4-5 hardly reliable for telling us what people felt about Stalin or even how effective interpret the source, assess its utility and produce a communist rule was.
Its date of 1936 is no co-incidence as this was the start developed response in context. of the purges and Stalin wanted to maintain support amongst ordinary people while their work colleagues and family members were disappearing to labour Level 2 camps accused of political crimes.
There is no hint of the gulags either, or the pressure usefulness. to work like a Stakhanovite and put up with poor living and working conditions.
Overall, the source has too many limitations to be entirely useful for learning Level 1 (Surface details/ description/ Not answering about communist rule in the 1930s. question) 1 Candidates describe the source and produce a very limited response.
Use the This is an example of a top level response that may be used as guidance source and your knowledge to answer the demonstrating evidence of all three AOs. question.
He was on trial with Kamenev and others for crimes against the party, specifically for Level 4 6 being part of an assassination plot against Stalin.
Having admitted his Candidates demonstrate sound understanding of the source ‘crimes’ it would justify Stalin in removing him and others who were influential and sound knowledge and understanding of the situation in opponents in the party.
They began after Stalin secretly ordered the assassination of Kirov, the leader of the Leningrad Soviet, who is Level 3 mentioned here, as an excuse to attack his rivals.
He then forced, probably Candidates demonstrate some understanding of the source 4-5 through torture or holding their families hostage, confessions like this one out and some knowledge and understanding of the context. of his political enemies to discredit them.
Great ‘show trials’ were arranged They interpret the message intended and produce a where loyal old-Bolsheviks like Kamenev, Bukharin and here Zinoviev response explaining why it was made. ‘admitted’ to their crimes against Stalin and the party, and were then executed or sent to gulags.
Stalin wanted to send a message to his political Level 2 or P or CK) rivals in the party and he also wanted to justify his actions to gain the 2-3 approval of the people.
OR they explain the purpose or message without setting it in Zinoviev was forced to make it the context of 1936.
Set an example to the people of Russia Level 1 Legitimisation of Stalin’s actions in removing opponents 1 To bolster Stalin’s position; increase support for Stalin; pass blame onto Candidates describe the speech and produce a very limited response.
Russia, 1905-1941 Q Answer Marks Guidance 8 6 Q: Explain why Stolypin’s policies were This is an example of a top level response that may be used as guidance successful. demonstrating evidence of AOs 1 and 2.
Level 3 Stolypin’s policies were successful in reducing the unrest in Russia.
This was 5-6 Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge to explain the because he came down hard on strikers and revolutionaries, hanging over success of Stolypin’s policies.
This killed off response that demonstrates thorough understanding of the opposition in the countryside until after 1914.
His use of hanging was so past through explanation and analysis of the relevant key common that the noose became known as ‘Stolypin’s necktie’. concepts and features of the period.
He tried to win over peasants who were unhappy that their life options Level 2 3-4 were limited by the mir, allowing wealthier peasants called kulaks to opt out Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding of the mir communes and buy land.
These peasants were then less to explain the success of Stolypin’s policies.
They produce a troublesome, and as they ran larger more efficient farms, they helped to single-causal response. boost food production levels.
Level 5 10 The First World War was a very important reason for the March Revolution.
Candidates demonstrate comprehensive knowledge and This is because it increased the unhappiness of all classes with the Tsar’s understanding of the reasons for the March Revolution in government.
They produce a fully developed response that success to maintain morale.
The Tsar took personal control of the armed demonstrates thorough understanding of the past through forces in September 1915, so from then on he was blamed for its failures. detailed explanation and analysis of the relevant key Back at home there were food and fuel shortages overcrowding and inflation, concepts and features of the period to justify a valid all of which frustrated workers.
The middle classes weren’t any happier, conclusion. blaming the government when Russian soldiers were poorly equipped and Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and when they couldn’t get supplies of raw materials to fulfil war contracts.
It was the collision of these forces in Level 4 early 1917 which led to the March Revolution.
He had understanding of the reasons for the March Revolution in survived a revolution in 1905 but did not change his style of government as a 1917.
He had given the people a Duma that he said he would work with, but demonstrates understanding of the past through explanation then limited its power so it was practically ineffective.
This made many in the and analysis of some relevant key concepts, and features of middle classes question his leadership.
Despite Stolypin’s reforms many the period to reach a conclusion. peasants continued to live in abject poverty in the countryside, and the Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and number of strikes amongst industrial workers grew again after Stolypin’s punctuation are accurate.
Meaning is communicated very assassination, showing they were still deeply unhappy with their low wages clearly. and high cost of living.
The lack of judgement and leadership the Tsar showed is clearly seen by the faith he and his wife placed in Rasputin, a man Level 3 so hated that he was murdered by a group of aristocrats in late 1916.
These Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding 5-6 were the problems that existed even before the war, so clearly the Tsar’s of the role of the First World War OR other reasons in hold on power was already weakening before it happened. causing the March Revolution, explaining one side of the Having said that, the fact that he had survived the nine years since the 1905 argument.
They produce a response that demonstrates revolution suggests that the Tsar’s leadership was not totally doomed. some understanding of the past.
However, I would Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and argue his hold on power was weak enough before the war, that he was punctuation are mostly accurate.
The war simply accelerated that loss, clearly. revealing his weaknesses more clearly, and uniting opposition to his rule.
Candidates show some relevant knowledge as they describe One side: the role of the war AND/OR other factors in causing the  Failures of the WWI March Revolution in 1917.
Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and  Mutiny of the Army punctuation are mostly accurate.
Must explain Failures of WWI to access Level 4 Level 0 0 No response or no response worthy of credit.
This is an example of a top level response that may be used as guidance Explain your answer. demonstrating evidence of AOs 1 and 2.
One reason it failed was because it was unable to solve any of the problems Level 3 5-6 Russia had at the time.
It continued to fight in the war alongside the Allies but this went disastrously, leaving people to question the quality of its leadership.
Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge to explain why The army rallied for an offensive in June, but fell apart in the face of a German the Provisional Government failed.
They produce a multicounter-attack, and deserters filled the roads home.
This continuation of the causal response that demonstrates thorough understanding war stretched resources even further, and fuel, food and everyday necessities of the past through explanation and analysis of the relevant got even scarcer.
This had been one of the causes of the strikes which key concepts and features of the period. unseated the Tsar.
Level 2 3-4 Another problem was that the Bolsheviks were successful in turning many Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and people against the government.
Support increased quickly after Lenin understanding to explain why the Provisional Government published his April Theses and many in the soviets and army were attracted to failed.
This message contrasted with what the Provisional Government only. were providing, and the Bolshevik’s support increased further after they helped deal with Kornilov.
By September 1917 the Provisional Government was Level 1 1-2 looking weak while the Bolsheviks only got stronger.
Candidates demonstrate limited knowledge of the Provisional Government and its failure.
Level 0 0  Decision to continue the war No response or no response worthy of credit.
They included groups with totally opposing aims, your answer referring only to and . like the landlords and capitalists who were fighting to regain land and money Level 5 10 lost in the revolution, and the Socialist Revolutionaries, who wanted all land to Candidates demonstrate comprehensive knowledge and be given to the peasants.
With such different aims obviously they would find it understanding to explain why the Bolsheviks won the civil difficult to work and fight together.
They produce a fully developed response that of their enemies’ lack of unity in anti-White propaganda.
White forces were demonstrates thorough understanding of the past through also widely spread, surrounding the Bolshevik heartlands, so found it more detailed explanation and analysis of the relevant key concepts difficult to co-ordinate their campaigns.
Unlike the Bolsheviks, they could not and features of the period to justify a valid conclusion. benefit from strong internal lines of communications, and had to resource and Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation transport supplies much further.
Having said that, War Communism was just as important, as this ensured that Level 4 7-9 the Red Army was well supplied and equipped.
The Bolsheviks rationed food Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding and forced peasants to hand over surplus food rather than sell it, to make sure to explain why the Bolsheviks won the civil war.
If peasants didn’t cooperate a developed response that demonstrates understanding of the they were shot, so this was a powerful incentive and prevented some of the past through explanation and analysis of some relevant key problems the Tsarist army had faced.
They were also well equipped, as the concepts and features of the period to reach a conclusion.
Bolsheviks took over the factories of Moscow and Petrograd and planned and Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation organised production.
With strict discipline for workers and strikers being shot, are accurate.
Meaning is communicated very clearly. the Bolsheviks secured the necessary supplies of guns and ammunition to fight the Whites.
Without these supplies, Trotsky’s Red Army could have easily Level 3 5-6 been undermined by the weight of forces against them.
Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding to explain one of the given reasons for why the Bolsheviks On balance, of these two factors, the lack of unity of the Whites is probably won the civil war.
There was a lot of support for the various White forces, so if some understanding of the past. they had been more effective, no matter how well supplied the Reds were, Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation they could have been crushed.
Meaning is communicated clearly. enemies’ disunity, and war communism meant their victory was quicker.
Level 1 1-2 Candidates demonstrate limited knowledge of these reasons and the Bolshevik victory in the civil war.
High performance 5-6 marks Candidates spell, punctuate and use rules of grammar with consistent accuracy and effective control of meaning in the context of the demands of the question.
Where required, they use a wide range of specialist terms adeptly and with precision.
Intermediate performance 3-4 marks Candidates spell, punctuate and use rules of grammar with considerable accuracy and general control of meaning in the context of the demands of the question.
Where required, they use a good range of specialist terms with facility.
Threshold performance 1-2 marks Candidates spell, punctuate and use rules of grammar with reasonable accuracy in the context of the demands of the question.
Where required, they use a limited range of specialist terms appropriately.
