This form of “sentimental militarism”—best seen in ªlms like White Christmas , The Caine Mutiny , and Mister Roberts —helped create popular support for the ongoing militarization of American society and its overseas actions in places like Korea.
Using a range of statistics, Markusen demonstrates that the needs of a defense-based economy dramatically transformed occupational and residential patterns in the United States into something qualitatively different and unique.
This restructuring around the “gunbelt” regions, she argues, had several negative consequences, not least the draining of the federal treasury and the deepening of the urban crisis in older industrial centers.
The remaining chapters focus either on the interaction between gender roles, sexuality, and Cold War language or on the Cold War’s impact on child-rearing.
All the essays are thought-provoking and well documented, and the editors have done a ªne job of making them as coherent as possible.
The volume is essential reading for those interested in United States Cold War culture.
Alice George has set out to right the balance, and in Awaiting Armageddon she has made a welcome contribution to a crowded shelf.
George begins with a brief narrative of the main events of the public week of the crisis before discussing, in six chapters plus an introduction and conclusion, how Americans reacted psychologically and behaviorally to nuclear vulnerability and possible imminent catastrophe; the utter inadequacy of civil defense; the role of the media; the domestic political context and subtext; and the long-term effects of the crisis on America’s children.
Always fascinating, often gripping, and occasionally poignant, her analysis of these topics provides a great deal of detail and color normally missing from histories of the event.
Readers who remember having lived through the crisis will ªnd themselves transported, possibly in an unsettling way, back in time.
Readers who do not remember the crisis will ªnd in George’s lucid prose the best available proxy for the lived experience.
Nonetheless, although the book is extremely effective in recapturing the sense of the time, it does not do so in a way that will shock or surprise.
George shows that many Americans were profoundly scared during the crisis, but also that many were not.
She suggests that some who reacted calmly may have been in denial, though others may not.
She reminds us that the crisis took place in the context of a midterm election campaign, but she concludes that, at the end of the day, the Kennedy administration’s handling of the crisis reºected a greater concern for avoiding a nuclear holocaust than for keeping Congress for the Democrats.
George comes close to advancing a thesis—that the Cuban missile crisis played a bigger role in unsettling American politics and society than we typically recognize—but does so timidly and tentatively, and ultimately backs away.
I could assert that the missile crisis was the real fount of that loss of faith, which still permeates American culture to this day; however, to do so would be to embrace a fallacy.
Although Awaiting Armageddon is not a book about the high politics of the missile crisis, it evinces a good grasp of the voluminous literature.
The story of the missile crisis continues to evolve, more than forty years after the event, and the “facts” are something of a moving target.
These quibbles aside, George has written a compelling book whose importance will only increase with time, as fewer and fewer people are able to recall the visceral horror of contemplating imminent nuclear death.
What makes the book compelling, aside from its thoroughness, is how vividly George conveys her own experience of the crisis.
Awaiting Armageddon is not a didactic exercise but an attempt to come to grips with and to memorialize a trauma that was as personal as it was social and political.
