Two superpowers overarmed with nuclear weapons challenged each other in what could have spiraled so easily into the ultimate catastrophe.
Robert Kennedy’s Thirteen Days has become a minor classic in its laconic, spare, compelling evocation by a participant of the shifting moods and maneuvers of the most dangerous moment in human history.
Just how dangerous it was I didn’t fully understand until I attended a conference on the missile crisis in Havana in January 1992.
The Havana conference was the fifth in a series of conferences on the missile crisis.
What began as an all-American affair next acquired Russian participants.
My belief when I went to Havana was that we had over-dramatized the danger.
After all, Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, was well aware that the United States had conventional superiority in the Caribbean and nuclear superiority overall.
The most arresting moment came when General Anatoly Gribkov, who had been in Cuba during the thirteen days, described the Soviet military deployment.
These included warheads for short-range as well as for long-range missiles.
I was sitting next to Robert McNamara, our Secretary of Defense during the crisis, and he almost fell out of his chair.
Had their advice prevailed, as McNamara later said, nuclear war would have begun on the beaches of Cuba and might have ended in a global holocaust.
By 1962 Castro’s Cuba was well established as a designated enemy of the United States.
After this misbegotten affair, the Kennedy administration sponsored a CIA campaign of harassment and sabotage.
In Havana and in Moscow Operation Mongoose was taken, not unreasonably, as preparation for invasion by United States forces.
We know a surprising amount today about the inner history of the missile crisis.
Khrushchev, Castro, and Kennedy, 1958–1964 draws on hitherto secret Soviet documents.
This abundance of new testimony supplements and reinforces Robert Kennedy’s account in Thirteen Days.
American acquiescence in their deployment, Kennedy understood, would demonstrate the Soviet ability to act with impunity in the very heart of the American zone of vital interest.
Soviet missiles in Cuba might not upset the strategic balance, but they would certainly upset the political balance and have a profoundly destabilizing effect on the world power equilibrium—not to mention their impact on domestic politics, never far from any presidential mind.
Kennedy, as his brother emphasized in Thirteen Days, was equally determined to get the missiles out peaceably.
There is the theory that John and Robert Kennedy were “obsessed” with Castro and out to destroy him.
If this had been the case, the deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba would have provided a heaven-sent pretext—one that would have been accepted around the world—to invade Cuba and smash Castro forever.
Instead Robert Kennedy led the fight against military intervention, and John Kennedy made the decision against it.
The President’s purpose was to stop the delivery of further missiles through the naval “quarantine” of Cuba and to effect the removal of missiles already in Cuba through diplomacy.
He did not think Khrushchev would initiate a nuclear war he was bound to lose.
He had not read in vain The Guns of August, Barbara Tuchman’s account of the way the nations of Europe stumbled into the First World War.
Thus he took the greatest care to keep the armed forces on the tightest leash, much to their ill-concealed irritation.
The Bay of Pigs had taught the President to distrust the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
That is why the President resisted a sneak air attack, even when a majority of the Ex Comm favored it.
That is why he prepared to enlist the United Nations in fallback plans in case bilateral negotiation faltered.
That is why from an early point he saw a trade of American missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba as a possible way out.
And that is why he sent Robert Kennedy on a secret mission to Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to arrange the trade.
Secrecy was deemed essential lest disclosure of the trade anger NATO allies abroad and hard-liners at home.
The deal remained secret until I came across the relevant documents in Robert Kennedy’s papers and published them in Robert Kennedy and His Times in 1978.
Khrushchev, whose gambler’s throw precipitated the crisis, proved an equal partner in resolving it.
As the American military objected to the rejection of an invasion, the Soviet military objected to the withdrawal of the missiles.
When Khrushchev asked whether his brass hats would guarantee that keeping the missiles in Cuba would not bring about nuclear war, they looked at him, he later told Norman Cousins of the Saturday Review, an informal emissary between Kennedy and Khrushchev, “as though I were out of my mind or, what was worse, a traitor.
Far from neglecting the dangers of nuclear war, he had a keen sense of what they were.
Far from opposing a compromise, he pushed for one more strongly than anyone else in his administration.
Far from relying on the Ex Comm he bypassed it at the most critical moments, and may have seen it as more useful for consensus-building than for decision-making.
Far from placing the nation and the world at risk to protect his own reputation for toughness, he probably would have backed down, in public if necessary, whatever the domestic political damage might have been.
There may be, in short, room here for a new profile in courage—but it would be courage of a different kind from what many people presumed that term to mean throughout much of the Cold War.
Had the Soviet missiles remained in Cuba, the 1960s would have been a most dangerous decade.
He would like to prevent a nuclear war but is under severe pressure from his hard-line crowd, which interprets every move in that direction as appeasement.
As for the alleged Kennedy obsession with Fidel Castro, a year after the missile crisis Kennedy was exploring the possibility of normalizing relations with Castro’s Cuba.
In November 1962, while the thirteen days were still fresh in his mind, Robert Kennedy dictated a memorandum to himself.
