The assassination itself was carried out by a sole killer, Lee Harvey Oswald, out of his admiration for Fidel Castro and his animosity toward the American Government and its President.
The question that remains open after fifty years gone by is whether Castro, who was perfectly aware of the Kennedy brothers’ plots against him – thanks to a Cuban double agent who had proposed to the CIA that he assassinate Castro – had ordered his intelligence services to collaborate with Oswald in his action.
The list included, besides presidents, also writers and others, including…baseball players.
It was a slap, the motive behind which was unclear…unless it was a relic of the religious wars – Kennedy having been the first Catholic president of the United States.
The attack had been carried out by Russian troops on orders of Fidel Castro.
I cite this anecdote of Robert McNamara to show that the margin between a political solution to the crisis and a nuclear holocaust was extremely thin throughout the thirteen days of the crisis – during which time the President warded off the insistent appeals by most of his senior military officers for an immediate attack on Cuba.
In particular, Curtis LeMay, the head of the Air Force and the most hawkish of these officers, was disrespectful toward the ‘young’ President in person and railed against him during the latter’s occasional absences from the Situation Room.
The famous thirteen days comprised the period between the discovery of the missiles by the American U-2 airplane on October 15, 1962 and the move toward a political solution when Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev announced on October 27 that he was removing the missiles from the island since Kennedy had agreed not to invade Cuba.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy succeeded in convincing the Soviet Ambassador in Washington, Anatoli Dobrynin, that, because of the United States legislative elections that were coming up in the following month, the Turkish side of the agreement had to remain secret – otherwise President Kennedy would look weak before American voters.
The Soviets stuck to their word, respecting the agreement made by the two interlocutors.
But because of this fact, and from the point of view of public relations, the Soviet Union came off as the loser in the missile crisis.
The danger had been so great during the missile crisis that President Kennedy made an effort to ensure that such a situation should never arise again.
In addition, the first agreement on nuclear disarmament – the Limited Test Ban Treaty – was signed in the summer of 1963.
A year after the missile crisis, on Friday, 22 November 1963, President Kennedy was assassinated at Dallas.
The back story to this act still remains mysterious, from the fact that the killer, Lee Harvey Oswald, was himself shot dead before then end of the weekend.
He had participated earlier that autumn in a rally in New Orleans in support of the Cuban regime.
What remains unknown is the question of contacts Oswald might have had with agents of the powerful Cuban intelligence service, the Directorate General of Intelligence , in Mexico City or elsewhere.
And in the final analysis, the question remains open as to whether Fidel Castro himself might have been implicated in the assassination of the young American President.
With fifty years having gone by, nothing concrete has emerged as to the involvement of the Cuban government or Cuban intelligence in the assassination; which leads to the conclusion -provisionally – that Oswald acted on his own, out of his admiration for Castro.
Perhaps after the death of Castro more will be learned about the role of the Cubans.
Nevertheless Castro, because of his reckless temperament, and because of the information he possessed concerning the plots of the Kennedy brothers against his person, would make a perfectly credible sponsor of an operation to assassinate the President.
The French newspaper Le Monde published on 23 November 1990 a series of letters exchanged between Castro and Nikita Khrushchev, in which the Cuban leader asked Khrushchev to initiate a nuclear war in the event that American forces attacked Cuba.
In sum, Fidel Castro was prepared to sacrifice his country for the benefit of a future world of communism.
If…the imperialists invade Cuba with the goal of occupying it, the danger that this aggressive policy poses for humanity is so great that following that event the Soviet Union must never allow the circumstances in which the imperialists could launch the first nuclear strike against it.
In a message of 27 October, Khrushchev informed Castro that a solution was in sight, as President Kennedy had promised not to invade Cuba.
Khrushchev advised Castro not to be carried away by his emotions and not to respond to provocations, such as the attack he ordered against an American U-2 airplane on 27 October, which claimed the life of the pilot.
Earlier isolated violations were committed without a determined military purpose or without a real danger stemming from those flights.
In your …you proposed that we be the first to launch a nuclear attack on the territory of the enemy.
Rather than a single strike, it would have been the beginning of a thermonuclear war.
We knew, and one must not think otherwise, that we would be annihilated, as you indicated in your letter, if there was a nuclear war.
Shortly after this exchange of letters, Khrushchev sent the seasoned diplomat, Anastas Mikoyan, to Havana to continue the discussions with the Cuban leaders.
Guevara: Even in the context of all our respect for the Soviet Union, we believe that the decisions made by the Soviet Union were a mistake.
We see your readiness to die beautifully but we believe that it isn’t worth dying beautifully.
As to the knowledge Castro had of American intentions against Cuba and against Castro himself, the Cuban leader was amply informed.
After he had seized power, Castro became aware of the hostility of the United States towards his regime.
Even before he became President, John Kennedy had been alerted by his advisers of the danger that the new revolutionary regime in Cuba represented, and the possibility that Fidel Castro might invite the Soviets to establish forces on the island.
There followed the disaster of the Bay of Pigs, an operation inherited from the administration of Dwight Eisenhower, and during which Kennedy refused coverage of the landing beach by the United States Air Force, thereby clinching the failure of the operation.
The humiliation of the Bay of Pigs fiasco only doubled the determination of the Kennedy brothers to remove Castro.
In October 1961, a covert operation, codenamed Mongoose, was launched against the Cuban regime, with at its head Robert Kennedy, then the AttorneyGeneral.
A so-called Augmented Special Group was created in the White House and set about planning lethal attacks on Castro himself and conducting sabotage operations on the island.
Virtually all of these activities either failed or did not see the light of day.
In fact, the DGI did use a “dangle” to learn about American intentions towards Castro and the Cuban Government.
In 1961, a DGI agent, Rolando Cubela, let it be known through an intermediary that he was against Castro and was seeking a contact with the Americans.
Later, in July 1962, Cubela met with a CIA officer during the World Youth Festival at Helsinki.
The contact was dropped shortly afterwards, when Cubela refused to take a polygraph test.
In 1963, when the tempo of plots against Castro intensified, and as a result of a decision at CIA, a Spanish-speaking American operations officer, Nestor Sanchez, met with Cubela at Porto Alegre, Brazil.
Presumably this was at Cuban instigation, as Cuba had an embassy there and thus had agents available for counter-surveillance.
By that point the CIA was preparing to have delivered to Cubela in Cuba a rifle with telescopic sights – ironically the same type of weapon that Oswald used against Kennedy.
The assassination of the American President the same day cut off further attempts to assassinate Castro, although the CIA contact with Cubela was maintained until December 1964.
In sum, because of Castro’s temperament – his apocalyptic wish for the nuclear obliteration of Cuba followed by the communization of the world, plus the fact of the information from Cubela of the Kennedy brothers’ plans to assassinate him, Castro may well have decided to strike at Kennedy before he himself was attacked.
In this regard, it is well to keep in mind the role of the CIA in the early 11 Edward Jay Epstein, The Annals of Unsolved Crime, Epilogue, Brooklyn NY, Melville House, 2012, 316.
Moreover, the ease with which the CIA overthrew the regime of Jacobo Guzman in Guatemala and that of Mohammed Mossadegh in Iran created an atmosphere of invincibility around the CIA and gave rise to the idea that covert action was an effective tool of its own, between war and diplomacy.
But this failure only redoubled the efforts of the Kennedy brothers to do away with Castro.
During the entire period of the Cold War the CIA seems to have underestimated the capabilities of Cuban Intelligence.
One could speculate that, because of the high degree of professionalism of the DGI, that organization has been able to conceal all these years an involvement with Oswald.
A graduate of Harvard, then a journalist, and then a military officer, he spent thirty-seven years in the Central Intelligence Agency, twenty-three of them on assignments overseas.
From August 1979-August 1984 he was chief of the Near East South Asia Division in the Directorate of Operations.
After leaving the CIA, he earned a doctorate in public administration at Harvard, in June 1992.
For other uses, contact the H-Diplo editorial staff at h-diplo@h-net.msu.edu.
