From Vietnam to Cuba, two historians sketch out an alternate history of the twentieth century.
By James G Blight and Janet M Lang Fraud of Distance—Fraud of Danger, Fraud of Death—to bear— It is Bounty—to Suspense’s Vague Calamity— Staking our entire Possession On a Hair’s result— Then—Seesawing—coolly—on it— Trying if it split— Emily Dickinson On 22 November 2013, America and the world will observe the 50th anniversary of John F Kennedy’s assassination.
The media coverage of the anniversary will no doubt prove that, alas, people still find the circumstances of Kennedy’s death far more interesting than the achievements of his presidency.
For the first quarter-century or so after JFK’s murder, insensitive cynics sometimes remarked that having been assassinated was a great posthumous career move for Kennedy.
To most, Dallas was tragic because he and his wife and children were beautiful, young and cool.
But to understand the significance of JFK’s assassination, we need to move beyond the fluff and into a deep analysis of what he actually did and did not do as president.
Moreover, he proved during his 1,036 days in the White House that he had the backbone to face down his hawkish advisers who, on at least six occasions, recommended he take the nation to war.
We believe a careful consideration of such a hypothetical scenario is important, but are also aware that the exploration involves both opportunities and risks.
On the one hand, something fundamental is missing from histories that lack reference to paths not taken, decisions not made, or histories that seem almost, but not quite, to have happened.
Such histories seem to us sanitised, unreal, lacking in the contingency and uncertainty of historical moments as they pass by, one by one, full of anxiety and regret for those bearing the burden of responsibility.
History without an edgy contingency is bound to be uninteresting, and the drawing of lessons will make no sense, if it is assumed that what happened was bound to happen.
Most of us believe intuitively that things could have been different and, in addition, we instinctively search for lessons we might draw from history.
As often practised, it is little more than a literary parlour game, in which the objective is principally to showcase the cleverness of whomever is spinning the counterfactual tale.
The storyline is composed mostly of fictitious events, made seemingly out of thin air.
Vietnam If Kennedy Had Lived , examined in some detail the distinction between counterfactual history, whose purpose, with few exceptions, is purely to entertain, and virtual history, which can yield important insights into history as it happened, and can lead to lessons applicable to the present and future.
Virtual history requires the historian to move more deeply into the experience of a historical character and/or events of interest.
The focus is on what happened, how what happened forms a recognisable pattern, and why it makes sense to project that pattern cautiously into an account of the subsequent history that did not happen, but perhaps could have happened.
Actual JFK JFK’s well-documented record of his decisions on matters of war and peace is as astonishing as it is unambiguous.
We now know that no American president was ever pressured more intensely or more often to take the United States to war.
His advisers lobbied him, attempted to intimidate him and schemed throughout his presidency to force him to authorise direct United States military interventions.
In each case, Kennedy successfully resisted their pressure to intervene militarily even though, on each occasion, intervening would have been politically popular, at least initially.
The declassified documents and oral testimony that have become available over the past quartercentury are unequivocal – JFK was regularly out in front of his advisers in articulating what might go wrong if military force was used as an early option rather than, as he believed, an option of last resort, and how such action, if taken, could escalate into a disaster.
A half-century after JFK’s assassination in Dallas, we know that he was right, and that those counselling the use of force were wrong.
We now have the data necessary to calculate with confidence the probable result if JFK had ordered, for example, the demolition of the Berlin Wall after 13 August 1961, when its construction by the East Germans and Soviets began; or the escalation of the conflict in Vietnam in November 1961 to an American war by despatching United States combat personnel to South Vietnam; or an invasion of Cuba during the October 1962 missile crisis.
Had Kennedy caved in to his hawkish advisers on any of these occasions, the probable result would have been a disastrous war that would have been much bloodier and more costly than his hawkish advisers estimated.
Today, we know what Soviet leaders were thinking during the Berlin Wall and Cuban missile crises, and what they were prepared to do in the event of a United States military intervention.
Many of JFK’s advisers argued that the Soviets, woefully inferior to the United States in deliverable nuclear weapons, would act “rationally” by not acting at all, rather than challenge the United States with a counterattack.
Aggressive United States military action over Berlin or Cuba would have led to war between United States and Soviet forces, perhaps initially limited, but carrying a very high risk of escalation to a nuclear catastrophe.
Regarding Vietnam, we know for certain that JFK’s refusal to Americanise the war was wise.
His successor, Lyndon B Johnson, retained virtually the entire team of national security advisers assembled by Kennedy, who gave Johnson the same hawkish advice they had given Kennedy.
They urged him to intervene, to save the Saigon government from collapse and maintain America’s credibility with its allies, no matter how corrupt or incompetent the South Vietnamese government had become.
Unlike JFK, LBJ caved in to his inherited hawks again and again as he Americanised the conflict in Vietnam.
The result was a costly and humiliating defeat for the US, and a foreshortened career for a president who lacked JFK’s cautionary impulse and steely determination to stand up to misplaced hawkish advice.
Sceptical JFK In a revelatory paper published in Foreign Policy in 2006, “Why Hawks Win”, the Nobel Prize-winning psychologist and economist Daniel Kahneman and the Harvard political psychologist Jonathan Renshon documented a number of biases, or “heuristics”, in political decision-making that raise the odds of hawks triumphing over doves – of going to war rather than keeping the peace.
These findings, according to Kahneman and Renshon, are consistent across the more than 40 studies they reviewed.
But we now know that JFK’s decisionmaking profile on matters of war and peace deviates spectacularly from this rule – it is the inverse of what is to be expected, based on the research of Kahneman, Renshon and their associates.
JFK repeatedly resisted his hawks, often at considerable political risk and cost.
He was no pacifist, having fought and nearly died in the Second World War, and he is well known as the president who vowed in his inaugural address to “pay any price, bear any burden” to fight for liberty around the world.
But the gap between some of his anticommunist rhetoric and his behind-the-scenes decision-making is immense.
As president, JFK refused to believe the rosy estimates and predictions of his hawkish advisers, and the hawks came to regard him as basically irrational – as a leader who refused to give the go-ahead to their carefully constructed scenarios, which they believed were based on good data and their own vast experience.
In dozens, perhaps hundreds, of such conversations , JFK drove his hawkish advisers crazy.
But in every major crisis of his presidency involving national security, he refused to abandon his scepticism.
JFK knew in his viscera and from wartime experience that the essence of war is chaos, anarchy and loss of human control over events, that human understanding is fallible and thin, and that what human beings believe is true is often delusional – self-serving, short-sighted and plain wrong.
Two virtual variants suggest themselves for each of the four principal foreign policy challenges he would have faced in his second term, presuming he had won the election in 1964.
One variant presents a series of no-brainers, given his pattern of successful resistance to his hawks.
No surprise, he continues successfully to resist his hawks in a second term.
In a second variant, one more open to debate, he not only resists the hawks, but also shifts fundamentally out of the cold war paradigm.
Vietnam: JFK would have continued to resist a United States war in Vietnam.
Even though the Saigon government, weak and corrupt, was destined for the dustbin of history, he would have resisted those calling on him to send United States combat troops to Vietnam.
The 1962 Cuban missile crisis had made both JFK and Nikita Khrushchev intensely aware of the danger of such confrontations and they were determined to prevent them.
JFK would have resisted those calling for the continued build-up of United States nuclear arsenals, and worked with Khrushchev to reverse the nuclear arms race, limiting and eliminating redundant warheads and delivery vehicles.
He and Khrushchev might have succeeded in achieving very low numbers of weapons, although the time available to them for such a monumental task would have been limited.
The president would have resisted sustained and urgent calls for the United States to liquidate the Cuban Revolution by means of military force and to instal a more Washingtonfriendly regime in Havana.
He might have succeeded in working with Fidel Castro’s government to normalise relations between Washington and Havana.
If JFK had survived Dallas and served as United States president until January 1969, the world would probably have become a safer, more peaceful place.
It is even possible that the cold war would have been rolled back and headed for an amicable end by 1969.
This conclusion has nothing to do with the myth of a Kennedy Camelot and everything to do with respect for the historical facts, as they have become available over the past quarter-century.
Morning Call Quick and essential guide to domestic and global politics from the New Statesman's politics team.
World Review The New Statesman’s global affairs newsletter, every Monday and Friday.
The New Statesman Daily The best of the New Statesman, delivered to your inbox every weekday morning.
Green Times The New Statesman’s weekly environment email on the politics, business and culture of the climate and nature crises in your inbox every Thursday.
This Week in Business A handy, three-minute glance at the week ahead in companies, markets, regulation and investment, landing in your inbox every Monday morning.
The Culture Edit Our weekly culture newsletter – from books and art to pop culture and memes – sent every Friday.
Weekly Highlights A weekly round-up of some of the best articles featured in the most recent issue of the New Statesman, sent each Saturday.
Ideas and Letters A newsletter showcasing the finest writing from the ideas section and the NS archive, covering political ideas, philosophy, criticism and intellectual history sent every Wednesday.
Events and Offers Sign up to receive information regarding NS events, subscription offers & product updates.
