It’s not us Presidents Putin and Biden in two video conferences in placing our missiles there, it’s them shoving December, in which the most urgent issue addressed theirs under our nose. was the danger of war between Russia and Ukraine.
United States intelligence claims to have evidence, based on Putin referred to the February 1990 promise made Russia’s troop movements along the border, that Russia to Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev by U.S. is preparing to invade Ukraine as early as the end of officials on behalf of NATO, that no eastward expansion January.
While Biden insists that an offer cation, in no circumstance would NATO infraof NATO membership is not imminent, the Russians structure move toward the east.
Russia should have pointed to ongoing NATOUnited States military exercises have been able to at least rely on that.
They lied ... and then they exsecurity. panded it once, and then they expanded it again.
He territory of Ukraine now—or trying to do and has raised the need for security guarantees repeatedly, going to do—this is not thousands of kilometers as the anti-Russian rhetoric and NATO military away from our national border.
Reproduction in whole or in part without permission strictly prohibited.
Putin stressed that placing weapons with nuclear In a nationally televised address delivered on Oct. devices in Ukraine puts them within five minutes flight 22, 1962, President Kennedy said of the placement of of Moscow.
In case the urgency and intensity of Putin’s message JFK sent a letter to First Secretary Khrushchev, were missed by the trans-Atlantic powers, Foreign along with a copy of his speech, on the same day he Minister Sergei Lavrov reiterated the non-negotiable spoke to the American people.
And just as JFK called out Khrushchev for strophic consequences to the whole world, inlying that there were no missiles being deployed, Putin cluding the aggressor. is right in calling out the trans-Atlantic powers for the Big Lie about NATO expansion, famously formulated Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., who served as a special by Secretary of State James Baker III, who told adviser to JFK, wrote that “we can say authoritatively Gorbachev in 1990 that there would be “not one inch” that the world came closest to blowing itself up during of expansion east of Germany.
A memoir signing of a Nuclear Test Ban of the Cuban Missile crisis, that Treaty less than a year later, on they knew this action could lead Aug., 1963.
And if channel discussions which we cannot end now our difincluded his brother, who met with Soviet Ambassador ferences, at least we can help make the world Anatoly Dobrynin to pass on messages to Khrushchev, safe for diversity.
For, in the final analysis, our one of which ultimately defused the crisis. most basic common link is that we all inhabit Though Khrushchev was worried that he would this small planet.
We appear weak if he dismantled the missiles, avoiding the all cherish our children’s future.
And we are all threat of nuclear annihilation proved to be a more mortal. compelling argument than preserving the image of toughness.
The war-hawks of JFK’s day did not appreciate these thoughts, just as today’s war-hawks would A Fruitful Back-Channel deprecate such sentiments while seeking to preserve Deploying NATO’s advanced weapons capabilities their unipolar world empire.
Still, as long as there is in Ukraine, including the possibility of using it as a base dialogue, there can be hope for solutions, especially if for nuclear-equipped bombers and anti-missile ballistic those engaged in this week’s negotiations can learn defense systems, is certainly as great a threat to Russia from how nuclear destruction was avoided 60 years today, as Soviet missiles based in Cuba were to America ago.
