JFK and Obama Share Tweet Share Tweet Print Email October 29, 2008 Democratic vice-presidential nominee Senator Joe Biden recently predicted that within the first six months of an Obama administration the freshman president would be tested by a contrived international crisis.
In fact, the poor way in which JFK handled earlier crises fostered that nearly disastrous nuclear confrontation.
In February 1961, JFK faced his first crisis in far away Laos, where a three-way civil war raged.
Kennedy soon discovered that United States forces, structured for conventional warfare in Europe, would be logistically hamstrung fighting hundreds of miles inland in the land-locked, mountainous jungle kingdom bordering Red China and North Vietnam.
In July 1962, the Kennedy administration acquiesced in the neutralization of Laos.
Kennedy then decided to “draw a line in the sand” in nearby South Vietnam, where United States forces would benefit from large ports and numerous airfields.
Thus, JFK placed the nation on the slippery slope into a Vietnam quagmire.
A rag-tag army of 1,200 Cuban refugees, trained by the CIA and supported by B-26 bombers in Cuban markings—flown from a secret base in Guatemala by members of the Alabama Air National Guard—failed disastrously.
As Fidel Castro personally led forces that overwhelmed the Cuban patriots, United States Navy fighter planes orbited just outside Cuban airspace, anxiously awaiting orders to strike.
That summer, at their first summit meeting in Vienna, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev threatened Kennedy with war over Berlin.
A shaken Kennedy returned home to order a massive buildup in United States strategic and conventional forces.
A confident Khrushchev, meanwhile, ordered a wall built to seal off communist East Berlin and East Germany.
That same summer, JFK ordered plans for a nuclear first strike on Soviet bomber and missile bases.
The plan called for 55 B-52s to drop 80 nuclear weapons, wiping out an estimated 90 percent of Soviet nuclear forces.
Because these bases were located in isolated regions, planners estimated fewer than a million Russian casualties and deemed Soviet retaliation unlikely, given that Soviet nuclear forces would be drastically reduced while United States striking power remained entirely intact.
Having tested JFK’s mettle and finding weakness, Khrushchev deployed medium-range, nuclear-tipped missiles and light bombers to Cuba, threatening nuclear annihilation for every American city within 1,500 miles.
Senator Obama, I grew up admiring John F Kennedy, and you’re no John F Kennedy.
During his first year in office, JFK increased defense expenditures by a third.
By contrast with JFK’s commitment to “go anywhere, bear any burden,” Obama vows retreat and withdrawal within 16 months from a war that United States forces are winning in Iraq.
Any nation seeking unconditional negotiations assumes a position of weakness.
The Soviet challenge in Cuba occurred when the United States possessed overwhelming nuclear superiority.
Additionally, from the start of his administration, JFK rebuilt United States conventional forces, including expanding the Army from 16 to 20 divisions.
By contrast, Obama proposes deep cuts in the American military while Russia revitalizes its armed forces; China engages in massive military modernization; Iran moves inexorably toward acquiring nukes; and Russian, Cuban, Venezuelan, and Iranian leaders become increasingly chummy.
An advisor one heart-beat away from the Oval Office should know Herbert Hoover, not Franklin Roosevelt, occupied that office in 1929—when television was 10 years into the future.
An advisor on foreign policy must know Hezbollah is stronger in southern Lebanon today than in 2006 and French monitoring forces under a United Nations mandate can only ogle—not interfere with—Hezbollah operations.
A former Air Force intelligence officer and former Director of Research for the United States Army’s Strategic Studies Institute, Dr.
