For the same reasons, the crisis is a least likely case for domestic politics affecting foreign policy.
Recent disclosures aboutthe United States side duringthe crisis suggest that United States public opinion and interest group activity played a role in United States governmentpolicy choices that has not formerlybeen appreciated.Public opinion and interest group opinion were generally supportiveof the blockade option.
The discussion of the crisis by ExComm members shows awareness of and sensitivity to domestic political considerationsin the selection of the initial United States response to the Soviet missiles.
Evidence of events outside the ExComm supportsthe contentionthat domestic political concerns shaped Cuba decision making.
If such considerationsintrudedupon decisionmakingthen,treatingtheirimportanceas moregeneralis reasonable.
Scholars continue to be fascinated by the Cuban missile crisis, and for good reason.
Besides being our closest brushwith thermonuclearwar,the United States side of events is documented in extraordinarydetail.
The ExComm tapes, now almost completely declassified and published , are the jewel in this documentarycrown, but the wealth of other material that has also become available means that our understandingof events inside and outside of the ExComm is far more complete than it was 20 or 25 years ago.
The release of additionalmaterial often leads to new understandings.This is particularlyso in this case, where the first accounts of the United States side of the crisis were severely circumscribedby the security classification of most of the documentaryrecord.The new materialsuggests that domestic politics played a more importantrole in United States foreign policy making than heretofore suspected.
This in turn directs us to evidence that has been available all along but has not previously been viewed as relevantto understanding United States decision making.
I am gratefulto seminarparticipantsand to AlexanderGeorge, JamesNathan, Eric Mlyn, Peter Feaver,James Nathan, Michael Hunt, FrankZagare, and Robert Keohane for their comments and suggestions, and to Paul Sigmund for his help in facilitating an importantinterview.
The CubanMissile Crisis and Politics as Usual 71 Cuba as ""Least Likely Case"" for the Importance of Domestic Politics Allison's account has long defined the terms of the discussion about organizationalfactors in the missile crisis and in United States foreign policy making overall.
Of particularinterest is his use of the missile crisis as a ""least likely case"" for a bureaucraticpolitics model of foreign policy decision making.
As summarized by Patersonand Brophy , the only way in which domestic politics have been generally thought to have affected the U.S.'s behaviorwas by providing a generalized incitement to the Kennedy administrationto ""do something"" about Cuba and the Soviet missiles.
The blockade as a means of inducing the removal of the Soviet missiles possessed obvious strategicand domestic political limitationsthat observers during and after the crisis had no trouble in identifying.
As Hampson succinctly summarized,the blockadeby itself accomplishedalmost none of the strategic objectives of the United States It did not prevent the installation of the missiles or their use against the United States, although we now know that it nearly prevented the arrivalof some missiles and a shipment of warheads(Fursenko and Naftali 1997, 247), nor did it impose serious costs on Castro or the Russians since it was not extended to cover petroleum, oil and lubricants,or other essential commodities.
Moreover, it could have triggered violence or even war between the United States and the Cubans or Soviets, or Soviet responses elsewhere in the world that would have been at least as difficult to meet as the Cubanmissiles.
Although it admittedlyserved crisis managementobjectives reasonablywell it gave the Russians time to respond, the administrationa respite from domestic criticism of its Cuba policy, and it was considerably less threateningto allies than the immediateuse of force it was otherwise not well suited to solving the administration'sdomestic political problems.
If the missiles had not been removed, Kennedy would have faced the unpalatablechoice of a prolonged confrontationwith no obvious end in sight or a substantialescalation in the level of 72 Timotly J McKeown coercion.
I argue that domestic politics specifically, mass public opinion and interest group pressures conspired to renderthe blockade option both a prominent(in the Schelling sense) and an appealing option for the Kennedy administration.This is not to say that Kennedy was motivatedby a desire to influence the outcome of the 1962 elections in a way that many Republicanscharged the crisis was not manufacturedto suit such partisanpurposes.
Rather,the domestic political situationinduced the selection of the blockade mainly by inhibitingthe choice of initial responses that were either more or less forceful.
Leaving the internationalsituation aside, less forceful options would have generated sharp public criticism from hawkish Republicans and others.
Public opinion, which supported""doing something"" even before the discovery of the missiles, would not have been as supportiveof the White House as it was afterthe announcement of the blockade.
While more forceful alternativeswould not have generatedcriticism from those Republicansand others who desired to use force, the level of public supportfor such alternativeswould have been noticeably lower than that given to the blockade, againjudging by contemporarypolls.
Because the administration continued to consider the use of force, it had to develop a strategy for ""preparing""public opinion for this eventuality and begin to carry it out.
Doing so required initiating the public political process in a way that would lose the least amount of political support for the administration.
Interestgroup activity created a parallel set of constraints:interestedin eliminating Castroand Castroismfrom LatinAmerica, some interest groups with an economic stake in the region lobbied for the specific measureof a blockade, but the available record reflects no lobbying in favor of the use of force.
From the standpointof the set of interest group demands confrontingthe White House, a blockade would initially appear to satisfy pressures to implement exactly that measure, even if its objective ultimately proved to be more limited than the one envisioned by corporate advocates.
Corporatecriticism of the administration's Cuba policy would at least temporarilycease.
During the lull in critical commentarythe administrationwould have the opportunityto solidify a nationalconsensus aroundthe blockade andto use the blockade and otherevents to ""prepare"" public opinion for further,perhapsmore forceful responses.
Although the blockade would end before the interest groups achieved the objectives they desired, after the Soviet capitulationon the missiles it would have been fruitless to criticize the White House for not keeping the blockade in place longer.
However, once the crisis had died down, the same political groupingsthathad been critical of Kennedy's Cuba policy before October 1962 resumed their criticism.
Arguing for the importanceof public opinion and interest group activity is a commonplace in studies of domestic politics and in studies of foreign economic policy making.
Despite the recent growth in interest in the domestic politics of The CubanMissile Crisis and Politics as Usual 73 internationalpolitics, the claim is a bit more unusual in studies of national security politics.
This supposedly happens because top officials want to exert close control over governmentactivity and because they desire especially close secrecy.
Public opinion is thoughtto matter only because of the commitmentvalue to governmentofficials in parliamentary democraciesof publicly takinga bargainingposition.
However, such an argument leaves unexplored the question of whetherthe substantivepreferences of the public serve to shape the choice of demands,threats,or promises.
The newly available empirical record suggests that such views are at best incomplete and, in importantways, simply incorrect.
Responding to and Shaping Public Opinion One problem with the Paterson-Brophy thesis that domestic politics demandedonly that Kennedy ""do something""is that it neglects supportamong the general public for the specific response of a blockade, comparedto supportfor other specific actions.
This is consistent with James, Rioux, and Hristoulas' statistical analysis of presidential approvalratings over the entire 1953-92 period:the use of force tends to blunt any ""rally""effect in public opinion occasioned by the onset of crisis, particularly when casualties are sustained.
Since Kennedy'spopularity in the autumnof 1962 was lower than at any previous point in his presidency , he and his administrationhad particularreasonto be attentiveto these reports.
Given the pronouncedpublic support for the blockade comparedto more violent options, the blockade was the ideal response in terms of gratifying public opinion.
The CubanMissile Crisis and Politics as Usual 75 ""Preparing""Opinion in Domestic and Foreign Audiences Just as important as the prior support for a blockade was the way that the White House attemptedto shape public opinion by its specific responses to the crisis.
In this view, implementingthe blockade option first would serve to acclimate the public to elevated tension levels.
The new high-tension status quo would mean that any move to a higher level of tension or violence would be less of a loss, and any movement back to the old status quo would actually become a gain.
Thus, one could create majoritysupportfor using force by first leading voters through a sequence of choices over a small, fixed set of alternatives.Although the ExComm discussions of public opinion are never so explicit that one can determine whether the actors actually thought in terms of either process, there is enough evidence of the importanceattachedto ""preparing""public opinion to treatit as a factor contributingto the choice of the blockade.
Thus, its value stemmed not just from the military advantages that would accrue from destroyingthe Soviet missiles, but from its importanceas a signal to domestic and foreign audiences of American governmentintent.
If the American government were preparedto incurthe costs and risks attendantupon an air strike, even a surgical one, it would be more difficult to doubt that it would be preparedto face the costs and risks associated with invadingCuba.
By extension, if the U.S. were preparedto run the risks involved in a blockade, then it would be viewed as more likely to run other risks as well.
If the blockade now seems to have been a militarily innocuous act, that perspective is only the result of hindsight about an operationthat did not lead to casualties.
Because the risk level associatedwith the blockade was perceived by many to be close to the risk level associated with invasion, the willingness of the administrationto undertakethe former strengthenedthe credibility of its implicit threatto undertakethe latter,for which it also prepared public opinion.
Although outside the ExComm the president mused about the impact of his handling of the crisis on the 1962 elections , his ExComm comments about his forthcoming public speech on the missiles suggest that his immediate objective was to use public statements to rally public opinion at home and abroadto support United States action.
In discussing the trade-off between the military advantagesof an unannouncedair strike and the political advantagesof beginningwith a public presentation,Kennedyand Rusk saw merit in investing in ""preparing""opinion.
On Tuesdayevening, October 16, Rusk suggested that any course of action involves heavy political involvement.
It's going to affect all sorts of policies, positions, as well as the strategic situation.
So I don't think there's any such thing as a nonpolitical course of action.
I completely agree that there isn't any doubt that if we announcedthat there were MRBM sites going up that that would change ... we would secure a good deal of political supportafter my statement.And the fact that we indicatedour desire to restrain,this really would put the burdenon the Soviets.
On the otherhand, the very fact of doing that makes the military. .. we lose all the advantages of our strike.
Because if we announcethat it's there, then it's quite obvious to them that we're goninaprobablydo something about it, I would assume.
Although neither Kennedy nor Rusk mentioned exactly how public statements would have this effect, both took it for grantedthat the effect could be induced and that it would be valuable to induce it.
I think also that we have an almost unmanageableproblemin this countrygetting any support for a foreign policy that would assume we are going to sustain the cause of independence of states here and in all parts of the world.
We've got foreign-aid programs.We've got a major effort in the making in every continent.
And it seems to me that inaction in this situation would undermineand undercutthe long supportthatwe need for the kind of foreign policy thatwill eventuallyensureour survival.
Judging from his inquiries about when the photos of the missile sites would leak to Congress and then to the public, PresidentKennedy also thought he had to do something before this happenedin ordernot to create a situation in which it appearedthat the administrationwas being driven to take action by the criticisms of the opposition and the force of public opinion.
As several ExComm participantsnoted, the U S. government had gone on record as saying that it would act if the Soviets deployed offensive missiles in Cuba.
While different people attacheddifferentmeanings to ""act,""(the most drastic view was George Ball's, who believed that ""act""was understoodby the Americanpeople to mean ""militaryaction, period"") there was general agreement that diplomatic protest or acquiescence did not suffice.
The president wished to move public opinion to a consensus aroundhis program and to avoid creatinga situationwhere it would appearthat he was merely 78 TimothyJ McKeown being swept along by domestic political events.
If he startedwith a weakeraction than the blockade and then was criticized for timidity, any subsequentstronger action would appearto be taken under domestic political pressure.
That would suggest that the administrationwas reluctantto take many risks with Khrushchev in the absence of such pressure.This would be highly costly to the White House not only in bargainingwith the Soviets, but in coping with the domestic situation.
Beginning with a stronger action that would not be subject to much publiccriticismmeantthatKennedycould escalatewithoutappearingto be pushed into doing so.
Interest groups and the Blockade Option Business Groups and Events beyond the ExComm Prior analyses of the domestic politics of the crisis have generally been predicated on the assumption that evidence on the point could be found in the ExComm records.
First, analysts have recently begun to attendto evidence that points towarda differentlocus for the considerationof domestic political factors in United States governmentdecision making duringthe crisis.
When read in the light of other available evidence, it suggests that the ExComm memberswere awarethat such discussions were taking place, but that they were doing so outside of the ExComm.
In response to a question about public opinion at the 1987 Hawk's Cay conference, Dillon stated that I never heardin the ExComm any comment about public opinion or how our choices would fly politically or anything else like that.
Obviously, every President has to consider that sort of thing, but that wasn't ourjob.
Maybe the Attorney Generalpaid a certain amount of attention to that, because he was so close to his brother;but we others-Bob McNamara,Mac Bundy and I, and the rest-that wasn't our role, and we didn't discuss it.
One can read hundredsof pages of declassified National Security Council documents without encounteringeven an allusion to domestic politics.
Anderson has suggested that there is a norm in foreign policy-making bodies like the NSC that militates against even mentioning domestic political matters-if so, it would appear that the norm was becoming frayed under the pressure of the crisis.
Judgingby this remark,as well as by the above remarksby George Ball, Robert McNamara, Douglas Dillon, Dean Rusk, unidentified participants,and the Presidenthimself, an awarenessof the domestic political stakes was general.
The second reason not to be satisfied with the examination of the ExComm transcriptsis related to our new understandingof the degree of anticipationof the crisis.
If actors anticipatean outcome, they can exert themselves to change others'behaviorbefore the others act.
If we have evidence that influence attemptsoccurred just prior to the crisis, it would be reasonableto infer that decision makers still rememberedthem.
Thus, governmentbehavior in the crisis could have been affected by them.
Althoughsome wantedstrongeractionand a few thought the crisis was partly manufactured,most thought that the blockade was an excellent idea.
Such reactions are hardlysurprising,and they do not differ substantially from the reactions of the general public.
What is more significant about business opinion and United States behavior in this crisis is evidence that the consensus that the Journal observed the morning after Kennedy'sspeech existed before the public announcementof the missiles.
This consensusmanifesteditself in businesspressureon legislativeandexecutivebranch officials for the United States governmentto implementthe specific option of a blockade.
In 1962, the Americanbusiness communitythat was involved in LatinAmerica was becoming increasingly restive over the Kennedy administration'sLatin American policy.
Government officials were concernedaboutthe slow pace of privateinvestmentin Latin America, the continuingpolitical fragility of the region, and the vulnerabilityof some countriesto Communisttakeovers.An indicationofthe seriousnesswithwhich the latterpossibility was takenwas the commentby the Secretaryof State during the second ExComm meeting that a United States attackon the missile sites might trigger the overthrowof the governmentby the Communistsin one or anotherof five Latin Americancountriesunless those governmentstook adequateinternalsecuritymeasures priorto the attackbeing announced.
The Army-NavyClub Meeting of September 5, 1962 It was against this backgroundthat Senators HubertHumphrey and Jacob Javits called an off-the-recordmeeting at the Army-Navy Club in Washington,DC, that was attendedby more than two dozen business and trade association executives whose companies were involved in LatinAmerica, as well as the two Senators and members of their staffs, officials from the State and Commerce Departments and AID, and Ralph Dungan from the White House.
Mr Taylor suggested that the lack of confidence by the business community in Latin America began with the Cuban affair and with the failure of the United States to take decisive action in protectingUnited States investorsagainst expropriationby the CastroGovernment.The problemof loss of confidence has been intensified by the impression left with the business community that the Alliance for Progress does not consider private investment to be of major importancein achieving the goals of the Alliance.
In response to SenatorJavits' question as to what course of action he would recommend in regard to Cuba, Mr Sargent forcefully recommended that the United States begin by initiating a naval blockade and risk any consequences.
The recordof the meeting does not containany remarksthatcontestedMr Sargent'sviews.
Nor does anyofthe abundantfollow-upcorrespondenceresultingfrom this meeting criticize it or suggest any alternativecourses of action on Cuba.
Many of these firms were quite importantin Americaneconomic and political life.
Of the 23 firms (not countingthe Committeefor Economic Developmentand the Business Council) representedat the meeting, 14 were rankedin the Fortune rosters of the top firms in the United States for 1966.
Otherevidence suggests thatthese views were representativeof business opinion.
Two administrationofficials who attendedthe meeting-Ralph Dungan of the White House staff and Jack Behrman of the Commerce Departmentrecalled that in the summerof 1962 business complaints about Cuba were commonplace.Although neitherRobertMcNamaranorTheodoreSorensenrecalled hearingsuch complaints5,the dailyworkof DunganandBehrman placed them in much more frequentcontactwith businesspeoplethanMcNamara or Sorensen were likely to experience.
If Austen-Smith's theory of lobbying is correct, business leaders would be far more willing to devote effort to lobbying those with whom they shared the greatest ideological affinity.
It would make sense for businesses concerned about Cuba to lobby Republicans in Congress more heavily than the Democrats in the administration.
Other evidence suggests that hawkish business views on Cuba were widely held in the period before the discovery of the missiles and that they were brought directly to the President'sattention.
Council on ForeignRelations, 1963) The comment is significant because any campaignmeeting between the President and his business supporterswould have had to occur prior to the public 4Telephone interview,Jack Behrman,21 February1996 and interview,Ralph Dungan, 24 January 1997.
Loeb, Rhoades in the early 1960s was active in LatinAmerica;the Loeb family also had a stake in the Cuban sugar industrythat it did not completely liquidatepriorto Castro'snationalizations.
The Significance of Interest Group Activity The Kennedy administrationwas being lobbied by elements of the business communityin 1962 to take action againstCuba.
In at least one case, the lobbying was a more specific plea for a blockade.
This does not mean that the blockade was a simple-mindedresponse to corporatepressure:the administrationhad its own reasons for consideringa blockade and might well have acted in the absence of such pressure.
Indeed, the facts that the blockade was not implementedwith the objective of securing compensation for American investors and that it was ended before such compensationwas secured suggest that it was not a response to corporatearm-twisting.
Rather,the propagationby business interests of the blockade proposal or more generalized demands to ""do something""could have had more subtle effects.
First, it could have directed or re-directedthe attention of centraldecision makersto the problemof what to do about Cuba, if not to the specific option of the blockade.
The quotation is immediately preceded by a discussion of congressional sentiment.
It was always less than those who named foreign aid spending as the chief foreign policy problem.
The acceptance by business interests of measures that might have negative short-runeffects on business confidence would also allow the administrationto initiate the process of leading public opinion to a position of support for strongeraction, confident that presidentialexhortationswould not be undermined by complaints from that quarter.
Zaller's model of public opinion formation suggests that in the presence of elite consensus, public opinion formationcan be understoodin terms of a ""single voice"" process in which the most politically ""aware""become the strongest supportersof elite policy initiatives.
Brody'sexaminationof the so-called ""rally 'roundthe flag effect"" concludes that whetherpublic opinion moves to greatersupportof the presidentafter a newsworthyinternationalevent is heavily dependentupon whetheropinion leader comment that is critical of the president'sconduct appearsin the mass media.
Kern, Levering, and Levering's analysis of press coverage of the Cuban issue finds that the period after the public announcementof the embargo saw the virtual disappearanceof dissident views from the pages of leading newspapers.
Strong business support for Kennedy's chosen course of action is consistent with this outcome and helps to explain his willingness to implement a blockade.
Conclusion ""All Administrationscare less and know less about the Soviets than the domestic political situation.""-Arnold Horelick 84 TimothyJ McKeown When Allison examined the missile crisis, he did so partlybecause it seemed a ""least likely case"" for bureaucraticprocesses affecting decision making.
The combination of severe threat, strong time pressure and great surprise would so engage the attention and energies of top decision makers that any bureaucratic resistance would be quickly overcome.
For the same reasons, Cuba is a least likely case for the influence of domestic politics on foreign policy decision making.
If the nation is on the edge of thermonuclearwar and time is short, presumably that is one situation in which the day-to-day concerns of a presidential administrationaboutpublic opinion, Congress, and interest groups would be set aside in orderto concentrateon the strategic situation.
If the missile crisis is a least likely case for the importanceof public opinion and interest groups, then the references in the ExComm and elsewhere to using actions and statements to shift public opinion, the Kennedy White House's interest in the results of opinion polls asking about specific responses to Castro, and the evidence of interest group lobbying for a strong United States response to Castro suggest how commonplace these domestic political phenomena are.
The ExCommmeetings andthe rest of the crisis are superimposeduponpolitics as usual, but politics as usual do not vanish.
As Richter shows, an analogous set of considerationswas at work on the Soviet side.
There is no reason to treat the set of incentives and pressures confronting the Kennedy administration'sdecision making regardingthe blockade as unique.
Although the evidence presentedhere does not suggest that strategicconcerns were irrelevant or that domestic politics is ""more important""than those concerns, it does suggest that any theory of United States foreign policy decision makingthat treats it as being insulated from domestic politics is inadequate.
Of particular interestis the evidence thatthe Kennedyadministrationconsiderednot only how domestic politics constrainedthem, but how they might be able to alter or transcend those constraintsby taking actions that would alterthe climate of opinion.
This suggests that the United States Executive need not function merely as a price-taker with respect to domestic politics, passively accepting the constraintsthat it imposes, but ratherhas some capacity to act strategicallyin ways that relax or design aroundthose constraints.
This case also has implications for how the documentaryrecord of foreign policy decision making is used in analyzing decisions.
Ourunderstandingof interestgroup activity on foreign policy also ought to be reconsidered.
There is little disagreement that interest groups are involved in seeking to influence foreign policy outcomes in domains where their privatepecuniary gains are directly at stake.
Tradepolicy, for example, has long been understoodto be shapedby interest group pressures.
What is remarkableabout this case is that business interest groups are seen to be lobbying for governmentactions that have only a probabilisticand indirectrelationship to their privatepecuniary gains (in the case of firms that lost businesses in Cuba due to expropriationhoping to regain them after the ouster of Castro) or to the public good of improving the Latin American investment climate.
If firms in this case seek government actions that are relatively weakly connected to their private pecuniary gain, then we can expect firms to seek a variety of other foreign policy actions that do not at first glance seem to have a close tie to interest group welfare.
It will be interestingto see if this predictionholds up when other non-obvious domains are more closely examined for evidence of interest group involvement.
Getting to War.Predicting International Conflict with Mass Media Indicators.
The CubanMissile Crisis and Politics as Usual 87 James, Patrick,Jean Sebastien Rioux, and Athanasios Hristoulas.98.
Aggressiveness, involvement, and commitment in foreign policy attitudes.
Availability:A heuristic for judging frequency and probability.In JutdgmentUnder Uncertainty:Heuristics and Biases, ed.
