The paper will argue that the actual response of the Menzies government, as distinct from its public pronouncements, was constrained rather than unconditional, considered rather than reflexive, and shaped by strategic calculations of Australian interests.
A Missing Dimension From the arrival of the Great White Fleet in 1908 to the stationing of American marines in Darwin in 2012, a strong relationship with the United States has remained a pivotal plank in Australian foreign policy.
That relationship assumed critical importance during the early Cold War, when the capacity of the United Kingdom to assist Australia’s defence in the “Far East” shrank.
The signing of the ANZUS Treaty over sixty years ago formalised the Australian-American alliance, and the hosting of joint intelligence and communication facilities cemented it.
This paper argues that, just like Australian involvement in Vietnam, public expressions of unwavering support for the US were juggled with advancement of national interest.
Furthermore, it argues that support for the American position on Cuba was circumscribed and closely linked to regional concerns.
More significantly, Canberra’s response to the crisis has also escaped scholarly attention, with the exceptions of Prue Torney-Parlicki and Gordon Greenwood.
Torney-Parlicki’s emphasis, however, centres on the claim that comments made about the crisis by Australian Broadcasting Corporation journalist, Peter Russo, in December 1962, facilitated anti-American sentiment.
Neither scholar focuses on the government’s reaction to the crisis itself and the anxieties and dependencies that shaped its policy.
Neither provides any analysis of Australia-American relations in 1962, in the way that, for example, Asa McKercher has recently discussed in connection with Canada.
This collection of essays contributes much to the revision of such orthodox views.
Instead of “all the way” with the United States, the Menzies government actively sought involvement in Vietnam; it was looking for a way in, not a way out.
We have instructed our own ambassador to the to do all in his power to support the passing of this resolution.
We do not underestimate the gravity the situation, a gravity profoundly demonstrated by both the tone and substance of the President’s broadcast Indeed, the whole matter will serve to test whether the Soviet Union’s constant advocacy of peace possesses either sincerity or substance.
Given that the United States and its neighbours faced, as Menzies noted, “a very grave threat at close quarters”,12 and given the previous twenty years of close Australian-American diplomatic relations, the Australian government’s public pledge of support to its most important ally was predictable.
A closer examination, however, reveals the calculated nature of this pledge of support.
The government’s policy on the crisis was not a kneejerk reaction, but rather one that carefully considered Australia’s national interests.
The American resolution called for the immediate dismantling and withdrawal of offensive weapons from Cuban soil under UN supervision.
Following UN verification of the weapons’ dismantling and withdrawal, it called for termination of the quarantine.
Finally, it recommended that the United States and the Soviet Union confer on this threat to security and peace, and subsequently, report on this to the Security Council.
Arthur Calwell, MP, Leader of the Opposition, also addressed parliament.
Menzies’ and Calwell’s statements were repeated in the Senate that afternoon by The Rt Hon.
A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, outward cablegram , Department of External Affairs to various embassies, 23 October 1962.
It notified the Department of External Affairs in Canberra, which received its cablegram in the early hours of 23 October.
The Embassy highlighted the atmosphere of urgency associated with Kennedy’s scheduled meetings with the National Security Council, Cabinet, and Congressional leaders of both political parties — who were in the midst of campaigning — and that American naval activities in the Caribbean were causing the press to speculate over action regarding Cuba.
A further cablegram from Donald J Munro, First Secretary to the Embassy, advised that along with heads of mission, he had been called to a meeting at the State Department preceding Kennedy’s broadcast, to be briefed on its subject matter.
Around two hours later, Munro advised that he believed the subject was Cuba and its “offensive capability”.16 Munro, along with representatives of the United States’ allies, attended an intelligence briefing at the State Department.
Ball, and Director of the State Department’s Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Roger Hilsman, detailed the nature of the Soviet threat and outlined the evidence in relation to the installations.
Hilsman told representatives that the United States had no concrete evidence of nuclear warheads in Cuba.
Nevertheless, he advised that the missiles would be pointless without nuclear warheads, which could be easily hidden, and the US believed storage for them was under construction.
Munro privately enquired about the number of ballistic missile bases, but Hilsman declined to disclose this information.
A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, inward cablegram , Australian Embassy, Washington, to DEA, 22 October 1962.
A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, inward cablegram , Australian High Commission, London, to DEA, 22 October 1962.
A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, inward cablegram , Munro to DEA, 22 October 1962.
NAA: A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 3, record of conversation, Woolcott with Ivanov and Lessiovski, 25 October 1962. “accurate beyond question”, and that the nature of the weapons was not defensive, but aggressive.
He reminded Menzies of his public statement a month earlier that “if at any time the Communist buildup in Cuba were to become an offensive military base of significant capacity for the Soviet Union, then this country would do whatever must be done to protect its own security and that of its allies”.21 He advised Menzies of his immediate course of action, briefly repeating what was outlined in his address.
It enabled a representative of the Menzies Government to access evidence of the missile build-up, including the reconnaissance photographs, and it provided the government with the most detailed information it possessed on the situation.
However, when it came to how the United States would respond to this situation, the Menzies government possessed no more information than the general population.
Of significance, however, is the date on which Australia became aware of the crisis.
A closer examination reveals its true date, 29 October, which was noted on the final page.
William C Battle interviewed by Dennis O’Brien, Charlottesville, Virginia, 2 March 1970; JFKOH-WCB-02 ; John F Kennedy Oral History collection; JFK Presidential Library.
It is likely that the briefing to which he referred was the one delivered to heads of mission by the State Department preceding Kennedy’s address, which Munro attended rather than the Ambassador, Howard Beale, who was on leave in Australia; see “Beale Home”, Sydney Morning Herald, 22 October 1962,5.
This confirms that, although the United States and UK were Australia’s closest allies, Australia did not share with them the “special relationship” they shared with each other.
Until the morning of the 23 October, the Menzies government was in the dark.
Policy Considerations The government’s formulation of its policy was swift, but also measured.
This desire to secure an American military presence was shaped by anxieties over regional security.
The real or perceived spread of communism in South-East Asia necessitated such ambitions; the articulation of such ambitions was embodied in Department of Defence policy.
In a paper released in January 1962, the Defence Committee stated that “Australia cannot defend herself unaided against the military power of the communist nations”.32 It was considered in Australia’s national interest to invest in collective defence arrangements, more than in its own military capacity, to secure Australia and its region.
Barwick and Tange’s position, as we have seen, implied that Australia’s geostrategic interests could be met by hosting offensive American weapons and bases on its territory, and the rights of the United States to do so would be supported.
However, this must not have affected its position on Cuba; otherwise logic, but not Realpolitik, required Australian endorsement of Soviet actions in Cuba to install offensive weapons and bases on the territory of its ally.
Articulating this at such a volatile time would have brought the Menzies government’s support for its most powerful ally into question, and subsequently, the alliance on which Australia heavily relied.
Legal advice was sought regarding the quarantine, as 30 Discussions throughout 1962 culminated in an agreement in 1963 to host the North West Cape communications station; this was followed in 1966 by the agreement to establish satellite intelligence facilities at Pine Gap.
A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, minute, Tange to Harry, Forsyth, Dunn and Robertson , 23 October 1962.
See generally, Edwards with Pemberton, Crises and Commitments. legal basis appears”.35 In subsequent communiqués to its embassies, the DEA later adopted the position that “the ‘stop and search’ of ships could be in conflict with doctrines of the freedom of the high seas, and may be challengeable under international law”, and thus, advised its representatives of its “reservations on accepting the principle of a ‘quarantine’”.36 The quarantine also caused unease amongst officials in the Department of Prime Minister.
Nimmo, Deputy Secretary to the Department, queried the implications, if any, with John Bunting, Secretary to both the Department and Cabinet.
Nimmo speculated that the US may ask her allies via NATO or the Organization of American States to provide ships, and although less likely, Australia too may be asked to contribute.
His apprehension over Australian participation in the quarantine, and more generally, support for American actions, was reflected in his suggestion to Bunting that “any endorsement by Cabinet of the latest United States action should be in terms of support of a principle which in no way leaves us open to be called upon by the United States to play a part in these physical activities”.37 This view was reiterated in the Cabinet meeting of 23 October, at which the crisis was the first item on the agenda.
Menzies opened the discussion by reading aloud Kennedy’s personal message and broadcast, but it was Barwick who dominated the discussion on the government’s response.
In reply, Barwick urged that the issue be approached with “sound common sense” and cautioned against suggestions that tended to “over formalize” the Australian response, “even if only”, he added, “to avoid 34 “Pacific blockade” is a term used in international law and is not a reference to the geographical area.
When he returned to the meeting to present the statement, it was endorsed without amendment or further comment.
In preparing Barwick for any initial parliamentary questions on this matter, Ralph Harry, First Assistant Secretary of the DEA, investigated the extent of Australia’s obligations.
Last of the Mandarins ,55; and Percy Spender, Exercises in Diplomacy: The ANZUS Treaty and the Colombo Plan ,106.
A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, memorandum on “Australian Obligations under the ANZUS Treaty in relation to the Cuban situation”, Harry to Barwick, 23 October 1962.
A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 3, DEA paper on “The Cuban Crisis” with annotations, Forsyth to Barwick, 25 October 1962, “Australian Treaty Commitments”,5.
Furthermore, an attack on a member state in North America or Europe would be considered “an attack against them all”.46 This exacerbated Australian uncertainty over the level of support it was expected to provide to its Western allies should the crisis escalate.
Departmental advice and comment therefore indicates that the Menzies government’s policy on the crisis was not automatically formulated or a foregone conclusion, as the literature on the alliance would lead us to believe,47 nor were the considerations behind it straightforward; but it does explain the calculated nature of the government’s response.
Although it is unclear as to whether the DEA’s advice on 23 October regarding the legality of the quarantine reached Menzies prior to his parliamentary statement of the same day, it is plausible that the issue influenced government policy.
By Menzies declaring Australia’s support for the American UN resolution, Australia sanctioned American actions which, should the resolution have passed, would have provided a legal foundation.
What the Menzies government was not influenced by was the British government’s response.
Eastman, Australian Senior Officer to the DEA in London, to obtain the British Cabinet’s reactions; McEwen had urged, in Cabinet, that such views be gleaned without delay.
Harry attempted to do so an hour before Menzies addressed Parliament, but as it was the middle of the night in London, he did not receive a reply from Eastman until that evening.
A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, record of telephone conversation, Harry to Eastman, 23 October 1962.
The Menzies government’s explicit statement of support for the American UN resolution indicates a renewed faith in the UN as a “forum for the pacific settlement of disputes”.52 This is in contrast to both its earlier doubts over the efficacy of the UN in influencing world affairs, and to what others considered to be Menzies’ attitude towards the forum.
Howard Beale, Australian Ambassador to the US, felt that the negative experience Menzies gained from his involvement in the U2 Affair of May 1960 resulted in him having “no high opinion of that body as an impartial deliberative assembly”.53 Whilst the relevant Cabinet Notebook does not confirm that Menzies held these views, it does reveal that, during this crisis, Barwick certainly looked favourably to the UN — both in terms of its role and influence in the resolution of this crisis, and in relation to the Menzies government’s stated policy.
A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, Menzies to Battle for Kennedy, 23 October 1962.
Menzies included with his message his parliamentary statement given earlier that day.
A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, outward cablegram , DEA to Plimsoll, 23 October 1962.
Belgium, Canada, France, Ghana, Japan, Malaysia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Philippines, Poland, United Arab Republic, West Germany, and Yugoslavia; see NAA: A1838, 262/12/8/1 parts 1-3, correspondence, various dates.
American bases and weapons on Australian soil; the Menzies government believed that the attainment of such weapons and bases served its geostrategic interests, and further cemented the alliance.
In short, it was deemed in Australia’s national interest to ensure that the crisis did not deflect American attention from Australia’s region.
From Australia’s perspective, the diversion of such power elsewhere would have left it vulnerable to regional communist threats, and even limited war.
Policy Reactions Menzies’ parliamentary statement of 23 October was cabled to the United States State Department.
Deputy Director of the Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs, David Cuthell, expressed the State Department’s appreciation of Menzies’ statement and noted it “was the first one received”.61 This comment, though, is misleading.
A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, paper on “Points for Public Presentation” with annotations (author and audience unknown; likely Harry or Forsyth to Barwick), 23 October 1962,2.
We did not propose to remain silent on a matter of this kind or to fail 68 to discharge the duty to inform honourable members of the view taken by the Government.
What Menzies did not of course disclose was that an attempt was made to contact Whitehall but was unsuccessful.
The Labor Opposition therefore inferred from Menzies’ apparent alacrity an uncritical adherence to American foreign policy.
The belief, encouraged by the State Department, that Australia was the first state to endorse the American position was mistaken, but it was a belief that has persisted.
Malcolm Fraser, for example, echoed this view when he claimed in 1987 that Menzies was “perhaps the first international leader to support the United States in her action”.69 Insofar as managing the Australian-American alliance within the UN was concerned, Plimsoll gave some foreign officials a broader expression of Australian support than the Menzies government perhaps intended.
In a conversation with Eric Louw, South African Foreign Minister, Plimsoll was asked, if the present situation 62 Kennedy received Macmillan’s message at 3pm.
A1209, 1962/912 , telegram with annotations, Daily Telegraph to Prime Minister’s press office, 24 October 1962.
Whilst Plimsoll was instructed to do “all in his power” to support the American UN resolution, his comments departed from Canberra’s more cautious response.
I agree with you that the situation is one which can only be improved by continuing to give firm support to the resolute stand taken by the United States.
I had felt it important myself to make our public position from the beginning one of unequivocal support for the President.
It is difficult to ascertain the extent of Menzies’ faith in Kennedy and his administration during the crisis; apart from the approval he gave to messages drafted on his behalf and the delivery of his parliamentary statement, he did not personally make a significant contribution to Australia’s response.
It was departmental officials who carried the burden of Australian foreign policy formulation and diplomacy during the crisis.
Soviet follow a non-alinement policy and have been quite consistently opposed to the establishment of nuclear weapon bases in their areas”.77 Barwick noted that India, Ceylon and Burma had all received Soviet aid and had given assurances to the UN that they would not manufacture or house nuclear weapons.
However, there were Asian countries — especially Indonesia — in closer proximity to Australia, which the Menzies government would have considered more likely to have become Soviet satellite states.
Barwick’s public reply did not convey the Menzies government’s private unease that some of its South-East Asian neighbours had similar desires, and may draw inspiration from Cuba.
The government was also concerned regarding the ramifications it might one day face should it host American bases and weapons.
This issue was vocalised by Soviet diplomats to the UN in a meeting between Richard A Woolcott, member of the Australian Delegation to the UN, B Ivanov, Political Affairs Counsellor of the Soviet Permanent Mission, and V Lessiovski, Deputy Director of the Programme Division of the Soviet’s Technical Assistance Board.
Woolcott responded by focusing on the undoing of the “delicate nuclear balance”, which had been maintained between the United States and the Soviet Union to date.
Menzies, again, pinned his faith in a UN solution and informed Cairns that Plimsoll had been instructed “to further, by such means as are within his power, the success of 75 Ibid.
A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 3, record of conversation, Woolcott with Ivanov and Lessiovski, 25 October 1962.
The Parliament was about to adjourn for a week, hence the aspect to Cairns’ question regarding its recall. that we can count on active assistance from our closest friends during the troubled days that lie ahead”.83 It appears from this that the government’s public expression of support was taken more broadly than intended.
Importantly, Kennedy’s comment that Australian support was “no surprise” implies that his administration believed such support would be axiomatic.
Australia had previously demonstrated that it could swiftly support American ventures elsewhere, especially its entry into the Korean War.
Whilst Kennedy may have overestimated the extent of Australia’s support for its actions — its pledge, as we now know, was not an open-ended one — Australia nonetheless met American expectations, and it did so more quickly, and with less evidence, than the United States provided to other allies.
After the most tense period of the crisis had passed, Bill Hayden (Labor, MHR Oxley) asked Menzies if Cuba had become “a strategic target of paramount importance” given the installation of nuclear missile bases, and whether American actions to remove such bases were justified.
I do not propose to speculate on the attitude of unnamed countries to the hypothetical situation of nuclear bases being established in this country at some time in the future, especially since I have 82 Ibid.
Department offices overseas on possible ramifications of the crisis in South-East Asia.
The DEA was, however, concerned that China may see this as an opportunity “for testing the United States position in the Far East”, and North Vietnam may “delay withdrawal of their forces still further and continue to obstruct inspection” regarding the Laotian settlement.
The first reply to this request for information was received from the Australian High Commission in London.
When Australians went to bed on 28 October, the world was on the brink of thermonuclear war; when they awoke, the darkest days of the crisis appeared to be over.
For Australia, the crisis seemed to have ended as quickly as it had begun.
Time differences made it difficult for the government to maintain their grasp on the crisis as it unfolded.
Munro noted that Harriman’s reflections were in light of the crisis being resolved, as at that point, there was some progress towards a solution.
Six minutes later the DEA received a further cablegram from the Australian Embassy, Washington, which stated that Pierre Salinger, White House Press Secretary, had clarified that there were two messages from Khrushchev; was the perspective adopted by the Menzies government when Barwick addressed parliament on 6 November.
In his statement, Barwick attributed the aversion of disaster to the “prompt and decisive action” of the US; credited the United States and its OAS partners for their cooperation over regional defence and for bringing the matter before the UN; and praised Kennedy for his determination to thwart the Soviet threat.
The government’s private concerns examined in this paper therefore place its public pledge of support in perspective.
A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 2, inward cablegram , Plimsoll to DEA, 27 October 1962.
Barwick, rather than Menzies, provided a summary of the key events in the crisis and detailed the government’s policy; in the UK, Canada, and New Zealand, like statements were delivered by the Prime Minister.
