Crisis de octubre ) in Cuba and the Caribbean crisis in the former USSR—was a 13-day confrontation in October 1962 between the Soviet Union and Cuba on one side and the United States on the other side.
The crisis is generally regarded as the moment in which the Cold War came closest to turning into a nuclear conflict and is also the first documented instance of mutual assured destruction being discussed as a determining factor in a major international arms agreement.After the United States had placed nuclear missiles in Turkey, aimed at Moscow, and the failed United States attempt to overthrow the Cuban regime, in May 1962 Nikita Khrushchev proposed the idea of placing Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba to deter any future invasion attempt.
During a meeting between Khrushchev and Fidel Castro that July, a secret agreement was reached and construction of several missile sites began in the late summer.
These preparations were noticed by the Defense Intelligence Agency, which on October 14 tasked an Air Force-operated U-2 aircraft to scan the suspected areas in Cuba, securing clear photographic evidence of medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic nuclear missiles on the ground.
The United States considered attacking Cuba via air and sea, but decided on a military blockade instead, calling it a ""quarantine"" for legal and other reasons.
The Kennedy administration held only a slim hope that the Kremlin would agree to their demands, and expected a military confrontation.
However, in secret back-channel communications the President and Premier initiated a proposal to resolve the crisis.
While the tense negotiations were taking place, several Soviet ships attempted to run the blockade, increasing tensions to the point that orders were sent out to United States Navy ships to fire warning shots and then open fire.
On October 27, a U-2 plane was shot down by a Soviet missile crew, an action that could have resulted in immediate retaliation from the Kennedy crisis cabinet, according to Secretary of Defense McNamara's later testimony.
The confrontation ended on October 28, 1962, when Kennedy and United Nations Secretary-General U Thant reached an agreement with Khrushchev.
Publicly, the Soviets would dismantle their offensive weapons in Cuba and return them to the Soviet Union, subject to United Nations verification, in exchange for a United States public declaration and agreement never to invade Cuba.
Secretly, the United States also agreed that it would dismantle all US-built Jupiter IRBMs, armed with nuclear warheads, which were deployed in Turkey and Italy against the Soviet Union.
After the removal of the missiles and Ilyushin Il-28 light bombers from Cuba, the blockade was formally ended at 6:45 pm EST on November 20, 1962.
The tense negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union pointed out the necessity of a quick, clear and direct communication between Washington and Moscow.
As a result, a direct telephone link between the leaders of the two countries was established.
Contents 1 Earlier actions by the United States 2 Balance of power 3 Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba 4 Cuba positioning 5 Missiles reported 5.
Such an involvement would also directly defy the Monroe Doctrine, a United States policy which, while limiting the United States' involvement with European colonies and European affairs, held that European powers ought not to have involvement with states in the Western Hemisphere.
United States covert operations continued in 1961 with the unsuccessful Operation Mongoose.In addition, Khrushchev's impression of Kennedy's weakness was confirmed by the President's soft response during the Berlin Crisis of 1961, particularly the building of the Berlin Wall.
In January 1962, General Edward Lansdale described plans to overthrow the Cuban Government in a top-secret report , addressed to President Kennedy and officials involved with Operation Mongoose.
By October 1962, they may have had a few dozen, although some intelligence estimates were as high as 75.
Overall, the United States had a very considerable advantage in total number of nuclear warheads at the time and, more importantly, in all the technologies needed to deliver them accurately.
The United States also led in missile defensive capabilities, Naval and Air power; but the USSR enjoyed a two-to-one advantage in conventional ground forces, much more pronounced in field guns and tanks.
He faced a strategic situation where the United States was perceived to have a ""splendid first strike"" capability against the Soviet Union.
But to meet the threat it faced in 1962, 1963, and 1964, it had very few options.
A second reason Soviet missiles were deployed to Cuba was because Khrushchev wanted to bring West Berlin—the American/British/French-controlled democratic zone within Communist East Germany—into the Soviet orbit.
Khrushchev believed that if the Americans did nothing over the missile deployments in Cuba, he could muscle the West out of Berlin using said missiles as a deterrent to western counter-measures in Berlin.
If the Americans tried to bargain with the Soviets after becoming aware of the missiles, Khrushchev could demand trading the missiles for West Berlin.
Finally, Khrushchev was also reacting in part to the nuclear threat of obsolescent Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missiles which the United States had installed in Turkey during April 1962.
From the very beginning, the Soviets' operation entailed elaborate denial and deception, known in the USSR as maskirovka.
The Soviet code name, Operation Anadyr, was also the name of a river flowing into the Bering Sea, the name of the capital of Chukotsky District, and a bomber base in the far eastern region.
All these were meant to conceal the program from both internal and external audiences.In early 1962, a group of Soviet military and missile construction specialists accompanied an agricultural delegation to Havana.
However, according to another source, Fidel Castro objected to the missiles deployment that would have made him look like a Soviet puppet, but was persuaded that missiles in Cuba would be in the interests of the entire socialist camp.Specialists in missile construction under the guise of ""machine operators,"" ""irrigation specialists"" and ""agricultural specialists"" arrived in July.
He told Khrushchev that the missiles would be concealed and camouflaged by the palm trees.The Cuban leadership was further upset when in September the United States Congress approved United States Joint Resolution 230, which expressed Congress's resolve to prevent the creation of an externally supported military establishment.
On the same day, the United States announced a major military exercise in the Caribbean, PHIBRIGLEX-62, which Cuba denounced as a deliberate provocation and proof that the United States planned to invade Cuba.Khrushchev and Castro agreed to place strategic nuclear missiles secretly in Cuba.
The Soviets continued their Maskirovka program to conceal their actions in Cuba.
On October 13, Dobrynin was questioned by former Undersecretary of State Chester Bowles about whether the Soviets plan to put offensive weapons in Cuba.
And again on October 17, Soviet embassy official Georgy Bolshakov brought President Kennedy a ""personal message"" from Khrushchev reassuring him that ""under no circumstances would surface-to-surface missiles be sent to Cuba."":494As early as August 1962, the United States suspected the Soviets of building missile facilities in Cuba.
The R-12 was an intermediate-range ballistic missile, capable of carrying a thermonuclear warhead.
It was a single-stage, road-transportables, surface-launched, storable liquid propellant fueled missile that could deliver a megaton-class nuclear weapon.
Missiles reported The missiles in Cuba allowed the Soviets to effectively target almost the entire continental United States.
Aerial images find Soviet missiles Despite the increasing evidence of a military build-up on Cuba, no U-2 flights were made over Cuba from September 5 until October 14.
The first problem that caused the pause in reconnaissance flights took place on August 30, when a U-2 operated by the United States Air Force's Strategic Air Command flew over Sakhalin Island in the Soviet Far East by mistake.
Therefore, the Kennedy administration decided to try the new Corona KH series satellites in an attempt to obtain sufficient evidence.
Preparations for an emergency launch proceeded at fever pitch and led to the NRO's institution of ""R7"" status, that is, keeping a Corona spy satellite ready for launch on 7 days' notice in case of an emergency.
At the end of September, Navy reconnaissance aircraft photographed the Soviet ship Kasimov with large crates on its deck the size and shape of Il-28 light bombers.In September 1962, photo interpreters from the Defense Intelligence Agency noticed that Cuban surface-to-air missile sites were arranged in a pattern similar to those used by the Soviet Union to protect its ICBM bases, leading the wary Agency to lobby for the resumption of U-2 flights over the island.
Following CIA's unsuccessful mission over the Soviet Union, it was thought that if another U-2 was shot down a cover story involving Air Force flights would be easier to explain than CIA flights.
When the reconnaissance missions were re-authorized on October 8, weather kept the planes from flying.
That evening, the CIA notified the Department of State and at 8:30 pm EDT, National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy elected to wait until morning to tell the President.
Responses considered The United States had no plan in place because United States intelligence had been convinced that the Soviets would never install nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Send a message to Castro to warn him of the grave danger he and Cuba were in.
Full force invasion of Cuba and overthrow of Castro.The Joint Chiefs of Staff unanimously agreed that a full-scale attack and invasion was the only solution.
Kennedy also believed that United States' allies would think of the United States as ""trigger-happy cowboys"" who lost Berlin because they could not peacefully resolve the Cuban situation.:332 President Kennedy and Secretary of Defense McNamara in an EXCOMM meeting.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff believed that the missiles would seriously alter the military balance, but Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara disagreed.
An extra forty, he reasoned, would make little difference to the overall strategic balance.
As part of the blockade, the United States military was put on high alert to enforce the blockade and to be ready to invade Cuba at a moment's notice.
The 1st Armored Division was sent to Georgia, and five army divisions were alerted for combat operations.
The Strategic Air Command distributed its shorter-ranged B-47 Stratojet medium bombers to civilian airports and sent aloft its B-52 Stratofortress heavy bombers.
A United States Navy P-2H Neptune of VP-18 flying over a Soviet cargo ship with crated Il-28s on deck during the Cuban Crisis.
Reservations about the plan continued to be voiced as late as the twenty-first; however, the paramount one being that once the blockade was put into effect, the Soviets would rush to complete some of the missiles.
President Kennedy signs the Proclamation for Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba at the Oval Office on October 23, 1962.
Ambassadors around the world gave advance notice to non-Eastern Bloc leaders.
All were supportive of the United States position.On October 22 at 7:00 pm EDT, President Kennedy delivered a nation-wide televised address on all of the major networks announcing the discovery of the missiles.
The heavy cruiser USS Newport News was designated flagship for the blockade, with the USS Leary as Newport News' destroyer escort.
On October 23 at 11:24 am EDT a cable drafted by George Ball to the United States Ambassador in Turkey and the United States Ambassador to NATO notified them that they were considering making an offer to withdraw what the United States knew to be nearly obsolete missiles from Italy and Turkey in exchange for the Soviet withdrawal from Cuba.
Turkish officials replied that they would ""deeply resent"" any trade for the United States missile's presence in their country.
In West Germany, newspapers supported the United States' response, contrasting it with the weak American actions in the region during the preceding months.
Soviet broadcast At the time, the crisis continued unabated, and on the evening of October 24, the Soviet news agency TASS broadcast a telegram from Khrushchev to President Kennedy, in which Khrushchev warned that the United States' ""outright piracy"" would lead to war.
However, this was followed at 9:24 pm by a telegram from Khrushchev to Kennedy which was received at 10:52 pm EDT, in which Khrushchev stated, ""If you coolly weigh the situation which has developed, not giving way to passions, you will understand that the Soviet Union cannot fail to reject the arbitrary demands of the United States"" and that the Soviet Union views the blockade as ""an act of aggression"" and their ships will be instructed to ignore it.
US alert level raised Adlai Stevenson shows aerial photos of Cuban missiles to the United Nations.
United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson confronted Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin in an emergency meeting of the SC challenging him to admit the existence of the missiles.
For the only confirmed time in United States history, while the B-52 bombers went on continuous airborne alert, the B-47 medium bombers were dispersed to various military and civilian airfields, and made ready to take off, fully equipped, on 15 minutes' notice.
Twenty-three nuclear-armed B-52 were sent to orbit points within striking distance of the Soviet Union so that the latter might observe that the United States was serious.Jack J Catton later estimated that about 80% of SAC's planes were ready for launch during the crisis; David A Burchinal recalled that, by contrast, the Russians were so thoroughly stood down, and we knew it.
Fomin noted, ""War seems about to break out"" and asked Scali to use his contacts to talk to his ""high-level friends"" at the State Department to see if the United States would be interested in a diplomatic solution.
On October 26, President Kennedy was still leaning towards military action to eliminate the missiles in Cuba.
Operation Mongoose planning in the Pentagon focused on using Cuban sabotage units to attack the missile sites and on installing a government after an invasion.
They also noted that the Cuban military continued to organize for action, although they were under order not to initiate action unless attacked.At 9:00 am EDT on October 27, Radio Moscow began broadcasting a message from Khrushchev.
At 10:00 am EDT, the executive committee met again to discuss the situation and came to the conclusion that the change in the message was due to internal debate between Khrushchev and other party officials in the Kremlin.:300 Kennedy realized that he would be in an ""insupportable position if this becomes Khrushchev's proposal"", because, number 1.
The missiles in Turkey were not militarily useful and were being removed anyway.
Italy's Prime Minister Fanfani, who was also Foreign Minister ad interim, offered to allow withdrawal of the missiles deployed in Apulia as a bargaining chip.
The stress in negotiations between the USSR and the United States intensified, and only much later was it learned that the decision to fire the missile was made locally by an undetermined Soviet commander acting on his own authority.
An EXCOMM meeting on October 29, 1962 held in the White House Cabinet Room during the Cuban missile crisis.
President Kennedy is to the left of the American flag; on his left is Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and his right is Secretary of State Dean Rusk.
Crisis ends A United States Navy HSS-1 Seabat helicopter hovers over Soviet submarine B-59, forced to the surface by United States Naval forces in the Caribbean near Cuba On October 27, after much deliberation between the Soviet Union and Kennedy's cabinet, Kennedy secretly agreed to remove all missiles set in southern Italy and in Turkey, the latter on the border of the Soviet Union, in exchange for Khrushchev removing all missiles in Cuba.At 9:00 am EST, on October 28, a new message from Khrushchev was broadcast on Radio Moscow.
The United States continued the blockade, and in the following days, aerial reconnaissance proved that the Soviets were making progress in removing the missile systems.
At the time when the Kennedy administration thought that the Cuban missile crisis was resolved, nuclear tactical rockets stayed in Cuba since they were not part of the Kennedy-Khrushchev understandings.
It is possible that Khrushchev only placed the missiles in Cuba to get Kennedy to remove the missiles from Italy and Turkey and that the Soviets had no intention of resorting to nuclear war if they were out-gunned by the Americans.
Because the withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles from NATO bases in Southern Italy and Turkey was not made public at the time, Khrushchev appeared to have lost the conflict and become weakened.
This is not entirely the case as both Kennedy and Khrushchev took every step to avoid full conflict despite the pressures of their governments.
Cuba perceived the outcome as a partial betrayal by the Soviets, given that decisions on how to resolve the crisis had been made exclusively by Kennedy and Khrushchev.
Further, seven crew died when a MATS Boeing C-135B Stratolifter delivering ammunition to Guantanamo Bay Naval Base stalled and crashed on approach on October 23.
Critics including Seymour Melman and Seymour Hersh suggested that the Cuban missile crisis encouraged United States use of military means, such as in the Vietnam War.
This Soviet-American confrontation was synchronous with the Sino-Indian War, dating from the US's military blockade of Cuba; historians speculate that the Chinese attack against India for disputed land was meant to coincide with the Cuban missile crisis.
Post-crisis revelations Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., a historian and adviser to John F Kennedy, told National Public Radio in an interview on October 16, 2002 that Castro did not want the missiles, but that Khrushchev had pressured Castro to accept them.
Castro was not completely happy with the idea but the Cuban National Directorate of the Revolution accepted them to protect Cuba against United States attack, and to aid its ally, the Soviet Union.:272 Schlesinger believed that when the missiles were withdrawn, Castro was angrier with Khrushchev than he was with Kennedy because Khrushchev had not consulted Castro before deciding to remove them.In early 1992, it was confirmed that Soviet forces in Cuba had, by the time the crisis broke, received tactical nuclear warheads for their artillery rockets and Il-28 bombers.
Khrushchev feared that Castro's hurt pride and widespread Cuban indignation over the concessions he had made to Kennedy might lead to a breakdown of the agreement between the Soviet Union and the United States.
In order to prevent this Khrushchev decided to make Cuba a special offer.
Khrushchev concluded that because the Americans hadn't listed the missiles on their list of demands, the Soviet Union's interests would be well served by keeping them in Cuba.Anastas Mikoyan was tasked with the negotiations with Castro over the missile transfer deal designed to prevent a breakdown in the relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union.
Castro was forced to give way and much to the relief of Khrushchev and the whole Soviet government the tactical nuclear weapons were crated and returned by sea to the Soviet Union during December 1962.
See also Bomber gap Cuba–Soviet Union relations Norwegian rocket incident Nuclear disarmament Soviet NavyMedia Thirteen Days, Robert F Kennedy's account of the crisis, released in 1969 Topaz, 1969 film by Alfred Hitchcock, set during the run-up to the crisis The Missiles of October, 1974 TV docudrama about the crisis The World Next Door, 1990 novel by Brad Ferguson, set in this period Quantum Leap,1991 TV Show, , Sam must deal with the panic associated with the Cuban missile crisis as a Florida fallout shelter salesman.
Black Ops, 2010 video game, set during and after the Cuban missile crisis.
Armageddon 1962, 2013 mockumentary, Lyndon B Johnson, not Kennedy , is President in October 1962, and his handling of the crisis brings about a nuclear exchange.Notes ↑ McNamara mistakenly dates the shooting down of USAF Major Rudolf Anderson's U-2 on October 26.
Archive of correspondence between Kennedy and Khrushchev during Cuban missile crisis.
Association of Former Intelligence Officers, August 12, 2011 ↑ 5.05.15.25.35.
External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cuban missile crisis.
