Jenny Skelly & Aarti Parmar Editor: James Pickering Picture Research: Brooks Krikler Research First published in Great Britain in 2000 by Heinemann Library, Halley Court, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8EJ, a division of Reed Educational and Professional Publishing Limited.
The dates in brackets after a person’s name give the years that he or she lived.
An explanation of difficult words can be found in the glossary on page 30.
Amazingly, all of this But the USSR had happened during the ’60s. already put the first person into space in 1961.
Each great nation also saw how space could be used for military purposes by orbiting spy satellites and missiles of mass destruction.
As the decade developed, the rush for supremacy in space drove scientific research and technological invention at a great pace.
Spin-offs from space and military programmes flooded into everyday life, ranging from live colour television beamed around the world by satellite, and sightsaving laser eye surgery, to plastic disposable clothes and non-stick coatings on frying pans.
Telstar 2 was an early comsat (communications satellite), relaying phone calls and television channels.
Atoms were 4 made of even tinier y bits, such as electrons, @ protons and neutrons.
By the 1960s, new evidence from more powerful particleaccelerators or ‘atomsmashers’ pointed to even smaller particles.
Electron orbits around nucleus Nucleus at centre INSIDE AN “ON ATOM ere THE QUARK In the 1950s Murray GellMann, at the California Institute of Technology, had studied cosmic rays.
Strange particles in them did not follow the usual laws of atomic physics.
Gell-Mann analyzed the idea of ‘strangeness’ using maths and extended it to the structure of the atom.
It showed that protons, neutrons and similar particles were in fact made of even smaller pieces — quarks.
Murray Gell-Mann became Professor of Theoretical Physics in 1956 and received a Nobel Prize for physics in 1969.
NUCLEUS PARTICLES EARTH ON THE MOVE On a larger scale, new science was solving ancient mysteries.
Paleomagnetism was the developing study of particles magnetized by the Earth’s natural magnetic field, trapped as rocks formed millions of years ago.
With more new information, especially from the first survey satellites, it supported the idea of continental drift suggested in 1912 by German weather expert Alfred Wegener.
Earth’s land masses were once all together and drifted to their present positions — the theory of plate tectonics.
PLATE TECTONICS In the 1960s new evidence from rock layers, drill holes, satellites and fossils came together into the theory of plate tectonics, often called continental drift.
This says the major land masses are carried around the globe on giant curved plates of rock.
The plates grow as molten rock oozes from below and adds to their edges.
They crumple into mountains, and cause earthquakes and volcanoes as they rub together.
Rock layers Alfred Wegene. crumpled into mountains * Ocean Continent movement.
Two seabed plates move apart Seabed crust slides under continental crust.
New rock wells up from below maa © (eee P THERE As superpowers raced to launch astronauts, astronomers peered through telescopes across the Universe and analyzed the mass of information from new satellites and space probes.
In 1963, radio astronomers noticed an incredibly powerful source of radio and other waves far across the Universe.
It seemed no bigger than an average star, like our Sun, yet gave out more energy A pulsar ‘flashes’ on and off like a lighthouse, sending out radio rather than light waves.
A quasar is thought to be matter and Regular radio blips from pulsars fuelled ideas of aliens in space.
But some were hoaxes, some were natural weather features like ball lightning and Some radio telescopes have many dish some were secret military test craft.
As far as antennae linked by we know, none was an alien spacecraft. computer.
They work as one giant dish to detect very weak radio signals. the centre of a galaxy.
Within weeks they noticed strange, regular pulses of radio signals, 1. seconds apart, from far away in our Galaxy.
They worked out the signals were given off by fast-spinning neutron stars — small, incredibly dense remnants of old giant stars that collapse into themselves.
Our eyes see light rays from the Sun, Moon, stars, planets and other objects in space.
But many other kinds of rays also reach Earth from space, including natural radio waves, microwaves and cosmic rays.
They are invisible to our eyes but radio telescopes can ‘see’ or detect them.
Radio telescopes use antennae shaped like large dishes, similar to huge satellite TV dishes, or long wires strung on towers to receive the signals.
Radio astronomy began in the mid 1940s but expanded greatly in the 1960s.
A quasar pours out unimaginable amounts of energy from the heart of a galaxy.
They are among the most distant and powerful objects discovered so far.
Parabolic dish reflects and concentrates incoming waves on to receiver Dish tilt Receiver Incoming mechanism waves Signal computing Dish control and analysis and radio receiver building WN RY ee tower ; ( ; s C /edlaa HE RACE IS O At the beginning of the 1960s most independent experts agreed that the USA led the USSR, in space technology.
It was a shock when the USSR announced it had put the first human into space, on 12 April 1961.
THE COLD WAR The Cold War was a tense stand-off between the During the Cold War of the 1960s, Soviet Russia frequently displayed its military might.
Intercontinental ballistic missiles, armed with nuclear warheads, which could reach the other side of the world, were one spin-off from the space race. capitalist USA and allied western nations, and the communist-based USSR and eastern European allies.
The success of the first manned space flight was a huge boost for the USSR’s scientific President Khrushchev of the USSR meets “{ fellow communist 1 i) leader Fidel Castro of i Cuba in 1963. reputation and for its political system and communist friends.
THE FIRST TRIP INTO SPACE Gagarin’s craft, Vostok 1, was launched 5 Capsule separates into orbit by a Soviet A-1 rocket with the aid of four strap-on boosters.
It had very few controls — the astronaut was large 4 Second stage bs rocket fires 6 Heat shield s protects craft.on XN re-entry { VOSTOK CAPSULE Pod passenger for the trip.
Its shield deflected the enormous heat of re-entry as the craft plunged back into the blanket of air around Earth, the atmosphere, at more than 8,000 km/h.
At the time the USSR announced garin stayed in his craft until it t he ejected at a height of out 6 és iilomeue and parachuted down separately.
On 16 June 1963 Vostok 6 rried the first woman, Valentina Tereshkova, into space Ejector 2 Boosters detach on and gen air supply bottles In 1961 President John F Kennedy declared the USA’s main aim in space — to land a man on the Moon and bring him back safely by the end of the decade.
FIRST IN SPACE The first person in space was Yuri Gagarin, a former USSR air force pilot.
His craft, the ball-shaped Vostok, had already been used to carry Sputnik satellites and was tested in several unmanned flights.
Gagarin took Join Clem ibore off from Baikanour Space 1921) made his first flight in a Mercury craft, Friendship 7.
Earth and landed near the 1.1998 he became Volga River after a flight the oldest astronaut when he went into space again on the space shuttle.
THE USA’S REPLY The USA was stung into action and soon had its own After his astronauts.
The USSR now space in a Soyuz craft when he was killed in concentrated on building an orbiting a jet fighter training accident.
Shepard on 5 May and Virgil Grissom space station and unmanned deepspace probes.
The USA, on the other hand, developed from the one-person Mercury / craft, to the two-person ‘ ae by Gemini, then to the threeen person Apollo — to send astronauts to the Moon.
ATELLITE REVOLUTION DATOS PETE EES WEES AER A satellite is now launched every week or two.
But in the 1960s satellites were new and every launch made global headlines.
Some, like Telstar and Early Bird, became almost like celebrities — as famous as the human stars of movies, sport and pop music.
HARD WORKERS The TIROS series of 10 satellites, launched between 1960 and 1965, carried television cameras to picture the clouds far below.
The information was radioed down to Earth and used to make the first satelliteaided weather forecasts.
A technician tests one of the two television cameras on TIROS 10 (Television and Infrared Observation Satellite), in 1965.
Astronauts go on space walks when they need to repair their craft, or satellites.
First was the USSR’s Alexei Leonov in 1965, soon followed by the USA’s Edward White, shown above.
The USSR space probe Venera 4 parachuted an instrument capsule through the atmosphere in 1967.
In the 60s huge dishes like Goonbilly in Cornwall, England picked up the signals and passed them to the usual terrestrial system.
In July 1962, Telstar 1 sent live black-and-white television pictures from the USA to Europe.
In May 1963, Telstar 2 went one better and relayed the first live colour television images across the Atlantic.
Because the satellites were in low oval orbits they could only be used for short periods, unlike today’s television satellites.
DOowN TO EARTH fer er Gr e Venera 4 vb Once Venera 4 reached in orbit © the orbit of Venus, its a descent capsule Descent capsule separated from it, and separates and entered the atmosphere. enters Venus A parachute opened to atmosphere ® slow its descent, and its . instruments switched on to + start transmitting data back to Earth.
It took 94 minutes before the massive atmospheric pressure J crushed it.
Capsule caves in 25 kilometres above the surface of Venus pr Atl Nimaveon The most spectacular sciencebased event of the 20th century happened on 20 July 1969.
APOLLO PROGRAMME The Moon landing was the climax of ten years of incredible technological advance in almost all areas of science, from computing to medicine.
In May ’69 Apollo 10 went all the way to the NY Coleyome-teve Mer tu ule meltiar II the tests, but did not land.
This was attached to the Service Escape tower Module with its life-support equipment and rocket, except for final re-entry to Earth.
The Lunar Module detached from the CM to land on the Moon with two astronauts.
This versatile device dates back to 1960 when United States physicist Theodore Maiman powered up the first working version.
Prokhorov’s research work helped Maiman to construct a practical laser.
How A LASER WORKS A laser is based on a substance called the active medium — in Maiman’s case, a rod of ruby crystal.
A flash tube wrapped around it pumps MASERS TO LASERS light energy into the crystal.
These gather together, bounce to and fro similar device called a maser, that works with between mirrors, become stronger and finally microwaves rather than light waves, had been emerge through the partially reflecting mirror. built in'1954.
Light flash from tube gives atoms extra energy A scientist tries a laser using gas as the active medium.
The genetic substances DNA and RNA have different sequences of chemicals that code for different amino acids — substances which clip together to make proteins, from which all living things are built.
The first ‘code-word’ to be identified was the sequence UUU which represented the tL isenctic sequences show up as ‘bar codes’, amino acid phenylalanine.
Holograms are images that can be viewed from different angles to see around and behind objects, yet they are contained on a flat surface.
THE HOLOGRAM A holographic image is recorded on photographic film like an ordinary photo, But it does not show different colours and shades of light.
It shows where two sets of laser light beams come together and interfere or cancel each other out.
These suggested how long-distance air travel might progress in different ways.
FAST VERSUS BIG my Tf; Concorde was for people with money and in a hurry.
But the plane encountered several problems such as the high temperatures created on its metal ‘skin’ by its great speed, its noisy engines, and the sonic The manned submersible Trieste dived to 10,911 m in the Pacific, in 1960. boom as it went faster than sound.
It ‘Sun yuasoOuaN went into service in 1970, and in various The Jumbo jet had a new type of jet engine, the turbofan.
It was similar to a standard jet but with a very large, angle-bladed turbine ‘fan’ at the front.
The fan worked like a propeller to push air backwards around the engine for added thrust.
This ‘bypass’ air also made the main engine run at a lower temperature and more quietly.
Large fan provides Turbines drive compressor extra thrust and large fan models since, has sold well over 1,000 compared to Concorde’s 15.
Japanese Shinkansen ‘bullet trains’ went into service in 1965S, almost halving the journey time on some routes.
The hovercraft, invented in the 1950s, went into service on short, busy sea routes such as across the Channel between Britain and France.
SMALLEST AND DEEPEST The ’60s pioneering spirit extended from space to the ground and far below.
The tiny Mini car was advertised as fun to drive and convenient around town.
It caught the public’s imagination despite cramped seats and minimal luggage space.
In 1960 Jacques Piccard and Donald Walsh descended to the deepest part of the ocean, the Marianas Trench near Japan, in the deep-sea submersible Trieste — still a record deep dive.
THE PERSONAL JET The Bell Company’s ‘Pogo’ was an experimental platform thrust into the air by its own jet.
It was part of a combined research programme into vertical take-off jet planes, military ‘jet belts’ and maybe one day, personal jetpowered hovercraft.
A Bell Pogo trip in 1967. oO The Austin-Morris Mini was designed in 1959 by Alec Issigonis.
Its transverse engine and front wheel drive saved parts and so space and cost.
THE MAKE '*) COLLAPSE mpresiarernien Unitary or modular building seeme ‘Unitary technology’ safe if all modules stayed intact to * ’ strength to the whole structure.
Rae “i 7 Pe a y ts ao In doubt, Inspired by the experimental spirit of the decade, architects and building engineers designed houses The collapse based on mass-produced sections or modules.
These of Ronan were made in factories, then quickly ‘plugged in’ on Tate Point, London, 1968. site.
The aim was to manufacture modern, safe, hygienic housing at a very low cost.
MASS-PRODUCED LIVING BOXES The modular system applied the idea of the assembly line to making entire houses, offices and factories.
But in practice some of the materials were not strong or long-lasting enough.
In certain buildings the roofs leaked, the walls and joints cracked and the floors were not level.
FLOAT GLASS Glass was easy to blow into bottles and similar shapes but difficult to form into large, flat sheets.
The float glass process developed by the 1960s was a great leap forward.
The glass oozed like syrup to form a ribbon, smooth on the top and against the mirror-like surface of the tin beneath.
Many petrochemical by-products and other substances can be broken down into what chemists call monomer hydrocarbons.
The monomers are then heated and treated to link them together into polymers, like beads in enormously long molecular necklaces, to produce dozens of different types of plastics.
MAKING ACRYLIC Acrylic is the plastic polymer PMMA, polymethy| Acrylic fibre is drawn methacrylate.
It can be ‘squirted’ through tiny through dryer and then on is holes in a spinneret to make fibres, or to be stretched, crimped ; _ y formed into blocks and sheets for all kinds and baled / of uses, from signs to aircraft windows.
Liquid acrylic is forced through spinneret into bath to form fibre Mix is dissolved in solvent Raw ingredients are combined or Impurities are polymerised filtered out nas ( / Neal PLASTICS EVERYWHERE Acrylic-type plastics had first been developed in the 1930s as glass-like clear j sheets.
With names such as Perspex and | Plexiglass they were used for high-speed or high-stress applications where glass might shatter, splinter and cause injury.
In ay the 1960s, acrylic followed rayon and nylon to become the latest, most fashionable artificial fibre.
BECAUSE THEY’RE THERE The rush to develop new plastics and similar 1967’s Blow Chair supposedly spread the body's weight for ultra; comfort.
But a tiny pinprick... artificial materials led to some very unusual products, such as see-through televisions and blow-up furniture.
With the pioneering feel of the space race, materials technologists pushed these new substances to the limit in all manner of Ea unusual ways.
THE THROWAWAY SOCIETY C) During the 1960s most people were not yet aware of environmental concerns and the need to conserve and recycle natural resources.
The same applied to manufacturing. a These transparent dresses e from 1966 were made of te plastic.
They were uncomfortable and | sticky to wear, but that mattered little. ie They were designed to be worn once or 1 twice, then thrown away.
Dresses by Hechter of Paris. bECTECH Domestic electrical equipment of the 1960s benefited greatly from the space race and military research.
By 1970 transistors, in general use since the early 1950s, were already being replaced by integrated circuits.
THE MARVELLOUS CHIP An integrated circuit, IC, is made with all the transistors, resistors and other electronic components already in position and connected together or integrated, rather than manufactured separately and linked by wires.
Integrated circuits are made from semiconductor materials such as silicon or germanium, grown in high-pressure vats as lump crystals.
Components are etched or ‘carved’ onto the surface with acid or laser light.
L 5 Chip incorporated into plastic case with connectors ; 4 Wafer cut into chips ——.t# 3 Components printed or etched on wafer 2 Silicon wafer Integrated circuits are checked on electronic test rigs before being passed for use. ( <_f 3 THE COMPUTER KEY In the early 1960s computers were rare and room-sized, found only in government departments, big businesses and universities.
They were not operated directly by ordinary typewriter-style keyboards until 1967.
Before In-car television Pega te ome ae ae ‘ _ | was available in ed in from reels of punched paper tape o1 1963.
But the this the programmes and information were Large reels of magnetic tape magnetic tape.
People had money to spend, which encouraged new areas of manufacturing.
Radios, televisions, vinyl record \ Ji players and similar equipment sold in huge f numbers.
One of medical history’s greatest events took place in Cape Town, South Africa, in 1967 — the first human heart transplant.
A NEW ERA Chief surgeon for this historic operation was Christiaan Barnard . it was not a very demanding or difficult procedure.
Its importance lay in the old idea that if the heart stopped, the body was dead.
In 1966 French doctors were first to use the idea of brain inactivity, rather than a stopped heart, as the main sign of death.
LASER EYE SURGERY Focused laser beam hits the retina with pinpoint accuracy Blue-green light of the argon laser enters the eye through the dilated pupil Optic nerve A Bee is prepared for 1960s.
One of the first practical uses of laser light was eye surgery, from 1962.
A ruby laser beam could be directed accurately to cut just a tiny area with its intense heat, leaving nearby tissues undamaged.
The beam came to a concentrated point or focus inside the eye so that it passed through the outer layers without harming them and carried out its work at a precise depth.
The beam’s heat also ‘welded’. blood vessels closed as it passed, so there was less bleeding than with a scalpel incision.
The laser can ‘spot-weld’ a loose or detached retina back to the inside of the eyeball.
In 1965, Francis LEsperance argued that the bluegreen light of an argon laser would be more effective than a ruby laser.
In 1968, he treated his first human patient with an argon laser. ) in the early microscope could see much smaller items than the light microscope.
These small blobs are individual bacterial germs, seen through a scanning electron microscope.
SEEING SMALLER Electron microscopes use beams of electron particles to see much tinier objects than with a an ordinary light microscope.
Instead of looking through a tiny object or very thin slice, as in other microscopes, the electron beam scans to and fro across its surface.
It altered the They included measles in female hormonal cycle to 1965 and rubella (german Pict ean ae measles) in 1969.
In a few people fell ill after 1967 another hormone-based P vaccination.
New guidelines i ; a ee were introduredieeaaan pill was introduced to do the \ people who had certain opposite.
Most types of electrical appliances designed to take the hard work out of chores, such as washing machines and vacuum cleaners, were well established by the 1960s.
The new generation of gadgets was more to do with convenience, entertainment, leisure and just plain fun.
FAST FASHION Shrinking electronics, smaller batteries, plastics, and new methods of mass production made for a whole range of smaller, more portable, hand-held devices.
They were designed to look bright, work quickly, and be simple to operate.
ADGETS f The skateboard craze began in 1962 with boards rolling on ball-bearing wheels made of new, soft but tough rubber.
TIME FOR ACCURACY A quartz wristwatch is based on a crystal of quartz — the same mineral that forms sand grains.
An electric current passed through the crystal makes it oscillate or vibrate exactly 32,768 times each second.
A microchip counts the vibrations and produces regular pulses of electricity that turn the rotor, and via gears, the watch hands.
Drive wheel Rotor turns hands Quartz crystal oscillator Capacitor Microchip (GEES SMALL MUSIC Large reels of magnetic tape were used by professionals to record and play music.
Unlike vinyl discs, Cassette tape was too you could record as well as narrow and moved too slowly past the record/playback was also more convenient than | head to produce highquality sound.
This new sound medium discs and less affected by HAPPY SNAPS ‘Convenience’ and ‘ease of use’ were the new key terms.
Consumer gadgets seemed simple, but this masked sophisticated design and advanced technology.
The photos might not be quite up qrie & to professional standards but were good MAO inst enough for most people.
Feltand fibre-tip pens were softer and easier to control. artificial grass Astroturf, first used in the US’s Houston Astrodome.
But in the next decade, the 1970s, the effects began to appear as pollution and other environmental problems.
ATOM The smallest part of a pure substance (chemical Putsar A relatively small, element) that can exist amazingly heavy or dense star naturally.
Most atoms are that gives off pulses of energy. made of three types of even It is probably a fast-spinning tinier particles called protons, _ neutron star left over from the _ neutrons and electrons. explosion of a giant star.
It | Amplification by Stimulated perhaps consists of an entire Emission of Radiation. galaxy falling into a giant black hole.
Striking photographs illustrate this informative account of the revolutionary thinking which changed the world forever. 1960s tells the story of the pioneers of innovations such as manned space travel, genetic science, transplant surgery, high-speed electric trains, and plastics.
