This is an example of a student written essay.Click here for sample essays written by our professional writers.
View full disclaimer Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of UKEssays.com.
The Cuban Missiles Crisis was a very important part of the world history because of the risk of nuclear war that could lead to the destruction of the world.
During Batista’s, the ruthless ruler of Cuba, regime, Cuba per capita income was twice greater than other countries in general.
Furthermore, the USA put a very strict controlled on Cuban sugar production.
Furthermore, Batista was a corrupted dictator, and a pro western ruler.
Between 1956 to 1959, Fidel Castro, Ernesto Che Guevera, and his younger brother Rual used the tactic Guerilla warfare to fight against Batista’s army at Mount Sierra Maestra in Cuba where he gained support from the local framers.
On January 1959, Castro and his troops were able to overthrown Batista and his government.
After the overthrown of Batista government, Fidel Castro set up a shadow government consisted of major Cuban political figures.
Two months after the victory of the Guerrilla force, Castro paid his first visit to the USA where his story was romanticized by the media.
He was supposed to have a meeting with Eisenhower; however, the President refused to have a meeting with him, and went to the golf court.
During the meeting, he refused to accept USA financial support because he believed that it would continue the USA influence in Cuba.
On the other hands, the relation between the Cuba and the USSR had become more dynamic.
In order to reach economic independency from the USA, Castro turned to the USSR for support.
The Bay of Pig Invasion The Bay of Pig Invasion, January 3, 1961, was the CIA’s plan to overthrown Castro government by launching thousand of Cuban exiles on Cuba’s Bay of Pigs believing that only thousand of trained exiles would be able to overthrown Castro government.
However, the mission was a total failure because the Cuban army was already waiting for the Cuban exiles at the Bay of Pigs.
As a result, one hundred people were killed and thousands of people were taken as political prisoners.
However, the main reason was the United States insecurity of its decline in Latin America domination.
Causes The Soviet Union’s Hidden Agendas There were several reasons for the USSR to installed missile in Cuba.
Furthermore, during the 50s and the 60s the United States had advanced the USSR in terms of the arm race, therefore, Khrushchev decided to deploy missiles in Cuba as a mean to for the USSR to reach symmetry with the USA, which would provide him with negotiation power for the missile trade.
His motive to reach symmetry in terms of arm race with the USA could be seen as a mean for the USSR to boost its nation prestige.
Cuban insecurity The main reason for Cuba agreement on the installation of missile with the USSR was its insecurity.
After the Bay of Pig Invasion in 1961, the CIA planed many assassin plots on Fidel Castro.
The plots varied from poisoning, car bombs, to massive underwater explosion.
Moreover, the Cuban intelligent discovered that the CIA planed another invasion on Cuba, Operation Mongoose, which would be more substantial than the previous invasion.
Therefore, Castro decided to let the USSR installed missiles on their island.
Our academic experts are ready and waiting to assist with any writing project you may have.
From simple essay plans, through to full dissertations, you can guarantee we have a service perfectly matched to your needs.
View our services The Crisis and the Resolution In 1962, the USSR sent a cargo ship to Cuba.
After the President was informed, there was a meeting between President John F Kennedy and the EXCOMM, the Committee of the national Security.
One of the most obvious plans was the scheme to use air strike to remove missiles from Cuba.
However, Robert Kennedy, John F Kennedy’s younger brother, advised the President not to use air strike because there was no way to guarantee that the air strike could remove all of the missiles from Cuba.
However, the USSR’s cargo ships did not turn back, but its cargo ships did not break the USA quarantine.
Nevertheless, from October 22 to 28, President JFK and Chairman Khrushchev exchanged several letters.
On October 27, one day after Khrushchev second letter was sent, the US’s U-2 plane was shot down in Cuba.
This act was seen by some of American politician as an invitation to start war.
However, because of the secret meeting between Robert Kennedy and Soviet ambassador Dobrynin, the situation was able to cool down.
Robert Kennedy assured that the President would remove the missiles in Turkey On October 28, JFK sent Khrushchev another letter proposed that in exchange for the USSR to uninstall missiles from Cuban soil within the UN inspection, the USA would never invade Cuba, and secretly uninstall missiles from Turkey.
Khrushchev accepted the proposal from President Kenndy; thus, both countries were able to resolve their conflicts.
It removed missiles from Turkey, and made a public announcement that it would never invade Cuba.
Nevertheless, JFK’s motives to secretly remove of the missiles in Turkey and Italy should be emphasized.
Impacts The Cuban Missiles Crisis left several impacts on the USA and the USSR foreign policy.
In addition, in August 5, 1963, the USA and the USSR both signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
Subsequently, the USA and the USSR continue the arm race for another twenty five years.
Furthermore, the treaty caused the relation between the USSR and China to decline.
Because of the treaty, China concluded that the USSR was being weak, and more importantly, sold its soul to the capitalist camp.
Hence, China broke out from the USSR’s spear of influence and gained the status of superpower by itself.
The main causes of the crisis were the Soviet Union hidden agendas and the Cuban insecurity, which was caused by the United States of America.
During the crisis, President John F Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev exchanged many letters before the resolution could be made.
The period of the crisis was the period that the cold war reached its peak because both superpowers almost confront each other.
If they had confronted each other, the use of nuclear weapons could have happened.
After the crisis, the USSR removed missiles from Cuba under the UN supervision in exchanged for the USA to remove the Jupiter missiles in Turkey, and to never invade Cuba.
Moreover, President Kennedy began to view the USA relationship with the USSR in terms of coexistence.
However, the nuclear competition still continued for the next 25 years.
Furthermore, both countries began the competition in the new area, which was the strategic competition.
Dissertation Resources at UKDiss.com How to Write an Essay Essay Buyers Guide Referencing Tools Essay Writing Guides Masters Writing Guides EssaysHistory Facebook logo Twitter logo Reddit logo LinkedIn logo WhatsApp logo Mendeley logo Researchgate logo We've received widespread press coverage since 2003 We can help with your essay Find out more Safe & Trusted Your UKEssays purchase is secure and we're rated 4.4/5 on reviews.co.uk Bespoke All work is written to order.
