When United States leaders discovered that the Sotine mission to gather data.
The pictures the viets were installing nuclear missiles in Cuba, aircraft took of the ground disclosed developthey were stunned.
The photos leader Nikita Khrushchev or Fidel Castro’s revealed Soviet efforts to install approximately intentions.
In October repeatedly warned the Soviets against attempt1962, Americans did not know the answers to ing to put missiles in Cuba.
The Soviets had these questions. assured the United States that they had no Khrushchev’s motives aside, the White intention of giving the Cubans nuclear misHouse was shocked that the Soviets had igsiles.
They pledged that Cuba would receive nored United States warnings against putting missiles only nonnuclear weapons to defend the island in Cuba.
President Kennedy was especially infrom attack. dignant at the secrecy surrounding the Soviet operation.
Kennedy administration officials recognized that members of Congress and the “ There is no need for the Soviet Union to shift its weapons for the repulsion of aggression, for a retaliatory blow, American media would press for a strong U.S. response. to any other country, for instance Cuba.
For the search for sites for them beyond the first time, American territory would be highly boundaries of the Soviet Union.” vulnerable to Soviet nuclear attack.
From the —TASS United States perspective, the question was not whether September 11, 1962 the missiles should be removed but how.
Initially, President Kennedy and his The discovery of evidence that nuclear advisers decided to keep their knowledge of missiles had been sent to Cuba forced United States the missiles secret from the Soviets and the leaders to respond.
On October 16, the president the reconnaissance photos were examined on called together his closest and most trusted October 15 was the most dangerous confrontaadvisers to help him manage the crisis.
This tion between the Soviet Union and the United group was the Executive Committee of the States of the Cold War.
Today, it is known to Americans as “the President Kennedy and ExComm met to Cuban missile crisis,” to Soviets as “the Caribconsider the options for removing the Soviet bean crisis,” and to Cubans as “the October missiles from Cuba.
At no other time in history has the three distinct choices for United States action, rangworld come so close to nuclear war. ing from the purely diplomatic to a full-scale military assault.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 2 had supporters within ExComm and President Kennedy weighed each carefully.
On October 20, President Kennedy decided on a blockade of Cuba by the United States Navy to prevent further shipments of military supplies to the island.
The president decided to use the word “quarantine” instead of the word “blockade” because international law considered a blockade to be an act of war.
This option allowed the president to steer a middle course among ExComm’s varied options.
Cuban President Fidel Castro was convinced that the United States was going to attack Cuba.
On October 26, 1962, he wrote a letter to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev.
