After the coverage of Katrina and Rita, I’m convinced that you have to flunk kindergarten to become a reporter.
I have a rise of 3.6’ in the first 24’ section and then a platform followed by a rise of 1.8’ in the next 12’ and then a platform and a run of 27’ with a rise of 4.05.
And to think I offered to let them stay in my shelter for only $4,300 per person per day.
Lewis Burwell Puller was the scion of an old and respected, but not wealthy, Virginia family.
The family was proud of their Confederate officers who had been killed during the War of Northern Aggression, that dark page in American history.
He lost a leg in Nam and stumped his way to Basra during the 1st Gulf War in charge of the VII Corps in the highly successful ""Hail Mary"" maneuver against fourteen Iraqi divisions.
On April 5, 2005, Bush gave Army Sergeant First Class Paul Ray Smith the Medal of Honor for actions he took on April 4, 2003.
This was the first Medal of Honor awarded to anyone for action in Iraq or the Persian Gulf.
The most recent previous recipients were Gary Gordon and Randy Shughart in Somalia.
At least getting a loan and buying a completed shelter, I wouldn’t have to tar and feather it myself.
As I stood and contemplated that 24’ deep hole, it occurred to me that I’d forgotten about a water supply.
Palmdale treats its water in order to avoid people getting the whatever.
I had gone to bottled water for a number of years, a good plan, and then replaced the bottled water with a reverse osmosis filter, a bad plan.
I set up a search on my computer to find the link in one of my nearly 50 stories where I wrote about those plastic water tanks.
Between the shed and the planter, I had room to put in a fuel tank and a water tank, buried, of course.
One squirrel had said he had 2 generators, a 4kw and an 11 kw and that he rarely used the 11 kw.
I was thinking of something more on the order of the 1 Mw when it occurred to me that with natural/LP gas prices rising and diesel being about $3.40 a gallon my appetite was bigger than my pocketbook.
I settled for 3rd best, Generac, and went shopping at TSC in Bakersfield.
It was cheaper to buy the Generac Guardian Industrial/Commercial Portable generator than the same sized unit as a Generac Emergency Automatic Home Standby Generators $2,395 $3,499.
I said screw it and bought an Onan RSI 5000, expensive at half the price.
We’ll put the propane and water behind the shed and the generator in a little room off the access to the shelter.
Knowing how things work in the real world, maybe I’d better go for a 1,700-gallon cistern.
I can put a gray water holding tank under the floor of the shelter and pump it to the sewer.
Once I get everything done, I have about 5,655ft 3 of dirt I have to get hauled off.
That’s what happens when you get old and your memory occasionally works.
I replaced the chemical toilet with a regular toilet and a wastewater holding tank with a sewage pump.
Anytime anyone doesn’t do it the way she thinks it should be done, she argues with them.
I doubt that a Volcano will erupt in the middle of the La Brea Tar Pits.
Of all the things that could happen, a nuclear war and an earthquake are the most likely so far as California are concerned.
I’m not so sure China would attack, that would really screw up their Wal-Mart contract.
You know what I think the avian flu, H5N1, seems to be the topic of the moment.
It was those guys over there that do all of the offshore technical support and their neighbors.
What’s his name had the technical service contract for 50 different United States firms.
Actually, he can’t; he says they have a problem that will be fixed, when it’s fixed.
It can’t be a fire; it’s a stupendous fire with smoke billowing twice as high as the build is tall.
Here’s this gal standing under a streetlight explaining the accident that happened 6 hours earlier.
Then they interviewed a guy with the fire department who explained how they would handle the fire.
We talked about having a disaster drill, but decided it wasn’t worth the effort.
If a disaster happened, everyone would grab their checkbooks and guns and boogie over to my house.
Very little maintenance is needed to keep your MIA in superb condition.
This is especially true with National Match and Super Match rifles, whose actions are glass bedded in their stocks.
Unnecessary removal promotes wear, sloppy fit, inaccuracy and defeats the purpose of the bedding.
Please do not field strip your match rifle unless it is absolutely necessary.
I 21 read all of the things I wasn’t supposed to do and wondered if I dare shoot the gun.
I wrapped up a belt in an envelope and mailed it to Kirkpatrick Leather Company in Laredo.
I told them I had 2 Berretta Stampedes, one with a 714” barrel for a right side draw and a 4 3 /4” model for the crossdraw.
They called me and I gave them my debit card number and they said I’d have the leather in a week.
Then you added 12 bullets plus the weight of the holsters and you were really loaded down.
After you put cartridges in the cartridge belt, you almost needed suspenders or a bigger butt than I have.
Always had trouble wearing cowboy leather because my waist was as big as the bottom end.
There was a solution, Sam Browne to the rescue, I added suspenders and called them shoulder straps.
On his Saturday morning address to the nation, he mentioned what was happening and then put in a plug for extending the troops in Iraq for another year.
I told Ron that Derek was sending me the rifle in pieces, but it was Mary, Derek was Over There.
I had a 55-gallon drum that I was filling with gasoline, 5 gallons at a time.
I figured that 55-gallons of gas would get us from here to there, wherever that was.
With a full tank and 55 spare gallons, we could get about 1,675 miles from Palmdale.
They said that this vaccine had 2 A stains and one other strain, so we could hope.
There are 16 different HA subtypes and 9 different NA subtypes of flu A viruses.
However, when we talk about “bird flu” viruses, we are referring to those flu A subtypes that continue to occur mainly in birds.
When we talk about “human flu viruses” we are referring to those subtypes that occur widely in humans.
There are only three known subtypes of human flu viruses (HI N1, HI N2, and H3N2); it is likely that some genetic parts of current human flu A viruses came from birds originally.
Flu A viruses are constantly changing, and they might adapt over time to infect and spread among humans.
There currently is no vaccine to protect humans against the H5N1 virus that is being seen in Asia.
Research studies to test a vaccine to protect humans against H5N1 virus began in April 2005.
Ayman al-Zawahiri is number the #2 guy in al Qaeda and formerly the head of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad paramilitary organization.
Abu Musab al-Zarqawi is a Sunni Jordanian insurgent and the leader of al Qaeda in Iraq.
Al-Zarqawi’s real name is believed to be Ahmad Fadeel al-Nazal al-Khalayleh.
Like other cults, such as Jim Jones’ People's Temple, the Heavens Gate sect or the Order of the Solar Temple, members are persuaded to give up their own lives for the promise of a paradise beyond.
This technique was used a millennium ago by Hassan I Sabbah, a mystic, alchemist and master terrorist on whom bin Laden probably models himself.
Hassan's Order of Assassins was made up of suicide killers with poisoned daggers who believed that their leader had the key to the gates of Heaven.
The Assassins transformed the act of murder into a system directed largely against Seljuk Muslim rulers that had been persecuting their sect.
They were meticulous in killing the targeted individual, seeking to do so without any additional casualties and innocent loss of life, although they were careful to cultivate their terrifying reputation by slaying their victims in public, often in mosques.
Typically they approached using a disguise; their weapon of choice a dagger, rejecting poison, bows and other weapons that allowed the attacker to escape.
Our goal is to prevent regimes that sponsor terror from threatening America or our friends and allies with weapons of mass destruction.
Viruses cannot “live” or reproduce without getting inside some living cell, whether it's a plant, animal, or bacteria.
An alcohol molecule is 0.96 picometers in length, and a picometer is 1/1000 of a nanometer.
He couldn’t stay; he and Linda were going over to Fess Parker’s vineyard.
At the time he was famous in France for his Davy Crockett and Daniel Boone roles, French distributors found they had to rename him on posters, in TV programmers...etc. for the French audience/ Public, into ""Fier"" Parker.
The advantage to the MIA is that it’s almost legal the way I have mine configured.
As long as I don’t show off the 20-round magazines, no one will give me any trouble, I hope.
And that’s how the 3 of us came to each have a Loaded model MIA rifle, purchased through straw women in Arkansas.
It was beginning to seem like a waste of time and money, no one nuked the United States and we hadn’t invaded Iran, yet.
To top it off, both Clarence and I got the regular flu after we’d gotten flu shots.
Our rule of thumb was you could put anything you wanted in the freezer, but it had to be enough to feed 20 people.
If we had to somehow squeeze in Clarence’s kids, we’d make room and slice the meat a lot thinner.
Still, it was racing season and the radios had new batteries and were ready to go.
Having seen the pictures of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, I have to wonder if anyone would win a war between India and Pakistan.
Neither country had mastered fusion and their bombs and warheads were about 20kt, max.
If you’ve watch the E-Ring last week, you know that Dennis Hopper doesn’t think the United States would invade Iran because of the terrain.
It appears that they aren’t going to continue the show, it’s shown as ‘complete’ at IMDb.com, but the monster shows are doing fine.
Although used occasionally in later experimental devices, the Little Boy design was used only once as a weapon because of the extreme danger of a misfire.
A simple crash could drive the ""bullet"" into the ""target"" and release lethal radiation doses or even a full nuclear detonation.
Even if the force of a crash did not set the bomb off, if water entered the fail safe system, it would be shorted out, possibly leading to a detonation of the bomb.
We were in a hurry to get everything done, but we were getting older and moving slower.
Our hearts were in it, including Ron and Clarence’s worn out and repaired hearts, 28 but the bodies didn’t cooperate.
There were also those ladders and we concluded that we all use the pet basket, one at a time.
The only problem with that was the war would be over before we all made it in the shelter.
I suspected that when the announcement came on TV, Chris and Patti, Dick, Dave and Lance would show up with their families looking for a room for a couple of weeks.
The air filter was rated at 50 people and we’d still have 10ft 2 apiece with 50.
Lance had been a Special Forces officer in Vietnam; he’d be good to have on our side.
Chris didn’t own any guns and I figured that if any of them did, it would be Dick and Lance although I didn’t think that either of them hunted.
Clarence thought the rifle was awful loud and I told him to buy a muffler.
Now we had the pattern for the adapter and the muffler and Dave had the lathe.
Clarence let Dave dismantle it and draw patterns with all of the measurements.
He said if the world ever ended, he’d think about the mufflers but he could machine the adapters now so we could install them on our rifles.
I suspected when he got bored, he’d probably make the mufflers, just to see if he could.
Dave said he’d figure it out and have all of the metal supplies he needed.
For the next week or two, I noticed the light on in Dave’s garage late at night.
He has the biggest collection of dirt bikes I’ve ever seen, at least 20 and possibly as many as 30.
Dick’s garage is filled with lumber of every size, shape and description.
He has a table saw, a radial arm saw, drill press and lots of carpentry equipment.
Chris’s garage looks like an auto repair shop because of his constant building and repairing his race car.
He has the Mig welder, sheet metal brakes, grinders and all that stuff.
Amongst those 3 neighbors, we had the capability of building about anything we wanted.
Dick was sort of a jack-of-all-trades, installing gas piping for the gas company.
I hadn’t planned it that way, but this was, in some ways, the perfect blue-collar neighborhood.
I tried to make friends with the couple who bought Dan and Dawn’s house, but they preferred to hang with the wetbacks in the house between Chris and me.
The Country of Mexico obviously thought that California, Arizona, New Mexico and Texas we still part of that country, they had more of their population north of the border than south.
Ours had started out the typical multi-ethnic California neighborhood in 1987.
The way these things went, eventually the neighborhoods went Hispanic or black and ours was Hispanic.
The Hispanics couldn’t afford the houses at the prices they were going for so they sublet.
The 29 house between Chris and me seemed to be more of an apartment house with a constantly changing group of people.
I’m explaining, not complaining, one of these days, we’d have our disaster and it might be open season.
The Pakistani Meteorological Department put the magnitude at 7.5, and Japan's Meteorological Agency put it at 7.8.
In January 2001, some 30,000 people died in a magnitude 7. quake in western India.
His legislation would mandate alcohol tests any time a boat is involved in a fatal accident.
I told him that he’d better leave them with me, they were illegal and I didn’t want him to get in trouble.
Whether or not he’d been able to identify the super-secret aerospace metal that Surefire used in their suppressors would have to wait until we fired a few rounds through the mufflers and checked the rear baffle.
But late at night, I could go out and shoot the rifle and no one would be any the wiser.
I didn’t know if Ron and Clarence had done any night practice, but as quiet as the rifle was, they could have.
We talked about it, as much as anyone who was in Vietnam was willing to talk about it.
Although often quoted and stated this phrase doesn’t come from the Bible nor is it even Biblical in origin.
At last he came to a part of the road where the wheels sank halfway into the mire, and the more the horses pulled, the deeper sank the wheels.
So the Waggoner threw down his whip, and knelt down and prayed to Hercules the Strong.
He didn’t want me to be offended so he called and I explained about the clique that exists in every Methodist Church, generally, the Country Club Set who sort of look down their noses at we mere mortals.
For a while I attended the First Church of the Open Bible in Des Moines.
They should change their name to the First Church of the Open Hypocrites.
Once you join the Methodist Church, they carry you on their rolls until someone tells them you’re dead or you officially resign.
The clique to end all cliques is Grace United Methodist Church in Des Moines, Iowa.
You rub elbows with Iowa Supreme Court Judges, high ranking public officials and it goes way beyond the Country Club Set.
I didn’t transfer my membership to another Methodist Church until 1997.
They should have left me alone, I rarely get mad, but I always get even.
Don’t you believe it, that’s only true if you’re getting even is an active, not a passive act and there is more than one way to skin a cat.
If the theater is on fire and it’s filled with those folks from south of the border, they probably wouldn’t understand if you yelled ‘Fire’ when you saw it.
Tick, North Korea tested a nuclear weapon and the United States moved the Pacific Fleet to the southern Sea of Japan.
My Fellow Americans, Recent developments in the western Pacific have forced me to deploy all of our Pacific Naval assets.
As I speak, half of our carrier forces are moving to the East China Sea to aid Taiwan in its time of need.
During the summer of 2004 the Navy surged some aircraft carriers from their homeports ...to generate as many as seven of 12 carriers on station ...for Coalition operations.
The ability to push that kind of military capability to the four corners of the world is quite remarkable and recent.
Through this series of deployments, surge operations and exercises, the Navy will demonstrate and exercise a new approach to operations and maintenance.
In an ongoing effort to improve our capacity to deploy the fleet, changes were made to our operations.
We currently have 8 Carrier Strike Groups deployed, 2 will be ready in 30 days and the remaining 2 in 90 days or less.
I cannot and will not remove the 2 Carrier Strike Groups from the Middle East as they are supporting our ongoing effort on the War on Terror.
I have ordered the remaining carriers to accelerate their plans to deploy and my advisers tell me that well have 2 additional groups at sea within 2 weeks and the other 2 within 45 days.
There remains no easy way to increase the number of carriers deployed with the Pacific Fleet.
The 2 groups deploying in the near term will replace those in the Middle East and when relieved, they will deploy to the Pacific.
The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of their country; but he that stands it now, deserves the love and thanks of man and woman.
Tyranny, like hell, is not easily conquered; yet we have this consolation with us, that the harder the conflict, the more glorious the triumph.
If called upon to prevail against the North Koreans and the Chinese, we shall.
This is 33 not a war against Muslims; it is a war against all who would destroy our way of life.
As far as your country is concerned, it would be difficult to say even in general terms what this would have meant for them.
In the first place, your country would have been burned in the fire of war.
There's no doubt that your people would have fought courageously or that they would have died heroically.
Castro wrote him a letter complaining about the Soviet Union caving in to Kennedy.
It occurred July 20, 1960, off Cape Canaveral, Florida, and within three hours a second Polaris test missile was launched.
On November 15, 1960, the submarine and its 16 Polaris Als began the first patrol.
The first successful submerged launch of the Polaris A2 came from the USS Ethan Allen on 23 October 1961 off the Florida coast.
On 26 June 1962, the POLARIS A2 began its initial operational patrol when the USS Ethan Allen departed Charleston, South Carolina.
Trident II D-5 is the sixth generation member of the United States Navy's Fleet Ballistic Missile program, which started in 1956.
While Trident I was designed to the same dimensions as the Poseidon missile it replaced, Trident II is a little larger.
The Trident II D-5 is a three-stage, solid propellant, inertially guided FBM with a range of more than 4,000 nautical miles Trident II is more sophisticated with a significantly greater payload capability.
All three stages of the Trident II are made of lighter, stronger, stiffer graphite epoxy, whose integrated structure mean considerable weight savings.
The missile's range is increased by the aerospike, a telescoping outward extension that reduces frontal drag by about 50 percent.
Trident II is fired by the pressure of expanding gas in the launch tube.
When the missile attains sufficient distance from the submarine, the first stage motor ignites, the aerospike extends and the boost stage begins.
Within about two minutes, after the third stage motor kicks in, the missile is traveling in excess of 20,000 feet per second.
The ten Trident submarines in the Atlantic fleet were initially equipped with the D-5 Trident II missile.
The eight submarines in the Pacific were initially equipped with the C-4 Trident I missile.
In 1996 the Navy started to back fit the eight submarines in the Pacific to carry the D-5 missile.
We have 14 SSBNs, each equipped with 24 missiles and 8 warheads per missile, 2,688 warheads.
Finally we have the Minuteman III and Peacekeeper Missiles, anywhere from 1,000 to 2,000 warheads.
On top of that, we have the B-52s, the B-1 Bs and the fighter aircraft that can deliver B-61 In terms of sheer power, we’d win.
Check telephone numbers in family emergency plan and update as necessary.
Continue to be alert for suspicious activity and report it to authorities.
Review your family emergency plan and make sure all family members know what to do.
Expect some delays, baggage searches and restrictions at public buildings.
Check on neighbors or others that might need assistance in an emergency.
DEFCON 5 Normal peacetime readiness DEFCON 4 Normal, increased intelligence and strengthened security measures DEFCON 3 Increase in force readiness above normal readiness DEFCON 2 Further Increase in force readiness, but less than maximum readiness DEFCON 1 Maximum force readiness.
DEFENSE EMERGENCY: Major attack upon United States forces overseas, or allied forces in any area, and is confirmed either by the commander of a unified or specified command or higher authority or an overt attack of any type is made upon the United States and is confirmed by the commander of a unified or specified command or higher authority.
Air defense emergency is an emergency condition, declared by the Commander in Chief, North American Aerospace Defense Command.
Now, if you want, you can store all or some of your weapons in the cabinet in the shelter.
I’ll give both of you a 37 key to the shelter entrance and the gun cabinet I have down there.
China is qualitatively and quantitatively improving its strategic missile force.
This could provide a credible, survivable nuclear deterrent and counterstrike capability.
It is fielding more survivable missiles capable of targeting India, Russia, virtually all of the United States, and the Asia-Pacific Theater as far south as Australia and New Zealand.
China will also maintain a force of nuclear-armed CSS-5 MRBMs for regional contingencies.
China currently deploys approximately twenty silo-based, liquid-propellant CSS-4 ICBMs, which constitute its primary nuclear deterrent.
The Second Artillery also maintains approximately twenty liquid-fueled, more limited-range CSS-3 ICBMs to sustain its regional nuclear deterrent.
The Second Artillery will likely keep this older missile in service until it is replaced by the more survivable, road-mobile DF-31.
China supplements the aged CSS-2s with solid propellant, road-mobile CSS-5 MRBMs.
The mobility of the new DF-31-class missiles will enable these systems to operate over a larger area, making them more difficult to locate and neutralize.
The introduction of a new generation of SLBMs on China’s new ballistic-missile submarine will provide an additional survivable nuclear option.
Finally, replacement of the older, silo-based CSS-4 Mod 1 with the longer range CSS-4 Mod 2, coupled with the ongoing migration to mobile, solid-fueled systems will enhance the operational capabilities and survivability of China’s strategic missile force.
The law’s passage followed months of speculation by outside observers over its contents and a simultaneous lobbying effort on the part of Chinese officials to cast the law in benign terms, while closely guarding the draft of the text.
The law itself is broken into ten articles that codify, or render as legal instruments, policies and statements applied by the Chinese government to the Taiwan question.
Article Five reiterates China’s position that acceptance of “One China” is a necessary pre-condition for peaceful resolution.
Article Six enumerates the steps Beijing is willing to take to realize peaceful unification, such as expanding cross-Strait exchanges, including cultural, economic, educational, science and technology, health, and sports exchanges.
It also refers to “other activities” conducive to peace and stability, but does not offer details.
Article Seven specifies the range of issues that would be subject to negotiation during cross-Strait consultations.
Article Eight states the State Council and CMC “shall decide on and execute” nonpeaceful means to “protect China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity” if “secessionist 39 forces . . .cause the fact of Taiwan’s secession from China,” if “major incidents entailing Taiwan’s secession” occur, or if “possibilities for peaceful reunification” are exhausted.
Article Nine provides that during conflict, China will “exert its utmost” to protect lives, property, and rights of Taiwan civilians and foreign nationals on Taiwan, and the rights of Taiwan citizens in other parts of China.
Article Ten specifies that the law comes into force on the day of its proclamation.
Some PLA theorists are aware of the electromagnetic effects of using a high-altitude nuclear burst to generate high-altitude electromagnetic pulse , and might consider using HEMP as an unconventional attack, believing the United States and other nations would not interpret it as a use of force and as crossing the nuclear threshold.
This capability would most likely be used as part of a larger campaign to intimidate, if not decapitate, the Taiwan leadership.
HEMP causes a substantial change in the ionization of the upper atmosphere, including the ionosphere and magnetosphere.
These effects likely would result in the degradation of important war fighting capabilities, such as key communication links, radar transmissions, and the full spectrum of electro-optic sensors.
Additional effects could include severe disruptions to civil electric/power and transportation.
These effects cannot easily be localized to Taiwan and would likely affect the mainland, Japan, the Philippines, and commercial shipping and air routes in the region.
It’s a copy of The Military Power of the People’s Republic of China 2005.
Those are some of the key points and if China believes that Taiwan will secede, they’ll attack.
They have the entire ocean between the mainland and Taiwan under a missile umbrella.
Even if they don’t attack this country directly, we’re likely to see them using a series of HEMPs.
To demonstrate this fact he built a room coated with metal foil, and allowed high-voltage discharges from an electrostatic generator to strike the outside of the room.
He used an electroscope to show that there was no electric charge present on the inside of the room's walls.
I’d connected all of the pieces of sheet metal with pieces of cooper grounding mesh, which I had connected to one of my grounding rods.
For the next few days, I stayed up each night until 5am and slept until 1pm.
I’m telling you, those people next door must have a motel, and people were going in and out all night.
Chris’s radios were in a metal case in a metal cabinet, his truck, and should be well protected on the off chance that EMP hit us.
His generator was also mounted in the truck so it would likely survive too.
Since I only had 2 comments, I was holding chapter 3 until I felt justified in posting chapter 4.
I also read all of the comments hoping that when I got tired of a story or ran out of ideas, I could find and excuse to slide the cabins off into the canyon, like in Big John.
I’d given up proofreading more than a couple of times because if I missed an error twice, I was sure someone else would find it and send me an email.
I really liked the 1am to 5am shift and could get a lot written if I didn’t get too foggy in the head.
I had to take those at least 20 minutes before I ate to protect my stomach.
Plavix worked but costs $4 a pill, about the price of a pack of smokes.
You could tell if it was a fire truck from the diesel engine and that darned horn, but the cops and the ambulances all sounded the same.
I rigged up my little Berkeley TV with its 3-4” screen so I could keep an eye on the late night news.
Unlike when I’d gotten sick in 2003, I was getting a full night sleep and my health was holding up just fine for an 80 year old man.
Of course I wouldn’t be 63 until my next birthday, but it didn’t matter.
We finally gotten me a wheelchair ramp for the front door and the patio door, but I decided to just leave the wheelchair in the house unless I could make it work with my computer/radio table.
Ron bought a couple of the 8’ folding tables and Clarence a few folding chairs that looked like they come from the Palmdale Group.
Aside from the one time we’d fired our Ml As, we hadn’t bother to go back to a range.
I’d shot out the streetlight on the other side of 47th a couple of times, usually within a mag41 azine of ammo.
I did it so I could learn the gun and get used to cleaning it and clearing any malfunctions.
I had one magazine with 20 rounds all of the time and the other with ten.
I had some stripper clips off the net and an adapter so I could probably load the other 19 in 5-10 minutes.
I was debating buying one of those loaders they sell but they were some kind of plastic and I was getting a really bad attitude about plastic.
I got the MIA with the black fiberglass stock because it was cheaper and hopefully lighter.
I’d forgotten that the guy at Santa Fe Gun Galleria had told me they had several of the fiberglass stocks and I should buy the rifle with the walnut stock and he’d give me one.
He was right and I started sharpening Rambo I Derek had Rambo II and Rambo III would take a month of grinding to get the top sharp, a good project if we ended up in that shelter.
Sitting there writing at times, researching at others, keeping an eye on the motel next door and watching always for the EAS screen, the nights passed quickly and I managed to get Rambo one as sharp as it had ever been.
That was some hard steel and it took a while to get the top to the point where I could start using the stone.
Once they had the top sharp, I could take the stone and really get it sharp.
It has a compass on top and a hollow handle with some survival equipment.
I may sharpen this one up and carry 2 knives, one for everyday use and one for fighting.
Damon is ok, but he’s so focused on his being bi-polar, he is essentially worthless to himself and others.
I’m almost convinced that if the Chinese attack, they use HEMP and not bother with anything else.
About the only circumstance that would require an extended stay in the shelter would be a hit on LA, Plant 42 or Diablo Canyon.
If the Chinese are going to do anything, they’re going to do it within the next 2 weeks.
I could be wrong, but I’m guessing that those Groups will steam at 35knots or about 40mph.
It’s about 3,850 from Norfolk to Gibraltar and 2,250 miles from Gibraltar to Port Said.
Assuming the other two carriers depart when they reach Port Said, they can be in the East China Sea in less than a week; it’s only about 4,100 miles or 102. hours steaming 44 time.
If I were running this operation, I’d blockade the Straits of Malacca with a couple of l-class Los Angeles subs.
It might take 3 to put a tanker down quickly, but one should be enough to blow it up and start an uncontainable fire.
It was going to be close; there were more cases of H5N1 in Europe and Indonesia.
What he had said was that he wouldn’t be going where he first thought, the distance was the same but it would be in the direction they all prayed to.
The American CSGs were staying just outside of the protective missile umbrella the Chinese had installed to protect the ocean between the mainland and Taiwan.
They called the place the Taiwan Strait and it connected the South China Sea to the East China Sea to the north.
The area south of Taiwan was the Luzon Strait and the ocean to the east was the Philippine Sea.
The Chinese had been firing missiles on Taiwan for about a week, apparently trying to soften the island before attacking.
Most of the missiles they had deployed could barely reach Taiwan and were intended, I presume, to only protect the Strait.
They had a supply of larger missiles purchased from Russia with convention warheads and were using those against Taipei.
China had a lot of the solid-fueled, road-mobile DF-31 missiles, which the DIA had said would have initial operational capability in 2005-06.
When the intelligence agencies replaced Humint with Elint, they screwed the pooch.
The Chinese had satellites of their own and were perfectly capable of tracking American and Russian satellites.
China is currently upgrading all classes of its nuclear ballistic missiles, both quantitatively and qualitatively.
Beijing intends this program to improve its nuclear deterrence by increasing the number of warheads that can target the United States and augmenting the nuclear force’s operational capabilities for contingencies in East Asia.
There is also evidence showing that China is developing the MIRV capability for the DF-31 A and JL-2 to improve their strike capabilities.
The 7,000km-range DF-4 was reported upgraded to 8,000-10,000km range under the name of CZ-1D space launch vehicle project.
The improved missile is said to have been deployed in “ready-to-launch” status in silos.
Early reports suggested that China may only has about 20 DF-4s, 25 DF-5s, and several DF-31 However, some other sources indicated that by 2000 the PLA Second Artillery Corps could have deployed eight ICBM brigades, including three DF-5 brigades, three DF-4A brigades and two DF-31 brigades, each brigade with 12 ICBMs, giving the total number of I CBM in China’s inventory 96.
The JL-2, which is believed to also have MIRV warheads, has an estimated range of 8,000km.
This would allow the submarine to strike America and Europe from waters close to Chinese coasts.
The same people who generated the DODs report suggested that the range of 10,GOO12,000km DF-31 A ICBMs wouldn’t be deployed until 2007-09 and sea-based JL-2 SLBMs wouldn’t be deployed until 2008-10.
No explanation was given for the report being withheld until July 2005.
The WTC Commission said that that disaster was the fault of the intelligence agencies.
They were still arguing over whether or not to have a Katrina Commission to learn why a hurricane had devastated New Orleans and the Gulf Coast.
I can save them millions, these things run in cycles and Louisiana didn’t want the money spent on levees capable of protecting New Orleans against a Category 5 storm.
They were scrambling to get up the $61 million they stole from the feds.
If the truth dare be told, we were hoping to be gone before TSHTF but we forgot about God’s sense of humor.
It turned out that He was getting even for 90 combined years of our giving him the Bird.
Nothing too dramatic, He was a loving God these days and would give us just a little taste to get our attention.
All broadcast stations will follow activation procedures in the EAS Operating Handbook for a national level emergency.
The President of the United States or his representative will shortly deliver a message over the Emergency Alert System.
A local disaster was only a national emergency if you lived in New Orleans.
But wait, an Air France flight was just arriving at Kennedy and there were several passengers aboard with colds.
The San Andreas let loose with The Big One just before the Chinese launched and the people aboard the Air France flight all had the avian flu.
They also detonated 4 HEMP warheads over the US, immediately wiping out all of the electrical generation capabilities and making 90% of the vehicles in the United States inoperable.
Without electricity, the United States stock markets couldn’t open and the President responded in kind, wiping every major Chinese city off the face of the planet.
There weren’t enough replacement transformers in the world to get the lights back on anytime soon.
We heard on the radio that the USGS had given a preliminary magnitude to the quake on the San Andreas, M w 8.2.
We had to deal with the ground shaking every couple of hours plus radioactive fallout but didn’t know about the avian flu, yet.
We voted and Chris’s price of admission was changing the oil in the generator.
After we were able to come out of our overcrowded hole in the ground, Dick would see about getting the gas back on and repair any broken plumbing.
They muffle the sound and don’t totally silence the rifle, making muffler a more correct name.
It was becoming difficult to get upset about people dying, there had been so many since the turn of the century.
The WTC was only a month’s worth of highway deaths compressed into a very short time.
Japan, experienced in dealing with quakes of its own, said it was sending relief workers and $220,600 worth of goods such as blankets and tents.
Added to the $200,000 they pledged to the United States after Katrina, they should be close to broke.
Al Qaeda has put job advertisements on the Internet asking for supporters to help put together its Web statements and video montages, an Arabic newspaper reported.
The London-based Asharq al-Awsat said on its Web site this week that al Qaeda had ""vacant positions"" for video production and editing statements, footage and international media coverage about militants in Iraq, the Palestinian territories, Chechnya and other conflict zones where militants are active.
I’m sort of worried about that avian flu; regular flu shots won’t protect you against it.
Our house looked like someone had used it as the pins in a bowling alley, cracked in dozens of places, the patio cover down on the west end and most of the windows broken.
I looked in the sliding glass door to see what kind of shape the kitchen was in.
The false ceiling Sharon had put in had come down so I couldn’t tell much.
The place stunk, like someone had left food on the stove and it had rotted.
We didn’t have to worry about gas because of the earthquake valve and since the generator had run, I knew we didn’t have electricity.
Chris and Patti went to check on their home as did Dick, Dave and Lance.
Maybe this was what the outskirts of Hiroshima look like after they dropped the atom bomb.
From what we could learn on the single radio frequency, the earthquake had extended from just north of San Bernardino all the way past Ft.
The same radio listed the cities that had been hit with nukes, 10 including Washington.
Then to make matters worse, the HEMP attack had shut down everything electrical.
I didn’t have a chain, but did have a towing strap and they could use that to move the downed light poles.
I gave Ron and Clarence the CD V-715 and told them once we got the street cleared, it might be a good idea if they checked on their homes.
They should, I suggested, travel together and maybe take along the boys to enhance their firepower.
My shed must have slid 5-6’ and it was off its slab, a problem that would require emptying the shed before several of us could push it back in place.
We can use Coleman stoves, ice chests, guns and ammo and a lot of things.
We survivalists prefer to think of it in term of strategic reallocation.
The California National Guard could have been in Palmdale much sooner than this.
They had those MOPP suits, the battledress over garments that had charcoal liners.
I have to see if I could get my computer up and check the field manuals I had on CDROMs to what the criteria was for them entering an area with residual fallout.
When Ron and Clarence returned 3 hours later, it was a mixture of good and bad news.
They also got propane and Coleman camp stoves, fuel, empty propane bottles and ice chests.
They must have done this between Ron and Clarence’s homes because they also had tents.
Ron had also cleaned out everything on our list from the Wal-Mart Pharmacy.
The bag of pills he had for Linda and him was larger than the bag she had for Sharon and me.
They were gone about 2 hours and while they were gone, some of us set up tents.
We brought the folding tables up from the shelters and had everything out of the house by the time they were back.
I have my wheelchair all charged up and can sit up near the entrance in case anyone comes to the tract.
Other than a couple of patrol cars on 47th Street East going somewhere in a hurry, I didn’t see anything all night.
Around 6am I woke Ron up and told him they’d better get on the road before the Guard showed up.
He told me that they’d hit Pep Boys and a couple other places that sold gas can plus the Lowe’s for generators.
After that, they’d get all of the propane they could and call it quits.
They hit both the Lowe’s and Home Depot, which was only about a block away from Lowe’s.
They came back to drop off a truck and trailer load of generators and empty gas cans and headed out for more.
They came back in an hour will more gas cans and headed out for propane.
By noon they were back and we had everything we needed, except gasoline.
A Hummer pulled up at the front of the tract and two guys got out, a Sergeant and a Lieutenant.
They ignored me and tried to get past, even though I had my Winchester in the scabbard of Salina, my Berettas strapped on and a shotgun across my lap.
I’ve been a member for 41 years and nobody and I repeat, nobody, is taking any weapons from me.
There is nothing illegal about a pump shotgun, single action revolvers or lever action rifles.
I may have given up on Geraldo, but I don’t think much of the government of California.
Chris was standing there shaking his head; he’d never heard the 3 of us when we really got the routine going good.
I put the safety on and laid the shotgun on my wheelchair, loosening the hammer thongs on my two revolvers.
I reset my hat and turned to look them in the eye, hand poised over the crossdraw holster.
All they had to do was show me their IDs and ask me how many people were in the housing tract, I would have told them.
The orders said Iraq, but George was a politician and all politicians lie.
I knew how to take out one of those tanks too; Derek explained all of the weak spots to me.
From the front, they were impossible to hurt, but from the back, they were particularly vulnerable.
It would be nice if they did, I could get a new house from the government and keep the insurance money.
We didn’t really need a thing, we’d already been out and about, but if they wanted to give us MREs, we could hang on to them until the next 6 disasters.
We’d had 3 all at once and if there were a 4th, we’d have 9 before it ended.
The real reason I wrote fiction was because I hated soap operas and if I had to contend with them, I might just as well write my own.
But this was going to be the 3 amigos last campaign, we were getting too old for this stuff.
I had read just before TSHTF that the French were the furthest along on the vaccine for the H5N1 virus.
They had a vaccine that worked most of the time and the United States had ordered 2 million doses.
But Clarence and I had both had the flu, so maybe our immune systems were up to snuff.
We should probably just get some light, medium and heavy machine guns and some hand grenades.
Once they realize we’ve looted their Logistic Base, they’re going to guard the place like Fort Knox.
The M240 is a medium machinegun and your friend and mine, the Ma Deuce, is the heavy machinegun.
If we can find an Mk-19, so much the better, they have a range of over a mile.
A semi would have been nice, but none of the ones at the Depot would start.
Everyone found something they wanted and I drove my new used Hummer home, all by myself.
I had it fixed up with a M240 and enough ammo that I could repel at least one small MZB attack.
When we got home, we covered them with tarps and parked them all on Moonraker Road and Moondance Drive.
The exact coordinates of your house can be determined by looking up your address on MapBlast and going to the highest resolution.
My house is at approximately 34.57132N by 118.04692W and we live in the shed in the backyard.
We stored the MREs in the shelter for the next time, assuming we lived through this one.
Every time they came, I hit them up for another 74 cases of MREs and 74 cases of water.
The Guardsmen were wearing those N-95 or N-100 facemasks so we concluded that the flu was spreading.
They didn’t try to enter the housing tract and Chris had the entrance blocked with his pickup and trailer.
Our principal problem was it was starting to get cold and six weeks into the disaster, we hadn’t seen a single insurance adjuster.
Finally KTPI came back on the air broadcasting local disaster information.
You were supposed to call them if you had a missing loved one or whatever.
The only news from the eastside was that a person or persons unknown had looted Big 5, Wal-Mart and the Chevron station on Pearblossom Highway.
The person or persons unknown had completely gutted both stores and emptied the propane tanks at the Chevron station.
You already know what we borrowed so you know it 62 couldn’t have been us.
We had knocked down a fence and put the propane tanker in my neighbor’s backyard, under some camo netting we’d borrowed from Big 5.
I wasn’t worried about Big Foot that had been 30 years before on the Westside.
If there was such a thing, you could see it coming a mile away and get the 50 cal loaded.
What you couldn’t see was what I figured would kill us, those little Chinese bugs, the H5N1 virus.
We checked all of the houses and the only people left alive in the tract was our little group.
With the CNG having secured itself at the Lancaster and Palmdale Sheriff’s Stations, and them being prevented from enforcing any laws because the Governor refused to issue them ammunition, we didn’t have a lot of trouble.
By this point, I was totally paranoid, but they gave me the shot in my arm, not my shoulder.
That night we broke into the High Desert Animal Clinic and borrowed their AVID Reader.
Early studies showed that the vaccine was only partially effect; it worked on about % of the people.
If the world experienced a pandemic like all of those alarmists were projecting, that meant that most of the people would get sick and many would die.
Some countries stockpile flu vaccines but since this was a new vaccine, nobody had any.
We weren’t soldiers, healthcare workers or the military; we were just ordinary citizens.
There is a medical supply place on Date in Lancaster and maybe they have some.
My buddy always says you shoot them twice in the chest and once between the eyes.
What we really needed was the 3M 6291 PI 00 Mask with a lot of spare PI 00 filters.
But we had enough of the cheap disposable masks to last the better part of a year.
Neither KTPI nor that station in Pasadena was talking about the avian virus, which was very odd.
They talked about the 10 cities that had been bombed or nuked or whatever.
Experts say the H5N1 strain is mutating steadily and fear it will eventually acquire the changes it needs to easily infect and spread among humans.
If it does, they say, it will sweep around the world in months, possibly killing millions.
The World Health Organization has been tracking the virus, taking samples and sending them to labs to be tested for mutations.
WHO officials say quick action will be needed if the virus does make the final jump to become a human infection.
Some experts say the virus could theoretically be contained if the first human victims of a new strain are quarantined, treated quickly with antiviral drugs, and others around them are vaccinated.
But stocks of antiviral drugs, such as Gilead and Roche's Tamifiu, are limited, and the companies do not have the capacity to make large quantities quickly.
Vaccines take months to formulate and manufacture, and they must match the flu strain fairly precisely to be of any use, so they cannot be made ahead of an epidemic.
I know we had to change our plans about Barstow, but we’re a little better prepared.
Mounting state-of-the-art optics and a composite stock, the M-40 system has been a reliable, proven weapon in the Marine Corps inventory since the Vietnam War.
The M-40 is currently produced by the Marine Corps' own Rifle Team Equipment Shop at Quantico where it is being further refined for the 21 st century.
Maybe the guy was confused, I heard they used a Winchester model 70 floorplate and modified trigger guard.
It brought to mind the old saying; you should walk a mile in a man’s moccasins before you judge him.
Geena Davis wasn’t President and it was really a shame, she was a good one.
It was a shame it was only a TV program, she even told the reporters to leave her kids alone.
If they took all of the money they’re spent on trying to defeat Arnold and gave it to the state, there wouldn’t be a budget crisis.
I wasn’t so sure I was going to vote for him, until my daughter started supporting his detractors.
They didn't have the energy to defend the housing tract one more time and you couldn't kill the avian flu bug with a rifle.
BRUSSELS, Belgium Out of an idyllic blue sky dotted with birds and butterflies come warplanes that carpet-bomb the Smurfs' forest village, killing Smurfette, leaving Baby Smurf wailing in distress and sending Papa Smurf and the others bolting for cover.
The scene from a bizarre commercial featuring Belgium's lovable blue-skinned cartoon characters is so upsetting it can only be shown after 9m. to avoid scaring children.
I wanted to hang up my guns and let Chris and the others guard the housing tract.
We all have a favorite; mine was my Winchester rifle because it didn’t care if my hands were numb.
He’d always wanted to shoot someone with that magnum of his and wanted to know if I was volunteering.
In a world gone mad, with the electricity out for the duration plus 6 months, continuing small aftershocks and the occasional click on the CD V-715, we were in a tough spot.
The driver bringing the ice from the Northeast would probably bring the avian flu along.
The delivery truck of propane meant I wouldn’t run out electricity any time soon and I could always share.
We were sort of like the Palestinians, trapped in a refugee camp with limited resources but armed to the teeth.
My Fellow Americans, In view of the disasters in our country, we’ve decided to bring our troops home.
They have had the H5N1 vaccinations and will be able to help restore order.
Your country will pursue a different course of action to end the War on Terror.
Until that time, I urge all of you to cooperate with local authorities.
You can see them, but they don’t give off a big enough return that you recognize them as aircraft.
But, I sup72 pose you’re right, if he were going to use nukes against them, he’d have to use the B2s.
A flight of 4 B-2s out of Diego Garcia could pretty well wipe out Iran and Iraq.
The B61 has been deployed on a wide variety of tactical and strategic aircraft.
Strategic versions have been carried on B-52, FB-111, B-1, and B-2 bombers.
Tactical versions, with lower yield options, have been deployed on a variety of United States and NATO air force aircraft, including the F-100, F-104, F-4, F-105, F-15E, F-16, F-111, F-117, and Tornado.
The United States Navy and Marines have used the B61-2/5S on A-4, A-6, A-7, and F/A-18 aircraft.
After the navy terminated the nuclear strike mission from United States aircraft carriers in the early 1990s, the bombs were retired and disassembled.
According to the Bush administration's recent Nuclear Posture Review , some future Lockheed Martin F-35 Joint Strike Fighters may be nuclear capable.
WARREN AIR FORCE BASE, Wyo. The Peacekeeper intercontinental ballistic missile mission came to an end Sept. during a ceremony here.
Ronald M Sega, undersecretary of the Air Force, were on hand to celebrate the Peacekeeper’s role in nuclear deterrence.
Sega, guest speaker at the event, had many words of thanks and appreciation for the people who made the Peacekeeper mission a success throughout its years.
He also explained its development and journey to becoming an operational weapon system, and credited the Peacekeeper with helping to end the Cold War.
The Peacekeeper was the nation’s most advanced strategic missile, so advanced that it was called the Missile Experimental, or MX, during President Jimmy Carter's administration.
The Peacekeeper warheads, with their advanced safety features, will be installed on Minuteman III ICBMs as part of the Safety Enhanced Re-entry Vehicle program, allowing the Air Force to upgrade its Minuteman fleet.
It took a while to pull the troops out of Iran, Iraq, South Korea, Germany and the other place we had troops stationed.
For some reason, they had those airmen working overtime; trying to make sure all of the wing coatings were just perfect.
If it wasn’t, George was missing a golden opportunity to get the Democrats in Congress really pissed off.
We had plenty of volcanoes of our own; we should be worried about them instead of Cleveland Volcano, Mount Spurr and Tanaga Volcano.
And to make matters worse, the Corporal who brought the 74 cases of MREs and 74 cases of water had the sniffles.
I guess it didn’t matter about the $2,000 shopping cards, our shopping cards didn’t have a limit and ammo was readily available.
I read the book as a serial in the Weekly Magazine that came with the Sunday paper, that and Jurassic Park.
It was only later that I met the lady who claimed she called Michael Crichton, Mikey.
Entered Harvard Medical School, MD 1969; spent one year as a postdoctoral fellow at the Salk Institute for Biological Sciences, La Jolla, California 19691970.
Nobody was willing to risk spending all night in their garages, but by February, the houses had completely collapsed and the garages were still standing.
We’d been watching for the MZBs, but didn’t see any because we weren’t sure what they looked like.
Probably the French, they opposed everything we did including manufacturing soap.
He’s been arrested over 70 times for protesting the United States government; maybe he ought to move to Spain.
We heard later that someone had nuked Iraq and Iran, probably the French.
The United States ambassador to the UN wanted to the General Assembly to censure the French for their unprovoked attack.
This guy, John Bolton, just about had me believing that the French did it.
The French had 3 Triomphant class submarines all equipped with 16 M45 SLBMs.
The M45 differs from its predecessor by its increased range (6000 km vs.00 km), its increased accuracy and penetration capabilities and its new TN75 warheads.
They used the D5 missiles with the older lOOkT warheads, which were about the size of the 150kT warheads used by the French.
Bolton was insisting that all of the D5s had been upgraded to the W88, 450kT warheads.
When the French denied Bolton’s claim but refused to allow anyone to inspect their 3 subs, Bolton claimed that proved that what he was saying was true.
Meanwhile the French accelerated the construction of their 4th Triomphant class sub, Terrible, and launched it early.
The cold morning sky was clear as we took off from the Pyongyang airport in a dark green military helicopter bearing the distinct red-star emblem of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
As the vintage 1960s chopper flew with surprising quiet over the rough mountain terrain, Dr.
Li Sang Gun, director of the ""Radiochemistry Laboratory"" at Yongbyon, and I made an attempt at small talk.
Li was escorting the first official United States delegation ever to visit his country to the highly secret Yongbyon nuclear complex 75 miles to the northwest.
Here North Korea's first small nuclear reactor lay dormant, with some 48 tons of highly radioactive spent fuel stored in a pool of water.
That fuel contained enough plutonium for possibly five or six nuclear weapons.
There isn’t much I can do about hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, volcanoes or tsunamis, but a nuclear war can be protected against.
As long as your shelter isn’t in the crater, you have a chance to survive.
People should have learned something from Three-Mile Island and Chernobyl.
If that weren’t enough, there are something on the order of up to 20,000 nuclear weapons distributed in the arsenals of the various countries.
You don’t need food, water, shelter, medicine or anything if you’re dead.
Even if your shelter is a makeshift thing in your basement, you need to survive the fallout before you worry about medicine.
Even though I take insulin, I could get by without for a few days, I’m a type II not a type I diabetic.
Insulin keeps well and I’d guess that every insulin dependent person never gets below one or two bottles.
If you don’t have the money for a CD V-715, buy a Kearny kit because they’re cheap.
Or, if you prefer, sit out with the rest of us and watch the missiles come in.
If you live north of Minneapolis, the area is RED because they are east of all of the missile silos.
I think about it every time I remember those B-47s sitting on the Edwards runway in 1962.
We’re only 40 miles as the crow flies from where they parked those 12 B-47s carrying hydrogen bombs.
We went to work like any other morning and then Kennedy made that address and scared most of us to death.
We came home that night to find 12 B-47s, probably from March, sitting on the end of the runway loaded up and ready to go.
Someone must have removed 2 from each of the sixteen missiles so we only had 6 warheads per missile.
I had my wheelchair on the sidewalk these days and Chris had removed his pickup and trailer from in front of the entrance to Moon Shadows.
I asked him to sit and visit for a while because quite honestly I was afraid of the dark and had been since about age 5.
Usually Missy sat with me on a leash and I knew that no one could sneak up on her.
We had a Vfe gallon thermos of coffee and he had his packets of Sweet and Low.
I had Benadryl for when the coffee finally got to me and gave me the hives.
Even though it had only been a few months since the earthquake and attack and none of us had gotten the avian flu, things weren’t really good.
The California Earthquake Insurance was a state program and someone hadn’t done a very good job of estimating the losses that would come from the Big One.
They said they would pay our claims, eventually, but we were wondering if we could hold out that long.
The CNG had forced its way into the tract, pulled the tarps off the Hummers and driven them off.
Lance had foreseen the problem and brought tripods for the Ma Deuces from Barstow.
They were pretty darned heavy and I couldn’t handle one had I wanted to.
He claimed he never laid hands on a M240, but he had it disassembled for cleaning in a minute.
And for all he told me about what he did in ‘Nam, I had no idea what he did over there.
Let the young guns have them, they’re strong and like stuff that fires a lot of shots.
I suppose if we could come up with some sort of scabbard for the back of this wheelchair, I could carry the MIA and the magazines in saddlebags or something.
Clarence and I discussed this and we’re going to wait for the insurance to settle.
If they had waited until they had fielded more of the DF-31 A, it could have been a different story.
But I suppose our interfering in their Taiwan invasion forced them to launch way ahead of schedule.
Our problem is that no one is willing to accept the risks that go along with space flight.
If they hadn’t been in such a hurry, they could have built a real space shuttle that was carried atop of the rocket instead of being strapped onto the side.
Those F-1 engines each developed 1. million pounds of thrust and of they had used maybe 8 engines, they could have lifted the shuttle into orbit without much trouble.
All of the stages were recoverable and if anything went wrong with the launch, the shuttle fired its engines and left the area almost instantly.
Diabetic Neuropathy is a small blood vessel disease that ends up killing of the nerves in your periphery.
Ron had prostate cancer and that changed him more than you can imagine.
They got their Hummers because there were belts in the machineguns mounted on the Hummers they already had.
When the Earthquake Authority finally paid our claims, there was a lot to do.
We extend the kitchen to the corner they left open in the original floor plan, increasing the size of the house.
While the house was down, I had the shelter removed and placed in storage.
We divided up the machineguns; none of the guys in the housing tract wanted anything to do with them.
There still wasn’t any electricity and because AmeriGas had picked up their tank, I didn’t have a generator.
I suppose I could have used bottles, but let the contractor provide his own electricity.
You get a good framing crew and they can frame a house in a day or two.
The room that I used as an office couldn’t legally be converted to a bedroom because it connected to the garage.
We wired the place right this time, using 25 pairs for the phone and more electrical circuits.
Kingman wasn’t really that far from Searchlight as the crow files, 53 miles.
But given the choice of the boonies or a large city, I’d take the boonies.
When we got there, I looked, but couldn’t find the searchlight; maybe I missed something.
The climate is a little cooler than Las Vegas because Searchlight is on a higher elevation, but it still ranges in the nineties in the summer; cool enough to ride.
Consider it a done deal, Ron bought 5 acres and hired a lawyer to get it rezoned to R-1.
The shelter had to be dynamited into place, the ground was a little on the hard side.
Ron said we should get together and share a 10,000-gallon propane tank that was metered.
I suggested that we each take one of the 1,700-gallon cisterns and think about putting in a new tank for the shelter.
We decided to leave it above ground because water couldn’t become radioactive.
When the kids wanted to know where we were moving, we told them Las Vegas.
We only gave them the cell phone numbers; we didn’t want them to find us.
Ron added a Kohler 30RES in case he lost his lights, but then they had more money to spend than we did.
They popped for a prefabricated barn after I told Ron about a story I written where the residents got a prefabricated barn, from A Family Alone.
The place was perfect when we 83 were done; all we needed was the livestock.
Ron bought a put in a Castlebrook Barns Raised Center Aisle 8 stall horse barn on a concrete slab from the company in Fontana.
They bought saddle horses, Sharon got her Arabian and I got a gaited mule that had flunked the test.
I even figured out that the Onan RSI 5000 or the Kohler RES30 were about equal, both put out a bit more than lOOamps so we’d always have full power.
Especially living in a small Nevada town named Searchlight that didn’t have a searchlight that I could find.
It didn’t really matter, we’d have carried anyway, but now we could carry a concealed weapon anywhere it was permitted.
I don’t care for the dock, so I opted for something else, the H&K USP Tactical 45.
But when I checked I learned that the larger handguns were more difficult to silence, the bigger the bore the greater the noise.
A Shooting Times Technical Editor rates the 9mm Luger and .357 Magnum as the most influential and important autoloader and revolver cartridges of the century.
Then, he went on to say, “The award for top pistol and revolver cartridge of the 20th century by any standard should really go to the .22 Long Rifle rimfire for both.
Given a choice between the .380 and the 9mm, he said that the 9mm won hands down.
Charter Arms .44 Bulldog 87 Given such a limited choice, I went with #18, the Browning Hi-Power.
To satisfy the requirements of a major United States Military Anti-Terrorist unit, AAC has made a number of improvements to the EVOLUTION-9 silencer.
The Nielsen Device is now completely integrated within the 1.25 in diameter, aerospace quality aluminum body, yielding a sleek appearance that belies the fact that this is a recoil-assisted design.
Improvements to the baffle stack and initial expansion chamber have further reduced first round pop and increased the overall level of sound reduction.
The EVOLUTION-9 delivers flawless semiautomatic operation with traditionally recalcitrant Browning inspired designs from Glock, Heckler & Koch, Sig Sauer, and Walther.
The EVOLUTION-9 is delivered with a comprehensive operator’s manual, takedown tool, and one Nielsen Device piston assembly.
Additional piston assemblies are available in 1/2-28,1/2-32, and Ml3. x 1 LH threads so that operators may use their EVOLUTION-9 on a variety of 9mm host firearms.
Once again, the EVOLUTION-9 is simply the world’s most efficient, high performance, recoil assisted 9mm silencer.
It was like having a long lost friend come home when I ended up with a Browning HiPower.
Mec-Gar made a flush-fitting 15-round magazine for the Browning Hi-Power for only $28.50 each, MGBRHP15B Blue.
Of course by the time I bought the gun, a new barrel, the suppressor, the federal tax stamp, the magazines and the ammo, I’d spent a bundle on a 9mm handgun.
After a major earthquake and 14 nukes had hit the US, the reality shows fell into disfavor.
They weren’t doing that well in the first place and after, the last thing anyone wanted was another dose of reality.
They were theoretically based on one of Arnold’s movie, The Running Man.
I never thought I live to see the day that The Running Man was a TV show but after Survivor, Donald’s whatever you called it and Martha’s spectacular success , reality shows began to disappear.
Go ahead and laugh, 88 but Adam-12 was used to train new police officers.
I tried that once or twice and got up to about $300 before the nag decided not to cooperate.
When I get it to $20 I play blackjack until I’m down to $2 and start over again.
I was making minimum bets and every once in a while would put down $25 or $50.
In the end, one guy ends up with all of the chips and walks away with a bundle of cash.
The odds seem to favor me ending up with a Royal Flush and getting shot like Arnold Rothstein.
Several companies’ makes cans for bolt action .50 caliber guns and Surefire makes can for the M240.
A disaster is a natural or man-made event that negatively affects life, property, livelihood or industry often resulting in permanent changes to human societies, ecosystems and environment.
Disasters manifest as hazards exacerbating vulnerable conditions and exceeding individuals' and communities' means to survive and thrive.
Most events are under the jurisdiction of United States Federal Emergency Management Agency and Department of Homeland Security.
The rule of threes is personal and it can include deaths in the family or of close friends and even people in the same community.
Attacked as it was on the day the pandemic arrived in the country aboard an Air France flight diverted to Newark, the spread was contained.
Hundreds, not thousands or hundreds of thousands contracted the avian flu.
About half of them died, but the vaccination of the military and healthcare workers prevented them from spreading the disease.
Very good news, but that meant we’d only experienced 2 disasters, not 3.
The 3 of us initially chalked it up to our receiving the special flu vaccine, but we had been right and the vaccine we received was the run of the mill flu vaccine.
Maybe Newark is the armpit of the universe, I don’t know, never been there.
We distributed the MREs to everyone at Moon Shadows, only taking our share.
In Lighthouse, we kept them in the shelter, but to tell the truth I couldn’t understand why I insisted on them in the first place, other than to get our fair share.
The shelter was designed for 6, not 37 and I’d never do 37 people again.
I bought a replacement carbon filter for the LUWA system, once you used them you had to replace them.
It looked like the boss and the hired help after Clarence and Shirley set a doublewide on the other side of Ron’s house.
We were getting a little grass now, thanks to the manure and Ron watering the field.
Somebody from the water district came around and told Ron to stop watering the field because there was a water shortage.
From that point on, he had water hauled from Lake Mojave for the field.
Aside from being a little higher and a little cooler, Searchlight was very much like rural Palmdale desert.
Clarence persuaded me to get a saddle horse and use Jack to haul our gear.
Not that we were going anywhere, 3 old men in their mid ‘60s with one foot in the grave didn’t have the energy.
It took all three of us to set up the Ma Deuce, and even with the suppressor, it was pretty noisy.
When the well was in he went to the Water District folks and told them he didn’t need their water.
I would have loved to hear that conversation; Ron could be nasty when he wants.
I’m sure he didn’t cut off his nose to spite his face; our well could always go dry.
He emptied and flushed the lake water tank and hooked it up to the first water tank.
We were ready for the next disaster, with water, fuel, my shelter, machineguns and the MREs.
They ranged from good to bad, but I had one heck of a pile of little packets of toilet paper.
You can never have too many of some things and toilet paper is at the top of my list.
After we moved to grandpa’s farm in ’48, I thought the outhouse was a thing of the past.
They didn’t have indoor plumbing until they moved to town in the mid ‘50s.
We had a few and I didn’t want them to get old and either go boom or not work when we were attacked by the MZBs.
I want to thank my 7-9 loyal readers; you read and comment and I’ll keep writing.
It may be that some large areas of land are best used for livestock farming; and, • has a lot of land covered with grass and shrubs.
If we get more livestock, we’ll have more manure and can grow more grass.
We could have 5 acres of alfalfa planted and get someone to bale it in the small bales to feed the animals during the winter.
That’s what my father did with the small piece of land he had on the other side of the railroad tracks.
A cow eats about Vz a bale of hay a day, less if they’re munching grass.
Canta y no llores Porque cantando se alegran Cieltio Undo los corazones Ay ay ay ay Canta and you do not cry.
He was on the set to show the actor how to be a sergeant but did such a better job that they hired him to play the part.
Although he retired from the United States Marine Corps in 1971, Ermey was later awarded the honorary rank of Gunnery Sergeant, thus his nickname, The Gunny.
Don’t believe that list of firearms, Glock was 6th and the Springfield Armory MIA didn’t even make the list.
This post-Civil War slogan would have been music to Sam Colt's ears had he lived long enough to hear it.
You know you’re old when you say; Nothing ever is as good as the memory.
In order for a story to qualify as Survivalist Fiction, you need action and a disaster.
Oh, yeah, they got the lights on sooner than planned, about the time we moved to Searchlight.
Which was good because otherwise there’d have been no way to pump the water.
I bought the horse to replace Jack, solely on the strength of the recommendation of my Ferrier friend.
It was a Tennessee Walking Horse that did that funny gait when prompted.
I think that Jack was jealous because Sam, my horse, did it better than he did.
I named the horse after Sam Colt because the Beretta Stampedes were about as close as I’d ever get to owning Colt revolvers.
For the price of one of those, I had 2 Berettas and some of the price of the Laredoan Crossdraw.
I’d already nuked Lost Wages in some of my stories and China had hit us with a few, so I didn’t plan on a nuclear disaster.
In some stories, I’d written that the terrorists had nuked us before the Chinese nuked us.
Not a whole lot happened as we sat there in Searchlight waiting for the end of the world.
Or maybe it was the other guys who bailed me, we may never know for sure.
Basically, the principal type of dirty bomb, or Radiological Dispersal Device , combines a conventional explosive, such as dynamite, with radioactive material.
In most instances, the conventional explosive itself would have more immediate lethality than the radioactive material.
At the levels created by most probable sources, not enough radiation would be present in a dirty bomb to kill people or cause severe illness.
For example, most radioactive material employed in hospitals for diagnosis or treatment of cancer is sufficiently benign that about 100,000 patients a day are released with this material in their bodies.
However, certain other radioactive materials, dispersed in the air, could contaminate up to several city blocks, creating fear and possibly panic and requiring potentially costly cleanup.
Prompt, accurate, non-emotional public information might prevent the panic sought by terrorists.
The presumed purpose of its use would be therefore not as a Weapon of Mass Destruction but rather as a Weapon of Mass Disruption.
The dirty bomb going off in Lost Wages wasn’t our 3rd disaster because we weren’t there.
The bird flu virus that infected a Vietnamese girl was resistant to the main drug that's being stockpiled in case of a pandemic, a sign that it's important to keep a second drug on hand as well, a researcher said Friday.
The drug, produced by Swissbased Roche Holding AG, is in short supply as nations around the world try to stock up 99 on it in case of a global flu pandemic.
In lab tests, the girl's Tamiflu-resistant virus was susceptible to another drug, Relenza, which is made by GlaxoSmithKline.
Power and water began returning to parts of Baghdad early Saturday morning hours after an election-eve insurgent attack plunged 70 percent of the city into darkness.
In addition to the two cities, Beiji also was affected, Muhsin Shalesh said.
Turkish medical staff on Friday tested nine people for possible bird flu a day after European health officials confirmed what many had long feared the arrival of the deadly H5N1 strain on Europe's doorstep.
European Union experts held crisis talks on the spread of the bird flu to examine the risk that migratory birds might pose for the 25-nation bloc.
The meeting was expected to approve measures to combat the spread of the disease by requiring EU member states to reduce contact between poultry and wild birds in high risk areas, the EU Commission said.
The spread of the disease from Asia was a “troubling sign”, United States Health Secretary Mike Leavitt said, and the world must work harder to prepare for a potential flu pandemic among humans.
The European Commission said on Thursday the bird flu outbreak in Turkey was indeed H5N1 and advised Europe to prepare for a pandemic.
Turkish health officials kept nine people from the western town of Turgutlu under observation and carried out tests after the death of 40 of their pigeons, state-run Anatolian news agency said.
There's a 1 in 3 chance of a major quake as high as magnitude 8 on the San Andreas and 7 on the San Jacinto along either of the two faults in the next 30 years, said Cal State San Bernardino professor Sally McGill, who specializes in the region's seismic geology.
Lucy Jones, scientist in charge of Southern California for the United States Geological Survey, is more blunt about the area's prospects during a huge quake on one of those two faults.
The Faults are the San Andreas Fault, the San Jacinto Fault and the Elsinore Fault.
Ammo wasn’t the second thing on my list of things you should never run out of, that honor went to Kleenex, which in a pinch, could be used as a substitute for toilet paper.
Ammo was third on the list with included cigarettes, coffee, rice, beans and macaroni in that order plus onions, diced tomatoes and chili powder.
The only meat item on my list was water packed tuna and the only dairy product was Velveeta.
Toilet paper, Kleenex, ammo, cigarettes, coffee, rice, beans macaroni, onions, diced tomatoes and chili powder, and you could get 10 of the 11 items at any grocery store.
Since toilet paper and Kleenex were redundant, I didn’t worry if I got low on Kleenex.
The original engine had 60 horsepower but I managed to fit in a 4JB1 with a minimum of 61 hp.
What we should do is get a horse trailer and a motorcycle trailer that we can pull with the Hummers.
I did some snooping and I think we should attend the Citizen’s Police Academy and then set up a Neighborhood Watch Program, unless you have a better idea.
We could install police scanners in our vehicles and keep in touch with business radios.
It couldn’t be simple like we’d drive around in our vehicles looking for trouble.
In order to be reserve deputies we needed to shave 30 years and attend some school to be peace officers.
I seemed to remember killing off a politically correct peace officer in my story involving Jenna up near Reno.
Even the Beretta 92FS rated higher than my Browning Hi-Power, go figure.
Didn’t matter because I had a pair of Colt knockoffs and a Winchester, a horse named Sam, a mule named Jack and a wheelchair named Salina.
Still working on a name for the trike and I was thinking of naming it Blue in honor of Robert Blake.
If you kill someone and get acquitted, the family sues for wrongful death and they get a second chance with a lesser burden of proof.
You might be innocent, but you still working 3 jobs and eating bologna, like Jerry Reed.
OJ made a public appearance the other day and 12 people lined up for autographs, eleven more than expected.
If the government had been in charge, they’d still be waiting for the MREs and ice.
She figures it will cost $11,000 per family to provide temporary assistance for 6 months.,000 families at $11,000 each; they couldn’t do the math, but its $462 million.
Even if they spin off FEMA from DFIS, the mindset has already been established.
Once you tap the bottle, the clock starts ticking and you have to use the bottle up in 28 days, refrigerated or not.
In the refrigerator, I think my Humalin would last up to the expiration date on the bottle.
Assuming you’ve prepared, you need electricity to preserve the meat and refrigerated foods.
Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa's dream of building a subway to the ocean won't begin with digging.
The Fairfax District home to the bubbling La Brea tar pits poses a particularly vexing problem for diggers.
The luncheon meat might be the subject of satire back home in the US, but in South Korea, it is positively classy.
With $136 million in sales, South Korea is the largest market in the world for SPAM outside the United States.
But here, some consider the pink luncheon meat with its gelatinous shell too nice to buy for themselves, and 40% of the SPAM is purchased as gifts.
Whoever suggested that Harriet Myers was fodder for Congress was probably right; she doesn’t seem to stand a snowball’s chance in hell.
Then George will come long and nominate another conservative Republican female judge and the Senate will have to approve her to avoid being accused of sexual bias.
And Harriet will go back to being his private counsel, probably with a raise.
Once Bush gets his appointee, Republicans, will have selected 7 of the 9 judges with only Ruth Bader Ginsberg and Stephen Beyer having been selected by a Democrat, Willy.
I haven’t had any faith in the United States Supreme Court since M'//er307US174.
This is the only Supreme Court case where the court examined whether the 2nd amendment inhibits the feds from regulating guns, in this case the NFA regulation.
The lower court decided the law violated the 2nd amendment, and let the guys out.
They promptly fled, or died, take your pick, and the government pursued an appeal, with no representation for Miller and his buddy.
The court decides the law does not on its face violate the second amendment, at least as applied to a sawed off shotgun.
The court does seem to hold the door open that if it is shown a gun is a “militia weapon” then the 2nd amendment forbids the feds from regulating that weapon.
An Assault Weapon is whatever they use to Assault you, maybe it’s a bow and arrows.
In a confrontation reminiscent of the Wild West, police shot and wounded a man who allegedly took over a freight train with a bow and arrow.
Juventino Vallejo-Camerena boarded the Union Pacific train Sunday night as it was stopped for a signal and threatened the engineer and conductor, the only people on board, police Capt.
The crew members escaped and disabled the train by turning off fuel switches, then used a cell phone to call police, Union Pacific spokesman Mark Davis said.
Vallejo-Camerena was aboard the train in western San Bernardino County when officers arrived.
The man cocked the bow and pointed the arrow at officers, who opened fire, Jones said.
Searchlight Airport is 1L3, elevation 3,410’, the runway is 5040x70 ft., asphalt in good condition.
Runway 16/34 thresholds are marked with 6 green reflectors no lights. single engine aircraft are based at the airport and they average 25 operations a month.
Searchlight Airport is located approximately 70 miles southwest of Las Vegas.
The Army Air Corps originally built the airstrip in the early 1950's, as an emergency alternate paved airstrip for Nellis Air Force Base.
The hard-surface runway is located approximately one mile south of the community of Searchlight, Nevada on Highway 95 and just minutes away from Lake Mohave, a recreational area located on the Colorado River.
Searchlight Airport offers no services and is uncontrolled, unmanned, and unlighted.
The name ""SPAM"" was chosen in the 1930s when the product, which’s original name ""Hormel Spiced Ham"" was far less memorable, began to lose market share.
The current official explanation is the SP and AM were taken from “SPiced hAM” to win a $100 prize.
I always wrote in my stories that the place to be if it blew was in Reno.
That’s way outside of the range of pyroclastic flows and the heavy ash falls.
I seem to recall that until it gets to Orange, only California is notified.
We ask very politely for them to wave the limits due to the pending disaster.
We have to be discreet; I don’t think we’re allowed to wear the guns into the store.
Everyone buy one double pack of the Kirkland maximum strength Allergy Sinus non-aspirin medicine.
Well, I guess it was back in '63, When eatin’ my cookin’ got the better of me.
She said she would, so I said ""I do"" But I'd have said, ""I wouldn't"", if I'd just knew How say in' ""I do"" was gonna screw up all of my life.
Well, it wasn't too long 'til the lust all died, and I'll admit I wasn't too surprised, When I come home and found my suitcase sittin' out on the porch.
Ill Then, I found a note taped on the mailbox that said, ""Goodbye, Turkey.
They split it right down the middle, and they give her the better half.
Why, they give her the color television set, Then they give her the house, the kids, and both of the cars.
Then they started talkin' about child support, alimony, and the cost of the court.
I'm tel I in' ya, they have made a mistake, 'Cause it adds up to more than this cowboy makes.
They said they's splittin' it all down the middle, and she got the better half.
Well, it all sounds mighty funny, but it hurts too much to laugh, She got the gold mine.
In 1967, he notched his first chart hit with Guitar Man, which Elvis Presley soon covered.
After Presley recorded another of Reed's songs, United States Male, the songwriter recorded an Elvis tribute, Tupelo Mississippi Flash, which proved to be his first Top 20 hit.
After releasing the 1970 crossover hit Amos Moses, a hybrid of rock, country and Cajun styles, Reed teamed with Atkins for the duet LP Me and Jerry.
During the 1970 television season, he was a regular on the Glen Campbell Goodtime Hour, and in 1971 he issued his biggest hit, the chart-topper When You're Hot, You're Hot, which was also the title track of his first solo album.
While he continued to record throughout the decade, his greatest visibility was as a motion picture star, almost always in tandem with headliner Reynolds.
After 1976's Gator, Reed appeared in 1978's High Ballin' and 1979's Hot Stuff.
In 1979, he released a record comprised of both vocal and instrumental selections, Half & Half.
I like Winchester lever action rifles, SAA revolvers and Country Western Music.
And yes, I’d drive to Texas for a semi load of beer, as long as it was Coors and I wasn’t dodging ash from the Long Valley Caldera.
Let’s talk about the eruptive history for the Mono-Inyo Craters volcanic chain for the past 5,000 years.
Eruption volumes have all been relatively small (generally less than 0. km 3 compared with the 0.25 km 3 for the magmatic component of the May 1980 Mount St.
Several of the explosive eruptions, however, have produced pyroclastic flows extending as far as 8 km from the vent.
It was never a question of whether the caldera would erupt again; rather it was a question of when.
Right now was when it let loose; bigger than the last time 760,000 years ago.
This time it approached the eruption of Yellowstone 640,000 years ago, yielding ~240mi 3 /1,000km 3 of lava and ash in an explosive rhyolitic eruption.
The experts asserted, explosive eruptions of rhyolitic lava could range in volume from small to moderate like those that formed the Inyo and Mono Domes to much larger volumes like those that formed Mammoth Mountain and the Mammoth Knolls north of Mammoth Lakes.
During their initial explosive phases, the more energetic of these eruptions typically produced large volumes of coarse pumice deposited as a thick blanket of tephra over a wide region, as well as destructive pyroclastic flows and surges capable of causing severe damage to distances of at least 20 km from a vent.
The later phases of such eruptions produced steep-sided lava flows and domes.
Which, in light of recent misadventures beginning with Katrina in 2005, wouldn’t happen anytime soon.
The planet earth had been experienced earthquakes, tsunamis, hurricanes and typhoons at an increasing rate.
The USGS figured Alaska would be next to go; man did they get a surprise.
A few months earlier, they had gone to high green level and a couple of weeks before, yellow.
California started to move people but Nevada didn’t seem too concerned.
The Orange alert changed that and areas included in the area of the Bishop Tuff, especially the heavily populated areas, began gearing up to evacuate.
There was no evacuating the M w 8. quake in California until after the fact.
The 3 of us stayed around, guarded the ruins and got out of town as soon as we could.
We could see the cloud of ash when it got really high using binoculars.
We could see it spreading out and headed generally in our direction, to the east.
The only problem I see is that stuff almost turns to concrete when it gets wet and dries.
I didn’t bother with the chemical filter for the LUWA system, figuring the HEPA filters would be enough.
According to my map of the Bishop Tuff, San Diego would only get a light dusting unless the wind changed.
When Amy called on Sharon’s cell phone I told her to go south and not come here, she’d be driving right into the ash fall.
I figured $500 would buy them enough gas to get to San Diego and David and Lorrie had all of my camping equipment.
After supper, I fired up the radio shack to listen to the chat on the ham bands.
I was listening to a ham in Reno and they were getting ash this time around.
The direction may have explained why the area was spared the previous time.
Air around the center of a high-pressure system in the northern hemisphere flows clockwise and air around the center of a low-pressure system in the northern hemisphere flows counter-clockwise.
When the two collide over eastern Nevada and western Utah just as the LVC blows its lid, you have a real mess and ash goes every which way.
The ash that gets high makes it to the jet stream and they don’t call it the jet stream because it moves slowly.
Strictly speaking, as noted in the American Meteorological Society's Glossary of Weather and Climate, a jet stream is a relatively narrow river of very strong horizontal winds embedded in the planetary winds aloft.
Air rises in a high-pressure area and falls in a low-pressure area.,000’ is only a shade over 6km and the ash column was pushing 30km.
CTAF isn't really a radio service at an airport it's more of a designated frequency to use for airplanes to announce to each other what they're doing.
Which, of course, is fine if you know how to fly and the plane is under control.
I’ll admit, I’ve never been on a plane that crashed, but there’s that law they call the law of averages.
For 4way switch wiring, you will need two 3-way switches and then as many 4-way switches, as you want in between.
Two-wire cable runs from the light to the first switch, and then 3-wire is run between all the switches.
Clarence and I had the end switches and the shelter, Ron and the light pole had the 4-way switches.
A correct term because an electrical fault is an unintended open or ground.
However, it was more probable that Clarence or I had left a switch in a halfway position.
Before I’d heard of George Santayana, I was a very poor student of history.
Morgan The ultimate measure of a man is not where he stands in moments of comfort, but where he stands at times of challenge and controversy. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Gary's career began with the state of Iowa's Department of Revenue and Finance in 1973.
He also served as a Field Supervisor, and later as a senior member of Iowa's Out-of-State Audit Team.
He was subsequently selected to implement usage of the program on a nationwide basis by the Out-of-State Audit Unit.
Gary's audit experience led him to leave the Department of Revenue and Finance to expand his career to include Individual Income Tax Return Preparation and Excise Tax Return Preparation.
His new career as an Excise Tax Consultant included such exercises as preparation of Business Plans and analysis of field audit techniques applicable to each of the 40+ states imposing an Excise Tax.
Starting with a small customer base in the San Francisco area, Gary utilized his Excise Tax expertise to help clients resolve registration and filing issues with the various states.
That effort culminated with the development of a multi-state Excise Tax audit program based on The Iowa Auditor computer program and utilizing Vertex Sales/Use tax rate database.
The complexities of identifying and importing necessary invoice data into the program's databases lead to the cancellation of the software development project during 1996.
Gary's latest challenge is programming web sites, specifically, this web site.
Every time he sees another new or neat feature, he has to reprogram this web site.
He received his MBA degree from the Drake Graduate School of Business in 1972.
In order that I become capable of making the sales/use tax audits, I was given a whirlwind course on sales/use tax auditing.
I concluded that when all was said and done, the state of Iowa only used 4 methods to perform audits, the detailed audit and 3 types of projections.
I laid it out on paper and wrote a computer program in the dBase III language to do it for me.
What I should have done was made the local tax computation a separate module that only computed the local option taxes when the program compiled the liability.
Local leaders were taking steps ""so this doesn't turn into some kind of race war,"" she said.
I hate to rain on his parade, but they call it the 1st Amendment and the ACLU will defend the right of Nazi’s to march, Ed must have forgotten.
Andrew Sheppard said it best in the first part of his speech, right before he stomped on the 2nd Amendment.
If someone wants to burn the flag, that’s their right, it’s also my right to conduct target practice anywhere I choose.
My defense will be that I went temporarily insane and did it on the spur of the moment during heightened passion in response to an uncontrollable urge.
You better flip-flop back here and gimme' a hand, son, or we gonna be in a heap of trouble.
The winner always says it’s a proper election and the loser usually complains of fraud.
We have had our 3 disasters and the story would be complete except for the fact that we hadn’t survived this disaster, yet.
We weren’t short on supplies and when the lights went out, again, we’d never even noticed the generators kicking in.
I had Ron shut down everything except the radios because they were my only set and the shelter already diverted enough power.
There was the refrigerator, freezer and the motor on the LUWA filter still running along with the radios.
I told you that volcanic ash was just tiny little rocks with very sharp edges.
Even a light dusting of volcanic ash poses a health hazard to people and animals and damage crops, electronics, and machinery.
Just for once in your life, accept things as they are and don’t try to make them perfect.
When a weapon misfires, you eject the defective cartridge and go to the next one.
Never attribute to malice that which can be adequately explained by stupidity. Hanlon's Razor In other words, if the shoe fits, wear it.
Yeah, we ordered the different flashhiders for the Ml 4 that had the bayonet lugs.
We even bought the M6 bayonets with the olive-drab fiberglass body with steel throat and drag.
My son always says that if you get close enough to use a bayonet, you’re too close.
He looks and says the charge will be $40 for the service call and $40 to rectify the problem.
The other difference is that if you lose a little Freon, the plumber wants $40 for the service call, $100/pound for the Freon and so much a pound to let it go from his bottle into your lines.
He doesn’t know that you know a guy who will sell you all the Freon you want for $12 a pound.
And, since you watched him connect the lines before you told him NO, you can do it yourself.
He had open-heart surgery and one of the networks reported he died and when the funeral was.
The title was, in part, to reassure his fans that he was still alive and kicking.
Sharon and I remain convinced that he once worked for WHO radio in De Moines.
The nearest we can figure is that we have Jerry Reed and Jerry Reno mixed up.
It is issued with a special sheath designed to double as a wire cutter, developed by Qual-A-Tec from the Buck Buckmaster line.
The design had some origins in designs for SEAL teams and the Rambo movies.
The design was later sold commercially as the Buck 188, though the design was widely copied and sold by other makers.
In 1986 a patent on Buckmasters’ that had been applied for was granted, to help cut-down on knockoffs.
The M9 Bayonet partially replaced, but is used in addition to the older M6 and M7 Bayonets, introduced in 1957 and 1964 respectively.
Many troops have retained the M7, since the M9 has a reputation for breakage, due to a combination of its relatively thin blade, and varying quality among the various contractors used.
It has some extra features, such as a hammer pommel, but uses the same knife and scabbard as the M9.
We speculated that we’d still be getting ash a day or two after the eruption stopped.
The winds on the backside of the low were circulating the ash in our direction and being stalled we got more ashfall than one might have expected.
The weather wasn’t cooperating, but finally the high weakened and the low pushed through.
With the low gone, the wind blew out of the west and the ash finally died down.
Wet ash, however, usually exhibits cohesive properties that can dramatically decrease such reworking and disturbance.
The resistance to wind erosion of compacted ash will increase as grains nest more tightly together.
Helens' 1980 ash showed initial resistance to wetting as water beaded on its surface.
However, this resistance lasted for only a few hours in light rain and was eliminated by heavy rain in minutes.
After initial wetting, an undisturbed ash layer may remain persistently wet.
This is due to the inefficient water drainage from between the surfaces of ash grains, which are particularly angular.
Raindrops impacting on an ash layer contribute to rapid compaction through decreasing porosity.
Pore space saturation will then occur relatively rapidly during heavy rain.
In the 1964 Irazu eruption in Costa Rica fine-grained soft, loose ash formed a hard impervious surface crust thought to be a result of precipitation of soluble salts by evaporation.
We had it all, when the ash began to fall during daylight hours, the sky turned increasingly hazy and dusty and sometimes a pale yellow color.
The falling ash was so dense that daylight turned to murky gray and later an intense blackness such that it was impossible to see your hand when held up close to the eye.
Loud thunder and lightning and the strong smell of sulfur occurred during the ash fall.
Furthermore, rain accompanied the ash and turned the tiny particles into a slurry of slippery mud.
You could describe it as an intense quietness, except for thunder that may accompany the ash fall, giving deadness to the normal sounds of life.
The most serious problems to communications systems result from the conductive and abrasive properties of ash.
The wholesale price of propane had slowly risen and was sitting at around $1.75; on 9/30/05 it was $1.19.
It’s cheaper because an engine doesn’t use the BTUs in a gallon of propane with total efficiency and they’re comparing apples and oranges.
The downside of the thunderstorms was the risk we had for a lightning strike.
I had Alpha Delta surge protectors on everything and standby power supplies in addition to the generators.
A computer or radio can crash in the time it takes a generator to kick in. 500w seemed to be a reasonable balance to allow the generator to stabilize.
In Palmdale, I had a Best 1.7kw UPS that plugged into the one special outlet I had in my office.
When I returned home from my 2nd childhood, the thing wouldn’t work and I never fixed it.
This time around, I went with APC because they were cheap, both inexpensive and of questionable quality, but they only need to work for 5 minutes or less.
On the subject, a standby power supply is a good choice these days because they use microprocessor switching.
The problem with a true UPS is that they lose energy to heat because they use the power to charge a battery, which is run through an inverter to supply the power to your equipment, truly uninterruptible, but inefficient.
In the past the greatest problem with the non-true UPS units was the switching time.
Many large companies have their servers protected but they don’t bother protecting the networks, printers and individual computers.
If the individual computers and printers are down, nobody can work anymore.
The United States violent crime rate declined 2. percent last year, continuing a decade-long downward trend in serious offenses, the FBI said Monday.
The annual report offers no reasons for the trends, but the exhaustive statistical data provides criminologists and academics with raw material to examine.
I know, but it’s raining and the air is clearing and I don’t feel like telling you about what we had to go through, it was awful.
Naturally, I had to research that on my computer in my Yellowstone.pdf file.
Each of Yellowstone’s explosive caldera forming eruptions occurred when large volumes of rhyolitic magma accumulated at shallow levels in the Earth’s crust, as little as 3 miles below the surface.
This highly viscous magma, charged with dissolved gas, then moved upward, stressing the crust and generating earthquakes.
Eruptions of rhyolite have been responsible for forming many of the world’s calderas, such as those at Katmai National Park, Alaska, which formed in an eruption in 1912, and at Long Valley, California.
No, Virginia, they can’t predict earthquakes, because a foreshock isn’t a foreshock until after you get the really big quake like the M8. that hit the San Andreas Fault.
With the caldera forming eruptions, the magma moves upward causing the earthquakes so it’s an entirely different situation.
I loved that and about 10,000 other songs, but only by the original artists.
Sometimes that wasn’t always the case, because one person would record a song and someone else would re-record it and get a bigger hit.
In 1956, a desperately poor and struggling Perkins wrote the song Blue Suede Shoes on an old potato sack.
Foxx appeared to be making a comeback with the 1991 series The Royal Family, in which he co-starred with his long-time friend Della Reese when a fatal heart attack felled him on the set.
When you’re a recovering alcoholic in your 60s, about the only thing you have going for you is your humor.
You didn’t quit drinking soon enough to keep your body from taking a dump and you sure can’t go back and un-drink the booze.
If you spring for a generator, get one that runs at 1,800rpm, it will last longer.
Find a public shelter, but avoid the Super Dome or the Convention Center in New Orleans.
You’d be far better off evacuating, just don’t ride on a bus full of oxygen bottles.
I didn’t know he was the mechanic responsible for keeping the brakes up.
After President Bush acknowledged that Harriet E Miers' religious beliefs were among the reasons he nominated her to the Supreme Court, White House spokesman Scott McClellan reassured reporters that the nominee's faith would play no role in her decision-making on the bench.
They fear that, if confirmed, Miers' evangelical Christian faith would dictate her rulings.
In particular, they are concerned that the president's acknowledgment of his nominee's evangelism was his way of signaling her opposition to a constitutional right to an abortion as established in Roe vs.
Clarence Thomas stopped an abortion for an inmate in Missouri, but the Court overturned his stay.
But when a long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design to re129 duce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future security.
Such has been the patient sufferance of these colonies; and such is now the necessity, which constrains them to alter their former systems of government.
Maybe I should just slap him upside the head and reduce the charge to Assault and Battery.
Then the jerk will sue and own the house, especially if you happen to live in California.
I can express an opinion that his parents weren’t married when he was born or that he has his head where the sun doesn’t shine.
If you survive a disaster, and you have even a minimum of preparations, you’ll probably make it.
