How the Cold War and conflicts in Korea and Vietnam influenced domestic and international politics Historical Thinking Standards: Standard 4: Historical Research Capabilities A Formulate historical questions.
B Marshal evidence of antecedent circumstances and contemporary factors contributing to problems and alternative courses of action.
Objectives · Students will analyze the primary and secondary sources focusing on the main idea and significance.
Topic Background Thirteen days in October 1962 was one of the most intense periods in American and Soviet history.
During Eisenhower’s administration, the dictator of Cuba was General Fulgencio Batista Zaldívar who was friendly with the United States.
According to Mark White, the Soviet leader gave a number of explanations for the ""defend-Cuba theory:"" ally for Moscow, socialist model for other Latin American countries, correct the imbalance between Soviet and American nuclear arsenal, presence of American Jupiter missiles in Italy and on the Soviet border in Turkey, Vienna Summit and Khrushchev’s impression of John F Kennedy as a weak leader, a desire to improve his hand in the ongoing dispute over Berlin.
According to Garthoff, there were two lessons – one learned and one not.
The geopolitical rivalry continued for another quarter of a century, as did the arms race, and each side continued to seek strategic advantages when opportunities arose.
The crisis evoked miscalculations and misperceptions and frightened Soviet and American leaders into the realization that a change in policy was the only way to avert a nuclear war.
The Traditional and Revisionist Interpretations Reevaluated,” Diplomatic History 14 : 490.23Raymond L Garthoff, A Journey Through The Cold War A Memoir of Containment and Coexistence , 165.24Ibid., 183.
Closure:Lead a class discussion on the policy choices confronting the United States and Soviet leaders.
MRBM Field Launch Site RS #09 Missle Range Map RS #10 Mapping an Event RS #11 Mapping an Event Primary Source Annotaions Letter to Nikita Khrushchev from Fidel Castro regarding defending Cuban air space.
Fidel Castro is offering assistance in confronting the situation.Letter From President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev, October 22, 1962.
Students will place the letter under during the crisis to establish confrontation.Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy, October 24, 1962.
The CHE has in good faith secured or sought permission from identifiable copyright holders to reproduce materials for educational use, following fair-use guidelines.
