Dickson Musslewhite Acquisitions Editor: Charlyce Owen-Jones Editorial Assistant: Maureen Diana Executive Marketing Manager: Wendy Gordon Senior Digital Media Editor: Paul DeLuca Digital Media Editor: Alison Lorber Media Project Manager: Joseph Sleby Senior Managing Editor: Ann Marie McCarthy Project Manager: Carol O’Rourke Eull Service Project Management and Composition: Aptara®, Inc.
Refugees from Kyrgzstan receive help from UNICEF, 2010, Hrc/ Wenn Photos/Newscom, UN Secretary-Ceneral Ban Ki Moon with PSY, 2012, Hrc/Wenn Photos/ Newscom.
To obtain permission to use material from this work, please submit a written request to Pearson Education, Inc., Permissions Department, One Lake Street, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458 or you may fax your request to 201'236'3290.
At the same time, the NATO campaign in Afghanistan is winding down; Erance has routed Islamists from northern Mali, as has the African Union in most of Somalia; and the United States defense budget has begun a sharp decline.
Cyberwarfare, such as the Elame virus and expanding drone attacks, also contributes to the changing international security picture covered in this edition.
XV A Note on Nonnenclature In international relations, names are politically sensitive; different actors may call a territory or an event by different names.
BENEFITS AND COSTS Both governments and intergovernmental organizations play key roles in international relations and employ millions of people with interests and training in IR, Despite differences between careers in IGOs and governments, there are numerous similarities.
Whether in the U,S, State Department or the UN, entrance into and promotion in these organizations is regulated by exams, performance evaluations, and tenure with the organization.
Governments face competing pressures of public opinion, constituencies, and interests groups—each with distinct policy opinions, IGOs also deal with interest groups , but an IGO’s constituents are states, which in many cases disagree among themselves.
Both work environments also attract coworkers with deep interests in international affairs, and the resulting networks of contracts can bring professional and intellectual rewards, Finally, jobs in governments or IGOs may involve travel or living abroad, which many enjoy.
Usually, only individuals with advanced degrees or technical specializations achieve non-entry level positions, It can take years to climb within the organization and the process may involve working in departments far from your original interests.
For example, the State Department is only one of many parts of the U,S, government that deal with IR, Do not assume that to work in foreign affairs, one must be a diplomat.
BENEFITS AND COSTS People follow various your own time schedule, balancing other duties (such as paths to an interest in teaching and researching in the work as a teaching or research assistant) that can easfield of international relations.
One advantage of an academic and research career, whether at a teaching-oriented institution or a large reSKILLS TO HONE Whether one wants to pursue an adsearch university, is intellectual freedom.
Ifiih .i'.,■k North SOd M ■ Smotfnsk JlRELAND Veipwi I “ ^ KINGDOM v Anr^f’fdn ''-VCartlP, * ^NETH^ London ‘-r. fn^isn.
Watch the Video ""Authors' Chapter Introduction' at MyPoliSciLab Globalization, International Relations, and Daily Life International relations is a fascinating topic because it concerns peoples and cultures throughout the world.
The scope and complexity of the interactions among these groups make international relations a challenging subject to master.
Millions Globalization, International Relations, and Daily Life 7 of people contribute to international disaster relief funds after tsunamis, earthquakes, or hurricanes because of a shared identity as members of the community of human beings, In IR, identity communities play important roles in overcoming difficult collective goods problems, including the issue of who contributes to development assistance, world health, and UN peacekeeping missions.
For thousands of years the man has made the decision and the woman has followed it, I suggest you do the same, and buy season tickets to the opera,” This would be a dominance solution.
The “big five” with the largest nuclear arsenals hold veto power on the UN Security Council, Through agreements like the Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Proliferation Security Initiative, the existing nuclear powers actively try to keep their exclusive hold on these weapons and prevent smaller nations from getting them.
Examples include stopping genocide , enhancing world trade , and slowing global warming , Aftermath of Hurricane Sandy, New Jersey, 2012.
There is a close connection between scholars in colleges, universities, and think tanks and the policy-making community working in the government—especially in the United States, Some professors serve in the government (for instance.
Professor Condoleezza Rice became national security advisor in 2001 and secretary of state in 2005 under President George W, Bush), and sometimes professors publicize their ideas about foreign policy through newspaper columns or TV interviews.
Diplomats, bureaucrats, and politicians can benefit from the knowledge produced by IR scholars,""^ Theoretical debates in the field of IR are fundamental, but unresolved,^ It will be up to the next generation of IR scholars—today’s college students—to achieve a better understanding of how world politics works.
As a part of political science, IR is about international politics —the decisions of governments about foreign actors, especially other governments,^ To some extent, however.
Explore the Simulation 'You are a United States Senator"" at MyPoliSciLab the field is interdisciplinary, relating international politics to economics, history, sociology, and other disciplines.
Most, however, teach IR in political science classes, in which the focus is on the politics of economic relationships, or the politics of environmental management to take two examples.
Eor a given puzzle, various theories can explain the result as a case of a more general principle.
Actors and Influences Watch the Video 'Conflict Diamonds and the Kimberley Process"" at MyPoliSciLab The principal actors in IR are the world’s governments.
Each is an important actor in world affairs, especially the nine in the center that are largest in both population and economy, A few of these large states possess especially great military and economic strength and influence, and are called great powers.
They are defined and discussed in Chapter 2, The most powerful of great powers, those with truly global influence, have been called superpowers.
Some other political entities are often referred to as states or countries although they are not formally recognized as states, Taiwan is the most important of these.
They include Puerto Rico , Bermuda , Martinique , French Guiana, the Netherlands Antilles , the Falkland Islands , and Guam , Hong Kong reverted from British to Chinese rule in 1997 and retains a somewhat separate identity under China’s “one country, two systems” formula.
The status of the Vatican in Rome is ambiguous, as is Palestine, which in 2012 joined the Vatican as the UN’s only nonmember observer states.
Sometimes NGOs combine efforts through transnational advocacy networks.There is no single pattern to NGOs.
For instance, the state of Ohio is entirely a U,S, entity but operates an International Trade Division to promote exports and foreign investment, with offices in Belgium, Japan, China, Canada, Israel, India, Australia, and Mexico, The actions of substate economic actors— companies, consumers, workers, investors—help create the context of economic activity against which international political events play out, and within which governments must operate.
To these three levels can be added a fourth, the global level of analysis, which seeks to explain international outcomes in terms of global trends and forces that transcend the interactions of states themselves.
States are thus losing authority to supranational institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the European Union , and to transnational actors such as MNCs and NGOs, The values of technocrats and elite, educated citizens in liberal democracies are becoming global values, reflecting an emerging global civilization.
The old North-South division is seen as less important, because the global South is moving in divergent directions depending on countries’ and regions’ integration with world markets, A second perspective is skeptical of these claims about globalization.
While scholars debate these conceptions of globalization, popular debates focus on the growing power of large corporations operating globally, the disruptive costs associated with joining world markets , the perception of growing disparities between the rich and the poor, and the collusion of national governments in these wrongs through their participation in lOs such as the THINK GLOBALLY As the world economy becomes more integrated, markets and production are becoming global in scope.
Global Geography 21 WTO and the Policies to expand free trade are a central focus of antiglobalization protesters Street protests have turned host cities into besieged fortresses in Seattle ; Washington, D.C, ; Quebec ; and Genoa, Italy , where protesters engaged police in battles that killed one person, The key 2001 WTO meeting to launch a new trade round was held in Qatar, where protesters had little access.
These world regions differ from each other in the number of states they contain and in each region’s particular mix of cultures, geographical realities, and languages, But each represents a geographical corner of the world, and together they reflect the overall larger divisions of the world.
Erom Korea, for example, China and Russia are to the west, and Japan and the United States are to the east.
With perhaps just two other cases in history—the Thirty Years’ War and the Napoleonic Wars—the two world wars were global or hegemonic wars in which almost all major states participated in an all-out struggle over the future of the interna' 1 1 tional system.
The Two World Wars, 1900-1950 Europe mobilization plans developed Balkan crises World War 1 Sarajevo United States enters war — Italy invades Ethiopia Munich Agreement — World War II United States enters war D-Day Germany naval arms race with Britain CD CD H— CD Q Weimar Republic hyperinflation Hitler invasion wins r n 1 j of Poland power occupation rearmapf Austria, ° ""1®""* Czech.
United States Defense Department ro 28 Chapter 1 The Globalization of International Relations accidental After a century of relative peace, the great powers marched off to battle for no good reason.
Thus, when a Serbian nationalist assassinated Archduke Ferdinand of Austria in 1914 in Sarajevo, a minor crisis '1 '1 escalated and the mobilization plans pushed Europe to all-out war.
Hitler then double-crossed Stalin and invaded the Soviet Union in 194h This offensive ultimately bogged down and was turned back after several years.
But the Soviet Union took the brunt of the German attack and suffered by far the greatest share of the 60 million deaths caused by World War II, This trauma continues to be a powerful memory that shapes views of IR in Russia and Eastern Europe, The United States joined World War II against Germany in 1942, The U,S, economy produced critically important weapons and supplies for allied armies.
In 1944, after crossing the English Channel on June 6 , British-American forces pushed into Germany from the west while the Soviets pushed from the east, A ruined Germany surrendered and was occupied by the allied powers.
In 1961, East Germany built the Berlin Wall separating East from West Berlin, It symbolized the division of Europe by what Winston Churchill had called the “iron curtain,” Gaddis, John Lewis.
Although the Soviet bloc did not join Western economic institutions such as the IME, all the world’s major states joined the UN, The United Nations (unlike the ill-fated League of Nations) managed to maintain almost universal membership and adherence to basic structures and rules throughout the Cold War era.
The central concern of the West during the Cold War was that the Soviet Union might gain control of Western Europe—either through outright invasion or through communists’ taking power in war-weary and impoverished countries of Western Europe, This could have put the entire industrial base of the Eurasian landmass (from Europe to Siberia) under one state.
The Marshall Plan —U,S, financial aid to rebuild European economies—responded to these fears, as did the creation of the NATO alliance.
Much spending was also devoted to a superpower nuclear arms race, in which each superpower produced tens of thousands of nuclear weapons , Through the policy of containment, adopted in the late 1940s, the United States sought to halt the expansion of Soviet influence globally on several levels at once— military, political, ideological, economic.
Virtually all of U,S, foreign policy in subsequent decades, from foreign aid and technology transfer to military intervention and diplomacy, came to serve the goal of containment.
The Chinese communist revolution in 1949 led to a Sino-Soviet alliance (Sino means “Chinese”), But China became fiercely independent in the 1960s following the Sino-Soviet split, when China opposed Soviet moves toward peaceful coexistence with the United States,^""^ In the late 1960s, young radicals, opposed to both superpowers, ran China during the chaotic and destructive Cultural Revolution.
But feeling threatened by Soviet power, China’s leaders developed a growing affiliation with the United States during the 1970s, starting with a dramatic visit to China by U,S, president Richard Nixon in 1972, This visit led to U,S,-Chinese diplomatic relations in 1979, During the Cold War, China generally tried to play a balancer role against whichever superpower seemed most threatening at the time.
In 1950, the Korean War broke out when communist North Korea attacked and overran most of U,S,-allied South Korea, The United States and its allies (under UN authority obtained after the Soviets walked out of the Security Council in protest) counterattacked and overran most of North Korea, China sent masses of “volunteers” to help North Korea, and the war bogged down near the original border until a 1953 truce ended the fighting.
Some United States policy makers favored military strikes before the missiles became operational, when in fact some nuclear weapons in Cuba were already operational and commanders were authorized to use them in the event of a United States attack.
The costs of the Gulf War were shared among the participants in the coalition, with Britain and Erance making Herrmann, Richard K., and R Ned Lebow.
The republics became independent states and formed the CIS, Of the former Soviet republics, only the three small Baltic states and Georgia are nonmembers.
Western relations with Russia and the other republics have been mixed since the 1990s, Because of their own economic problems, and because of a sense that Russia needed internal reform more than external aid.
Western countries provided only limited aid for the region’s harsh economic transition, which had drastically reduced living standards, Russia’s brutal suppression of its secessionist province of Chechnya in 1995 and 1999 provoked Western fears of an expansionist, aggressive Russian nationalism, Russian leaders feared NATO expansion into Eastern Europe that placed threatening Western military forces on Russia’s borders.
Meanwhile, Japan and Russia could not resolve a lingering, mostly symbolic, territorial dispute,^^ Despite these problems, the world’s great powers overall increased their cooperation after the Cold War, Russia was accepted as the successor state to the Soviet Union and took its seat on the Security Council, Russia and the United States agreed to major reductions in their nuclear weapons, and carried them out in the 1990s, Just after the Gulf War in 1991, the former Yugoslavia broke apart, with several of its republics declaring independence.
Ethnic Serbs, who were minorities in Croatia and Bosnia, seized territory to form a “Greater Serbia,” With help from Serbia, which controlled the Yugoslav army, they killed hundreds of thousands of non-Serb Bosnians and Croatians and expelled millions more, to create an ethnically pure state.
But in contrast to the Gulf War, the great powers showed no willingness to bear major costs to protect Bosnia, Instead they o 1 tried to contain the conflict by assuming a neutral role as peacekeeper and intermediary,^ In 1995, Serbian forces overran two UN-designated “safe areas” in eastern Bosnia, expelling the women and slaughtering thousands of the men, Einally, two weeks of NATO airstrikes , along with losses to Croatia on the ground, induced Serbian forces to come to terms.
The treaty to end the war (authored by U,S, negotiators) formally held Bosnia together but granted Serbian forces autonomy on half of their territory, while placing about 60,000 heavily armed troops on the ground to maintain a cease-fire.
Meanwhile, Serbian strongman Slobodan ^Treedman, Lawrence, and Efraim Karsh.
However, when those forces were drawn into the fighting and sustained casualties, the United States abruptly pulled out,^^ In Rwanda in 1994, the genocide of more than half a million civilians in a matter of weeks was virtually ignored by the international community.
The U,S, military intervened in Haiti to restore the elected president, but Haiti remains mired in poverty.
New rifts opened in 2001 between the United States and both China and Europe— possibly signaling a realignment against U,S, predominance in world affairs—on issues ranging from global warming to the proposed International Criminal Court, Russia and China signed a treaty of friendship in 2001, and European countries helped vote the United States off two important UN commissions.
In late 2001, U,S, and British forces and their Afghan allies ousted the Taliban regime in Afghanistan, which had harbored the al Qaeda network , The great power divisions reappeared, however, as the United States and Britain tried to assemble a coalition to oust Iraq’s Saddam Hussein by force in early 2003, Prance and Germany bitterly opposed the war, as did millions of protesters around the world.
The invasion itself was brief and decisive, A U,S, military force of 250,000 troops with advanced technology overpowered the Iraqi army in three weeks.
This approach, called realism, is favored by some IR scholars and vigorously contested by others, but almost all take it into accountRealism is a school of thought that explains international relations in terms of powerThe exercise of power by states toward each other is sometimes called realpolitik, or just power politics.
Capabilities are easier to measure than influence and are less circular in logicMeasuring capabilities to explain how one state influences another is not simple, howeverIt requires summing up various kinds of potentialsStates possess varying amounts of population, territory, military forces, and so forthThe best single indicator of a ^Morgenthau, Hans J., and Kenneth W Thompson.
The method followed in this book adjusts for price differences among countries, but an alternative method gives GDP estimates that are, on average, about 50 percent higher for countries in the global North and about 50 percent lower for the global South including China So GDP is a useful estimator of material capabilities but not a precise one.
It built up military capabilities over the next few years that gradually matched and then overwhelmed those of Japan, Other capabilities allow actors to exercise influence in the short term.
To the extent that one element of power can be converted into another, it is fungible.
Yet, depending on the nature of the conflict in question, military power may be only one of many elements of power, Robert Gates, as U,S, secretary of defense, called for a “dramatic increase” in spending on diplomacy and economic aid, noting that despite very high military spending, these “other elements of national power” have lagged behind in an era of asymmetric warfare in which conflicts are “fundamentally political in nature” and not simply military.
The great majority of state interactions closely adhere to norms of behavior—shared expectations about what behavior is considered proper.Norms change over time, slowly, but the most basic norms of the international system have changed little in recent centuries.
For example, election monitors increasingly watch internal elections for fraud, while international organizations monitor ethnic conflicts for genocide.Also, the integration of global economic markets and telecommunications makes it easier than ever for ideas to penetrate state borders.
The International System 51 PASSPORT PLEASE 1 The territorial nature of the interstate system developed long ago when agrarian societies relied on agriculture to generate wealth.
Realists acknowledge that the rules of IR often create a security dilemma—a situation in which states’ actions taken to ensure their own security (such as deploying more military forces) threaten the security of other states.The responses of those other states, such as deploying more of their own military forces, in turn threaten the first state.
Other small states may, '1 'Z for domestic reasons, fail to mobilize to balance against threats.
In the post-Cold War era of United States dominance, balance-of-power theory would predict closer relations among Russia, China, and even Europe to balance United States power.
A/ei/i/ York T/mesfrom data of Pew Giobai Attitudes Project.00 data from State Department surveys.
Although there is no firm dividing line, great powers are generally considered the halTdozen or so most powerful states.
D f\ 20 years—perhaps more than any other state/ Japan and Germany are economically great powers, but both countries have played constrained roles in international security affairs since World War IL Nonetheless, both have large and capable military forces, which they have begun to deploy abroad, especially in peacekeeping operations, Russia, France, and Britain were winners in World War II and have been active military powers since then.
Some aspire to regional dominance, and many have considerable influence in their regions, A list of middle powers might include midsized countries of the global North such as Canada, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Poland, Ukraine, South Korea, and Australia, It could also include large or influential countries in the global South such as India, Indonesia, Brazil, Argentina, Mexico, Nigeria, South Africa, Israel, Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan, Middle powers have not received as much D1 attention in IR as have great powers, ' Shane, Scott.
United States foreign policy has historically alternated between internationalist and isolationist moods.
These views seemed vindicated by the failure of isolationism to prevent or avoid World War IL U,S, leaders after that war feared Soviet communism and pushed U,S, public opinion toward a strong internationalism during the Cold War, The United States became an activist, global superpower.
In the post-Cold War era, U,S, internationalism was tempered by a new cost consciousness, and by the emergence of a new isolationist camp born in reaction to the displacements caused by globalization and free trade,""^^ However, the terrorist attacks of September 2001 renewed public support for U,S, interventionism in distant conflicts that no longer seemed so distant.
Its ability and willi n• ati • i ingness to resume a role as hegemon—as after World War II—are important protracted conflict in Afghanistan, and factors that will shape world order, but the United States role is still uncertain.
United States, A second area of U,S, ambivalence is unilateralism versus multilateralism when the United States does engage internationally.
Multilateral approaches—working through international institutions—augment U,S, power and reduce costs, but limit U,S, freedom of action.
Lieber, Robert J Eagle Rules/ Foreign Policy and American Primacy in the 21st Century.
The Hapsburg countries were defeated by mostly Protestant countries in northern Europe—France, Britain, Sweden, and the newly independent Netherlands—in the Thirty Years' War of 1618-16^8^^ The 1648 Treaty of Westphalia established the basic rules that have defined the international system ever since—the sovereignty and territorial integrity of states as equal and independent members of an international system.
The Great Power System, 1500-2000 O) N9 Wars Spain conquers Portugal Spanish Armada 30 Years' War Napoleonic Wars War of the Spanish Succession 7 Years' War FrancoPrussian War World War I World Warn Cold War Major Alliances Turkey vs.
This happened to Iraq when it invaded Kuwait in 1990, as it had to Hitler’s Germany in the 1940s and to Napoleon’s France in the 1800s, Realists emphasize the fluidity of alliances.
Our interests are perpetual and eternal and those interests it is our duty to follow,”""^^ ^^Langer, William L European Alliances and Alignments, 1871—1890.
Anticommunist Richard Nixon could cooperate with communist Mao Zedong in 1972, Joseph Stalin could sign a nonaggression pact with a fascist, Adolf Hitler, and then cooperate with the capitalist West against Hitler, The United States could back Islamic militants in Afghanistan against the Soviet Union in the 1980s, then attack them in 2001, Every time history brings another such reversal in international alignments, many people are surprised, Realists are not so surprised.
The fluidity of alliances deepens the security dilemma (see p, 51), If there were only two states, each could match capabilities to have adequate defense but an inability to attack successfully.
Even when alliance cohesion is high, as in NATO during the Cold War, conflicts may arise over who bears the costs of the alliance , Great powers often form alliances with smaller states, sometimes called client states.
Extended deterrence refers to a strong state’s use of threats to deter attacks on weaker clients—such as the U,S, threat to attack the Soviet Union if it invaded Western Europe, Great powers face a real danger of being dragged into wars with each other over relatively unimportant regional issues if their respective clients go to war.
If the great powers do not come to their clients’ protection, they may lose credibility with other clients, but if they do, they may end up fighting a costly war,""^^ The Soviet Union worried that its commitments to China in the 1950s, to Cuba in the 1960s, Alliances generally result from a convergence of practical interests, not sentimental or ideological reasons.
Alliances 65 and to Syria and Egypt in the 1970s could result in a disastrous war with the United States, NATO At present, two important formal alliances dominate the international security scene.
By far the more powerful is the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , which encompasses Western Europe and North America, (The second is the U,S,-Japanese alliance,) Using GDP as a measure of power, the 28 NATO members possess nearly half the world total.
Members are the United States, Canada, Britain, Erance, Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Denmark, Norway, Iceland, Spain, Portugal, Greece, Turkey, Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Estonia, Latvia, Slovenia, Slovakia, Bulgaria, Romania, Albania, and CroatiaAt NATO headquarters in Brussels, Belgium, military staffs from the member countries coordinate plans and periodically direct exercises in the field.
Since 2006, these forces, known as the International Security Assistance Eorces , have been under NATO leadership.
Over 100,000 troops serve in the ISAE, with NATO states providing the bulk of the forces.
Longtime members France and GerALLIANCE OF THE STRONG many strongly opposed the war, and Turkey refused to let United States NATO alliance has been the world's strongest military force since 1949; its misground forces cross into Iraq.
The alliance was created in 1951 against the potential Soviet threat to Japan, Because of its roots in the U,S, military occupation of Japan after World War II, the alliance is very asymmetrical.
The United States is committed to defend Japan if it is attacked, but Japan is not similarly obligated to defend the United States, The United States maintains troops in Japan, but not vice versa.
The United States belongs to several other alliances, but Japan’s only major alliance is with the United States, The U,S, share of the total military power in this alliance is also far greater than its share in NATO, Japan’s constitution (written by U,S, General Douglas MacArthur after World War II) renounces the right to make war and maintain military forces, although interpretation has loosened this prohibition over time, Japan maintains military forces, called the Self-Defense Forces, strong enough for territorial defense but not for aggression.
Defeating the Taliban in Afghanistan BACKGROUND: After the terrorist attacks in 2001, NATO member states pledged their assistance in fighting the forces of al Qaeda and its Taliban protectors in Afghanistan, Countries formed the multinational International Security Assistance Forces , made up of mostly NATO troops deployed in Afghanistan, The forces are trying to provide security for the fledgling Afghan government, train a new military, and build political institutions to prevent the Taliban from retaking power.
The war has become a controversial political issue in nearly every country contributing troops to ISAF, Pro-Taliban forces continue to carry out widespread attacks and threaten to undermine the progress made to date, NATO members have been stingy in committing troops.
In the 2010 “surge,” America added 30,000 troops and other NATO members only 10,000, The allies face DOMINANCE Alliances 69 For its part, the United States has used the alliance with Japan as a base to project U.S, power in Asia, especially during the wars in Korea and Vietnam , when Japan was a key staging area.
The continued U-Smilitary presence in Japan symbolizes the U-Scommitment to remain engaged in Asian security affairs.
However, these U,S, forces have been drawn down somewhat in the past decade in response to high costs, reduced threats, and more American focus on the Middle East, In 2010, the alliance became a major political issue in Japan as its prime minister, Yukio Hatoyama, resigned after reneging on his promise to force the United States to renegotiate certain aspects of the treaty.
Parallel with the U,S,-Japan treaty, the United States maintains military alliances with several other states, including Australia and South Korea, where 25,000 troops are stationed under a bilateral alliance dating to the Korean War, Close U,S, collaboration with militaries in other states such as Israel make them de facto U,S, allies.
The 11 members of the Commonwealth of Independent States comprise the former Soviet republics except the Baltic states , Russia, the official successor state to the Soviet Union, is the leading member and Ukraine the second largest.
The solution to the collective goods problem in this case was for the dominant power to provide the good, NATO is not really a club of equals, but a hierarchy with one member having more military might than the others combined.
United States Department of Defense the 2003 war, and has faced stronger antipathy in the region thereafter, U.S, relations with Libya were also hostile for decades until a 2003 agreement, and became very friendly after Libya’s U,S,-backed revolution in 2011, It is unclear what new international alignments may emerge in the years to come.
For the present, international alignments—both military alliances and trade relationships—center on the United States , Although several independent-minded states such as China, Russia, and France keep U,S, hegemony in check, little evidence exists of a coherent or formal rival power alignment emerging to challenge the United States, Strategy Actors use strategy to pursue good outcomes in bargaining with one or more other actors.
Your population is still angered by the Chinese victory in the 1962 Sino-Indian war and the disputed border territory that gave rise to the conflict.
If deterrence works, its effects are almost invisible; its success is measured in attacks that did not occur,^' Generally, advocates of deterrence believe that conflicts are more likely to escalate into war when one party to the conflict is weak.
In this view, building up military capabilities usually convinces the stronger party that a resort to military leverage would not succeed, so conflicts are less likely to escalate into violence, A strategy of compellence, sometimes used after deterrence fails, refers to the threat of force to make another actor take some action (rather than refrain from taking an action),Generally, it is harder to get another state to change course is to get it to refrain from changing course (the ^^Rohter, Larry.
In theory, the less severe actions establish credibility—showing the first actor’s willingness to exert its power on the issue—and the pattern of escalation establishes the high costs of future sanctions if the second actor does not cooperate, These actions should induce the second actor to comply, assuming that it finds the potential costs of the escalating punishments greater than the costs of compliance.
The arms race process was illustrated vividly in the U,S,-Soviet nuclear arms race, which created arsenals of tens of thousands of nuclear weapons on each side,^^ The unitary actor assumption holds that states make important decisions as though they were single individuals able to act in the national interest.
Rationality in International Relations Most realists assume that those who wield power while engaging in statecraft behave as rational actors in their efforts to influence others,^^ This view has two implications for IR, ^^Isard, Walter, and Charles H Anderton.
Brown, Michael E., Owen R Cote, Sean M Lynn-Jones, and Steven E Miller, eds.
In this view, just as firms compete for money in economic markets, states compete for A.'l power in the international system.
Chicken represents two male teenagers speeding toward a head-on collision.
Liberal Theories 87 reciprocity principle, was that states could develop the organizations and rules to facilitate cooperation, specifically by forming a world federation resembling today’s United Nations, This answer forms the foundation of present-day liberal institutionalism, discussed shortly, Kant’s second answer, operating at a lower level of analysis, was that peace depends on the internal character of governments.
Neoliberals say to realists, “Even if we grant your assumptions about the nature of states and their motives, your pessimistic conclusions do not follow,” States achieve cooperation fairly often because it is in their interest to do so, and they can learn to use institutions to ease the pursuit of mutual gains and the reduction of possibilities for cheating or taking advantage of another state,^ Despite the many sources of conflict in IR, states cooperate most of the time.
Neoliberals argue that reciprocity can be an effective strategy for achieving cooperation in a situation of conflicting interests,^ If one side expresses willingness to cooperate Liberal theories emphasize the potential for rivalries to evolve into cooperative relationships as states recognize that achieving mutual benefits is most cost effective in the long run.
Regimes can help solve collective goods problems by increasing transparency— because everyone knows what everyone else is doing, cheating is riskierThe current revolution in information technologies is strengthening regimes particularly in this aspect^^Krasner, Stephen D., ed.
In international security affairs, the UN and other lOs provide a stable framework for resolving disputes , IPE is even more institutionalized, again because of the heavier volume of activity and the wealth that can be realized from cooperation,^^ Institutions gain greater stability and weight than do noninstitutionalized regimes.
These bureaucracies, however, can also promote policies not intended by the states that created the institutions (a problem noted by constructivist scholars; see p, 102), Important institutions in international security and IPE are discussed in Chapters 7 and 8, respectively.
Liberal institutionalism also places high value on international law, which receives its own discussion in Chapter 7, The culmination of liberal institutionalism to date is the European Union , which receives in-depth discussion in Chapter 10, After centuries of devastating wars, European states now enjoy a stable peace among themselves with strong international institutions to bind them.
Collective Security The concept of collective security, which grows out of liberal institutionalism, refers to the formation of a broad alliance of most major actors in an international system for the purpose of jointly opposing aggression by any actor, Kant laid out the rationale for this approach.
In the 1980s, the United States got into a series of conflicts with the UN about how much the U,S, dues should be.
Its membership did not include all the great powers , and its members proved unwilling to bear the costs of collective action to oppose aggression when it did occur in the 1930s, starting with Japan and Italy, After World War II, the United Nations was created as the League’s successor to promote collective security , Several regional IGOs also currently perform collective security functions as well as economic and cultural ones—the Organization of American States , the Arab League, and the African Union.
Suppressing a determined aggressor can be very costly, A second requisite for collective security is that enough members must agree on what constitutes aggression.
The UN Security Council is structured so that aggression is defined by what all five permanent members, in addition to at least four of the other ten members, can agree on , This collective security system does not work against aggression by a great power.
The UN Foundation, founded in 1998 with a large contribution by media mogul Ted Turner, started a campaign to use the identity principle to solve the problem of U,S, nonpayment of dues.
The United States began to catch up on arrears, and in 2009, it paid up the last of its back obligations, Wanting to be, and seen as, a great nation, America paid its bills.
When the UN did not act, the United States, Britain, and Australia sent military forces and overthrew Saddam Hussein by force, comparing the UN to the toothless League of Nations, However, the U,S, forces found no weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, and then found itself in a prolonged counterinsurgency war.
It has an extremely weak government that cannot control large parts of territory, and has become a home to terrorist organizations and pirates , In these cases, the international community has a duty to intervene, according to some approaches, to restore law and order, The Democratic Peace Kant argued that lasting peace would depend on states’ becoming republics, with legislatures to check the power of monarchs to make war.
Somewhat similarly, IR scholars have linked democracy with a kind of foreign policy fundamentally different from that of authoritarianism,^^ One theory they considered ^^Lepgold, Joseph, and Thomas G Weiss, eds.
This turned out not to be trueDemocracies fight as many wars as do authoritarian statesIndeed, the three most war-prone states of the past two centuries (according to political scientists who count wars) were France, Russia, and BritainBritain was a democracy throughout, France for part of the period, and Russia not at allWhat is true about democracies is that although they fight wars against authoritarian states, democracies almost never fight each other.
However, its lessons about the nature of norms, identity, and social interactions can provide powerful insights into the world of IR, In fact, most constructivist explanations draw heavily on the identity principle to explain international behavior.
Realists would quickly answer that North Korea poses a bigger threat, but from a pure military power perspective.
Great Britain is a jar superior military force to North Korea, Yet no one would argue that Great Britain is a threat to the United States no matter how many nuclear weapons it builds and no matter how deep disagreements about foreign policy become.
This is a rejection of the realist assumption that states always want more rather than less power and wealth as well as the assumption that state interests exist independently of a context of interactions among states,Constructivists hold that these state identities are complex and changing, and arise from interactions with other states—often through a process of socialization.
Eor example, many developing states have raced to create science bureaucracies and/or begin technological modernization of their militaries.
Ironically, many states that build science bureaucracies have few scientists while many states that build advanced militaries have few enemies.
In each case, however, new ideas and norms, rather than power and self-interest, drive state behavior.^^ 'xr\ Research in the constructivist tradition has expanded rapidly in recent years.
Moreover, both realists and liberals criticize that it is difficult to tell when a person’s identity is genuine or is adopted strategic reasons to bring material benefits (such as more aid, trade, or membership into an exclusive organization),^^ Despite these criticisms, constructivist thinking and its emphasis on the identity principle will continue to be at the core of IR research for years to come.
Because of their literary roots, postmodernists pay special attention to texts and to discourses —how people talk and write about their subject , ^ Postmodern critiques of realism thus center on analyzing realo n ists’ words and arguments,^' A central idea of postmodernism is that there is no single, objective reality but a multiplicity of experiences and perspectives that defy easy categorization, For this reason, postmodernism itself is difficult to present in a simple or categorical way.
Here we will show, briefly, how Marxist theories as social theories contrast with the realist paradigm, Marxism is a branch of socialism, a theory that holds that the more powerful classes oppress and exploit the less powerful by denying them their fair share of the surplus they create.
This process, called class struggle, is one way of looking at the political relationships between richer and poorer people, and ultimately between richer and poorer world regions, Marxism includes both communism and other approaches.
At that time, the Industrial Revolution was accompanied by particular hardship among industrial workers in Europe, Marxists still believe that the surplus created by labor should be recaptured by workers through political struggle.
One important class in revolutions during the past century (contrary to Marx’s expectations) has been peasants.Marxists traditionally consider peasants backward, ignorant, individualistic, and politically passive as compared to the better-educated and classconscious proletariat.
The largest was the Chinese revolution in the 1930s and 1940s, Marx’s theories of class struggle were oriented toward domestic society in the industrializing countries of his time, not toward poor countries or international relations.
The answer largely shapes how one sees North-South relations todayMarxists have mostly (but not exclusively) followed a line of argument developed by V 1.
Lenin, founder of the Soviet Union, before the Russian Revolution of 1917,'^^ Russia was then a relatively backward state, as the global South is today, and most Marxists considered a revolution there unlikely , Lenin’s theory of imperialism argued that European capitalists were investing in colonies where they could earn big profits and then using part of these to buy off the working class at home.
Imperialist expansion could occur only at the expense of other imperialist states, leading to interimperialist competition and wars such as World War I, Seizing on Russia’s weakness during that war, Lenin led the first successful communist revolution there in 1917, Lenin’s general idea still shapes a major approach to North-South relations—the idea that industrialized states exploit poor countries (through both formal and informal colonization) and buy off their own working classes with the profits.
Through this globalizcttion of class relations, world accumulation concentrates surplus toward the rich parts of the world and away from the poor ones.
After European colonization ended, the United States as the world’s richest country (with large investments in the global South and a global military presence) became the target of revolutionaries agitating against exploitation in poor countries, In a number of countries, imperialists were thrown out (often violently, sometimes not) and revolutionary nationalists took power.
One of the most important such revolutions was in China, where Mao Zedong’s communists took power in 1949 on a Leninist platform adapted to the largely peasant-based movement they led, Mao declared that “China has stood up”—on its own feet, throwing off foreign domination and foreign exploitation.
In India at the same time, the movement led by Gandhi used a different means to achieve similar ends—national independence from colonialism, Indonesia threw out the Dutch, Lebanon threw out the Erench, Cuba threw out the Americans, This pattern was repeated, with variations, in dozens of countries.
Eventually they can generate their own self-sustaining cycles of accumulation and lift themselves out of poverty,""^""^ However, such an approach has not worked well, A policy of self-reliance does not foster growth , And within a single poor country, trade-offs arise between concentrating or distributing wealth, Eor former colonies, the realities of economic development after independence have been complex.
In Nicaragua, the former communist leader whom U,S,-organized rebels fought in the 1980s won election as president in 2006, These events, along with China’s continuing formal adherence to Marxism, suggest that Marxist theories of IR have ongoing importance in the post-Cold War era.
Peace studies also seeks peace not in the transactions of state leaders but in the transformation of entire societies and in transnational communities (bypassing states and ignoring borders to connect people and groups globally Another way in which peace studies seeks to broaden the focus of inquiry is to reject the supposed objectivity of traditional approaches.
Recently, the use of conflict resolution has been increasing, becoming more sophisticated, and succeeding more often,""^^ Most conflict resolution uses a third party whose role is mediation between two conflicting parties,""^^ Most of today’s ^^Mandel, Ernest.
Some regional conflicts are mediated through regional organizations, single states, or even private individuals,^^ The involvement of the mediator can vary.
Some mediation is strictly technical —a mediator may take an active but strictly neutral role in channeling communication between two states that lack other channels of communication,^^ For example, Pakistan secretly passed messages between China and the United States before the breakthrough in U,S,-Chinese relations in 1971, Such a role is sometimes referred to as offering the mediator’s good offices to a negotiating process.
In these roles, the mediator is like the translator between the two sides, or a therapist helping them work out psychological problems in their relationship, ^ Travel and discussion by private individuals and groups can r o serve as citizen diplomacy , to ease tensions as well,^^ If both sides agree in advance to abide by a solution devised by a mediator, the process is called arbitration.
For example, when Serbian and Bosnian negotiators could not agree on who should get the city of Brcko, they turned the issue over to arbitration rather than hold up the entire 1995 Dayton Agreement, Arbitration often uses a panel of three people, one chosen by each side unilaterally and a third on whom both sides agree.
The creation of a world government has long been debated by scholars and pursued by activists,^' Some scholars believe progress is being made toward the eventual emergence of a world government.
The most commonly studied method of exerting such pressure is through peace movements— people taking to the streets in protest against war and militarism,As U,S, president GIVE PEACE A CHANCE Peace demonstrators play a role in many conflicts.
A GUY THING Feminists from various theoretical traditions agree that the gender makeup of international summits and national governments matters.
On some core issues, the different strands of feminism have conflicting views, creating interesting debates within feminism.
In either case, feminine perspectives create a standpoint from which to observe, analyze, and criticize the traditional perspectives on IR,^^ Another strand, liberal feminism, rejects these claims as being based on stereotyped gender roles.
Liberal feminists seek to include women more often as subjects of study—such as women state leaders, women soldiers, and other women operating outside the traditional gender roles in IR, A third approach combines feminism with postmodernism, discussed later in this chapter.
This view rests on a psychological theory that boys and girls grow up from a young age with different views of separateness and connection,^^ In this theory, because a child’s primary caretaker is almost always female in the early years, girls form their gender identity around the perception of similarity with their caretaker (and by extension the environment in which they live), but boys perceive their difference from the caretaker.
Women have formed their own organizations to work for peace on many occasions.
Nonetheless, U,S, public opinion on foreign policy issues since the 1930s partially vindicates difference feminists, A gender gap in polls shows that women are about ten percentage points lower than men on average in their support for military actions.
This gender gap shrinks, however, when broad consensus on a military action exists, as when U,S, forces attacked terrorist supporters in Afghanistan in late 2001, Meanwhile, feminists in recent decades have continued to organize women’s peace organizations,'^ In the 1980s, Women’s Action for Nuclear Disarmament opposed the nuclear arms buildup, and women encamped for years at Britain’s Greenham Common air base.
In 2004, Secretary-General Annan called “shameful” the reported behavior of UN troops from several countries serving in Democratic Congo, Investigators there found hundreds of cases of sexual crimes by UN personnel.
For example, the head of a group of Swedish men sent to build a bridge in Sri Lanka initially said, “Our task is to build a bridge, we don’t need to worry about gender issues,” When asked how it would be WOMAN POWER Difference feminists see women as inherently less warlike than men and more adept at making peace because of their potential and actual experiences as mothers.
As a result of this gender perspective, the bridge was redesigned to include a pedestrian walkway Through these various actions, difference feminists began developing a feminist practice of international relations that could provide an alternative to the masculine practice of realism.
Eor difference feminists, war does indeed begin in the minds of men, but the foundations for peace would better be sought in the minds of women.
Eor instance, in 1995, the world’s diplomatic delegations to the UN General Assembly were 80 percent male overall, and the heads of those delegations were 97 percent male.
In the U.SCongress, it is hard to compare men’s and women’s voting records on foreign policy issues because there have been so few women.
In the 2003 Iraq War, women flew all types of airplanes and helicopters, and one woman was in the first group of U,S, POWs captured early in the war.
Liberal feminists reject such arguments and contend that group bonding in military units does not depend on gender segregation, (After all, similar rationales were once given for racial segregation in U,S, military forces, The effect of war on noncombatant women has also received growing attention,®^ Attacks on women in Algeria, Rwanda, Bosnia, Afghanistan, Democratic Congo, and Sudan pointed to a possible new trend toward women as military targets.
Systematic rape was used as a terror tactic in Bosnia and Rwanda, and the Japanese army in World War II operated an international network of sex slaves known as “comfort women,” Rape has long been treated as a normal if regrettable byproduct of war, but recently certain instances of rape were declared war crimes , In sum, liberal feminists reject the argument that women bring uniquely feminine assets or liabilities to foreign and military affairs.
Gender differences posited by difference feminists mean that one bell curve is shifted from the other, even though the two may still overlap quite a bit , To take a simple example, a few women are physically larger than almost all men, and a few men are smaller than almost all women.
In the case of response to aggression, feminists might call attention to the importance of gender roles such as the need for state leaders to prove their manhood by standing up to the bad guys.
This is connected with the male role as protector of the orderly domestic sphere against the dangerous and anarchic outside world.
Since 2001, gender roles have become increasingly visible on both sides of the “war on terror,” with both women’s positions in society and men’s concepts of masculinity becoming contested territory between the West and armed Islamic groups.
Traditional theories of IR that ignore these issues may lack explanatory power as a result.
Whether states’ interests reflect fixed assumptions about power and well-being or are constructed by states and substate actors based on ideas and social interactions, those interests do sometimes conflict with those of other states.
R REVIEW Sgy Watch the Video ""Authors' Chapter Wrap Up"" at MyPoliSciLab SUMMARY ■ The central claims of realism—regarding anarchy, state actors, rationality, and the utility of military force—have been challenged on a variety of grounds.
States take actions because people in governments —decision makers —choose those actions-^ Decision making is a steering process in which adjustments are made as a result of feedback from the outside world.
A common starting point for studying the decision-making process is the rational model.
You Are the President"" at MyPoliSciLab For example, the United States secretary of state may have a different goal than the secretary of defense, just as the Central Intelligence Agency may view a situation differently than the National Security Council doesThe rational model of decision making is somewhat complicated by uncertainty and the multiple goals of decision makers.
The Vietnam War trapped U,S, decision makers in this way in the 1960s, After sending half a million troops halfway around the world, U,S, leaders found it difficult to admit to themselves that the costs of the war were greater than the benefits.
Decision makers also achieve cognitive balance through wishful thinking —an overestimate of the probability of a desired outcome, A variation of wishful thinking is to assume that an event with a low probability of occurring will not occur.
Cognitive balance often leads decision makers to maintain a hardened image of an enemy and to interpret all of the enemy’s actions in a negative light (because the idea of bad people doing good things would create cognitive dissonance),^ A mirror image refers to two sides in a conflict maintaining very similar enemy images of each other (“We are defensive, they are aggressive,” etc,), A decision maker may also experience psychological projection of his or her own feelings onto another actor.
This can be quite useful or quite misleading, depending on whether the analogy is appropriate,^^ Because each historical situation is unique in some way, when a decision maker latches onto an analogy and uses it as a shortcut to a decision, the rational calculation of costs and benefits may be cut short as well.
For example, U,S, leaders used the analogy of Munich in 1938 to convince themselves that appeasement in the Vietnam War would lead to increased communist aggression in Asia, In retrospect, the differences between North Vietnam and Nazi Germany made this a poor analogy , Vietnam itself then became a potent analogy that helped persuade U,S, leaders to avoid involvement in certain overseas conflicts, such as Bosnia; this was called the “Vietnam syndrome” in U,S, foreign policy.
All of these psychological processes—misperception, affective biases, and cognitive biases—interfere with the rational assessment of costs and benefits in making a decision, Two specific modifications to the rational model of decision making have been proposed to accommodate psychological realities.
Condemned to Repetition/ The Rise, Fall, and Reprise of Soviet'Russian Military Interventionism, 1973-1996.
Instead of optimizing, or picking the very best option, people usually work on the problem until they come up with a “good enough” option that meets some minimal criteria; this is called satisficing, or finding a satisfactory solution/^ The time constraints faced by top decision makers in IR—who are constantly besieged with crises requiring their attention—generally preclude their finding the very best response to a situation.
President Lyndon Johnson had “Tuesday lunches” to discuss national security policy with top national security officials.
For instance, Israel’s Golda Meir held many such discussions at her home, sometimes literally in the kitchen, Russian president Boris Yeltsin relied on the advice of his bodyguard, who was a trusted friend.
Crisis Management The difficulties in reaching rational decisions, both for individuals and for groups, are heightened during a crisis,^' Crises are foreign policy situations in which outcomes are very important and time frames are compressed.
In framing options decision makers tend to restrict the choices, again to save time, and tend to overlook creative options while focusing on the most obvious ones, (In the United States, shifting time constraints are measurable in a doubling or tripling in pizza deliveries to government agencies, as decision makers work through mealtimes,) Groupthink occurs easily during crises.
Even the president’s communication with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev was rerouted through Kennedy’s brother Robert and the Soviet ambassador, cutting out the State Department, Recognizing the danger of groupthink, Kennedy left the room from time to time—removing the authority figure from the group—to encourage free discussion.
But whether or not a foreign country has a large constituency of ethnic nationals within another country, it can lobby that country’s government.
In democracies, military industries also influence public opinion through advertising that ties their products to patriotic themes, U,S, military industries also give generous campaign contributions to national politicians who vote on military budgets, and sometimes bribes to Pentagon officials as well,^""^ Public Opinion Many domestic actors seek to influence public opinion—the range of views on foreign policy issues held by the citizens of a state.
Most analysts agree that the peace talks can succeed only if the United States applies strong leadership (including pressure and inducements) to get the two parties to make concessions, Opponents on each side can then blame the United States rather than their own leaders, who thus gain maneuvering room to compromise.
States use television, newspapers, and other information media in this effort.
Public opinion polls show that elite opinions sometimes differ considerably from those of the general population, and sometimes from those of the government as well.
In 2006, President Bush’s popularity, which had soared early in the Iraq War, deflated as the war dragged on ^^Page, Benjamin L, and Marshall M Bouton.
Some democracies, such as the United States, have presidential systems, in which legislative bodies are elected apart from the president (also referred to as executives), In these systems, legislatures play a direct role in making foreign policy by passing budgets, regulating bureaucratic rules, creating trade law, even controlling immigration policy.
Although executives may attend summits and talks, any agreement they sign must n Q be approved by their domestic legislature.
Parliament is not required to vote on international agreements negotiated by the prime minister, but it must approve any change to British laws that such agreements entailBecause most international agreements do involve these types of changes.
Thus the military might of the Soviet Union, and its control of buffer states in Eastern Europe, seemed defensive in nature to Soviet leaders but appeared aggressive to U,S, leaders.
Relatively democratic states tend to share values and interests, and hence to get along better with each other than with nondemocracies , In practice, most states lie along a spectrum with some mix of democratic and authoritarian elements.
Legislatures Should Not Play a Role in Deciding Whether to Use Military Force Legislatures are slow to act in times of crisis.
Raiding that is repeated or fuels a cycle of retaliation usually becomes a limited war or what is sometimes called lowantensity conflict.
In Chad, for example, a rebel group composed of rival clans to the president’s nearly overthrew the government in 2007, Sustaining a civil war usually requires a source of support for rebels, from neighboring states, diaspora ethnic communities, or revenue from natural resources or illegal drugs.
Rebels in most civil wars use such methods, U,S, military forces in South Vietnam fought against Vietcong guerrillas in the 1960s and 1970s, with rising frustration.
Efforts to combat a guerrilla army—counterinsurgency—are discussed in Chapter 6, In guerrilla war, without a fixed front line, there is much territory that neither side controls; both sides thus exert military leverage over the same places at the same time.
Thus, guerrilla wars are extremely painful for civilians, who suffer most when no military force firmly controls a location, opening the door to banditry, personal vendettas, sexual violence, and other such lawless behavior,""^ The situation is doubly painful because conventional armies fighting against guerrillas often cannot distinguish them from civilians and punish both together.
In one famous case in South Vietnam, a U,S, officer who had ordered an entire village burned to deny its use as a sanctuary by the Vietcong commented, “We had to destroy the village to save it,” Warfare increasingly is irregular and guerrilla-style; it is less and less often an open, conventional clash of large state armies, although the latter still occurs occasionally.
The Individual Level On the individual level of analysis, theories about war center on rationality.
An opposite theory holds that conflicts often escalate to war because of deviations from rationality in the individual decision-making processes of national leaders.
Kung bush people in Angola and TS Political scientists do not agree on a theory of why great wars like World War II occur and cannot predict whether they could happen again.
Some political scientists study war from a statistical perspective, analyzing data on types of wars and the circumstances under which they occurred.Current research focuses on the effects of democracy, government structure, trade, international organizations, and related factors in explaining the escalation or settlement of “militarized interstate disputes.
The Global Level At the global level of analysis, a number of theories of war have been proposed.
Advocates of these theories make historical analogies to the decline of the practices of slavery, dueling, and cannibalism—once considered normal but now obsolete.These approaches have a strong empirical basis , but no consensus has emerged regarding the best explanation for this trend.
Today such conflicts are widespread—in Northern Ireland, Quebec, Israel-Palestine, India-Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tibet, Sudan, and many '1 1 other places,^ The Netherlands helped establish the principle of self-determination when it broke free of Spanish ownership around 1600 and set up a self-governing Dutch republic.
The United States meanwhile had followed the example of the Netherlands by declaring independence from Britain in 1776, Latin American states gained independence early in the 19th century, and Germany and Italy unified their nations out of multiple political units later in that century.
In the past 50 years, nations by the dozens have gained independence and statehood, Jews worked persistently in the first half of the 20th century to create the state of Israel, and Palestinians aspired in the second half to create a Palestinian state.
In most such cases they aspire to have their own state with its formal international status and territorial boundaries.
It is unclear why people identify most strongly at one level of group identity, ° In Somalia, loyalties are to clans; in Serbia, they are to the ethnic group; in the United States and elsewhere, multiethnic nations command people’s primary loyalty.
Perhaps someday people will shift loyalties even further, developing a gloM identity as humans first and members of states and ethnic groups second.
Responsible German officials faced justice in the Nuremberg Tribunal after World War II , The pledges of world leaders after that experience to “never again” allow genocide have been found wanting as genocide recurred in the 1990s in Bosnia and Rwanda, and most recently in Darfur, Sudan, In 1994, in Rwanda, where the Hutu group is the majority and the Tutsi group the minority, a Hutu-nationalist government carried out the most deadly genocide of recent decades.
The international community’s ineffective response to the mass murders in Darfur, like that in Rwanda in 1994, shows the limited 'ZD reach of international norms in today’s state-based international system.
The breakup of these states allowed ethnic and regional conflicts to take center stage, sometimes bringing violence and war.
These cases may indicate a dilemma in that freedom comes at the expense of order and vice versa.
For instance, most people in Azerbaijan are Muslims; most Armenians are Christians, This is a very common pattern in ethnic conflicts.
But religious differences hold the potential to make existing conflicts more intractable, because religions involve core values, which are held o 1 as absolute truth,^ This is increasingly true as fundamentalist movements have gained strength in recent decades, (The reasons for fundamentalism are disputed, but it is clearly a global-level phenomenon,) Members of these movements organize their lives and communities around their religious beliefs; many are willing to sacrifice, kill, and die for those beliefs.
Huntington, Samuel P The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order.
Fanaticai Not respectfui of women Musiims think non-Musiims are: Fanaticai Jordan Turkey Egypt Indonesia Pakistan Not respectfui of women Source: Pew Global Attitudes Survey, 2005 and 2010.
Al Qaeda is a transnational group—more a network or movement than a central organization in recent years—that recruits fighters from various countries, encourages and sometimes trains them, and helps them fight in foreign conflicts (such as in Afghanistan in the 1980s, Iraq after 2003, or Syria today 37 Wright, Lawrence.
The Islamists swept aside the ethnic rebels and took power for themselves, but by 2013 were ousted by a military intervention by Erance and neighboring African countries to return control to the government of Mali.
In Angola in the 1980s, the United States backed a rebel army called UNITA against a Soviet-aligned government—supposedly a struggle of democracy against Marxism, In truth, the ideological differences were quite arbitrary.
The rebels who used democratic rhetoric to get U,S, support had earlier received Chinese support and mouthed Maoist rhetoric.
Because states value home territory with an almost fanatical devotion, border disputes tend to be among the most intractable in IR, States seldom yield territory in exchange for money or any other positive reward.
For example, in 2002, Bolivian public opinion opposed a gas export pipeline through Chile to the sea because Chile had seized the coastline from Bolivia in 1879, The goal of regaining territory lost to another state is called irredentism.
This form of nationalism often leads directly to serious interstate conflicts,^^ Because of their association with the integrity of states, territories are valued far beyond any inherent economic or strategic value they hold.
In the former Yugoslavia, ethnic groups had intermingled and intermarried, leaving mixed populations in most of the Yugoslav republics, When Yugoslavia broke up in 1991-1992, several republics declared their independence as separate states.
Two of these, Croatia and Bosnia, contained minority populations of ethnic Serbs, Serbia seized effective control of significant areas of Croatia and Bosnia that contained Serbian communities or linked such populations geographically, NonSerbian populations in these areas were driven out or massacred— euphemistically called ethnic cleansing, Then, when Croatia reconquered most of its territory in 1995, Serbian populations in turn fled.
Ethnic nationalism, whipped up by opportunistic politicians, proved stronger than multiethnic tolerance in both Serbia and Croatia, The breakup of a state need not lead to violence, however, Serbia split peacefully from Montenegro in 2006, Czechoslovakia split into the Czech Republic and Slovakia in a cooperative manner.
And the breakup of the Soviet Union did not lead to violent territorial disputes between republics in most cases, even when ethnic groups spanned new international borders , The norm against forceful redrawing of borders does not apply to cases of decolonization, Only the territorial integrity of existing, recognized states is protected by international norms.
The transfer of Hong Kong from British to Chinese control in 1997 also illustrates how colonial territory is dispensable while home territory is nearly sacred (China’s perspective), Erom neither perspective do the views of the inhabitants carry much weight.
In 2005, spurred partly by the devastating tsunami a year earlier, separatists in Aceh province, Indonesia, disbanded, giving up on independence and instead participating in regional elections in 2006, The Indonesian government withdrew its 24,000 troops from Aceh and offered the province limited self-rule along with 70 percent of the oil, gas, and mineral wealth earned there.
Among the most difficult are the borders of Israel The 1948 cease-fire lines resulting from Israel’s war of independence expanded in the 1967 war, Israel returned the Sinai Peninsula to Egypt, but the remaining territories occupied in 1967—the West Bank near Jordan, the Gaza Strip near Egypt, and the Golan Heights of Syria—are central to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
In particular, Israel’s ongoing construction of Jewish settlements in the West Bank, bitterly opposed by Palestinians and considered illegal by most international actors, remains a contentious sticking point, Israeli-Palestinian agreements since 1993 tried to move toward Palestinian autonomy in CIA’s World Factbook provides a comprehensive list of minor border and other international disputes.
The tiny disputed Spratly Islands in the South China Sea, whose surrounding waters may hold substantial oil reserves, are claimed in part or in full by China, Taiwan, Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia, and Brunei , All of FIGURE 5.
In 2012, China and the Philippines had a months-long standoff at a tiny shoal, but ended it peacefully.
Eor example, Libya claims ownership of the entire Gulf of Sidra, treating it as a bay; the United States treats it as a curvature in the shoreline and insists that most of it is international waters.
The theory has been used to help explain both World War I and the expansion of Japan prior to World War Another kind of economic conflict that affects international security concerns military industry —the capacity to produce military equipment, especially high-technology weapons such as fighter aircraft or missiles.
Unlike other smuggling operations, however, drug trafficking supplies illegal products that are treated as a security threat because of their effect on national morale and efficiency.
A New Cold War Will Emerge Between the United States and Russia Russia and the United States have major differences in key policy areas.
For example, the United States has about 20,000 diplomatic personnel but 2 million soldiers; it spends about $30 billion a year on foreign aid but about $700 billion on military forces and war (equaling the rest of the world combined), Because of the security dilemma , states believe they must devote large resources to military capabilities if other states are doing so,^ Beyond defending their territories, states develop military capabilities for several other purposes.
They may also hope to compel other states to behave in certain ways, by threatening an attack if the state does not comply,^ States also use military forces for humanitarian FIGURE 6.
You Are a Military Commander"" at MyPoliSciLab assistance after disasters, for peacekeeping, for surveillance of drug trafficking, and for repression of domestic political dissent, among other missions.
Author's estimates based on data provided by the following sources: ^2011 data from Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. ^2011 data from Institute for International and Strategic Studies.
While battling armed factions of an insurgency, a government must essentially conduct a public relations campaign to persuade the population to abandon the movement, while providing public services to show a government’s responsiveness to the population, A government must be strong militarily, but cannot be too brutal in the application of force, lest more of the population begin to support the guerrillas, U,S, military forces conducted counterinsurgency campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan for years.
For example, the U,S, Army’s counterinsurgency manual suggests deploying 20 troops for every 1,000 citizens to be protected from insurgents.
Indeed, even including allied forces, the United States never reached such a ratio of troops-to-population in Iraq or Afghanistan, Such a ratio would require 600,000 troops for Afghanistan, compared with the 130,000 international troops actually deployed there at the peak in 2010 , A common tool of guerrillas, insurgents, and the governments fighting them are land mines, which are simple, small, and cheap containers of explosives with a trigger activated by contact or sensor.
Controlling the Seas Navies are adapted primarily to control passage through the seas and to attack land near coastlines,^ Controlling the seas in wartime allows states to move their own goods and military forces by sea while preventing enemies from doing so.
Many states responded, including the five permanent members of the Security Council, U,S, Special Forces killed the hijackers of one American ship in 2009, European Union attack helicopters raided an onshore pirate base in 2012, and a Somali rescue freed a ship in late 2012, Many cargo ships began carrying armed guards.
All these measures led to a sharp decline in Somali hijackings in 2012, A notorious pirate leader, “Big Mouth,” who had once seized the Ukrainian ship full of tanks, announced his disarmament and retirement in 2013, Aircraft carriers—mobile platforms for attack aircraft—are instruments of power projection that can attack virtually any state in the world.
Merely sending an aircraft carrier sailing to the vicinity of an international conflict implies a threat to use force—a modern version of 19th century “gunboat diplomacy,” Aircraft carriers are extremely expensive and typically require 20 to 25 supporting ships for protection and supply.
Only the United States operates large carriers, known as supercarriers—II of them, costing more than $5 billion each.
In 2015, the U,S, Navy plans to launch a newly designed supercarrier, costing $14 billion, China has acquired and renovated one carrier, which it uses for training.
They use ingenuity to penetrate walls of secrecy that foreign governments have constructed around their plans and capabilities, For example, in 1999 a Russian spy taped conversations from a listening device planted in a high-level conference room at the U,S, State Department, The 2001 terrorist attacks showed a weakness in U,S, “human intelligence” capabilities, in that the United States had not penetrated a large terrorist network based in Afghanistan and operating globally,^ U,S, “signal intelligence” capabilities are more impressive.
The largest U,S, military intelligence agency is the National Security Agency , whose mission is encoding U,S, communications and breaking the codes of foreign communications.
Altogether, the budgets of U,S, intelligence agencies, although officially secret, were revealed in 2005 to be around $44 billion a year.
First, the resort to force in international conflicts now has more profound costs and consequences, Great powers in particular can no longer use force to settle disputes among themselves without risking massive destruction and economic ruin.
These technological advances undermine the territorial basis of war and the “hard shell” of the state itself,In recent years, this trend has accelerated with the use of unmanned drone aircraft, including drones armed with missiles, in U,S, military efforts in Pakistan, Yemen, and Libya, In addition to America’s 7,000 drones in 2011, other countries have been rapidly acquiring them, China showed off 25 models in 2011, Russia, India, Pakistan, and Iran also have drones.
An Iranianmade drone was shot down over Israel in 2012, Britain and Israel have used drones for attacks, but most drones worldwide are used for surveillance, U,S, underwater sea drones for mine clearing, produced by Germany, were sent to the Persian Gulf in 2012 as tensions with Iran escalated.
In the future, terrorist attacks also could target computer networks, including the Internet and critical infrastructure such as electric grids, Gyberattacks are an issue of growing importance in international relations, with Ghinese, Russian, and American hackers constantly probing each other’s systems.
In 2010, the U,S,-Israeli Stuxnet virus targeted Iran’s nuclear centrifuges, and in 2012, the Flame virus was found on thousands of computers across the Middle East, mostly in Iran, It could grab screenshots and keystrokes, and remotely turn on computer microphones to help the creators spy on operations in the Iranian nuclear program, A few months later, probably in response, a virus deleted files on the computers of a major Saudi oil company, replacing them with an image of a burning American flag.
Military historians refer to a period of rapid change in the conduct of war as a “revolution in military affairs,” These periods usually combine innovative applications of new technology with changes in military doctrine, organization, or operations.
Many military analysts consider the present period, starting with the 1991 Gulf War, a revolution in military affairs, especially in U,S, forces.
Two centuries ago, the German military strategist Garl von Glausewitz described as a “fog of war” the confusion and uncertainty that greatly reduces the effectiveness of armies in battle.
Today’s U,S, forces are piercing that fog for themselves while thickening it for their enemies.
The ability to conduct precision strikes, and the increasing use of space in warfare, are two other aspects of the present revolution.
Some are motivated by religion but others by class ideology (for example.
More than guerrilla warfare, terrorism is a shadowy world of faceless enemies and irregular tac1 0 tics marked by extreme brutality.
By capturing media attention worldwide with dramatic incidents of violence—even at the cost of rallying world public opinion against their cause—the radicals hoped to make Palestinian aspirations an issue that Western governments could not ignore when deciding on policies toward the Middle East, Yet, the persistence of terrorism is in some ways puzzling because the tactic has a mixed record of success.
Suicide bombers were arguably effective at convincing the United States to leave Lebanon in 1983, but the Chechen terrorists’ 2004 school attack marked their end as a serious force in Chechnya, The Palestinians did not win a state through terrorism, A1 Qaeda affiliates in Iraq so alienated the Sunni tribes that had sheltered them that the tribes turned against them.
In addition, even large numbers of suicide bombers have yet to be effective at gaining a state for the Tamils in Sri Lanka or providing leverage for Hamas or Islamic Jihad against Israel, Clearly, terrorist activities do not reliably achieve political ends.
According to one study, suicide bombings, rather than an irrational use of violence by terrorist groups, follow strategic patterns , In particular, they occur most frequently against democracies rather than autocracies, presumably because democracies are thought to be strongly influenced by public opinion.
Still, this same study concludes that this terror tactic has not been particularly successful at achieving significant goals, Terrorists are more willing than states are to violate the norms of the international system because, unlike states, they do not have a stake in that system.
This was true of the Palestine Liberation Organization during the peace process in 1993-2000 as well as the Irish Republican Army starting in 1995, States themselves carry out acts designed to terrorize their own populations or those of other states, but scholars tend to avoid the label “terrorism” for such acts, preferring to call it repression or war.
But in today’s world of undeclared war, guerrilla war, civil war, and ethnic violence, a large gray zone surrounds clear cases of terrorism, Disagreements about whether terrorism included Palestinian attacks ^^Pape, Robert.
The U,S, and British governments identified the Libyan intelligence agents responsible, and in 1992, backed by the UN Security Council, they demanded that Libya turn over the agents for trial.
When Libya refused, the UN imposed sanctions including a ban on international flights to or from Libya, In 1999, Libya turned over the suspects for trial—two received life in prison while a third was acquitted—and the UN suspended its sanctions.
When deployed on ballistic missiles, they can potentially be fired from the home territory of one state and wreak great destruction on the home territory of another state, ^' Until now this has never happened.
Watch the Video ""Iran's Nuclear Ambitions"" at MyPoliSciLab Nuclear Weapons Nuclear weapons are, in sheer power, the world’s most destructive weapons, A single weapon the size of a refrigerator can destroy a city.
Fission weapons are simpler and less expensive than fusion weapons (also called thermonuclear bombs, hydrogen bombs, or H-bombs), When a fission weapon explodes, one type of atom is split, or fissioned, into new types with less total mass.
Fission weapons were invented 60 years ago by U,S, scientists in a secret World War II science program known as the Manhattan Project.
Strategic weapons could hit an enemy’s homeland, usually at long range (for instance, Moscow from Nebraska), Tactical nuclear weapons were designed for battlefield use.
Ballistic missiles carry a warhead up along a trajectory and let it drop on the target, A trajectory typically rises out of the atmosphere—at least 50 miles high—before descending.
The modified Scud missiles fired by Iraq at Saudi Arabia and Israel during the Gulf War were SRBMs, In regional conflicts, the long range of more powerful missiles may not be necessary.
Shortand mediumrange missiles apparently are being developed by Iran, Israel, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, India, North Korea, and possibly Argentina and Brazil, In 2009, Iran alarmed the West by testing a missile that could reach Egypt, Israel, and parts of Europe, In 2012, North Korea, evidently in cooperation with Iran, successfully tested a long-range missile capable of transcontinental distances.
Since 2001, the United States has run a container security initiative aimed at preventing weapons of mass destruction from reaching U,S, shores in seaborne shipping containers, But doing so without impeding the prosperity-inducing flow of international trade is a daunting challenge—nearly 8 million shipping containers pass through U,S, ports every year.
It is possible to defend against most chemical weapons by dressing troops in protective clothing and gas masks and following elaborate procedures to decontaminate equipment, But protective suits are hot, and antichemical measures reduce the efficiency of armies.
Civilians are much less likely to have protection against chemicals than are military forces.
Several times, chemical weapons have been deliberately used against civilians (notably by the Iraqi government against Iraqi Kurds in the 1980s), Use of chemical weapons in war has been rare.
Since then , only Iraq has violated the treaty—against Iran in the 1980s, Unfortunately, Iraq’s actions not only breached a psychological barrier against using chemical weapons, but showed such weapons to be cheap and effective against human waves of attackers without protective gear.
This example stimulated dozens more poor states to begin acquiring chemical weapons, Chemical weapons are a cheap way for states to gain weapons of mass destruction.
Researchers try to ascertain the military '1 '1 implications of advances in biotechnology.
Lax security at the vast, far-flung former Soviet nuclear complex increased fears that fissionable 9 ^ materials could reach terrorists.
The relevant regional conflicts are those between Israel and the Arab states, Iran and its Arab neighbors, India and Pakistan,^® the two Koreas, and possibly Taiwan and China, India and Pakistan each have dozens of nuclear weapons and the missiles to deliver them.
In the 1990s, Pakistan’s top nuclear scientist sold bomb kits with lowgrade uranium, enrichment centrifuges, and bomb designs to Libya, Iran, and North Korea, Libya gave its up.
The Non-Proliferation Treaty of 1968 created a framework for controlling the spread of nuclear materials and expertise,^^ The International Atomic Energy Agency , a UN agency based in Vienna, is charged with inspecting the nuclear power industry in member states to prevent secret military diversions of nuclear materials.
Under the terms of the Gulf War cease-fire, Iraq’s nuclear program was uncovered and dismantled by the IAEA, In 2006, a deal between the United States and India to share nuclear technology led many states to question the NPT, because those benefits were supposedly reserved for only signatories.
Nonetheless the deal received final U,S, and Indian approval in 2008, North Korea withdrew from the IAEA in 1993, then bargained with Western leaders to get economic assistance, including safer reactors, in exchange for freezing its nuclear program.
Limiting Nuclear Arsenals BACKGROUND: After the creation of nuclear weapons in World War II, the two superpowers built large arsenals of them during the decades of the Cold WarEventually, each side had tens of thousands.
Eor decades the effort merely channeled and illuminated the steady buildup of arms on both sides.
If India could not assuredly destroy Pakistan’s missile, it would undoubtedly deploy its own nuclear missile to deter Pakistan from using its missile, India, too, could achieve a secondstrike capability.
The program is called the Strategic Defense Initiative , “Star Wars,” or Ballistic Missile Defense , It originated in President Ronald Reagan’s 1983 call for a comprehensive shield that would make nuclear missiles obsolete,^""^ However, the mission soon shifted to defending some U,S, missiles in a massive Soviet attack.
The nuclear arms race between the superpowers during the Cold War led to strategies and arms control agreements that helped develop norms and expectations about nuclear weapons and missiles.
It had begun testing an airplane-based laser system and had concluded agreements with Poland and the Czech Republic to build missile defenses in those countries, before reversing these plans in favor of a sea-based system to guard against any Iranian threat, with a radar system based in Turkey.
However, the treaty does not take effect until signed and ratified by all 44 states believed capable of building at least a crude nuclear weapon, India did not sign the CTBT and defied it in 1998 with five nuclear tests, Pakistan followed suit with its own tests.
The U,S, Senate voted in 1999 against ratifying the CTBT, Russia ratified it in 2000, Although no nuclear tests occurred worldwide in 19992005, North Korea’s nuclear tests in 2006 and 2009 dealt more setbacks to the CTBT, All the weapons of mass destruction are relatively difficult and expensive to build, yet provide only specialized capabilities that are rarely if ever actually used.
People once believed in the United States that “war is good for the economy” because, seemingly, military spending had helped end the Great Depression in the late 1930s, If this were true, state leaders would not face difficult choices in setting military budgets.
Governments must pay for war goods by borrowing money , by printing more currency , or by raising taxes , U,S, revolutionary Thomas Paine o n warned in 1787 that “war , ,, has but one thing certain, and that is to increase taxes,” ' ^Taine, Thomas.
Most is spent by a few big states, nearly half by the United States alone, (U,S, spending is expected to fall steadily in the coming years as its wars end, but other countries are increasing their spending rapidly,) World military spending is a vast flow of money that could, if redirected to other purposes, change the world profoundly and improve major world problems,^^ Of course, “the world” does not spend this money or choose how to direct it; states do.
In the global South, military spending varies greatly across countries, depending in part on the government in power ,Spending also depends heavily on available hard currency, from exports of oil or other products, to pay for arms purchases.
Most arms sales worldwide go to the global South, In recent decades, about half of these arms imports have been in the Middle East, but lately India and China have taken a growing share.
In the immediate post-Cold War era, global arms sales fell, but have since climbed back to near-Cold War levels,""^^ Activists have called attention to the sales of small arms, especially assault rifles, to unstable conflict zones where irregular armies commit brutalities.
In the fall of 2009, the UN General Assembly voted nearly unanimously to begin work on an Arms Trade Treaty, The treaty passed the General Assembly in 2013 with only Iran, North Korea, and Syria voting no.
Ratification by the U,S, Senate appears unlikely,""^^ ^®Liberman, Peter.
Many states, especially democratic states, adhere to a principle of civilian supremacy.
Historically, Turkey’s military has intervened numerous times to take control from elected leaders when military officers felt the government was threatening the secular nature of Turkey, Recently, however, the civilian government has been aggressive at arresting officers who they believe were plotting a coup.
If tensions become too sharp between a civilian leadership and their military forces, a coup d’etat can result, A coup is the seizure of political power by domestic military forces—a change of political power outside the state’s constitutional order,""^^ The outcome of a coup attempt is hard to predict.
Several thousand such operations were mounted during the Cold War, when the CIA and its Soviet counterpart, the KGB, waged an ongoing worldwide secret war, CIA covert operations in the 1950s overthrew unfriendly foreign governments—in Iran and Guatemala—by organizing coups against them.
The CIA-organized Bay of Pigs invasion in Cuba, in 1961, was its first big failure, followed by other failed efforts against the Castro government (including eight assassination attempts), CIA covert activities were sharply scaled back after congressional hearings in the 1970s revealed scandals.
North Korea uses its nuclear weapons development program as leverage to get U.S., Japanese, and South Korean aid.
Rather, states work with other states for mutual gain and take advantage of each other only “at the margin,” Unfortunately, the day-to-day cooperative activities of international actors often are less newsworthy than their conflicts.
Great gains can be realized by regulating international interactions through institutions and rules, thereby avoiding the costly outcomes associated with a breakdown of cooperation , The rules that govern most interactions in IR are rooted in norms.
State leaders become used to behaving in a normal way and stop calculating, for each action, whether violating norms would pay off, Eor example, at the turn of the 19th century, U,S, war planners had active war plans for the possibility of a major naval conflict between the United States and Great Britain, Today, such plans would seem ridiculous.
Tir* International norms are evolving in such areas as humanitarian intervention and human rights.
The functional roles of lOs are important to their overall effect on international relations, but those roles are taken up in Chapter 10 on international integration.
Eor instance, someone wanting to meet political scientists from other countries can join the International Political Science Association.
Amnesty International for human rights and Planned Parenthood for reproductive rights and family planning.
The UN does not exist because it has power to force its will on the world’s states; it exists because states have created it to serve their needs, A state’s membership in the UN is essentially a form of indirect leverage.
States get several benefits from the UN, Foremost among these is the international stability (especially in security affairs) that the UN tries to safeguard; this allows states to realize gains from trade and other forms of exchange (see Chapter 8), The UN is a symbol of international order and even of global identity.
The UN also promotes and coordinates development assistance and other programs of economic and social development in the global South, These programs reflect the belief that economic and social problems—above all, poverty—are an important source of international conflict and war.
Inadequate funding and management problems undermined peacekeeping efforts in Angola, Somalia, and Cambodia, In the former Yugoslavia in 1993-1995, the UN undertook a large peacekeeping mission before a cease-fire was in place—“peacekeeping where there is no peace to keep,” In response to these problems , the UN scaled back peacekeeping operations in 1995-1997 and carried out reductions and reforms in the UN Secretariat and UN programs.
This U,S, free riding shows that support of intergovernmental organizations presents a difficult collective goods problem , Finally, after criticism from allies, the United States agreed to pay up, but under renegotiated terms for the future.
The 2003 Iraq War, however, triggered serious divisions among the great powers that sidelined the UN, After reaching consensus to insist on Iraqi disarmament and send back UN weapons inspectors, the Security Council split on whether to authorize force against Iraq—the United States and Britain in favor; France, Russia, and China against.
When France threatened to veto a UN resolution authorizing war, a U,S,-British coalition toppled the Iraqi government without explicit UN backing, UN secretary-general Kofi Annan later called the war “illegal,” The UN sent a team to Iraq to help with reconstruction, but suicide truck bombers destroyed it, killing the chief of the mission and dozens of others.
The UN is in some ways just beginning to work as it was originally intended to, through a concert of great powers and universal recognition of the Charter, However, as states turned increasingly to the UN after the Cold War, its modest size and resources became seriously overburdened, leading to contraction of missions and funding.
International Organization, Law, and Human Rights The Security Council The Security Council is responsible for maintaining international peace and security and for restoring peace when it breaks down.
The three European seats could be combined into one , but this would water down the power of Britain and Erance, which can veto any such change in the Charter, Japan’s bid for a seat faces Chinese opposition.
Possible new permanent members could include Germany, Japan, India, Brazil, Egypt, and either Nigeria or South Africa, None of these plans has made much progress.
Any overhaul of the Security Council would require a change in the UN Charter, and a change in membership would reduce the power of the current five permanent members, any of which could veto the East Timor, operate under their national flags but their missions are authorized by UN resolution, (Peacekeeping operations are different, and are discussed shortly,) Even when the Security Council cannot agree on means of enforcement, its resolutions shape the way disputes are seen and ultimately how they are resolved.
As was learned in Bosnia, however, such neutral forces do not succeed well in a situation in which the Security Council has identified one side as the aggressor.
In 2012, these UN peacekeepers proved weak when a rebel movement in the unstable east of the country went on the attack, displacing civilians, A decade after the main war ended, such recurrent attacks proved vexing for UN forces.
The secretary-general has called for thousands of additional troops for Democratic Congo, and in 2013 the Security Council approved an intervention brigade prepared for combat with rebels in eastern Congo, In 2007, the Security Council approved a nearly 20,000-troop peacekeeping force for the Darfur region in Sudan, after several years of resistance from the Sudanese government.
In the 1990s, the UN had several spectacular failures in peacekeeping, in the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda, Angola, and Somalia, Less newsworthy were the successful missions in that period.
The lessons learned in Cambodia helped the UN accomplish a similar mission in Mozambique, A peace agreement ended a long and devastating civil war there, setting up mechanisms for disarmament, the integration of military forces, and the holding of internationally supervised elections for a new government.
These experiences helped the UN respond more effectively after civil wars in Sierra Leone, Ivory Coast, and Liberia in 2002-2003, But problems with sex-related crimes in UN peacekeeping operations and the importance of women in postwar societies spurred the Security Council to pass Resolution 1325 in 2000 to focus attention on gender issues in UN peacekeeping and reconstruction ,^ As UN peacekeeping has become more intensive in recent years, new missions have expanded the range of what are now called broadly peace operations.
These operations include not only traditional peacekeeping but also the use of force to protect civilians (as in Democratic Congo), the supervision of elections , and even running the government while a society gets back on its feet (as in Cambodia, East Timor, and Kosovo), These expanded operations after conflicts are called peacebuilding.
In an effort to provide longer-term support after wars, in 2005 the UN created a Peacebuilding Commission to coordinate reconstruction, institution building, and economic recovery efforts after peacekeeping missions end,^ Whitworth, Sandra.
Observers are unarmed military officers sent to a conflict area in small numbers simply to watch what happens and report back to the UN, With the UN watching, the parties to a conflict are often less likely to break a cease-fire.
They can interpose themselves physically between warring parties to keep them apart (more accurately, to make them attack the UN forces in order to get to their enemy), UN peacekeepers often try to negotiate with military officers on both sides.
Peacekeeping is much more difficult if one side sees the UN forces as being biased toward the other side, Israel feels this way about UN forces in southern Lebanon, for example.
In 2010, the five leading contributors are Bangladesh , Pakistan , India , Nigeria , and Nepal , Reasons for troop contributions to UN peacekeeping vary.
Alternatively, some states find contributing to these missions financially beneficial, since peacekeeping forces are paid by UN contributions, In a few countries such as Nepal and Sierra Leone, sending military forces out of the country for peacekeeping is useful for domestic political stability after a civil war.
The Assembly coordinates UN programs and agencies through the Economic and Social Council , which has 54 member states elected by the General Assembly for three-year terms, ECOSOC manages the overlapping work of a large number of programs and agencies.
UNICEF is the UN Children’s Eund, which gives technical and financial assistance to poor countries for programs benefiting children.
Unfortunately, the needs of children in many countries are still urgent, and UNICEE is kept busy.
Einanced by voluntary contributions, UNICEE has for decades organized United States children in an annual Halloween fund drive on behalf of their counterparts in poorer countries.
In 2006, the UN created a new Human Rights Council, replacing a Human Rights Commission notorious for includHELPING WHERE NEEDED ing human rights abusers as member states.
The longest-established lOs, with some of the most successful records, are specialized agencies dealing with technical aspects of international coordination such as aviation and postal exchange.
Eor instance, the International Telecommunications Union allocates radio frequencies.
Einally, the World Meteorological Organization oversees a world weather watch and promotes the exchange of weather information.
This is very costly in today’s world, in which economic welhbeing everywhere depends on trade and economic exchange in world markets.
A flagrant violation of the sanctity of embassies occurred in Iran after Islamic revolutionaries took power in 1979Iranian students seized and occupied the US, embassy compound, holding the US, diplomats hostage for more than a year.
The Iranian government did not directly commit this act but did condone it and did refuse to force the students out of the embassy, (Host countries are expected, if necessary, to use force against their own citizens to protect a foreign embassy,) Diplomats enjoy diplomatic immunity even when they leave the embassy grounds.
This happened twice in 1997, for example, when the United States and France were allowed to prosecute diplomats from Georgia and Zaire, respectively, for reckless driving that killed children, U,S, commitments as host country to the UN include extending diplomatic immunity to the diplomats accredited to the UN, Given this immunity, delegates simply tear up thousands of parking tickets each year, for example.
Diplomatic norms call for politeness when expelling spies; the standard reason given is “for activities not consistent with his or her diplomatic status,” If a spy operates under cover of being a businessperson or tourist, then no immunity applies; the person can be arrested and prosecuted under the host country’s laws.
For instance, U,S, interests are represented by the Swiss embassy in Cuba, and Cuban interests are represented by the Swiss embassy in the United States, In practice, these interests sections are located in the former U,S, and Cuban embassies and staffed with U,S, and Cuban diplomats.
The law of diplomacy is repeatedly violated in one context—terrorism (see pp, 204209), Because states care so much about the sanctity of diplomats, the diplomats make a tempting target for terrorists, and because terrorist groups do not enjoy the benefits of diplomatic law , they are willing to break diplomatic norms and laws.
In late 2004, terrorists stormed a U,S, consulate in Saudi Arabia, killing several guards, and in 2012, they burned the U,S, consulate in Benghazi, Libya, killing the ambassador.
Above and beyond its legal standing, just war doctrine has become a strong international norm, not one that all states follow but an important part of the modern intellectual tradition governing matters of war and peace that evolved in Europe, Walzer, Michael.
The intent must be just, A state may not take advantage of another’s aggression to wage a war that is essentially aggressive.
Although the U,S,-led war effort to oust Iraq from Kuwait in 1991 was certainly a response to aggression, critics found the justness of the war to be compromised by the U,S, interest in obtaining cheap oil from the Middle East—not an allowable reason for waging war.
Just war doctrine has been undermined, even more seriously than have laws of war crimes, by the changing nature of warfare,In civil wars and low-intensity conflicts, the belligerents range from poorly organized militias to national armies, and the battleground is often a patchwork of enclaves and positions with no clear front lines (much less borders), It is thus harder to identify an aggressor in such situations, and harder to balance the relative merits of peace and justice.
Human Rights One of the newest areas of international law concerns human rights—the rights of human n -I beings against certain abuses of their own governments,^ ^*^Johnson, James Turner.
These two covenants, along with the UDHR, are often referred to as the International Bill of Human Rights.
Besides the UN-related human rights treaties, several regional lOs have promoted the protection of human rights.
Nowhere is this more true than in Europe, where the European Union, the Council of Europe, and the European Court of Human Rights all work to ensure that human rights are respected by all states in the region (see Chapter 10), In Latin America as well, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights has had some success in promoting human rights, yet it has also been limited by state refusal to abide by its decisions.
Free trade agreements frequently contain provisions that condition trade benefits on the 'ZD respect for human rights, especially workers’ rights,^^ Because these treaties provide policies beneficial to the developing states, they create a ready mechanism to punish countries who abuse their citizens.
Today, NGOs play a key role in efforts to win basic political rights in authoritarian countries—including a halt to the torture, execution, and imprisonment of those expressing political or religious beliefs,^ The leading organization pressing this struggle is Amnesty International, an NGO that operates globally to monitor and try to rectify glar'Z '1 ing abuses of human rights,^^ Amnesty International has a reputation for impartiality and has criticized abuses in many countries, including the United States, Other groups, such Nowak, Manfred, and Elizabeth McArthur.
Several practices draw criticism; these include imprisoning political opponents of the government, the use of prison labor, and a criminal justice system prone to abuses.
According to Amnesty International, China executes more people than the rest of the world combined—thousands each year—sometimes within days of the crime and sometimes for relatively minor crimes.
But first, we review key world economic arrangements. ""^hkenberry, G John.
For example, U,S, sanctions on Iran, a major oil exporter, invited European companies to fill the void in recent years.
At this price, sellers are willing to supply the same number of units that buyers are willing to purchase, (In practice, prices reflect expectations about supply and demand in the near future,) The supply and demand system does not always produce stability, however.
These recessions in turn reduce demand, and oil prices drop,^ The amount of economic activity may vary by only 5 or 10 percent, but the price of oil doubles or triples, then drops in half.
Because power is relative, trade is desirable only when the distribution of benefits favors one’s own state over rivals,The terms of exchange shape the relative rates at which states accumulate power and thus shape the way power distributions in the international system change over time.
At that time mercantilism meant specifically the creation of a trade surplus in order to stockpile money in the form of precious metal , which could then be used to buy military capabilities in time of war,^^ Mercantilism declined in the 19th century as Britain decided it had more to gain from free trade than from protectionism.
North Korea maintained a policy of self-reliance and isolation even after the Cold War, and experienced mass starvation in the 1990s.
In a number of poor states, the textile trade has been a favored infant industry (adding value without heavy capital requirements) that governments have protected,Protection of infant industry is considered a relatively legitimate reason for protectionism.
When gas prices jumped in the 1970s, U,S, auto producers were slow to shift to smaller cars, and smaller Japanese cars gained a great advantage in the U,S, market.
The U,S, government used a variety of measures, including import quotas and loan guarantees, to help the U,S, industry through this transition, (Yet when gas prices jumped again in 2008, the U,S, producers again were unprepared, and needed government help to stay afloat in 2009,) Government also protects industries considered vital to national security.
In the 1980s, U,S, officials sought to protect the U,S, electronics and computer industries against being driven out of business by Japanese competitors, because those industries were considered crucial to military production.
Predatory generally refers to efforts to unfairly capture a large share of world markets, or even a near-monopoly, so that eventually the predator can raise prices without fearing competition.
These conflicts now generally are resolved through the WTO , Dumping complaints are usually lodged by particular industries that feel they have been harmed by foreign competitors.
If a state is to engage in protectionism, international norms favor tariffs as the preferred method of protection because they are straightforward and not hidden , Most states maintain a long and complex schedule of tariffs based on thousands of categories and subcategories of goods organized by industry.
The extreme version is a flat prohibition against importing a certain type of good (or goods from a certain country), The U,S, government used quotas to restrict the number of Japanese-made cars that could enter the United States in the 1980s, when the U,S, automobile industry was losing ground rapidly to Japanese imports.
In marketing U,S, products in Japan, U,S, manufacturers complain of complex bureaucratic regulations and a tight system of corporate alliances funneling the supply of parts from Japanese suppliers to Japanese manufacturers.
This has caused great controversy in the WTO , such as when Europe banned genetically modified crops that happened to come mostly from the United States, Einally, when a state nationalizes an entire industry, such as oil production or banking, foreign competition is shut out.
Citizens may follow a philosophy of economic nationalism —use of economics to influence international power and relative standing in the international system , Eor example, U,S, citizens sometimes ignore the advice of liberal economists to buy the best products at the best price, and instead “buy American” even if it means paying more for an equivalent product.
Although such a bias reduces the overall efficiency of world production, it does benefit U,S, workers.
When U,S, motorcycle manufacturer Harley-Davidson lost half its U,S, market share in just four years, the U,S, government imposed tariffs on imported Japanese motorcycles.
In the late 1980s, a reinvigorated Harley expanded its market share and began exporting to Japan, Protectionism worked in this case because it was short term and straightforward.
The Uruguay Round started in 1986 , Although the rough outlines of a new GATT agreement emerged after a few years, closure eluded five successive G7 summit meetings in 1990-1994As the round dragged on year after year, participants said the GATT should be renamed the “General Agreement to Talk and Talk,” A successful conclusion to the round would add more than $100 billion to the world economy annually.
In the end, the United States got some, but not all, of what it wanted, Eor example, Erance held out adamantly and won the right to protect its film industry against U,S, films, Erom 1947, the GATT encouraged states to use import tariffs rather than nontariff barriers to protect industries, and to lower those tariffs over time.
Agricultural trade is politically more sensitive than trade in manufactured goods (see p, 138) and came into play only in the Uruguay Round,^^ Trade in services, such as banking and insurance, is another current major focus of the WTO, Such trade exceeded onefifth of the total value of world trade in 2012, Trade in telecommunications is a related area of interest.
Recovering from Seattle, in 2001 trade ministers meeting in Doha, Qatar, agreed to launch a new round of trade negotiations, the Doha Round, The issues under negotiation ^^^Marlin-Bennett, Renee Elizabeth.
The Doha Round of WTO negotiations stretched from 2001 to 2013 without conclusion, In 2007, participants tried to use a key deadline—expiration of the U,S, Congress’s fast-track authorization, after which U,S, approval of a new WTO agreement would become difficult—to inspire a final agreement.
For instance, before the November 2008 summit in Washington, D,C,, that grappled with a growing financial crisis, some leaders suggested just wrapping up the Doha Round over that weekend, before the change in U,S, administrations.
For instance, one country may reduce its prohibition on imports of product X (which the second country exports at competitive prices) while the second country lowers its tariff on product Y , A sweeping agreement, such as that between Canada and India in 2007, generally contains mind-numbing levels of detail concerning specific industries and products.
These negotiations require every single member—almost all the world’s major trading powers—to agree before any can enjoy the benefits of an agreement, A new WTO agreement is a collective good because all the member states profit from relaxing trade restrictions regardless of which of them made the concessions needed to reach a deal.
For example, in the previous Uruguay Round, the entire deal was held up while France and the United States fought about French restrictions on U,S, films.
They have the advantages of reducing the collective goods problem inherent in muh 1 tilateral negotiations and facilitating reciprocity as a means to achieve cooperation/ When WTO negotiations bog down, bilateral agreements can keep trade momentum going.
Initially, Mexico’s currency dropped drastically relative to the dollar in 1994-1995, U,S, opponents of NAFTA, including various U,S, labor unions, criticized the low wages and poor labor laws in Mexico, which they feared would drag down U,S, labor standards.
Environmentalists similarly criticized Mexico’s lax environmental laws (relative to those of the United States) and saw NAFTA as giving U,S, corporations license to pollute by moving south of the border , But over 15 years, neither the great benefits predicted by NAFTA supporters nor the disasters predicted by opponents materialized.
President Clinton asked Congress in 1997 to reinstate fast-track legislation.
President Bush had more success winning fast-track authority from Congress, and FTAA negotiations began in 2003 with a target date of 2005, But by then several factors had created pressures against the FTAA, The 2001 recession and post-September 11 security measures reduced trade; China provided U,S, companies with a better source of cheap labor; and left-leaning governments, wary of liberal economic advice, came to power in most of the Latin American countries.
Those countries cared most about tariff-free trade, while the U,S, position emphasized a range of other issues such as services, intellectual property, and financial openness.
Currently, the FTAA talks remain in hibernation, and the weight of trade negotiations fall to the Doha Round, Meanwhile, however, the United States reached free trade agreements with several Latin American countries.
The collective good breaks down when too many members exceed their quotas, as has happened repeatedly to OPEC, Then world oil prices drop, (Iraq’s accusations that fellow OPEC member Kuwait was exceeding production quotas and driving oil prices down was one factor in Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990,) OPEC may work as well as it does only because one member, Saudi Arabia, has enough oil to unilaterally manipulate supply enough to drive prices up or down—a form of hegemonic stability within the cartel, Saudi Arabia can take up the slack from some cheating in OPEC and keep prices up.
Data adapted from: www. p I atts. c om/News Feature/2010/ope c/p rod_table.
However, in response to OPEC, the major oihimporting states formed their own organization, the International Energy Agency , which partly functions as a cartel.
The lEA coordinates the energy policies of major industrialized states—such as the maintenance of oil stockpiles in case of a shortage on world markets—in order to keep world oil prices low and stable.
Considering the importance of oil to the world economy, and the existence of both producer and consumer cartels, the price of oil has been surprisingly unstable, with prices fluctuating from about $20 per barrel in 1998 to over $140 and back to $40 in 2008, This shows the limits of cartels in affecting prices, Eor a few commodities that are subject to large price fluctuations on world markets— detrimental to both producers and consumers—joint producer-consumer cartels have been formed.
Such cartels exist for coffee, several minerals, and some other products, NGOs introduced Eair Trade Certified coffee, and later chocolate and other products, guaranteeing farmers a price above their production costs through the price booms and busts.
Industries and Interest Groups Industries and other domestic political actors often seek to influence a state’s foreign economic policies ,^'^ These pressures do not always favor protectionism.
Within an industry, such efforts usually work in a common direction because, despite competition among companies and between management and labor, all share common interests regarding the trade policies, However, a different industry may be pushing in a different direction, Eor instance, some U,S, industries supported the North American Eree Trade Agreement ; others opposed it.
For several years these disputes slowed the effective distribution of medicines to millions of Africans with AIDS, though progress picked up after 2004Companies trying to protect intellectual property in an international context cannot rely on the same enforcement of rules as in domestic contexts.
This sector includes many services, especially those concerning information, but the key focus in international trade negotiations is on banking, insurance, and related financial services, U,S, companies, and some in Asia, enjoy a comparative advantage in these areas because of their information-processing technologies and experience in financial management.
In general, as telecommunications becomes cheaper and more pervasive, services offered by companies in one country can be efficiently used by consumers in other countries, U,S, consumers phoning customer service at U,S, companies and connecting to India or another English-speaking developing country engage in a longdistance trade in services.
In the 1990s, the U,S, arms industry, like the tobacco industry, looked overseas for new customers to offset declining demand at home.
The Middle East has been the leading arms-importing region of the global South, with India and China increasing recently, A different problem is presented by the “industry” of illicit trade, or smuggling.
Black markets also exist for foreign currency exchange , The extent of illicit trade varies from one country and industry to another, depending on profitability and enforcement.
International black markets for weapons trade, beyond government controls, are notorious, A state with enough money can buy— although at premium prices—most kinds of weapons.
Enforcement of Trade Rules As with international law generally, economic agreements among states depend strongly on the reciprocity principle for enforcement , If one state protects its industries, or puts tariffs on the goods of other states, or violates the copyright on works produced in other countries, the main resort that other states have is to apply similar measures against the offending state.
The use of reciprocity to enforce equal terms of exchange is especially important in international trade, in which states often negotiate complex agreements—commodity by commodity, industry by industry—based on reciprocity, ° Trade disputes and retaliatory measures are common.
Bayard, Thomas O., Kimberly Ann Elliott, Amelia Forges, and Charles Iceland.
For example, to be denied access to U,S, markets today would seriously hurt export industries in many states, U,S, hegemony thus helped create the major norms and institutions of international trade in the post-1945 era.
Now that U,S, hegemony seems to be giving way to a more multipolar world—especially in economic affairs among the great powers—institutions are even more important for the success of the world trading system.
That is less than the present level of most of the global South, However, today Britain produces more than ten times that much per person (and with a much larger population than in 1750), This accomplishment is due to industrialization— the use of energy to drive machinery and the accumulation of such machinery along with the products created by it.
The Industrial Revolution started in Britain in the 18th century, underpinned Britain’s emerging leadership role in the world economy, and spread to the other advanced economies c By around 1850, the wooden sailing ships of earlier centuries had given way to larger and faster coal-powered iron steamships.
Now the former Soviet republics and Eastern Europe are transitional economies, changing over to a market-based economy connected to the world capitalist economy,^""^ This transition proved difficult.
In the first half of the 1990s, the total GDP of the region shrank by about 35 percent—a depression worse than the Great Depression the United States experienced in the early 1930s, Living standards dropped dramatically.
President Vladimir Putin brought new energy to economic reform, and high prices for crude oil, a major Russian export, buoyed its economy in the new century, but Putin’s centralization of political power could choke off capitalist growth, China, whose government continues to follow a Marxist political line (central control by the Communist party), has shifted substantially toward a market economy.
And the government sector of the economy (military spending, road building.
Social Security, and so on) makes up a substantial fraction of the industrialized countries’ economies.
These losses led to a global slowdown in consumer spending and production that caused large job losses in countries like the United States, China, and India, The subsequent fall in consumer demand for goods led to declines in global trade of 9 percent—the largest decline since World War II, Gustafson, Thane.
The ability to print one’s own currency is one of the hallmarks of state sovereignty.
These exchange rates affect almost every international economic transaction— trade, investment, tourism, and so forth.
If the price of the U,S, dollar, for instance, goes down too much relative to other important currencies , governments step into the currency markets, side by side with private investors, and buy dollars.
With this higher demand for dollars, the price may then stabilize and perhaps rise again, (If the price gets too high, governments step in to sell dollars, increasing supply and driving the price down,) Such interventions usually happen quickly, in one day, but may be repeated several times within a few weeks in order to have the desired effect,^ Note that monetary intervention requires costly multilateral cooperation among states.
Only after a coordinated multinational intervention into markets does the public find out about it, (If speculators knew in advance, they could make money at the government’s expense,) Note that this is an area where states have a common interest (making sure a large economy does not collapse) aligned against transnational actors, investors who are trying to make money at the expense of states, A successful intervention can make money for governments at the expense of private speculators.
If, for example, the G20 governments step in to raise the price of U,S, dollars by buying them around the world , and if they succeed, the governments can then sell again and pocket a profit.
These limits were well illustrated in the 2001 Argentine financial collapse, Argentina in the 1990s had pegged the value of its currency at a fixed rate to the U,S, dollar—a ^Baker, Andrew.
In 2010, South Korea agreed to further coordinate currency exchanges with China, Along with the ASEAN countries, they are also studying the creation of an Asian currency unit that would track the aggregate value of the region’s currencies.
Why Currencies Rise or Fall In the short term, exchange rates depend on speculation about the future value of currencies, But over the long term, the value of a state’s currency tends to rise or fall relative to others because of changes in the long-term supply and demand for the currency.
People do not want to own the currency of an unstable country, because political instability leads to the breakdown of economic efficiency and of trust in the currency, Conversely, political stability boosts a currency’s value.
World currency markets are dominated by the U,S, dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen.
In 2006, the United States accused North Korea of passing off tens of millions of dollars in extremely realistic counterfeit $100 bills—a direct gain for the North Korean regime at the expense of the U,S, Treasury, Despite these shared interests in currency stability, states also experience conflicts over currency exchange.
Because they see such adjustments as harmless, liberals view these changes as positive mechanisms for the world economy to work out inefficiencies and maximize overall growth, A unilateral move to reduce the value of one’s own currency by changing a fixed or official exchange rate is called a devaluation.
In the first three weeks of 2009, Russia devalued its ruble six times after the price of its main export, oil, plummeted, A currency may be devalued by being allowed to float freely after a period of fixed exchange rates, often bringing a single sharp drop in values.
To enforce self-discipline and enhance public trust in the value of money, these decisions are turned over to a central bank.
The U,S, economy no longer held the overwhelming dominance it had in 1944—mostly because of European and Japanese recovery from World War II, but also because of U,S, overspending on the Vietnam War and the outflow of U,S, dollars to buy oil.
The abandonment of the gold standard was good for the United States and bad for Japan and Europe, where leaders expressed shock at the unilateral U,S, actions.
To replace gold as a world standard, the IMF created a new world currency, the Special Drawing Right , The SDR has been called “paper gold” because it is created in limited amounts by the IMF, is held as a hard-currency reserve by states’ central banks, and can be exchanged for various international currencies.
The value of the U,S, dollar was pegged to the SDR rather than to gold, at a fixed exchange rate (but one that the IMF periodically adjusted to reflect the dollar’s strength or weakness), SDRs are linked in value to a basket of several key international currencies.
The G6 was later expanded to the G8 with the addition of Canada and Russia , In 2009, it was announced that the G20, including far more developed and developing countries, would begin to replace the G8 in undertaking major financial deliberations.
The quota is based on the size and strength of a state’s economy, A state can then borrow against its quota to stabilize its economy in difficult times and repay the IMF in subsequent years.
Consider how the past decade has changed the financial positions of the United States, of Russia and Eastern Europe, and of Asia, (The position of Europe, including the new European currency, is discussed in Chapter 10,) The Position of the United States The United States is an extraordinarily wealthy and powerful state.
The U,S, position in scientific research and higher education is unparalleled in the world.
The U,S, position in the international economy, however, has shifted over the decades, U,S, hegemony peaked after World War II, then gradually eroded as competitors gained relative ground , In the early 1950s, the U,S, economy was about twice the size of the next six advanced industrial states combined.
This long-term decline after the extraordinary post-1945 U,S, hegemony was a natural and probably unavoidable one.
The shifting U,S, financial position since the 1980s is illustrated in Eigure 9,1, In the early 1980s, the trade deficit (exports minus imports) grew from near zero to $200 billion in just a few years.
The trade deficit shrank back, but then grew to more than $700 billion a year by 2007, After shrinking again during the 2008-2009 recession, the trade deficit began to grow again in 2010, The budget deficit meanwhile jumped to $300 billion per year in the early 1980s, then closed in the 1990s and briefly became a large surplus, only to exceed $I trillion a year in 20082012 as a result of war spending, tax cuts, and a Keynesian effort to stimulate economic growth during the economic recession.
These trends have caused alarm regarding U,S, international economic leadership, The United States economy began the 21st century roughly, after a decade of relative prosperity in the 1990s, The bursting of an Internet investment “bubble” was followed by a worldwide recession in 2001 and then the economic disruptions that followed the September 2001 terrorist attacks.
By 2013, stock markets had fully recovered from the 2008 crash, but a new European recession threatened to hurt U,S, exports.
The U,S, government’s national debt grew from about $1 trillion in 1980 to $3 trillion in 1990, $5 trillion in 2000, and $16 trillion in 2013, The interest payments are equivalent to what would otherwise be a healthy rate of economic growth.
These U,S, financial trends have profound implications for the entire world political economy.
Other so-called emerging markets around the world—notably Brazil—suffered as investors generalized the problems in Asia, The Philippines addressed the problem in the manner that international agencies and foreign investors preferred.
But Indonesia resisted implementing the promised reforms, and its economy continued to slide in 1998, Riots and student protests eventually forced Indonesia’s President Suharto to resign after 30 years of dictatorship.
The government reduced inflation from 20 percent to less than 4 percent in 1995-1997, and the engineer of this tight-money policy, Zhu Rongji, became the Chinese prime minister in 1998, (Successful inflation fighters also became presidents of Brazil and Argentina in the 1990s,) In theory, the instant free flow of capital around the world—a result of global communications technologies—should stabilize economies.
Most important among these private actors are MNCs, Multinational Corporations @ Watch the Video ""Banking Interests and Regulatory Reform"" at MyPoliSciLab Multinational corporations are companies based in one state with affiliated branches or subsidiaries operating in other states.
The automobile, oil, and electronics industries have the largest MNCs, Almost all of the largest MNCs are 1 9 based in G8 states.
Financial corporations also operate multinationally— although often with more restrictions than industrial MNCs, Among the largest commercial banks worldwide, the United States does not hold a leading position—reflecting the traditional U,S, antitrust policy that limits banks’ geographic expansion.
Some MNCs sell services The McDonald’s fast-food chain and American Telephone and Telegraph are good examples.
MNCs have a range of conflicts with their home governments , just as they do with their host states.Some MNC conflicts with home governments resemble the conflicts with host governments.
In the 1990s, the U.S.-based Conoco oil company agreed to a bib lion-dollar oil development project in Iran, just when the United States government was trying to isolate Iran as a rogue state.
IR scholars continue to study the relationships between the international economic activities of MNCs and the international security activities of '1 their home governments.
However, a sudden unilateral devaluation of the currency is a risky strategy because it undermines confidence in the currency, ■ To ensure discipline in printing money—and to avoid inflation—industrialized states turn monetary policy over to semiautonomous central banks, such as the U,S, Federal Reserve, By adjusting interest rates on government money loaned to private banks, a central bank can control the supply of money in the national economy, ■ The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund work with states’ central banks to maintain stable international monetary relations.
From 1945 to 1971, this was done by pegging state currencies to the U,S, dollar and the dollar in turn to gold.
Though the uncontrolled inflation of the early 1990s has subsided, the economies of the former Soviet republics are still not fully integrated into the world economy, ■ Multinational corporations do business in more than one state simultaneously, The largest are based in the leading industrialized states, and most are privately owned, MNCs are increasingly powerful in international economic affairs, ■ MNCs contribute to international interdependence in various ways.
States depend on MNCs to create new wealth, and MNCs depend on states to maintain international stability conducive to doing business globally, ■ MNCs try to negotiate favorable terms and look for states with stable currencies and political environments in which to make direct investments.
Governments seek such foreign investments on their territories so as to benefit from the future stream of income, ■ MNCs try to influence the international political policies of both their headquarters state and the other states in which they operate.
They also support stable international security relations, because war generally disrupts business, ■ Increasingly, MNCs headquartered in different states are forming international alliances with each other.
FDI Brings Positive Benefits to Developing Countries FDI brings capital investment that is key to economic growth.
These lOs all contain a struggle between the contradictory forces of nationalism and supranationalism —between state sovereignty and the higher authority of supranational structures.
Such a shift in sovereignty to the supranational level would probably entail some version of federalism, in which states or other political units recognize the sovereignty of a central government while retaining certain powers ^Rissen-Kappen, Thomas, ed.
Most recently, the countries of Africa in 2002 formed the African Union, an ambitious plan to coordinate economic and foreign policies, elect an African parliament, and create a stronger infrastructure than the predecessor.
Eor example, in the early 1990s Venezuela found that its open border with Colombia brought in large transshipments of cocaine bound for the United States.
The wave of disintegration in some ways began with the decolonization of former European empires in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East after World War II, After the Cold War, disintegration centered on Russia and Eastern Europe—especially in the former Soviet Union and former Yugoslavia, States in other regions—Somalia, Democratic Congo, and Iraq—appear in danger of breaking into pieces, in practice if not formally, A challenge to integration theorists in the future will be to account for these new trends running counter to integration.
Most of the next decade was spent recovering with help from the United States through the Marshall Plan, But already, two Erench leaders, Jean Monnet and Robert Schuman, were developing a plan to implement the idea of functionalism in Europe—that future wars could be prevented by creating economic linkages that would eventually bind states together politically.
In 1950, Schuman as Erench foreign minister proposed a first modest step—the merger of the Erench and German steel and coal industries into a single framework that could most efficiently use the two states’ coal resources and steel mills.
If coal and steel sound like fairly boring topics, that was exactly the idea of functionalists, The issues involved were matters for engineers and technical experts, and did not threaten politicians.
Since 1952, technical experts have served as the leaders of the integration process in other aspects of European life and outside Europe, (Of course, coal and steel were not chosen by accident, since both were essential to make war,) As mentioned in Chapter 7, technical lOs such as the Universal Postal Union came before political ones such as the UN, International scientific communities deserve special mention in this regard.
For example, the EU operates the European Space Agency and the European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Although technical cooperation succeeded in 1952, political and military cooperation proved much more difficult.
One extended the coaland-steel idea into a new realm, atomic energy, Euratom, the European Atomic Energy Community, was formed to coordinate nuclear power development by pooling research, investment, and management.
Creating a free trade area meant lifting tariffs and restrictions on the movement of goods across borders, as was done shortly after 1957, Today the European Free Trade Association is an extended free trade area associated with the European Union; its members are Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein, and Switzerland, In a customs union, participating states adopt a unified set of tariffs with regard to goods coming in from outside the free trade area.
The Treaty of Rome committed the six states to creating a customs union by 1969, A customs union creates free and open trade within its member states, bringing great economic benefits.
These supranational bureaucrats are balanced in the EU structure by provisions that uphold the power of states and state leaders.
Politicians in member states have qualms about losing power to the Eurocrats, Citizens in those states have become more uncomfortable in recent years with the growing power of faceless Eurocrats over their lives.
The EU’s structure is illustrated in Eigure 10,1, The Eurocrats consist of a staff of 25,000, organized under the European Commission at EU headquarters in Brussels, Belgium, The Commission has 27 individual members—one from each member state—who are chosen for four-year renewable terms.
Their role is to identify problems and propose solutions to the Council of the European Union, They select one of their members as the commission president, These individuals are supposed to represent the interests of Europe as a whole (supranational interests), not their own states, but this goal has been only imperfectly met.
The European Commission lacks formal autonomous power except for day-to-day EU operations, Eormally, the Commission reports to, and implements policies of, the Council of the European Union , The Council is a meeting of the relevant ministers of each member state—politicians who control the bureaucrats , Eor instance, in 2009 the 27 energy ministers met to approve EU efforts to restart natural gas supplies from Russia that had been shut off in a price dispute with Ukraine, This formal structure reflects states’ resistance to yielding sovereignty.
Recall the similar tension between politicians and career bureaucrats in national foreign policy making , The Council of the European Union in theory has functioned using weighted voting based on each state’s population, but in practice it operated by consensus on major policy FIGURE 10.
The Council of the European Union must approve the policies of the European Commission and give it general directions,^ In the 1970s, state leaders created a special place for themselves in the EC, to oversee the direction of the community; this structure again shows state leaders’ resistance to being governed by any supranational body.
They are the ones with the power to get things done in their respective national governments , There is a European Parliament, which falls somewhat short of a true legislature passing laws for all of Europe,^ At present, it operates partly as a watchdog over the Commission, but with some power to legislate.
For example, to reduce the disparity between rich and poor EU states, the Maastricht Treaty increased the EU budget by $25 billion annually to provide economic assistance to the poorer members.
But the richer EU members pay the cost for this aid—in effect carrying the poor countries as free riders on the collective good of EU integration.
In 2010, new challenges to the euro arose, Greece, which had previously admitted to falsifying economic data in order to be admitted to the eurozone, had for years borrowed more than it could repay, and needed a European bailout to survive the global financial crisis.
Worse, the debt problems soon spread beyond Greece, In fact, in 2010, only two states in the EU actually met the EU targets for debt levels, Greece, Spain, Portugal, Ireland, and Italy all undertook large-scale economic reforms, and governments lost power in Greece, Italy, and other EU states, Germany and Erance fought over who would help bail out the euro states in trouble.
As a result, each is affected by the financial policies of the others, Eor instance, deficit spending on politically popular programs would normally affect just that country’s currency, but if the country is in the eurozone, then that effect is spread across all the other euro countries.
Eree riding threatens all eurozone members since an economic crisis in one country can easily spread to others through the common currency.
This instability threatened to spread to the other high-deficit euro members , The value of the euro began to drop and world financial markets fell as anxiety increased.
In response, the European Union and IME put together a $141 billion rescue package for Greece.
Granting full membership would reward these changes, keeping an implicit promise to reciprocate Turkey’s actions, Turkey’s GDP, growing rapidly in recent years, would add about 5 percent to the EU’s economy.
And Turkish workers could help alleviate a labor shortage in Western Europe, Supporters also argue that Turkey as an EU member would serve as a bridge between Europe and the important but unstable Middle East region and as an example of secular democracy to other Middle Eastern countries.
Opponents note that Turkey would be the only Muslim country in the EU, yet would become the second most populous EU member after Germany, With 2 million Turks already living in Germany, opponents argue that EU membership would open the floodgates for immigration from a large, poor country, overwhelming the smaller and richer EU members.
In economic terms, Turkey would be the poorest member, even including the new Eastern European members , Costs to subsidize Turkish farmers and expand social programs could reach tens of billions of euros, Einally, opponents want FIGURE 10.
Income Levels of Old and New EU Members, 2005 $40,000 30,000 LO o o C\J cc H —' §■ 20,000 CD Q Q_ Q CD 10,000 12 Euro Countries* Other Pre-2004 Members 10 Countries 2 Countries Joined in 2004 Joined in 2007 Germany, France, itaiy, Beigium, Netheriands, Lux., Ireiand, Greece, Spain, Portugai, Austria, Finiand Poiand, Czech Rep., Siovakia, Flungary, Siovenia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Maita, Cyprus Turkey (wants to join) Britain, Denmark, Sweden Buigaria, Romania Slovenia adopted the euro in 2007, Cyprus and Malta in 2008, Slovakia in 2009, and Estonia in 2011.
Recall that collective goods are generally harder to provide in larger groups, where free riding is less obvious, than in smaller ones, Eurthermore, by Western European standards, the new members are relatively poor.
Perhaps as a result of these pressures, the EU in the last decade has shown signs of dividing into “inner” and “outer” layers—with states such as Erance and Germany joining a currency union and deepening their integration, and those such as Britain and perhaps the new members operating at the edges of the EU with more autonomy.
Still, in some areas, there have been strides toward integration, Since 1995, the EU has established and expanded the Schengen area, a zone in which border controls have been abolished, Goods and people move freely within the zone without stopping at borders.
The Schengen countries include the major EU states , Norway, Iceland, and Switzerland also belong, although they are not EU members.
IMPERFECT UNION The European Union added 12 members, mostly from Eastern Europe, in 2004 and 2007.
The Lisbon Treaty To grapple with the implications of an expanding EU, the 25 leaders signed an EU constitution in late 2004, and the European Parliament gave it a strong vote of support in 2005, To take effect, it had to be ratified by all 25 states, including several requiring referenda.
But voters in Erance and the Netherlands rejected the constitution and the process halted.
Around the edges are the EETA states participating in the European Economic Area.
Cperating by consensus, with a large and universal membership of 56 states, the CSCE has little power except to act as a forum for discussions of security issues.
In the late 1990s, the CSCE shifted into new tasks such as running elections, helping political parties in Bosnia and Kosovo, and providing various forms of monitoring and assistance in half a dozen Eastern European countries.
These various structures of the European political system, centered on the EU, are IGCs composed of states as members.
The military importance of satellite reconnaissance has been mentioned , A powerful state such as the United States can increase its power through information technologies.
And Syria’s government used its own hackers to track down the identities of protesters anonymously posting antigovernment videos and messages on the Web, The U,S, government in response trained democracy activists in technologies of the Internet and social media and created shadow Internet and cell phone networks inside foreign countries whose governments were trying to shut down communications.
It is harder to fool international audiences these days, but domestic ones can still respond to propagandistic misinformation.
Information as a Tool against Governments Information can be used against governments as well, by foreign governments, NGOs, or domestic political opponents,Governments, especially repressive ones, fear the free flow of information, for good reason.
In Iran, where millions of people have used the Internet to discuss taboo topics such as sex, fashion, and politics, the government was widely criticized for cracking down on protesters after a disputed election in 2009, That crackdown was broadcast on Internet sites such as Twitter and Eacebook as opposition members posted video and pictures of beatings and even the shooting death of a female protester.
Here a staff member of Kenya's daily newspaper surveys the damage after police—responding to unfavorable coverage of the president— stormed its offices and burned tens of thousands of copies, 2006. c ^Fathi, Nazila, and Erik Eckholm.
The Internet in many ways empowers small fringe groups relative to states, and leaves states vulnerable in new ways, Hackers have taken over control of U,S, government computers and have unleashed costly viruses against businesses and people worldwide.
During the U,S,China spy plane standoff in 2001, nationalistic Chinese hackers claimed to have put pro-Chinese graffiti on 1,000 U,S, Web sites, and U,S, hackers returned the favor.
The Chinese communist party criticized “Web terrorism” and the crisis eased,^^ But the U,S, government worries that real terrorists could use the Internet to cause massive disruptions in U,S, economic life.
Similarly, the ability to monitor performance of agreements makes collective goods problems easier to resolve because cheaters and free riders can be identified, Moreover, the ability of governments to bargain effectively with each other and to reach mutually beneficial outcomes is enhanced by the availability of instant communications channels.
Tourism ranks among the top export industries worldwide, People who travel to other countries often develop both a deeper understanding and a deeper appreciation for them.
The emerging global culture is primarily the culture of white Europeans and their descendants in rich areas of the world (mixed slightly with cultural elements of Japan and local elites in the global South), This cultural dominance has been referred to 'XC\ as cultural imperialism,^^ For many people, especially in the global South, the information revolution carrying global culture into their midst is, despite its empowering potential, an invasive force in practice.
Because cultures are being subsumed, half of the world’s nearly 7,000 languages risk extinction this century, according to UNESCO, Above all, the emerging global culture is dominated by the world’s superpower, the United States; U,S, cultural influence is at least as strong as U,S, military influence.
A Behind'thc'Scenes Look at the Politics, the Scandals, and the Glory of the Games.
The EU Integration Process Is Finished Progressing Troubles with the proposed Constitution and new Lisbon Treaty prove there are difficulties.
Because environmental effects tend to be diffuse and long term and because such effects easily spread from one location to another, international environmental politics creates difficult collective goods problems , A sustainable natural environment is a collective good, and states bargain over how to distribute the costs of providing that good.
This type of collective goods dilemma has been called the tragedy of the commons.
As in other areas of IPE, the solution of environmental collective goods problems is based on achieving shared benefits that depend on overcoming conflicting interests.
Functional lOs specialize in technical and management aspects of the environment.
The 1992 Earth Summit established the Commission on Sustainable Development, which monitors states’ compliance with the promises they made at the Earth Summit and hears evidence from environmental NGOs such as Greenpeace, But it lacks powers of enforcement over national governments—again reflecting the preeminence of state sovereignty over supranational authority , The Commission has 53 member states.
But progress has been slow, China and other developing countries in Asia stand at the center of the debate over sustainable development.
In recent years, while China has been scouring the planet for raw materials, it has also become a leader in the development of “green” technology, Eor example, China now dominates the production of solar panels.
Sustainable Development A major theme of these conferences is sustainable development, This refers to economic growth that does not deplete resources and destroy ecosystems so quickly that the basis of that economic growth is itself undermined.
The greenhouse gases are carbon dioxide , methane gas, chlorofiuorocarbons , and nitrous oxide.
Ironically, data stored in “the cloud,” seemingly free from earthly concerns, actually lives in data centers that use vast amounts of electricity and run large diesel generators, contributing to global warming, FIGURE 11.
The chief culprits are CFCs, until recently widely used in refrigeration and in aerosol sprays.
South Africa’s foreign minister convened a small group of key players for a huddle on the conference floor—the United States, China, India, Britain, France, Sweden, Poland, Gambia, and Brazil.
The United States, which consumes half the world’s tuna catch, has gone further and unilaterally requires—in the Marine Mammal Protection Act—that dolphin-safe methods be used for tuna sold in U,S, territory.
Other countries have challenged the act through international trade organizations as an unfair restriction on tuna exports to the United States, Such conflicts portend future battles between environmentalists and free trade advocates,Eree traders argue that states must not use domestic legislation to seek global environmental goals.
Environmentalists do not want to give up national laws that they worked for decades to enact, over the opposition of industrial corporations, Eor example, the U,S, Clean Air Act successfully reduced air pollution in U,S, cities, but the regulations had to be revised in 1997, on order of the WTO, to allow gasoline refined in Venezuela and Brazil to compete in U,S, markets.
Environmentalists adopted the sea turtle as a symbol of their opposition to the WTO after the WTO overturned U,S, regulations that required shrimp to be caught in nets from which sea turtles (an endangered species) can escape.
Recent conflicts have arisen over U,S, laws restricting imports of foods with pesticide residues, and over European laws on imports of genetically engineered agricultural and pharmaceutical products, which the United States wants to export worldwide.
Unlike rain forests, oceans belong to no state but are a global commons.This makes the collective goods problem more difficult because no authority exists to enforce regulations.
It sets aside territorial claims on the continent for future resolution and establishes a regime under which various states conduct scientific research in Antarctica, The treaty was signed by all states with interests in the area, including both superpowers.
By 1991, Greenpeace had persuaded the treaty signatories to turn the continent into a “world park,” Antarctica is largely a success story in international environmental politics.
With some exceptions—such as dumping at sea—the effects of pollution are limited to the state where it occurs and its close neighbors; U,S, industrial smokestack emissions cause acid rain in Canada but do not directly affect distant states, China’s terrible air pollution kills nearly half a million Chinese a year, but few foreigners.
Several regional agreements seek to limit acid rain, caused by air pollution, European states—whose forests have been heavily damaged—have agreed to limit air pollution and acid rain for their mutual benefit.
In 1988, 24 European states signed a treaty to limit nitrogen oxide emissions to 1988 levels by 1995, After long negotiations, the United States and Canada signed bilateral agreements to limit such pollution as well.
Water pollution often crosses borders as well, especially because industrial pollution, human sewage, and agricultural fertilizers and pesticides all tend to run into rivers and seas, Eor instance, in 2005, a huge chemical spill in northeast China polluted a river that flows into Russia, Longstanding regional agencies that regulate shipping on heavily used European rivers now also deal with pollution.
The Mediterranean basin is severely polluted and difficult to manage because so many states border it,^^ In 2010, the largest oil spill in U,S, history occurred in the Gulf of Mexico, The spill resulted from an explosion on an oil platform, which resulted in a broken oil pipe 5,000 feet below the surface of the ocean.
The leakage took months to contain and highlighted the dangers associated with deep-water oil drilling, British Petroleum, the company that operated the well, agreed to set aside billions of dollars to pay damages to residents of several southern U,S, states affected by the spill.
But such wastes have been sent to developing countries for disposal, for a fee, Eor instance, toxic ash from Pennsylvania became material for bricks in Guinea, and Italian nuclear waste was shipped to Nigeria, Norms have developed in recent years against exporting toxic wastes—a practice seen as exploitive of the receiving country.
In the former Soviet bloc, decades of centrally planned industrialization created more severe environmental problems.With staggering environmental damage and human health effects, the economically strapped former Soviet republics had to bargain over limiting pollution and repairing the damage.
Because the extraction of resources brings states wealth, these resources regularly fuel international conflicts.Because they are mostly located within individual states, however, they do not present a collective goods problem.
The United States did not claim colonies or protectorates, but U,S, MNCs were heavily involved in the development of oil resources in the area from the 1920s through the 1960s—often wielding vast power,^^ These U,S, and European oil companies kept the price paid to local states low and their own profits high, yet local rulers depended on the expertise and capital investment of these companies.
Then in 1973, during an Arab-Israeli war, the oil-producing Arab states of the region decided to punish the United States for supporting Israel, They cut off their oil exports to the United States and curtailed their overall exports.
This supply disruption sent world oil prices skyrocketing, OPEC realized its potential power and the high price the world was willing to pay for oil.
The economic instability and sense of U,S, helplessness—coming on top of the Vietnam War—seemed to mark a decline in American power and perhaps the rise of the global South, In 1979, the revolution in Iran led to a second oil shock.
Solutions are enormously complicated—in this case factoring in additional elements like shipping, fishing, smuggling, and pipeline routes—and reaching agreement can take a very long time.
Israeli air and artillery attacks on the construction site forced Syria to abandon its diversion project, and Israel’s 1967 capture of the Golan Heights precluded Syria from renewing such efforts.
IR scholars have expanded their studies of environmental politics to systematically study the relationship of military and security affairs to the environment.
Among the world’s poorest countries, population is expected to triple in the next 50 years, whereas many rich countries will see ' 1 0 population shrinkage in that period.
The process of economic development—of industrialization and the accumulation of wealth on a per capita basis—brings about a change in birthrates and death rates that follows a fairly universal pattern called the demographic transition , First, death rates fall as food supplies increase and access to health care expands.
These population trends contributed to disparities within the global South that emerged in the 1990s, notably between Africa and Asia, Population Policies The policies that governments adopt—not just economic and demographic conditions— influence the birthrate.
Penalties for having a second child include being charged for services that were free for the first child, China has started to encourage wealthy and more educated families to have two children, and now, in some Chinese cities such as Shanghai, coupies are allowed two-child families.
Contraceptives and abortions are free, China’s policy has lowered growth rates considerably in the cities but less so in the countryside, where most people still live.
Still, in a single decade , China’s fertility rate fell from 6 children per woman to about 2,5, a dramatic change, But the Chinese policy has drawbacks.
Simply bribing or paying fines became more common routes around the one-child policy in the 1990s, Most often, parents in China are using information technology—ultrasound scans—to determine their fetus’s gender and abort it if female, China’s 2000 census showed the percentage of female births at 0,85 per boy, rather than the normal 0,95, a difference that amounts to a million “missing” girls per year.
In recent years, hundreds of o 1 thousands of young women there have been kidnapped and sold as brides,^ Because of the demographic transition, controlling population growth helps economic development and vice versa.
In North America and other industrialized regions, new drug therapies (which keep the virus in check for years) dramatically lowered the death rate from AIDS starting in the late 1990s, But these treatments were too expensive to help much in Africa and other poor regions, India and Brazil began to export cheap generic versions of these drugs, violating patent rights of Western drug companies.
The U,S, government threatened to punish South Africa and other countries if they allowed import of these drugs without compensating U,S, corporations holding patents.
It filed a complaint against Brazil with the WTO, In response, AIDS activists demonstrated loudly and mobilized public opinion to get the policies changed.
The United States withdrew its complaint against Brazil in 2001, Meanwhile, drug companies began offering lower prices to poor countries, but delivery of the drugs to millions of poor people remained painfully slow.
In the past four years, the number of people receiving treatment has increased fivefold, to over 3 million (over 2 million alone in sub-Saharan Africa), AIDS has killed 30 million people and is spreading rapidly in Southeast Asia and Africa.
The worldwide effort to slow AIDS, coordinated by the World Health Organization , illustrates how global-level problems such as AIDS are making IDs such as WHO more important.
As a result, 60 percent of China’s population has had hepatitis B, compared with 1 percent in the United States and Japan—a danger sign for the future growth of HIV in China,^^ China had an estimated 1 million infected people in 201L AIDS illustrates the transnational linkages that make international borders less meaningful than in the past.
But once again, a collective goods problem exists regarding the allocation of costs and benefits, A dollar spent by WHO has the same effect regardless of which country contributed it.
PANDEMIC PREVENTION In 2009, MINI influenza spread rapidly across much of the world, testing the small and poorly funded international institutions devoted to global health, such as the World Health Organization.
Other Infectious Diseases AIDS is not the only concern, TB, malaria, hepatitis, dengue fever, and cholera have all reemerged or spread in recent decades, often mutating into drug-resistant forms, TB now kills 1,5 million people per year (in addition to AIDS patients who also contract TB), Malaria sickens hundreds of millions of people and kills more than a million per year, nearly all in Africa, New campaigns have distributed millions of mosquito nets in Africa to reduce malaria—a proven, cost-effective measure, A new vaccine being tested in 2011 could cut malaria cases in half.
Vaccination programs have reduced the incidence of both polio and measles in recent years, A measles vaccination campaign now reaches 85 percent of infants worldwide, reducing deaths by 80 percent since 2000, Sadly, a polio vaccination drive in Pakistan was cut short in 2012 after Taliban militants killed health workers, claiming the vaccine was a Western plot to sterilize Muslim children.
An international campaign has increased the use of iodized salt from 25 percent of households worldwide in 1990 to 66 on percent in 2006.
Of Study and Review the Post-Test & Chapter Exam at MyPoliSciLab Smoking Worldwide, more than a billion people smoke, five-sixths of them in developing countries, and 5 million people a year die from tobacco-related disease.
Now, with India and China threatening to become economically successful.
Western states want to place limitations on how other states can develop and how they can treat the environment.
Although billions of people are rising out of poverty, because of population growth the number of very poor people nonetheless remains about the same.
Since 1990, 2 billion people have gained access to improved drinking water, but 1 billion remain hungry around the world.
World Bank. 12% n 10 o CM 05 O O CM CS DC O O Q_ Q CD 8 6 42 0 China South Asia Africa Middie East Latin America $10,000 GDP per Capita Note: For the global North overall, GDP per capita Is $30,000.
Watch the Video ""Global Migration and Employment"" at MyPoliSciLab regions.
Worid Bank. third method is immunization against six common deadly diseases: measles, polio, tuberculosis , tetanus, whooping cough, and diphtheria.
They are further along in the demographic transition and have lower birthrates than people in the countryside, Rather, the growth of urban population is caused by people moving to the cities from the countryside.
Many states have considered policies to break up large land holdings and redistribute land to poor peasants for use in subsistence farming—land reform,^^ The main opponents of land reform are large landowners, who often wield great political power because of their wealth and international connections to markets, MNCs, and other sources of hard currency.
Yet women hold inferior social status to men in the countries of the South (even more so than in the North), For instance, when food is in short supply, men and boys often eat first, with women and girls getting what is left.
Most industrialized states try to limit immigration from the global South, Despite border guards and fences, many people migrate anyway, illegally.
In the United States, such immigrants come from all over the world, but mostly from nearby Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean, In Western Europe, they come largely from North Africa, Turkey, and Eastern Europe,Some Western European leaders worry that the loosening of border controls under the process of integration will make it harder to keep out illegal immigrants.
Indeed, fear of immigration is one reason why Swiss voters rejected membership in the EU, In 2004-2006, tens of thousands of migrants and refugees from subSaharan Africa came to Morocco and climbed over razor-wire fences to enter two tiny Spanish enclaves there.
Once on Spanish soil, they could not be sent home if they kept authorities from determining their nationality, The increase in migrants trying to reach the enclaves in Morocco followed Spanish efforts to stem the flow of migrants crossing in boats from North Africa to Spain itself near the Gibraltar straits.
In turn, when Spain cracked down on the crossings at the Moroccan enclaves, Africans set out in boats and rafts to reach the Spanish-owned Canary Islands in the Atlantic off Morocco, International law and custom distinguish migrants from refugees, people fleeing to find refuge from war, natural disaster, or political persecution,^^ (Eleeing from chronic discrimination may or may not be grounds for refugee status,) International norms obligate countries to accept refugees who arrive at their borders.
These refugees crossing from war-torn Libya into Tunisia in 2011 show their Bangladesh passports. c ^ Aleinikoff, Alexander, and Douglas Klusmeyer, eds.
The number of international refugees in the world was about 10 million in 2012, About 15 million more people were displaced within their own countries.
Three-fourths of these internally displaced persons resided in Colombia, Congo, Somalia, Sudan, Iraq, Afghanistan, and Syria, An additional 4 million Palestinian refugees fall under the responsibility of the UN Relief and Works Agency , The majority of refugees and IDPs have been displaced by wars , most recently by the civil war in Syria, which by early 2013 had generated 600,000 refugees in Turkey and Jordan, and 2,5 million internally displaced persons, all fleeing violence in general and sexual violence in particular.
They live in “camps” that have become long-term neighborhoods, mainly in Jordan, Lebanon, and the Palestinian territories of Gaza and the West Bank, The poverty of the refugees in turn fuels radical political movements among the inhabitants.
In recent decades this issue has become a major one throughout the North, In Germany, France, Austria, and elsewhere, resentment of foreign immigrants has fueled upsurges of right-wing nationalism in domestic politics.
They are an important source of income for many poor countries, ' Remittances are important for states in many regions Terry, Donald F., and Steven R Wilson.
Almost all have some form of mixed economy 'ZD that includes both private and state ownership.
The problem is that, just as industrial infrastructure is located mostly in the North, so is the world’s information infrastructure , While a generation of students in industrialized countries go online, poorer countries still struggle to extend literacy to rural populations.
Having exportable natural resources would seem a big plus for an economy, but in fact the problems of basing economic growth on resource exports have been called the resource curse.
Republic S Asia Emergence of Hinduism, Buddhism; Ancient India; Arab conquest Turkish period Taj Mahal Europear built 0 o_ 0 Qj' Tn 3 V independence Africa Kingdom of Ghana Yoruba, Mali, Benin slave trade — Congo Zimbabwe Buganda Ashanti ^ 0 C European | colonialism | ■a c Middle East Mesopotamia, Egypt, Persia; Jews, Christians; Greeks/Romans; Islam Crusades Arah pmnirp _ Arab Islamic nationalism rev.
Eor example, Pan-Arabism , especially strong in the 1950s and 1960s, saw the region as potentially one nation again, with a single religion, language, and identity.
The military revolution of the period created the first modern armies-^^ European monarchs put cannons on sailing ships and began to “discover” the world.
Effects of Colonialism Eor most states in the global South, the history of having been colonized by Europeans is central to their national identity, foreign policy, and place in the world.
Eor these states— and especially for those within them who favor socialist perspectives—international relations revolves around their asymmetrical power relationships with industrialized states.
Eor Zambia, it was copper ore; for El Salvador, coffee; for Botswana, diamonds.
Eurthermore, infrastructure such as railroads most likely was set up to serve the export economy.
Einally, governments of many postcolonial states did not function very effectively, creating another obstacle to accumulation.
The rules of the international system now work for the revolutionaries instead of against them, j once they control a state.
Their state \ also has the same geographical as before, the same historical conflicts with its neighbors, and the same ethnic ties.
So it is not unusual over time to South Africa's former president, Nelson Mandela (here shown at a march of the find similar foreign policies emanating African National Congress in Boipatong, 1992), had unusual success in making from a revolutionary government as the difficult transition from revolutionary to state leader, and then leaving office from its predecessor.
Qy Watch the Video ""Authors' Chapter Introduction' at MyPoliSciLab Experiences Chapter 12 discussed the situation in the global South and how it came to be; this chapter takes up the question of what to do about it.
The Newly Industrializing Countries Before China took off, a handful of poor states—called the newly industrializing countries —achieved self-sustaining capital accumulation, with impressive economic growth.
Worid Bank Nationai Accounts Data, and OECD Nationai Accounts data fiies; Topic: Economic Poiicy & Debt; Code NY.GDP.PCAP.KDZG; Database: WDi.
In 2009, the large Western economies announced that ""^Rotberg, Robert L, ed.
These Delhi supporters of hunger-striking anti-corruption activist Anna Hazare hold a ""key"" to corrupt officials' Swiss bank locker, 2012. to accept paymentsCorruption in the global South presents a collective goods problem for states and MNCs in the ®World Bank.
The top five on the list in 2012 were Somalia, North Korea, Afghanistan, Sudan, and Burma, In 1997, the world’s 29 leading industrialized states agreed to forbid their companies from bribing foreign officials.
In Chad in 1999, a consortium led by ExxonMobil and backed by World Bank loans struck a deal to build a $4 billion oil pipeline, with oil revenues going through a Citibank account in London to avoid corruption, Chad promised to use 72 percent of the money to reduce poverty.
Watch the Video ""Fair Trade Coffee"" at MyPoliSciLab North-South Capital Flows Capital from the global North moves to the South and potentially spurs growth there in several forms—foreign investment, debt, and foreign aid.
Overall, private capital flows to the global South were about $500 billion in 2012—four times the amount given in official development assistance, Eoreigners who invest in a country then own the facilities; the investor by virtue of its ownership can control decisions about how many people to employ, whether to expand or shut down, what products to make, and how to market them.
However, the host government can share in the wealth by charging fees and taxes, or by leasing land or drilling rights , Because of past colonial experiences, many governments in the global South have feared the loss of control that comes with foreign investments by MNCs, Sometimes the presence of MNCs was associated with the painful process of concentrating capital and World Bank data.
Failure to make scheduled payments, called a default, is considered a drastic action because it destroys lenders’ confidence and results in cutoff of future loans, Rather than defaulting, borrowers usually attempt debt renegotiation—reworking the terms on which a loan will be repaid.
Occasionally state-to-state loans are written off altogether—forgiven—for political reasons, as happened with U,S, loans to Egypt after the Gulf War, North-South debt encompasses several types of lending relationships, all of which are influenced by international politics.
The first $40 billion, owed by 18 countries, began to be written off in 2006, Between 2005 and 2009, over $100 billion in debt had been forgiven.
The terms insisted on by the IMF are usually painful for the citizens (and hence for national politicians), The IMF demands that inflation be brought under control, which requires reducing state spending and closing budget deficits.
Because of the pain inflicted by a conditionality agreement—and to some extent by any debt renegotiation agreement—such agreements are often politically unpopular in the global South, On quite a few occasions, a conditionality agreement has brought rioters into the streets demanding the restoration of subsidies for food, gasoline, and other essential goods.
Of course, these IME conditions have also proved unpopular in developed countries that needed assistance during the 2008-2009 recession.
After receiving a $6 billion rescue package from the IME, Iceland was forced to make fundamental reforms to its banking sector.
Greece, which received over $133 billion from the IME, agreed to eliminate several paid holidays while cutting all wages of all public workers by 3 percent.
Such legal disputes can cost millions of dollars to litigate, requiring expensive lawyers and a large staff at WTO headquarters in Geneva, Few states in the global South can afford this legal process, and therefore few use it to help their own industries knock down unfair barriers to trade.
To compensate for these inequities and to help poor states use trade to boost their economic growth, the WTO has a Generalized System of Preferences , These and other measures—such as the Lome conventions in which EU states relaxed tariffs on goods from the global South—are exceptions to the overall rules of trade, intended to ensure that participation in world trade advances rather than impedes development,^^ Nonetheless, critics claim that poor states are the losers in the overall world trade regime.
The NIEO proposal also called for the promotion of industrialization in the global South and for increased development assistance from the North, The NIEO never became much more than a rallying cry for the global South, partly because of the South’s lack of power and partly because disparities within the South created divergent interests among states there.
A Comparative Analysis of Democracy Assistance and PolitP cal Conditionality.
Other UN programs focus on concentrating capital, transferring technology, and developing workforce skills for manufacturing, UNIDO works on industrialization, UNITAR on training and research.
But most UN programs—such as UNICEF, UNFPA, UNESCO, and WHO—focus on meeting basic needs, UN programs have three advantages in promoting economic development.
Second, UN workers may be more likely to make appropriate decisions because of their backgrounds, UN workers who come from the global South or have worked in other poor countries in a region may be more sensitive to local conditions and to the pitfalls of development assistance than are aid workers from rich countries.
Third, the UN can organize its assistance on a global scale, giving priority to projects and avoiding duplication and the reinvention of the wheel in each state, A major disadvantage faced by UN development programs is that they are funded largely through voluntary contributions by rich states.
For instance, the UN complained in early 2005 that only 5 percent of the $500 million pledged for southern Sudan by the international community five months earlier had actually been paid, A second major disadvantage of UN programs is their reputation for operating in FIGURE 13.
They work at the request and under the direction of the host state but are paid an allowance by the U,S, government.
By 2008, according to the OECD, private aid flows from DAG countries neared $130 billion.
The group’s philosophy of a “rights-based approach to development” has drawn praise from human rights NGOs, Because of disappointment with the political uses of foreign aid in the past, Oxfam has tried to minimize the role in its projects of governments in both the North and South, For instance, Oxfam does not accept government funds, nor does it make grants to governments.
Yet because of the Iron Triangle’s lobbying power, Congress killed off the proposal to allow purchase of local food in Africa, The one type of foreign assistance that is the least politically motivated is disaster relief.
It is the kind of foreign assistance given when poor people are afflicted by famine, drought, earthquakes, flooding, or other such natural disasters, (War is also a disaster and can compound naturally occurring disasters,) When disaster strikes a poor state, many people are left with no means of subsistence and often without their homes.
Contributions of governments, private charitable organizations, and other groups and agencies are coordinated through the UN Office of the Disaster Relief Coordinator in Geneva, In 2006, the UN set up a $500 million fund to enable it to respond quickly to disasters without waiting to raise funds first each time disaster strikes.
The international community has addressed children’s needs through agencies for humanitarian, public health, and economic development assistance—notably through the UN Children’s Fund, UNICEF, This benefit is enjoyed by humanity regardless of how much anyone contributes to it.
In 2000, the UN adopted the Millennium Development Goals for reducing poverty in the global South, Most of the MDGs affect children, and UNICEF is a core participant.
Embarrassing failures in the past—of underresponse or overresponse, of duplication of efforts or agencies working at cross-purposes— became rarer in the 1990s, and in the new century, groups coordinate their actions '1 '1 more effectively.
This somewhat spontaneous coordination of states, lOs, and NGOs seems contrary to the anarchical international system.
When the drought hit, the 20,000 herders who had been brought to the lake to learn fishing were left in an overcrowded, overgrazed environment in which every tree was cut for firewood and Felling, Mark.
Muslims See Islam, mutually assured destruction The possession of second-strike nuclear capabilities, which ensures that neither of two adversaries could prevent the other from destroying it in an all-out war.
The United States maintains troops in Japan and is committed to defend Japan if attacked, and Japan pays the United States to offset about half the cost of maintaining the troops, war crimes Violations of the law governing the conduct of warfare, such as by mistreating prisoners of war or unnecessarily targeting civilians, See also just ti^ars.
World Bank Eormally the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development , an organization that was established in 1944 as a source of loans to help reconstruct the European economies.
Entries for tables and figures are followed by “tabk” and “/ig.respectively.
Puerto Rico, 14 Punishment, deterrence and, 74 Putin, Vladimir, 160, 185, 312,339 Qaeda, al.
