Declare war on Cuba Wait to see what Castro does as the new leader of Cuba.
The previous leader of Cuba, General Batista, might have been pro-USA but he had also been a dictator who had been extremely unpopular.
Cubans who are loyal to America or believe in capitalism are expelled from the country as well.
Protest to the United Nations asking them to force Cuba to allow American companies back in.
However, on the other hand Cuba’s economy depends heavily on America buying sugar from them.
Scores a. points – This might have meant that Cuba never became a big problem.
However, the United States public won’t be impressed at your ‘laissezfaire’ attitude to the rise of Communism so close to America. b. points The United Nations would probably launch an investigation.
This could take a long time to solve the issue. c. points – The best option.
Economic sanctions are seen as a peaceful way of solving a problem without starting a war.
Cuba is heavily dependent on you so may well reverse their decision to get rid of American businesses. d. points – This could well start a nuclear war if Russia come to the aid of Cuba.
Offer to start selling American oil to Cuba and to start buying Cuban sugar again.
Complain to Russia that Cuba is in your backyard and they should stay out of its affairs.
Declare to the world that America will not tolerate Russia interference in Cuba.
Cuba is only 90 miles away from the USA and was within its sphere of influence.
The USA had not got involved when the Soviet’s put down the Hungarian Uprising of 1956 because they had respected that it was part of the USSR’s sphere of influence.
Scores a. points – it could improve relations but it is unlikely to work now that Castro is getting everything he needs from the Russians. b. points – This might work but Khrushchev is desperate to gain the upper hand in the Cold War so will probably ignore the complaint. c. points – The rest of the world don’t want a nuclear war so probably wouldn’t do anything. d. points – Probably the best option.
Reject the idea in case it angers the Russians Invade Cuba but only use ex-Cuban exiles living in America so if it goes wrong no Americans die.
Invade Cuba supporting the Cuban exiles with American warplanes, troops and battleships.
If any American troops are involved in an invasion then the Russians might see it as an act of war and might offer military support to Cuba.
By using ex-Cuban exiles it will look like a civil war as opposed to a war between the USA and Cuba. c. points The use of American troops could well lead to a retaliation from the Russians and a possible nuclear war.
The invasion was a disaster and was easily defeated by Castro and his supporters within two days.
Event 5 • 1961 – Castro asks Khrushchev to help him defend Cuba in case of further attacks.
Declare war on Cuba and send United States troops to remove the Communist regime.
Order U2 spy planes to fly over Cuba regularly to check whether nuclear missiles are being placed on the island.
Send a letter to Khrushchev saying that you will remove your missiles from Turkey, as long as he promises not to put nuclear missiles on Cuba.
If the USSR put nuclear missiles on Cuba it will mean that they will be able to attack America without spending large amounts of money developing more ICBMs.
If you remove missiles from Turkey it will mean that you face public humiliation and you lose your upper hand in the arms race.
Scores a. points – Russia will come to the aid of Cuba and this could start a nuclear war. b. points – This will help you collect evidence to find if there is a legitimate reason to invade Cuba. c. points – This might be good enough to convince Khrushchev not to place missiles on Cuba, however it will be humiliating for you.
Kennedy warned the USSR that he would prevent them by ‘whatever means necessary’ from placing nuclear missiles on Cuba.
However, on 14th October 1962, an American spy plane flew over Cuba and took amazingly detailed photographs of missile sites in Cuba.
