The 1962 Cuban missile crisis is one of the most studied and analyzed events in history.
It was the most dramatic showdown between the United States and Soviet Union during the Cold War.
It has been the subject of popular movies, self-serving memoirs, and propaganda by Kennedy court-historians anxious to perpetuate the legend of “Camelot” by depicting President John F Kennedy as a master of crisis management.
Serhii Plokhy, the director of Harvard’s Ukrainian Research Institute and the author of numerous books on Russian and Soviet history, begins Nuclear Folly, his new history of the Cuban crisis, by debunking the “often self-serving and inaccurate” portrayal of the crisis in Robert Kennedy’s book.
Plokhy also refuses to accept the still dominant narrative of United States historians and presidential scholars that credits President Kennedy and his advisers with masterful crisis management and clear-headed decision-making.
Plokhy writes that instead of mastery and clear-headedness, President Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev “marched from one mistake to another” during the Cuban missile crisis.
The Kennedy-Khrushchev relationship began indirectly during the 1960 presidential campaign.
According to Plokhy, Khrushchev ordered the KGB to help Kennedy’s campaign because he viewed Kennedy as “less tough” than Republican candidate Richard Nixon.
After the election—which Kennedy won by a razor-thin margin helped by voting irregularities in Texas and Illinois—Robert Kennedy in December 1960 on behalf of his brother discussed with the same KGB “journalist” ways in which both countries could accommodate each other over a nuclear test ban, Berlin, and China.
The backdrop to the Cuban missile crisis included the failed Bay of Pigs invasion—planned during the last days of the Eisenhower administration and executed poorly by the new Kennedy administration—the Kennedy-Khrushchev summit meeting in Vienna, and the construction of the Berlin Wall.
All three events convinced Khrushchev that Kennedy was inexperienced and weak.
This produced what Plohky calls the “red gamble”—Khrushchev’s decision to secretly ship to Cuba nuclear missiles, tactical nuclear weapons, nuclear-capable bombers, and large numbers of Soviet troops.
Khrushchev knew, despite the “missile gap” rhetoric of the Kennedy campaign, that “the American and Soviet nuclear missile arsenals were unequal.
He had virtually no rockets capable of reaching the United States to serve as a deterrent” to America’s formidable strategic arsenal.
In fact, the United States had advantages of three-to-one in long-range bombers, six-to-one in long-range missiles, and sixteen-to-one in nuclear warheads.
Khrushchev’s gamble, if successful, would close this missile gap by threatening much of the eastern United States with intermediate range nuclear missiles and would act as a deterrent to any further United States attempts to overthrow the Castro regime in Cuba.
The Soviets first sent antiaircraft missiles to Cuba—defensive weapons that Soviet officials hoped would help conceal the subsequent shipment of offensive nuclear missiles.
Khrushchev also played what Plokhy calls his “Berlin card” to distract the Kennedy administration from developments in Cuba.
During this time, Plokhy notes, United States Attorney General Robert Kennedy continued to oversee the administration’s efforts to overthrow the Castro regime in Cuba—codenamed Operation Mongoose.
As Soviet military shipments to Cuba proceeded and increased, Robert Kennedy suggested that United States forces stage a Cuban attack on the United States military base at Guantanamo Bay to provide a pretext for invading the island and overthrowing the Castro government.
CIA estimates of Soviet arms and men being sent to Cuba were consistently wrong.
The first medium-range ballistic missiles landed in Cuba on September 9, 1962.
CIA sources provided information that the missiles had arrived, and that was confirmed by a U-2 flight’s photographic evidence on October 14th.
The CIA estimated that there were about 8,000 Soviet military personnel in Cuba; in fact, there were 40,000.
Plokhy details the so-called “ExCom” meetings that occurred daily at the White House during the missile crisis, as well as Khrushchev’s relevant discussions with top Soviet political and military leaders.
At ExCom meetings, President Kennedy initially sided with the “hawks” and favored an air strike to take out the missiles before they became operational.
Later, he sided with the “doves” who favored trading United States missiles in Turkey and Italy for Soviet missiles in Cuba.
He even proposed threatening Khrushchev with the transfer of nuclear warheads to the West German government.
Publicly, the Kennedy administration agreed to refrain from invading Cuba in return for the Soviets removing the nuclear missiles and bombers from Cuba.
Privately, Kennedy agreed to dismantle United States medium-range nuclear missiles in Turkey—a NATO ally—at a future date.
This was no great “victory” for the United States as it has repeatedly been portrayed.
Some observers have viewed the Cuban missile crisis as an American defeat.
Shortly after the crisis faded, James Burnham criticized Kennedy for acquiescing in the continuation of a communist regime in Cuba.
In 1987, columnist George Will wrote that the missile crisis effectively killed the Monroe Doctrine, leading to subsequent communist victories elsewhere in the Western Hemisphere.
And British historian Paul Johnson opined that given the United States strategic, conventional and geographic advantages at that time, Kennedy should have insisted on a neutralized, disarmed Cuba.
And in the following year, Khrushchev was removed from power by his Politburo colleagues.
In the end, Plokhy concludes, what prevented nuclear war from breaking out was the mutual fear of nuclear war.
He he has also contributed to other books as well as written numerous articles and book reviews on foreign policy and historical topics for leading publications.
Mr Sempa is Assistant United States Attorney for the Middle District of Pennsylvania.
The views reported in this review are those of the reviewer and not those of the United States government.
