Their Responsibility to Withhold Shalom Sokolow The journalistic quandary of whether to report all that you know, even if doing so may jeopardize national security—illustrated most recently by live media coverage of military operations during the war in Iraq—is not a new one.
At the behest of the Kennedy administration, however, they withheld publication until the president determined it was safe to do so.
Shalom Sokolow, author of the essay, won first place in the Senior Division for the 2003 National History Day competition.
Max Frankel of theNew of The press happened Yorl·^ Times andupon Murreysome very sen Marder of The Washington Post deduced that the Soviet Union had placed nuclear weapons in Cuba.
A week later, John Scali, an ABC News reporter, was approached by Alexander Fomin, a KGB operative, who recruited the journalist to convey a negotiating offer to the White House in a desperate attempt to achieve a peaceful resolution for the removal of those weapons.
However, they became convinced that revealing all they knew might precipitate disaster.
The Times and The Post At 10:30 P.M. on Friday, October 19, 1962, Max Frankel, a New Yo Times reporter based in Washington, D.C., phoned the ambassador fr West Germany.
Frankel had been observing feverish activity at the Stat Department and wanted to know the location of the crisis that he feared was brewing.
But the diplomat had already gone to bed, so the journ deduced that nothing was amiss in Berlin.
Cu The following night, Murrey Marder, a journalist who worked for the Washington Post, observed a frenzy of arrivals and departures at bo the State Department's Latin American Bureau and its Bureau of International Organization Affairs, responsible for the United States delegatio to the United Nations.
Marder further realized that not much was h pening elsewhere in the building.
Marder, encouraged by his initial success at penetrating the department's cloak of secrecy, attempted to confirm his dire suspicions.
John F Kennedy in the White House (Bost Houghton Mifflin Company, 1965), 809.
President Kennedy, however, had only found out about the missiles, himself, five days earlier and was still weighing his options of how to respond, either by blockading shipping to the island—a plan endorsed by, among others, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and Attorney General Robert Kennedy—or, through an invasion to destroy the weapons and topple Castro, which is what General Maxwell Taylor and his Joint Chiefs advocated.
Until he was ready to address the American people, Kennedy did not want the full magnitude of the crisis to be exposed.
It is not clear what words were exchanged, but Kennedy either told Graham the truth and entreated him not to print it, or he hinted that the Post would be embarrassed if it concluded definitively that there was a crisis in Cuba because the ""real"" activity was actually in Berlin.
These two men were friends; they had eaten dinner together just five days previously, right after the president was apprised of the missiles' existence.
Therefore, it is conceivable that when Graham agreed to muzzle Marder, he was hop ing that it would be to the pair's mutual benefit.
Kennedy would be able to control the story until his anticipated Monday night speech to the nation, and Graham would both have a sound conscience, knowing that he was allowing the commander-in-chief to protect his citizens, and would likely be the recipient of exclusive newsworthy revelations in the future.
Monday's article was published unsigned in order to show that the entire Post organization was responsible for the decision.
Meanwhile, back at The Times on Sunday, October 21, Frankel was composing an article for the next clay's paper.
This divergent version was repudiated by, among others, Reston biographer John Stacks who agrees with Frankels account of the deal.
We struck out on Berlin and by a process of elimi nation figured it had to be Cuba, offensive missiles in Cuba.
Perhaps, this is how someone in the Washington bureau knew that the placement of nuclear weapons by the Soviet Union in Cuba was a possibility that the intelligence community feared, and then applied that knowledge to the developing situation.
By the time of the phone call, Kennedy had decided on a course of action.
James B Reston and the Rise and Fall of American Journalism (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 2003), 209.
Reston permitted Frankel to listen in on his conversation with Kennedy on a phone extension.
A quarantine, as opposed to a blockade, is not considered an act of war.
I'm going to order a blockade—a blockade of all Soviet shipping to Cuba.** if you reveal my plan, or print that we discovered their missiles in Cuba, Khrushchev could beat us to the draw.
He would make some preemptive move or counter with an ultimatum that would force us to take more violent action.
Although ""ultimatum"" might have been an overstatement, as Ex-com only really feared a minor public statement from the Kremlin; it was still certainly to Kennedy's advantage to be able to release the news on his own terms.
Upon hearing the president's entreaty, Reston tried to convince his staff, especially Frankel, to heed Kennedy's warning.
All present, however, did know that the ultimate decision would lie in the hands of Orvil Dryfoos, The Times' publisher.
But Frankel was skeptical at first, arguing that the paper, while it obviously should not reveal what the president had said, off the record, about his planned blockade, still had ""a right to report the discovery of the missiles, which we'd [The Times journalists] doped out ourselves'^1 Furthermore, just eighteen 27.
This choice was a difficult one, it that while it gave Khrushchev more time to approach the Americans diplomatically, it did nothing to immediately relieve the threat posed by the soon-to-be operational missiles that an air strike quite possibly would have been able to destroy.
When speaking to Reston, Kennedy did not even bother to use the euphemism ""quarantine"" as he was already flabbergasted by how much the Times knew.
Frankel felt that had his employer printed all that it knew in that situation, the administration might have been forced to scuttle the reckless attack.
The Times knew fully well that concern over Cuba was more than ""hinted at,"" and it also completely omitted any ref erence to offensive weapons.
John Scali Then, at approximately 1:30m., a telephone call was placed from Alexander Fomin, legally a ""counselor"" to, but really the KGB station chief at, the Soviet embassy in Washington, to John Scali, an ABC News veteran diplomatic correspondent.
The two had met before, and similar to the relationship between Times' reporters and CIA employees, they often used accounts of each others' exploits to mutual benefit; Fomin got a better feeling for what the American press was thinking about various Soviet policies, and Scali received exclusive stories that the Russians wished to disseminate.
The two decided to meet immediately at the Occidental Restaurant, an upscale eatery just steps from the White House on Pennsylvania Avenue and E Street.
Once there, they dined on escargot and began to discuss a certain proposal 39 It was not unusual for the Soviets to approach the American government through media personnel; however, what Fomin suggested to Scali that day went far beyond any previous use of this back-channel medium in both its sensitivity and its importance.
Scali knew that the nascent negotiations in which he was act ing as a conduit could prove to be instrumental in resolving the nuclear crisis.
And he also knew that if he participated faithfully, it could only be beneficial to his career later down the road.
So as soon as Fomin had finished, Scali bounded out of the restaurant, heading straight for Roger Hilsman, the State Department's director of intelligence and research.
Upon consultation with Secretary of State Dean Rusk, the reporter was brought to the White House.
At about the same time that this was unfolding, Khrushchev sent an emo tional, rambling letter to Kennedy, decrying the possibility of nuclear conflict and urging an immediate resolution.
The two incidents were seen by many as a two-pronged approach by the Soviet leader that would necessitate an American response.
For those who had been apprised of the development, things seemed to be looking brighter.
But the very next morning, Saturday, October 27, the tide again turned, this time quite dourly.
Another message had arrived from Moscow, but this one was cold and formal, obviously not written by Khrushchev, himself.
It made no mention of the previous letter and instead called for a trade whereby the Soviets would dismantle their Cuban arsenal only if the Americans removed their Jupiter missiles from Turkey, one of Russia's neighbors and a member of NAT0.44 Scali, furious that he had seemingly been deceived, stormed back to Fomin and accused him of having perpetrated ""a stinking double cross,"" negotiating in bad faith in order to provide more time for the busy missile crews.
The Soviet agent vehemently denied this and attempted to placate the journalist, assuring him that the second letter was the result of a ""mix up"" in some high-level bureaucrat's office in the Kremlin.
Despite the ensuing con fusion, Attorney General Robert Kennedy conceived the idea to agree to 42.
After having first brought Fomin's message to Kennedy, Scali was kept abreast of ensuing developments to the extent that the president joked that the reporter should perhaps join Ex-com.
The younger Kennedy met with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin and agreed unequivocally to the terms of the agent's offer.
He also provided a private assurance that as long as it was not publicized, the United States would remove the obso lete Jupiters in six months.
Reactions and Conclusions Years later, the journalist protagonists were proud of how they had performed throughout the turmoil.
According to the administration, the reporters all acted properly, and were instrumental in protecting the lives of their fellow citizens.
Looking at this episode twenty-five years later, one may be aston ished ... at the presumption of these young reporters, or impressed by Restons instant readiness to take Kennedy at his word, or instructed by this reminder that the right way to 'manage' the press in those days was to deal with it directly and honorably.
Kennedy had asked for the calls he got, and he surely did not think that taking such calls was a distraction from his work on the crisis.
No one but the president could have stopped The Post and The Times that Sunday.
