THEWORLD BEGGED FOR CHAOS BUT JFK GAVE THEM ""STABILITY"": Search WWW Search brothersjudd.com Home Reviews Blog Daily Glossary Orrin's Stuff Email Amazon.com Widgets « WWWD?: | Main | GOD DON'T GOVERN: » June 4, 2008 THEWORLD BEGGED FOR CHAOS BUT JFK GAVE THEM ""STABILITY"": New views of the Cuban missile crisis: Chaos may have been closer than we think.
Kennedy and Khrushchev “had the power to blow up the world, but they were both horrified by the thought of nuclear Armaggedon,” he writes.
To the contrary, there's nothing easier than acquiescing to the oppressive forces that conspire to keep people unfree.
That's what the dictators want themselves and there's always an isolationist constituency in the West that doesn't give a rat's patootie how other peoples are treated--the Obama candidacy rests on the assumption that they are a majority.
It is embracing chaos that is hard and fighting to grant people abroad the same God-given rights that we enjoy.
Fortunately, no matter how this election turns out, because W understood the stakes better than Ike, no one will be able to issue a similar sentence on the Shi'a and Kurds of Iraq.
Looking back on Cuba's Long Night The dark, bitter and long night through which Cuba endures has witnessed the imprisonment and execution of thousands of dissenters, religious persecution, and ultimately a cruel internal “blockade” inherent to Communism which has thwarted the creative power of a resourceful people and which is the true cause of the impoverishment of a once thriving country.
Now, almost twenty percent of the Cuban population of this planet lives outside the island.
And my family’s generational continuity was not meant to be — my children were the first in my lineage to be born outside Cuba since the nineteenth century.
I have been blessed to live breathing American freedom all of my life, in a society skeptical of false messiahs and which repudiates tyranny.
Consequently, what has always confounded me is the complacency with which so many in the world have accepted the propaganda of the Cuban revolution.
The dark, bitter and long night through which Cuba endures has witnessed the imprisonment and execution of thousands of dissenters, religious persecution, and ultimately a cruel internal “blockade” inherent to Communism which has thwarted the creative power of a resourceful people and which is the true cause of the impoverishment of a once thriving country.
Posted by Orrin Judd at June 4, 2008 12:01 PM Comments If Kennedy had followed up the reports of Soviet troops and materials from the fall of '61 on; he wouldn't have had to worry about the missiles, the next fall.
