We are all mortal. —JOHN F KENNEDY, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY, JUNE 10, 1963.
If somebody wants to shoot me from a window with a rifle, nobody can stop it, so why worry about it? —JOHN F KENNEDY, FORT WORTH, TEXAS, ON THE MORNING OF NOVEMBER 22, 1963.
I did know—but I should have guessed that it would be too much to ask to grow old with and see our children grow up together.
So now, he is a legend when he would have preferred to be a man. —JACQUELINE KENNEDY, NOVEMBER 17, 1964.
CONTENTS DEDICATION EPIGRAPH LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS A NOTE TO THE READER Prologue 1.
Oo: The president’s casket at the United States Capitol The funeral procession at the United States Capitol Jacqueline Kennedy and children at the Capitol The procession to St.
Matthew’s Carrying the casket to the grave site Panoramic view of the funeral at Arlington Folding the national colors The Lee mansion at Arlington Cemetery Mourning buttons Memorial banner Memorial banner Dealey Plaza desk set The electric Eternal Flame night-light Jackie tribute magazine Oswald magazine The Warren Commission presents its Report to President Johnson A NOTE TO THE READER t is hard to believe it happened fifty years ago.
Even in the current generation, it remains a great dividing line in American history.
It was the greatest national trauma since the assassination of Abraham Lincoln at the end of the Civil War in April 1865.
Those who were alive in the fall of 1963 and were old enough then to remember it today shudder at the mere mention of the date.
At once they will tell you where they were and what they were doing when they heard the news.
This charismatic leader of his people—beside his beautiful wife, whose natural poise captured the nation—is struck down at the height of his power and fame, leaving behind a young widow to conjure his legend.
It is a tale filled with irony and foreshadowing, with heroes and monsters.
It seeks to recapture how Americans lived through this tragedy and to resurrect the mood and emotions of those unforgettable days between President John F Kennedy’s murder and his funeral.
To those of you who remember, I hope this book does justice to your memories.
To those who do not and who know—or think they know—the story only through retellings in books or films, I hope this book evokes the mood, the loss, and the emotional and historical truth of the fall of 1963.
Our misguided modern-day obsession with exotic, multiple, and contradictory conspiracy theories involving tales of grassy knolls, umbrella men, magic bullets, second gunmen, Oswald imposters, doctored films, fraudulent photographs, and all-powerful government cover-ups has caused us to lose the emotional connection to the events of November 1963.
This is not meant to be a complete history of the Kennedy assassination, if such a book could ever even be written.
Nor does it travel down the rabbit hole to endorse or rebut any of those complicated webs of conspiracies.
This book is no more than a modest attempt to tell a story, to restore the balance, to travel back in time to the days before it happened, and to return to the day when we did not know what would happen next.
John Kennedy’s days ended on the sunny afternoon of a brilliant fall day in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963.
PROLOGUE istoric Georgetown, in the northwest section of Washington, D.C., is one of the most prestigious neighborhoods in the nation’s capital.
Founded as a commercial trading hub along the banks of the Potomac River before the American Revolution, it boasts the oldest home in Washington, along with many other eighteenth-century brick town houses.
Over the past two centuries, many distinguished Americans—congressmen, senators, judges, federal officials, military officers, authors, and one man who would become president—have called Georgetown home.
In its long history, no public figure has been more connected to the neighborhood than John F Kennedy, the thirty-fifth president of the United States.
He lived in several homes there beginning in 1946, during the time when he gained national recognition as a United States congressman and senator, married Jacqueline Bouvier, and in November 1960 was elected president.
Between his election and his inauguration on January 20, 1961, the circa-1811 three-story Federal-era brick town house at 3307 N Street NW, his last home in Georgetown, served as a nerve center where Kennedy hired staff and planned for his forthcoming administration, which he called the New Frontier.
Even before the election, the photographers Mark Shaw and Jacques Lowe had already made the house an iconic symbol of the Kennedy style.
For two and a half months, the lights inside the house burned late as the president-elect gathered his closest advisers around him.
They were there whenever he opened the front door, stood on the top step, and walked down to the public sidewalk a few feet in front of the house to announce the appointment of a new person to his administration.
On January 19, the night before his inauguration, a heavy snowstorm paralyzed the nation’s capital.
The glow from the pair of clear glass and black metal lamps flanking John Kennedy’s front door made the crystals layering the surface of the deep snow twinkle in the night.
Undeterred by the weather, the Kennedys ventured out to attend the long-planned pre-inauguration parties, including the Democratic Gala, scheduled for 8:45 pm. at the National Guard Armory.
Jacqueline Kennedy wore a shimmering white satin floor-length ball gown that mirrored the soft, thick snowy carpet that covered the capital.
The next morning, John and Jacqueline Kennedy left their town house for the last time and embarked on a journey he would not complete, from which he would never return.
He had chosen his victim, scouted the location, written detailed notes in his journal, drawn maps and diagrams, even photographed the building.
By the time he was ready to do it, his notebook bulged with all the information needed to carry out a successful political murder—black-and-white surveillance photos, ideas on where to hide the rifle before the attack, the best spot for his sniper’s nest, estimates of the range to the target, the distance between the building and some railroad tracks nearby.
After the shooting, he would conceal his rifle in a hiding place near the tracks and then flee on foot.
But the notebook contained all the vital information necessary to make a clean getaway on public transportation—the location of bus stops in the vicinity and, most important, the exact times that the buses would make those stops.
He would have to kill his victim, run away, hide the rifle, and arrive at the stop just before the bus approached.
It would be too risky to stand at a corner for several minutes, waiting for the next bus.
He would be the first assassin in American history to try to escape the scene of the crime on a city bus.
He figured the police would never suspect or even look for an unarmed passenger riding a bus.
Aides or bodyguards could not protect the man from a clean shot with a rifle.
The murder was sure to cause a national sensation and create headline news not only in Dallas, Texas, but throughout the country.
If he could just get the target in his telescopic sight, it should work.
At first, he had thought he might use a pistol, the assassin’s traditional weapon of choice for slaying an American politician.
Back on January 28, 1963, he sent an order form and a $10 down payment to Seaport Traders in Los Angeles for a $39.95 Smith & Wesson .38 special, a double-action, six-shot revolver with a five-inch barrel cut down to a stubby two and a quarter inches.
The shortened barrel made the weapon easier to conceal in a pocket or a shoulder holster.
Hidell, and he would owe the balance of the purchase price upon delivery.
You had to get close to the victim to use it, and his target was a combat veteran who had served in the military.
Six weeks later, on March 12, 1963, he mailed a postal money order to Klein’s Sporting Goods in Chicago and, under a false name, ordered an Italian, World War II military surplus 6.5mm Mannlicher-Carcano bolt-action rifle mounted with a 4-power telescopic sight.
By coincidence, the revolver and the rifle both arrived in Dallas on March 25, 1963.
Her husband told her a woman like her was incapable of understanding why a man like him needed to own a rifle.
A few days later, on the last weekend in March, he had her take photographs of him in their backyard brandishing his new rifle and wearing the pistol on his belt.
She had never taken a photograph, and he had to show her how to operate his cheap Imperial Reflex camera.
Lee Harvey Oswald poses with his rifle, pistol, and left-wing newspapers.
He held two newspapers in his hand while she took the photographs—copies of the left-wing journals the Worker and the Militant.
She could not understand why he would call attention to himself that way.
After he had developed photographic prints—for privacy he did the work himself at the printing company where he worked—he gave one to his wife and said that she should keep it for their infant daughter, June.
She hoped that he was just “playing around” and that this was just another example of her husband’s immaturity.
He ordered her to keep out of his private room, a little home office he had set up in their new apartment.
For a man who had shared a bed with his mother until he was ten or eleven years old, the nook, no matter how modest, represented the privacy and independence he craved.
She knew he meant it—he was an unpredictable and violent man who had beaten her up before.
He was twenty-three years old, she was twenty-one, and they had been husband and wife for only two years.
But he was not the same man she had met and married in her native Russia.
When he returned and found that he could not get in, he smashed a glass panel, reached in, and unlocked the door from inside.
She was furious and wanted him to know he had not beaten the pride out of her.
After he got home from work, he blew his top when he discovered that she had prepared the beans and rice together in the same pot.
That name, along with Alek, was one of the names she called him when they had lived in Russia.
It was not his fault, he was suggesting, that he could not control his temper.
Now, in their new apartment, not long after he had promised to never hit her again, he threatened to beat her if she ever intruded into his tiny private room.
His training in the United States Marine Corps had taught him all he needed to know about that.
On one occasion, she had discovered in their apartment photographs of a strange house.
On April 1, he was fired from his current one at the Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall printing company.
He had hurried through his assignments, made careless mistakes, and had to redo too many jobs.
He was brusque with coworkers, refusing to sit with them at lunch and often shouldering them aside in the darkroom.
He had already gotten what he wanted—he had used the office equipment to make himself fake identification cards and had developed prints of the photographs of him posing with his rifle.
It was as though his mind was distracted by something more important than holding a job.
Within the next four days, he would cross the line from malcontent to madman.
On the morning of Wednesday, April 10, he put on a gray suit and white shirt, the kind of outfit a man looking for a job might wear.
After waiting a week and a half to tell her, he admitted to his wife that he had been fired.
He did not reveal that he had been let go for poor performance and a bad attitude.
He offered a grander excuse that shifted the blame from himself to others.
She knew the government had had an ongoing interest in them since they had moved from Russia to the United States.
When he left the house that morning, his wife assumed he would spend all day looking for work.
Whenever he needed a job, it was his habit to buy a newspaper, scour the want ads for leads, and walk the streets from employer to employer.
He had only one appointment to keep, and he was not due there for another ten or twelve hours.
He was in no hurry to reach his destination, the house at 4011 Turtle Creek Boulevard, in one of the better neighborhoods in town.
Too many people, too many potential witnesses, too great a chance that the police might hunt him down.
He went to the spot where he had secreted his rifle a few days earlier.
Once again, he placed the residence under surveillance, just as he had done several times before on his practice missions.
And he was sure that at this moment his victim was somewhere inside that house on Turtle Creek Boulevard.
The man he had marked for death had been in command of thousands of American soldiers, but tonight they could not protect him.
AT THIS moment, President John F Kennedy was in the White House, 1,200 miles away.
The day before, in a 3:00 PM. televised ceremony in the flower garden, he had conferred honorary American citizenship upon Winston Churchill.
It was the first time such an honor had been given to a foreign statesman.
Ancient Sir Winston, too frail to travel to the United States, watched the event on television at his home in London, via a live satellite broadcast.
Earlier this day, April 10, Kennedy had addressed a gathering of economics students from abroad, sent a memo to place veterans of the Peace Corps in other government jobs, and proposed the creation of a National Service Corps.
Soon he would retire to bed on the second floor in the mansion’s residence.
But on this night, Lee Harvey Oswald did not care where the president of the United States was.
The man Oswald wanted to kill—Major General Edwin A Walker, United States Army—was less than forty yards away.
After a distinguished military career—West Point graduate, decorated World War II and Korean War combat officer—Walker received orders from President Eisenhower in 1957 to quell civil disturbances during the desegregation of Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas.
Although he did a superb job of protecting the black students, Walker thought it was wrong to use the United States Army to flout states’ rights and desegregate the South against its will.
He became obsessed with the idea that Communists had infiltrated the United States government, and he later accused Harry Truman and Eleanor Roosevelt of being “pink”—the hot-button word for communist sympathizers.
President Kennedy relieved him from command, and Walker resigned his commission.
He became a political activist, giving provocative speeches throughout the nation.
After Walker was charged with insurrection and the violation of several federal laws, Attorney General Robert Kennedy overreached and tried to commit the general to a mental institution.
In February 1963, Edwin Walker was in the news again when he gave a speech that seemed to advocate that the United States invade Cuba and assassinate Fidel Castro.
His justifications for the assassination came straight out of the pages of the Worker.
In trying to kill Walker, Oswald was attempting to assassinate one of JFK’s bitterest political enemies.
Then Lee spotted him, clear as day in a brightly lit room, sitting at a desk while he worked on his federal income-tax return.
Oswald steadied his shooting stance, verified the target in his scope, and squeezed the trigger.
She decided to search their apartment for some clue about where might have gone.
To keep her dependent on him, Oswald had discouraged her from learning the language.
The ninth point reminded Marina that “we have friends here,” implying that a small circle of Russian-born émigrés living in Dallas would help take care of her.
Then Marina got to the eleventh point and her husband’s final, bizarre instruction.
These handwritten instructions advising Marina what to do in case Lee vanished or was killed or arrested gave no hint about the awful things he had planned to do that night—what he might be doing right now while she was reading the note.
The bullet, traveling at 1,700 or 1,800 feet per second, had punched through the window glass and missed Walker’s head by less than an inch.
But on its way into the house, the bullet nicked part of the wood window frame, which altered its flight path just enough to save the general’s life.
Walker assumed that kids had tossed the fireworks through an open window missing its screen, but he was wrong.
It did not take the general long to figure out that somebody had shot at him.
Oswald could have operated the bolt, ejected the empty brass cartridge, chambered a fresh round, and fired again.
Either he convinced himself he had killed the general—how could he miss at that range?—or he was too skittish to stand his ground and fire a second round.
When Walker realized he had been fired upon, he did not duck for cover, cower on the floor, and hide.
Walker searched the area—“I went about halfway out to the alley’—but he found no one.
If Oswald had lingered in the vicinity, hoping to fire multiple shots, Walker might have caught him in the open and shot him to death.
Instead, Lee’s legs increased the distance between him and the pursuing general.
Oswald fled into the night and hid his rifle in the same spot where he had concealed it prior to the assassination attempt.
He didn’t want to get caught with the weapon in his possession on the way home.
In a few days, when it was safe, he planned to go back and retrieve the rifle from its hiding place.
At this moment, after months of careful planning, he did not know whether he had succeeded or failed in killing Edwin Walker.
MARINA OSWALD waited for Lee to come home—ten thirty, eleven, eleven thirty.
He told Marina he had run “several kilometers” and then caught a bus home.
To avoid being spotted by eyewitnesses, he decided not to stand at a bus stop too close to Walker’s house.
Within a minute or two of returning to his apartment, Lee Oswald switched on the radio.
He listened, hoping to hear a news flash about the attack and confirmation that the general was dead.
The assassination of an army general as well-known as Edwin A Walker was sure to make the news.
The newspaper suggested that Walker’s would-be assassin had fled by automobile.
And on the night of the assassination attempt, a fourteen-year-old neighbor boy said he saw two suspicious cars—one with a driver only and the second with several occupants—race away from the scene.
When reporters asked Walker if he had any idea who shot at him, he replied, “There are plenty of people on the other side.
This anticommunist crusader would have been humiliated to have been slain by a malcontent ex— United States Marine who had defected to the Soviet Union and was a disciple of Karl Marx.
And how ironic it would have been for this arch foe of overreaching government authority to be murdered while in the act of calculating his federal income tax.
It was the wood frames of both the mesh screen and glass window that had saved Walker.
He added that if someone had killed Hitler, it would have saved many lives.
Oswald admitted that he had been stalking Walker and planning his assassination for two months, even before he ordered the rifle.
Like many compulsive criminals, Lee Oswald desired to possess a souvenir of his crime.
In the future, whenever he fondled the cherished notebook, he could relive the thrilling assassination attempt.
Marina watched him tear out each page one by one, crumple it, and light it on fire with a match.
Then he dropped each crumpled, burning page into the toilet and flushed away his murder plans.Marina continued to chastise her husband.
She begged Lee to promise that he would not make another attempt on Walker’s life.
Oswald was guilty of attempted murder, but Marina was afraid to report him to the authorities.
If he were arrested, tried, and sentenced to prison, it would destroy their family.
She was afraid the government would also punish her or deport her to Russia.
In the Soviet Union, the family members of criminals were often held responsible for the offenses of their relatives.
Marina decided to keep Lee’s secret not only to protect him but to safeguard her daughter and their life in the United States.
ON SATURDAY, April 13, three days after the shooting and the night before Easter, the Oswalds received unexpected visitors.
George was an intelligent, well-educated, and exotic figure on the Dallas social scene who was acquainted with the local Russian émigré circle and had befriended Marina and Lee.
Oswald enjoyed having political discussions with the fifty-two-year-old bon vivant and world traveler.
People who knew them both could not understand the connection between the sophisticated European with aristocratic origins and the young, lower-class member of the Southern working poor.
The Oswalds invited the de Mohrenschildts in, and both couples sat down.
The assassination attempt fascinated George, and he wanted to talk about it.
Shortly after that, Oswald decided to follow Marina’s advice to leave Texas and move to New Orleans.
It was a print of one of the photos Marina had snapped of Lee in their backyard with his rifle and pistol.
Perhaps it was a humorous, mocking reference to George’s joke that it was too bad Lee had missed General Walker.
OSWALD’S ATTEMPTED asSassination of General Walker was a_ psychological turning point.
He had joined the Marine Corps in peacetime and had never fought in a war.
Yes, he had missed his target, but planning and executing the sniper attack had given him immense satisfaction.
Although Lee had botched his self-assigned mission, the failure of the police to catch him emboldened him and enhanced his smug attitude of superiority.
He did not know it now in late April 1963, but in a little more than seven months, he would find another human target.
He enjoyed the social scene and had been known for his associations with a number of attractive women.
But in that era, it was considered odd—especially for a politician—to be unmarried.
In May 1951, the journalist Charlie Bartlett and his wife, Martha, hosted a dinner party at their Georgetown home and invited their friend Congressman Kennedy.
They also invited an attractive young woman named Jacqueline Lee Bouvier, a stylish, educated, and well-bred twenty-one-year-old debutante who had, like him, been raised to assume a place among the wealthy American elite.
She liked his handsome features, wit, confidence, and devil-may-care attitude.
He was drawn to her good looks and sophistication and was intrigued by her private and mysterious personality.
In September 1953, at the age of thirty-six, John Kennedy married Jacqueline Bouvier.
Their wedding in Newport, Rhode Island, was the social event of the season.
However, soon his lifelong health problems began to haunt him once again.
He had been plagued by painful back injuries in his youth, and an incident during the Second World War had exacerbated the problem.
Kennedy had narrowly escaped death in the Pacific when, on August 2, 1943, at 2:30 A.M., his boat, PT-109, was rammed and sliced in two by a Japanese warship.
Jack clenched in his teeth a strap attached to the man’s life jacket and towed him to a nearby island.
He was given the last rites and almost died, but he struggled to live, and he survived.
IN JANUARY 1960, Kennedy declared himself a candidate for the Democratic nomination for president of the United States.
He outmaneuvered his older and more experienced rivals, including Senator Lyndon Baines Johnson of Texas, the powerful Senate majority leader, and won the nomination.
The Republicans nominated former senator Richard Nixon of California, who had for the past seven years served as vice president of the United States under the popular president Dwight Eisenhower, the victorious supreme allied commander during the Second World War.
Both had served as navy officers in the war, both had been elected to Congress in 1946, and then to the Senate.
There they worked cordially with each other, shared an interest in foreign affairs, and agreed on one of the great issues of the day—the danger posed by Communism and the Soviet Union.
John Kennedy’s family was rich, and he had enjoyed all the privileges that money could buy—a fine Harvard education, world travel, material possessions, leisure, and his father’s contacts.
John Kennedy never had and never would have to work for a living a day in his life.
His father wanted to free his sons from that pressure so they could pursue political careers.
Richard Nixon, by contrast, came from a poor family and grew up without privilege.
Whatever he had in life—a college education, a law degree, and political office—he had to earn on his own with hard work and a keen mind.
In college, Kennedy was an indifferent student, but he developed a love of American and European history.
By the time he captured the Democratic nomination, he had evolved into a mature leader who, like Nixon, was a voracious reader, a savvy politician, and a formidable debater.
The presidential election of 1960 was one of the closest in American history.
He possessed a track record of significant achievements, and the majority of voters respected his years of experience as vice president.
One of the top issues of the day was preventing the spread of Communism around the world and curbing the influence of America’s rival superpower, the Soviet Union.
And Richard Nixon had unsurpassed credentials as an anticommunist politician whose views were respected by the majority of Americans.
The most sustained effort to put Communism into practice began with the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the dictatorships of Vladimir Lenin and later Joseph Stalin.
Communists claimed that their philosophy, when put into practice, would serve the common good.
Millions of people who resisted Communism in Russia and some thirty other countries throughout the twentieth century were killed—more than one hundred million victims in all.
In pursuit of their goal, Communists established totalitarian political regimes that flouted individual rights, banned freedom of speech, eliminated free elections, set up police states, corrupted the rule of law, and imprisoned and murdered opponents.
World War IT had ended with the defeat of Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, and Imperial Japan by the Allies—the United States, Great Britain, France, and the Soviet Union.
With Germany and the Axis powers crushed, the Allies emerged as the great political powers of the postwar era.
Of the Allied powers, only the Soviet Union was a Communist nation and not a democracy.
The end of the war resulted in a delicate balance of power—a cold war in which no shots were fired —between the democratic nations and the Soviet Union.
Former British prime minister Winston Churchill warned in a famous speech that an “iron curtain” now divided Europe into the free, democratic nations in the west, and the totalitarian, Communist nations in the east.
Richard Nixon owed his meteoric political career to his vigorous anticommunism at the height of the Cold War.
But some Americans thought that Nixon had gone too far, and they associated him with what they believed were excesses committed at home by Senator Joseph McCarthy and the House Un-American Activities Committee during their investigations of Communists in the United States in the 1950s.
John Kennedy, too, began the race for the presidency with some disadvantages.
In that era, a prejudice that does not exist today might have prevented a person of that faith from becoming president.
Kennedy argued that he would not be a “Catholic president” but merely a president who happened to be Catholic.
He persuaded enough people that a person’s religious beliefs should not bar him from the office.
Yes, he had served in the House and the Senate for fourteen years when he began his race for the presidency, but he was not particularly accomplished as a legislator.
Nixon’s supporters portrayed Kennedy as a callow young man who was only forty-three years old and who had not taken his time in Congress seriously.
They said his lack of experience made him unqualified to serve as president.
Johnson believed Kennedy should wait his turn, until he was more mature, and not challenge him now for the nomination.
He believed in the power of fate, and that his illnesses, injuries, and near-death experiences had marked him as a man who might be deprived of a long life.
He was a man of action determined to make the most of his time, who wanted to accomplish things now.
In a series of televised debates between the two parties’ presidential candidates—the first in American history—Kennedy leveled the playing field as seventy million people watched.
Nixon was famous as a relentless and ruthless debater, and many expected him to vanquish Kennedy.
But before the evening of the first debate, Kennedy relaxed, shaved closely, and allowed stage makeup to be applied to his face.
Nixon spent the day campaigning and had aggravated a painful leg injury.
He showed up at the television studio with a day’s growth of beard, a five o’clock shadow.
He recognized that television would change political campaigns forever.
During the first debate, John Kennedy looked relaxed, fit, and charismatic.
Richard Nixon looked uncomfortable, swarthy, and nervous as he sweated under the hot lights.
Kennedy also looked much younger, even though Nixon was only four years older than he.
In the end, it was not necessary for John Kennedy to win the debate on the issues.
It was enough that he looked as though he belonged on the same stage with Richard Nixon.
When Americans went to the polls on November 8, 1960, no great issues divided the candidates.
Kennedy was as anticommunist as Nixon; both opposed Communist expansion, including in Cuba, an island ninety miles off the coast of Florida, and both saw the Soviet Union as a dangerous rival.
Neither candidate was then at the forefront of the civil rights movement.
Voters chose between the personalities of the two men as much as they did between their stands on the issues.
Nixon argued that he, not Kennedy, had the proven leadership experience to guide the nation in a dangerous world.
Out of 68. million votes cast, John Kennedy received only about 119,450 more votes than Richard Nixon.
Nixon had lost the presidency by just two tenths of 1 percent of the popular vote.
Not until the morning after the election was Kennedy declared the winner.
Without his father’s wealth, which funded much of his campaign, and without Lyndon Johnson as his vice presidential running mate delivering the electoral votes of Texas, Kennedy would not have won.
ON JANUARY 20, 1961, John Fitzgerald Kennedy stepped forward on the East Front of the United States Capitol to take the oath of office as the thirty-fifth president of the United States and to deliver his inaugural address.
Half of America had voted against him, but on this day, he behaved and spoke with confidence.
Although he knew he had not won by a large margin at the polls, he sought to win a mandate now with his words.
He summoned the American people to stand up for freedom in the shadow of the Cold War.
Then he suggested that nations pursue peaceful cooperation, not military confrontation.
Kennedy suggested that his election coincided with a special moment in history.
It was a patriotic call to the people of the United States to be civic-minded and politically active.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS and fighting the spread of Communism around the world dominated John Kennedy’s first two years in office.
He was a Cold Warrior who had a personal fascination with counterinsurgency warfare, covert action, and special military forces, including the Green Berets, a small, elite unit of the United States Army.
A fan of Ian Fleming’s James Bond novels, President Kennedy had an instinctive and enthusiastic appetite for secret operations.
A revolutionary who overthrew the Cuban government in 1959, Castro seemed at first that he might turn to America for inspiration and support.
Instead he turned to the Communist Soviet Union for aid and set himself up as the repressive dictator of his nation.
During the administration of President Eisenhower, the Central Intelligence Agency had developed a secret plan to help anti-Castro Cuban exiles—living outside Cuba, trained and equipped by the United States—to invade their homeland, depose Castro, and overturn Communism.
Kennedy authorized what became known as the Bay of Pigs operation, named for the spot on the Cuban coastline where the armed exiles would land.
The fourteen hundred freedom fighters, heavily outnumbered, found Castro’s troops waiting for them.
The CIA and the United States military had persuaded President Kennedy to support the plan by arguing that its success would not require him to send American troops or air support into battle against Castro’s forces.
They predicted that the invasion would trigger a spontaneous uprising by the Cuban people against their leader.
The assurances by CIA officials and military generals had proven wildly optimistic—even deluded—and now they implored Kennedy to commit American forces to save the catastrophic operation.
He feared that it might trigger a direct military conflict with the Soviet Union.
The Bay of Pigs episode did not stop the CIA from developing other secret plans—including one called Operation Mongoose—to overthrow or even assassinate Fidel Castro.
Kennedy worried that Cuba might influence or contaminate Latin America with Communism.
Nor did the Cuban failure deter Kennedy from opposing the spread of Communism in Southeast Asia.
When Kennedy took office, there were several hundred American military advisers in Vietnam.
He increased their number to seventeen thousand, believing that America should make a stand against Communism there to prevent the ideology from conquering not just Vietnam but also neighboring countries.
In 1961, to prepare for the challenges ahead, President Kennedy asked Congress to increase the size and budget of the United States military.
To promote peace and international cooperation, he also inspired thousands of young Americans to join public service by establishing the Peace Corps, an organization to help developing countries improve their public health, education, and agriculture.
Eighteen months after the Bay of Pigs, the United States and the Soviet Union almost went to war over another confrontation in Cuba.
In October 1962, American spy planes detected the presence of Russian missile bases under construction there.
The short distance between the island nation and the United States meant that from these sites Cuba or Russia could launch nuclear missiles at major cities and military bases in the eastern United States.
The Soviets sent missiles to Cuba to deter any future invasion of the island by the United States and because, beginning in 1961, the United States had deployed in Italy and Turkey nuclear missiles that could be launched to attack the Soviet Union.
Kennedy revealed the frightening discovery in Cuba in a televised address.
The volatile Russian leader, Nikita Khrushchev, had assumed, after the Bay of Pigs affair and an unimpressive personal meeting with Kennedy two months later, that the young president was weak and would do nothing when the Soviets parked their missiles in Cuba.
Many of Kennedy’s advisers urged him to attack Cuba at once, first bombing the missile bases and then invading the island.
Knowing that such a rash response might provoke war with Russia, Kennedy took his time, delaying his decision and hoping for a diplomatic solution.
In the meantime, he declared a naval quarantine around Cuba and insisted that no Soviet ships carrying missiles or military supplies would be allowed to approach the island.
At the last minute, to avoid a war, Khrushchev ordered his ships to turn back.
President Kennedy had taken the United States and the Soviet Union to the brink of a nuclear war in which millions might have perished, but he had solved the dispute in a responsible manner.
The competition between democracy and communism—between the United States and the Soviet Union—was not limited to Cuba, Southeast Asia, Eastern Europe, or even to planet Earth.
Each superpower believed it could tip the balance of influence in its own favor by placing satellites in space and men on the moon.
The Soviet Union had already beaten America into space when it launched the first satellite, Sputnik 1, in 1957.
Then, on April 12, 1961, the Russians launched the first man into space.
For reasons of prestige, and also national security, President Kennedy decided that America must catch up.
Inspired and supported by President Kennedy, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration , the agency in charge of America’s space program, recruited more astronauts, designed giant rockets, and planned the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo space programs.
Domestic issues captivated John Kennedy less than foreign affairs, although he was keen to reduce individual federal income tax rates and also corporate taxes, which he believed were too high and stifled the economy.
He was not one of the Southerners who had disagreed with the Supreme Court’s ruling in Brown Board of Education, the school desegregation case in which the Court declared it unconstitutional to ban black children from attending public schools with white children.
Nor did he want, as did many members of his own party in the South, to suppress other rights of citizenship, including voting, attending public universities, or patronizing restaurants, shops, and hotels.
During the century since the Civil War and the end of slavery, African Americans had not enjoyed equal rights.
But Kennedy worried that becoming a civil rights champion was premature, and that doing so would stir up political opposition among Southern Democrats and endanger the programs and legislation that he wanted Congress to approve.
Vice President Lyndon Johnson was, by contrast, a more enthusiastic advocate for civil rights; however, his authority was limited.
But a series of events made it impossible for John Kennedy to keep the civil rights movement at arm’s length anymore.
In May 1963, Americans—including President Kennedy—watched on television as Eugene “Bull” Connor, commissioner of public safety in Birmingham, Alabama, turned dogs and fire hoses on civil rights demonstrators.
This played into Communist propaganda that the United States was the land of oppression of blacks and hypocrisy, not liberty.
On June 11, 1963, Kennedy gave a televised address to the nation on civil rights.
Indeed, Martin Luther King Jr. would say that when he led civil rights demonstrations in Chicago, the racism he encountered there was as vicious as anything he had seen in the Deep South.
In 1963, Kennedy’s focus on foreign affairs gave him two of the greatest pleasures of his presidency, the first occurring in Berlin.
In 1945, at the end of World War II, a treaty signed by the Allies divided all of Germany into zones of occupation.
The zones controlled by the United States, Great Britain, and France became West Germany, and the zone controlled by the Soviet Union became East Germany.
Berlin, the national capital, was within the Soviet zone, and the city was divided into four sectors, each occupied by a different Allied power.
Po ree ‘ ae President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson meet with civil rights leaders including Martin Luther King Jr. on the afternoon of the March on Washington, August 28, 1963.
Indeed, in August 1961, during the first year of Kennedy’s presidency, the Soviets began to build a concrete-and-barbed-wire wall between East and West Berlin to prevent the population of the Soviet sector from fleeing Communism and escaping to the western zones.
During the years that wall existed, Russian and Soviet-controlled East German soldiers shot to death several hundred men, women, and teenagers who tried to cross over it to freedom.
On June 26, 1963, President Kennedy stood on the free side of the Berlin Wall and spoke to a throng of three hundred thousand people in the square.
The ecstatic crowd was the largest one that Kennedy had ever addressed.
It was the high point of his worldwide popularity, and he said that he could not imagine enjoying a better day than this.
LIKE JOHN Kennedy, Lee Harvey Oswald had always wanted to star in a historic moment.
With every success that JFK had enjoyed, Oswald had matched it with failure.
Lee Harvey Oswald was born in New Orleans, Louisiana, in October 1939, the youngest of three brothers.
But it seemed as though a dark cloud had formed over him even before he entered the world.
His father died two months before he was born, and during his unsettled childhood, his odd and unstable mother changed husbands, houses, jobs, and cities frequently—often turning over the care of Lee and his two brothers to orphanages or relatives.
He had disciplinary problems at school, made few friends, threatened family members with knives, rebelled against any kind of authority, and missed so much school he was tracked down by truant officers and ordered to appear at court hearings.
As a teenager, Oswald became interested in the Soviet Union and the teachings of socialism, Marxism, and communism.
These were strange pursuits for an American boy during the middle of the Cold War, an era in which the United States and the Soviet Union were locked in an intense ideological battle.
And, of course, proclaiming oneself a communist in America at that time could trigger a government investigation.
And in October, after he turned seventeen, he enlisted in the United States Marine Corps.
Throughout his three years in the Marine Corps, Oswald was a malcontent and constant complainer who loved to argue with his superiors to show that he was smarter than they were.
He never received a better than average performance rating, but the Marine Corps managed to teach him to do one thing well—shoot a rifle with skill and reasonable accuracy.
In September 1959, under false pretenses, he was granted a dependency discharge to care for his mother, and then, in October 1959, in a series of bizarre events, he traveled to the Soviet Union, showed up in Moscow, and tried to commit suicide there when his visa expired and he was ordered to leave the country.
That incident led him to the United States embassy, where he attempted to renounce his American citizenship.
Soviet officials, though suspicious that he might be a spy or more likely mentally unstable, allowed Oswald to remain in the country and assigned him a job at a radio factory.
In April 1961, he married a nineteen-year-old Russian woman named Marina Prusakova.
After a few years, Oswald grew dissatisfied with life in Russia, and he wanted to return to the United States.
He was no longer the exotic foreigner and center of attention he had been when he had first defected.
He, Marina, and their infant daughter left the Soviet Union in June 1962 and traveled to Fort Worth, Texas, where his mother and brother lived.
Between the summer of 1962 and the spring of 1963, Oswald struggled as a member of the lower class of Southern, white, working poor.
After his failed attempt at killing General Walker, Oswald, at his wife’s insistence, retreated to New Orleans with his tail between his legs to start over with another low-paying, entry-level job that would never allow him to fulfill his grandiose dreams.
It was a group that lobbied for fair treatment of the island nation after its revolutionary dictator, Fidel Castro, had installed a Communist regime there.
Around this time, Marina and their little girl joined Lee in New Orleans.
It didn’t take long for Marina to discover that Lee still possessed his rifle.
He kept it in a closetlike room where he hung his clothes and stored his other belongings.
Under the cover of darkness, when neighbors could not see him, Lee practiced aiming his telescopic sight.
On several occasions, Marina found him on the back porch, sitting alone in the dark, fondling the rifle.
By June, Lee was distributing FPCC handbills on the streets of New Orleans.
In July, he was fired from yet another job, and the United States Navy (which had jurisdiction over the Marine Corps) affirmed its decision to change his discharge from the Marine Corps to “undesirable” after it learned he had tried to defect to the Soviet Union.
In letters to Secretary of the Navy John Connally, Oswald had argued, without success, that the service should reinstate the honorable discharge he had been given when he left the Marines, before he moved to Russia.
In August 1963, Oswald got a taste of the celebrity he had always craved.
He was arrested in New Orleans after a street brawl with Cuban antiCommunists who objected to his distribution of pro-Castro literature.
Oswald was jailed overnight, and Marina did not know where he was or why he did not come home that evening.
Oswald shrugged his shoulders and told Marina that she did not understand him but boasted that some people understood the importance of his work.
He made a brief television appearance on WDSU-TV, when the station filmed him demonstrating in front of the International Trade Mart.
And on August 17 and then again on August 21, Oswald participated in two New Orleans radio shows to discuss Cuba, Communism, and Marxism.
His first appearance was on the WDSU-Radio program Latin Listening Post, hosted by William Stuckey.
Stuckey taped the interview and then condensed it down to a fiveminute segment for broadcast.
Today it is hard to grasp the hold that Cuba had on the American mind—and on the minds of John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy, and Lee Harvey Oswald—in the early 1960s.
Half a century later, the program feels dated, like a dusty, antiquated artifact from the Cold War.
Tonight we have with us a representative of probably the most controversial organization connected with Cuba in this country.
Oswald was an exciting find for Bill Stuckey, a New Orleans reporter who had covered Latin American affairs in the city for several years.
None appeared in public view until this week when young Lee Oswald was arrested and convicted for disturbing the peace.
He craved the publicity and was eager to show off his knowledge and oratorical skills.
Stuckey played up the drama by touting Lee as some sort of pro-Castro mastermind.
He was the organization’s only member, and he had awarded the title to himself.
During the interview, Stuckey probed Lee for details about the FPCC, questioning him about the size of the membership rolls, the specific goals of the organization, whether its members believed that Cuba was a puppet of the Soviet Union, and whether the FPCC was itself Communist controlled.
He said that both the number of members and their names must remain secret.
He explained that the organization’s central principle was “Hands Off Cuba!”—a policy of American nonintervention in Cuban affairs—the motto printed on the handbills that he had distributed.
Oswald denied Stuckey’s assertion that Cuba was a Soviet colony in the Western Hemisphere.
Stuckey asked him if the FPCC would continue to support Castro if he broke off relations with the Soviet Union.
In any event, Oswald argued, the United States government had no right to interfere.
You know, when our forefathers drew up the Constitution, they considered that democracy was creating an atmosphere of freedom of discussion, of argument, of finding the truth.
The rights, well the classic right of having life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
Oswald suggested that if America had adopted a different policy toward Cuba, and if the CIA had not meddled in its affairs, then “we could be on much friendlier relations” with Cuba.
He was a provocative and garrulous guest, and Stuckey was eager to interview him again.
But the host had no idea that Lee Oswald had withheld an explosive secret about his past.
ON AUGUST 21, Oswald was a guest on the WDSU radio show Conversation Carte Blanche, hosted by Bill Slatter.
Joining Slatter as cohost was Bill Stuckey, who had four days earlier debuted Oswald to the public on his Latin Listening Post and had brought Oswald to Slatter’s personal attention.
According to FPCC propaganda, Stuckey explained, “Castro’s government is completely free and independent and is in no way controlled by the Soviet Union.
In the four days since Lee’s appearance on Latin Listening Post, Slatter and Ed Butler had both researched his life.
They had found remarkable newspaper stories about things that Oswald had failed to disclose.
He told the audience that he and Butler had found old clippings that revealed that Oswald had attempted to renounce his American citizenship, had defected to the Soviet Union, and had returned to the United States in 1962.
He had the good sense not to try to deny the information that Slatter had collected on him.
But it inflamed the hotheaded Bringuier, who demanded in an excited clipped tone, “I want to know exactly the name of the organization that you represent here in this city, because I have some confusion.
Oswald had been blindsided, but he was willing to discuss his life in the Soviet Union.
He was enjoying the notoriety and public attention he was receiving tonight.
Then Bringuier recited a collection of boring statistics on the number of automobiles, telephones, and televisions per person in Cuba versus Russia, and the price difference for Cuban sugar when sold to America versus Russia.
It was a long and confusing statement that Bringuier insisted Oswald explain.
The conversation veered into a long discussion about whether Oswald ever tried to renounce his United States for Soviet citizenship.
Oswald lied and denied it, at which point Stuckey contradicted him with old newspaper clippings that claimed he did.
Lee, whose vocabulary was limited, either could not remember the correct word, superfluous, or had forgotten how to pronounce it.
Oswald launched into a long-winded and unconvincing list of countries as he tried to carve a vague distinction between Marxism and Communism.
Stuckey asked Oswald how he supported himself in Russia, and whether he had enjoyed a government subsidy.
Stuckey continued to ask Oswald about his time in Russia and pressed him again on whether he had tried to renounce his American citizenship.
That may have been true, but it did not answer whether Lee had attempted to renounce his citizenship.
The intricate question sounded obscure and meant nothing to the audience.
Oswald said no, he had not been there but in the next breath he revealed that he knew the street (and pronounced its name with a proper Russian accent) and that the Soviet foreign ministry was located there.
For a man who had lived in the Soviet Union during the Cold War, his comments about Russia were superficial and uninteresting.
If this was his moment to prove that he was a sophisticated political thinker, his performance was not that impressive.
The program was almost over, but now he would have the opportunity to explain.
We are honestly not interested in what Cuban exiles, or rightist . . . organizations might have to say.
Regardless of any of those facts, the Fair Play for Cuba Committee is an independent organization not affiliated with any other organization.
No doubt he was referring to the CIA sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 and the 1962 Cuban missile crisis ten months ago.
Then Oswald got into the question of American support for Castro’s overthrow of Batista.
Oswald spoke of the unavoidable consequences of reforms and diversification of agriculture.
He meandered onto topics like the production of sugar and tobacco versus sweet potatoes, lima beans, and cotton.
Then time expired and the program petered out without a dramatic climax.
He handled himself reasonably well when confronted by four hostile questioners on live radio.
Yes, Oswald had made some factual mistakes and exhibited some verbal tics.
In a document he prepared, he describes the beginning of his involvement with the FPCC as though he had accomplished something of significance.
In the extract below, Oswald’s overblown description of his counterintelligence operations against anti-Castro exiles sounds ludicrous.
He appropriates the language of “spy talk” that in his imagination a CIA agent might use.
Oswald’s writings are a riot of misspelled words, grammatical mistakes, punctuation errors, and lack of capitalization.
It is obvious that they are the musings of someone of limited education, even an autodidact, possibly dyslexic.
I infiltraled the Cuban Student directorate and then harresed them with information I gained including having the N.O. city atterny general call then in an out restraining order pending a hearing on some so-called bonds for invasion they were selling in the New Orleans area.
I caused the formation of a small, active FPCC organization of members and sympathizers. where before there were none.
He was the only member of FPCC in New Orleans, and he had failed to recruit another soul to serve Castro’s cause.
Oswald, as was so typical for him, was suffering from another one of his delusions of grandeur.
Lee National Director of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee of which I am a member.
Oswald fancied himself a propaganda expert and claimed a hitherto unrecognized expertise.
Oswald was too uneducated to realize how pathetic his boast of being an expert in “street agitation” would seem to any real intelligence agent.
It allowed him to indulge the conceit that he had actually accomplished something.
He was, he believed, on his way to becoming an important public spokesman for a cause.
In the Soviet Union, he had been a novelty—the American who rejected capitalism and chose socialist life in Russia.
Now he was another kind of novelty—the American who had chosen life in Communist Russia but rejected it and came back home, only to become a disciple of Fidel Castro and his revolution.
The media lost interest, the invitations dried up, and it looked as though his brief brush with fame was over.
Nothing that Oswald said on the New Orleans radio programs would have given any listener cause to suspect that he had already attempted to murder one man and soon would try to kill another.
In twelve weeks, he would attempt to assassinate the president of the United States.
Soon Oswald would speak to a much larger audience than had heard him on a New Orleans radio station, when he would answer hostile questions in the same manner as he did on the radio show.
Not only did he sit in the dark on the back porch peering through the telescopic sight at imaginary targets, he worked the bolt action of the Mannlicher-Carcano.
In the six months he had owned it, Marina had seen him clean the weapon four or five times.
Now, in New Orleans, she asked him why he continued practicing with the rifle.
There was no way she was going to agree to leave the United States and move to Fidel Castro’s notorious revolutionary island.
Lee had fantasized about killing Richard M Nixon, JFK’s republican opponent in the 1960 presidential election.
Marina barricaded Lee in the bathroom until he cooled off and promised he would not try to do it.
Despite Lee’s obsession with Cuba, he never complained to Marina about President Kennedy.
I always tried to point out to him that he was a man like any others who were around us.
Lee was not interested in his wife’s sanguine opinion of his limitations.
A man born with what Oswald called his mean independent streak and the smug sense of superiority he exhibited in the Marine Corps could never function in Soviet society.
She once said, “I am sure that if he had gone there he would not have liked it there, either.
Kennedy possessed a glamorous effervescence that made him seem larger than life and a youthful symbol of a new era of American optimism and spirit.
With his enchanting wife, who was just thirty-four, and two beautiful young children, the telegenic president cultivated a jaunty, athletic public image of a sailor, touch-football enthusiast, sportsman, and father.
Jacqueline Kennedy, or Jackie, as she was known—became a star in her own right.
Celebrated for her elegant, trendsetting fashion and understated beauty, she appeared on the covers of magazines looking more like an alluring movie actress than a politician’s wife.
And yet she remained a reserved, quiet person whose desire for privacy made her all the more fascinating to the public.
A strong believer in the preservation of America’s past, she undertook a much-needed historic renovation of the White House, hosted a popular and unprecedented television special on the result, and brought the president’s home alive with artists, authors, and musicians.
President Kennedy claps his hands as his children Caroline and John Jr. dance for him in the Oval Office at the White House.
John Kennedy’s sharp wit and ability to laugh at himself enhanced his appeal.
He loved history for its lessons and inspiration, but he was also drawn to its tragedy, irony, and disappointments.
And below the surface of his public image of vigor, his cheer camouflaged a lifetime of physical pain and multiple illnesses, including Addison’s disease.
Convinced that the American people did not want to see their president as weak or sick, he battled his ailments in secret.
Of all his characteristics, John Kennedy had one more important than all the rest—an ability to inspire people, through words and personal example, to attempt great things.
In August 1963, death whispered in Kennedy’s ear again when it took the life of his newborn, two-day-old son, Patrick.
They had kept it hidden from the American people, but theirs was not the picture-perfect marriage.
He viewed marriage the way a royal prince might see the institution—necessary and useful but not sacrosanct.
BY LATE September, Marina was fed up with life in New Orleans and with her husband, and on the twenty-third she left New Orleans for Irving, Texas, a suburb of Dallas.
She was expecting her second child next month, and her friend Ruth Paine had offered to take her in and care for her.
Ruth drove her station wagon from Irving to New Orleans to retrieve Marina and her simple household goods.
Then, unbeknownst to her, he carried the rifle to the car and slipped it inside.
The rifle that Lee had used to try to murder General Walker was now back in Dallas.
At the time of the Walker attack, Oswald and the Mannlicher-Carcano were barely acquainted.
He had owned it for less than three weeks when he attempted to use it to assassinate the general.
LEE LEFT New Orleans too, but he did not head straight to Texas or to his family.
He decided to take a long and mysterious excursion between New Orleans and Fort Worth—out of the United States and into Mexico.
On September 27, four days after his departure from New Orleans, Oswald showed up in Mexico City, where he visited the Cuban embassy and applied for permission to travel to Cuba.
The Cubans, scoffing at his wild tales of Fair Play for Cuba activities, gave him no special treatment and told him it would take months.
Frustrated, he then went to the Russian embassy for help in getting to Cuba or returning to the Soviet Union.
The Russians knew he was an odd duck and were in no hurry to allow him back into their country either.
THAT FALL John F Kennedy was worried about the proliferation of nuclear weapons among the superpowers.
The United States and the Soviet Union possessed arsenals of several thousand nuclear weapons.
Most of them were more powerful and destructive than the two atomic bombs that the United States dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan, in 1945 to end the Second World War.
Through the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s, the nations that possessed nuclear weapons tested their effectiveness and demonstrated their military superiority by exploding them in their own territory, either underground, in the ocean, or in the atmosphere in remote areas far removed from population centers.
Nonetheless, the tests still resulted in radioactive fallout, which winds and weather systems could carry for hundreds of miles and contaminate the food supply or towns and cities.
For in the end, he said, “our most basic common link is that we all inhabit this small planet.
Kennedy negotiated with the Russians to end atmospheric testing, and in October 1963, he signed a Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
ACHASTENED and humiliated Oswald returned to the United States on October 3, 1963, and went to Dallas, where he visited Marina at Ruth Paine’s house in Irving and spent the weekend of October 11—13.
Paine worried that Oswald was having trouble getting a job, so she told some of her friends he needed work.
Lee and Marina agreed that he would live at a boardinghouse in Dallas during the week and visit Marina at Ruth Paine’s house in Irving on the weekends.
Ruth, who disliked Lee and hated the way he treated his wife, hoped Marina would leave him.
Marina threw her husband a surprise birthday party on Friday, October 18, and he seemed touched.
On October 23, Lee attended a right-wing political rally where General Walker spoke.
Then the Federal Bureau of Investigation made a couple of visits to Marina Oswald.
It was nothing serious, she was told, just a follow-up to chat with him since he had returned home from Russia almost seventeen months ago.
The visits angered Oswald—he believed the FBI agents were harassing Marina.
On November 12, he left an angry note at the FBI headquarters in Dallas for agent James Hosty, telling him to leave his family alone.
IT WAS the autumn of 1963, and the presidential election was just one year away.
John Kennedy planned to run for a second term and hoped to win by a margin wider than he had eked out in 1960.
To increase his chances for reelection, he planned to travel to Texas in late November to campaign with Vice President Lyndon Johnson.
In 1960 Kennedy had chosen Johnson as his running mate—over the strong objection of his brother Robert Kennedy.
Without Johnson and the electoral votes of Texas, JFK would not have won that election.
Texas was to be a major political trip involving private meetings with Democratic leaders, public speeches, and fund-raising events.
The president and first lady would visit five cities in two days—San Antonio, Houston, Fort Worth, Dallas, and Austin—and then head to Johnson’s Texas ranch to rest.
She had traveled with JFK to Paris, and without him on private visits to Italy, Greece, India, and Pakistan.
But she had not been on a real campaign trip since the presidential election in the fall of 1960.
The Texas events would come only three months after her new baby, Patrick Bouvier Kennedy, had died on August 9— two days after he was born.
And although they did not know it at the time, it was also John and Jacqueline Kennedy’s last night together in the presidential mansion.
The occasion was a reception for the federal judiciary, including the justices of the Supreme Court of the United States.
Several days earlier, the Kennedys had treated hundreds of guests to a performance by the bagpipes and drums of the Black Watch, the legendary British military unit.
One of the most memorable was a dinner that the president hosted for Nobel Prize recipients.
He quipped that never had such talent and brilliance been assembled at the White House—since Thomas Jefferson had dined there alone.
On Monday, November 25, they would host their next dinner party—it was to be a State dinner for the new chancellor of West Germany, Ludwig Erhard.
They loved to entertain—not just at official events but also intimate, private dinner parties and small dances.
Often these evenings concluded with guests being invited upstairs to the private family quarters.
It was at a small private dinner party in Georgetown where they had met twelve years earlier.
Earlier in 1963 they had celebrated the tenth anniversary of their marriage.
Jackie would organize a little party for him before the adults arrived for dinner.
Then, for Thanksgiving that Thursday, November 28, they would travel to Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, and spend the holiday at a Kennedy family home there.
Already on JFK’s calendar for December 6 was a special event over which he was eager to preside—the first ever presentations of the new Presidential Medal of Freedom to a group of distinguished Americans.
He had created the award and then vetted the names of potential recipients.
The ceremony would epitomize the Kennedy style and its celebration of achievements in literature, culture, and the arts.
Just last month, when he spoke at Amherst College in a tribute to Robert Frost, JFK had paid homage to the arts.
It was similar to President John Adams’s famous observation that he studied politics and war so that his grandchildren could study poetry and music.
True, Jackie was the more passionate cultural devotee in the family (JFK might prefer a private screening of the Hollywood spectacular Spartacus over a sublime solo performance by Pablo Casals), but the president’s enthusiasm for American achievement in all fields was genuine.
When he nominated former football star and Justice Department lawyer Byron White to be a Supreme Court justice, Kennedy said that one of White’s qualifications was that he had excelled in everything he had ever attempted.
After the Medal of Freedom awards, the Kennedys were looking forward to Christmas in Palm Beach, Florida, at the family compound there.
The president and Jackie had just signed the first batch of their Christmas cards for mailing later.
He was never one of those presidents who complained about the debilitating stress and awesome burdens of the office.
He knew how lucky he was—not just to be president of the United States, but to be alive at all.
In addition to his own narrow escapes, many of those close to him, even some of his own siblings, had died young.
He and Jackie had lost their stillborn daughter, who Jackie would have named Arabella, and their son Patrick, who had lived less than two days.
To improve them, he had scheduled the three-day political swing through Texas in the week before Thanksgiving, where he would visit the five cities and make numerous speeches, as many as three in a single day.
She had never liked campaigning and had not done it since the election of 1960.
In the fall of 1963, as unlikely as it might sound to a jaded modern reader with fifty years’ worth of cynicism and hindsight in the wake of all the subsequent revelations about JFK’s private life, John and Jacqueline Kennedy might have been more in love with each other this November than they had been since the year they married.
The president had received warnings that he might not be entirely welcome in Texas.
In Dallas, various political enemies criticized him as either too liberal on civil rights or too soft on Communism.
Weeks earlier, the president’s opponents had protested a visit to the city by Adlai Stevenson, Kennedy’s ambassador to the United Nations.
It was exactly the aspect of Stevenson’s prickly, egghead personality that made JFK dislike him.
When, outside, the ambassador asked an angry woman how he might help her, she hit him in the head with a cardboard picket sign.
The previous month, on October 3, Senator J William Fulbright of Arkansas suggested during a meeting with President Kennedy that he not go there.
The hostile reception that Adlai Stevenson received in Dallas on October 24 seemed to confirm Fulbright’s counsel.
And on November 4, Byron Skelton, Democratic national committeeman from Texas, sent a letter to Attorney General Robert Kennedy that warned him about the hostile political climate in the city.
Skelton was so worried, he also wrote a warning to an aide of Lyndon Johnson, and the following week, when Skelton was in Washington, he alerted two other men at the national committee.
One woman from Dallas sent a letter to presidential press secretary Pierre Salinger.
But no warnings would intimidate John Kennedy enough to stay out of Dallas.
And third—and this was the most important reason he refused to drop Dallas from his itinerary—JFK believed that no president of the United States should ever be afraid to visit an American city.
Any man who showed such fear was not, in John Kennedy’s opinion, up to the job.
Before the Texas trip, JFK was less interested in threats than he was in what Jackie planned to wear to Texas.
In general he was happy to leave such matters to her personal taste—except when he saw the bills.
On one occasion, she insisted that reports of her extravagance were so exaggerated they could not be true.
But aside from occasional spats about the expense involved, JFK did not micromanage Jackie’s wardrobe.
In the family quarters of the White House, she began to show him the outfits she had chosen for the trip, holding them up in front of her body one after the other.
Three of the most attractive outfits included a black velvet dress, a matching white wool suit, and a matching pink suit.
AT THE White House on the morning of Thursday, November 21, John and Jacqueline Kennedy said good-bye to their daughter, Caroline.
On the lawn, three helicopters, their rotor blades spinning, prepared to leave for Andrews Air Force Base, where their jet was waiting.
Their son, John, who would celebrate his third birthday in a few days, loved flying in the helicopter; as a special treat, they agreed to take him along for the ride to Andrews.
The president sat with his boy and a few Secret Service agents in the first copter.
Then, dressed in a white two-piece suit, she left the White House and walked to her husband’s aircraft.
Awaiting the party at Andrews was Air Force One, the sleek new jet that had become the symbol of the modern presidency.
The plane had gone into service on October 21, 1962, making John Kennedy the first and only president to have flown in it so far.
It was a beautiful aircraft decorated with two tones of bright blue paint and a big red, white and blue American flag painted on the tail.
Raymond Loewy, the famous industrial designer, had given the aircraft his imprimatur, and JFK himself had approved the design.
Kennedy considered the aircraft one of the great perks of the presidency and a big step up from his own private plane—the Caroline, on which he had flown all over the country during his pursuit of the presidency.
The plane had a galley and a bedroom, and Kennedy and his staff used it to great effect during the campaign.
At Andrews, John Kennedy Jr. wanted to get on the plane and fly to Texas with his parents.
The president told his son he could not come on the trip, and explained that he would see him in a few days.
The Kennedys said good-bye to their son and boarded Air Force One for the flight to San Antonio.
The plane took off, bearing the president and first lady west to Texas and two busy days of back-to-back events.
John Jr., accompanied by Secret Service agent Bob Foster, returned to the White House by helicopter.
John Kennedy had left some unfinished paperwork behind on his desk in the Oval Office, including an autographed photograph he intended as a gift for a supporter.
THE DAY the Kennedys left the White House for Texas, a man waiting twelve hundred miles away in Dallas was eager for the president to arrive.
He was not an important politician who wanted to discuss business with President Kennedy.
He was not a supporter who hoped to shake his hand, nor one who had purchased a ticket to the November 22 breakfast to be held for several hundred people in nearby Fort Worth, or for the big lunch scheduled in Dallas that afternoon.
Nor was he a political opponent of John Kennedy’s who planned to protest his policies with a homemade, hand-lettered cardboard sign.
No, this man who awaited John Kennedy in Texas had something else in mind.
But the man’s timing was strange, because these feelings had come on all of a sudden.
Just two days earlier, on the morning of Tuesday, November 19, 1963, when Lee Harvey Oswald awoke in Dallas, Texas, he did not know that within the next three days, he would decide to murder the president of the United States.
If a fortune-teller had prophesied this future, the twenty-four-year-old married father of two children might not have believed it.
Indeed, among Oswald’s corrosive obsessions—and there were many—John F Kennedy was not one.
He had not been stalking the president or, as far as can be told, fantasizing about killing him.
Among Lee Harvey Oswald’s list of longsimmering resentments, frustrations, and grievances, the Kennedy presidency was not one of them.
ON THE nineteenth, the Dallas Morning News had published the details of the route President Kennedy’s motorcade would follow when, in three days, Air Force One would lift off from Fort Worth and land at Love Field, Dallas.
From there, the presidential limousine—a big, custom-built Lincoln Continental convertible—would take JFK on a long, circuitous motorcade through downtown Dallas to a lunch for more than 2,000 people at the Trade Mart, a huge convention center and wholesale merchandise mart.
But a parade would allow tens of thousands of Dallas citizens who would not otherwise glimpse JFK to assemble on the sidewalks and streets to see the president in person.
In addition, many people working in office buildings along the route could open windows overlooking the street to enjoy a good, unobstructed view of the president.
After the limousine drove through downtown Dallas, it would turn right from Main Street to Houston Street, proceed one block, turn left on Elm Street, and finally, as the crowds thinned in an area known as Dealey Plaza, pick up speed, vanish under an underpass, and follow the Stemmons Freeway for a short trip to the Trade Mart lunch.
It had a big, yellow clock atop the roof—put up by the Hertz rental car company—that made it a local landmark.
But he didn’t know that John F Kennedy would be driving right past the place he worked in three days because he probably failed to read the newspaper on the day the story ran.
Too cheap to buy a daily paper, Oswald was in the habit of reading stale, day-old newspapers left behind in the lunchroom by coworkers.
Thus, it is possible that it was not until the morning of Wednesday, November 20, two days before President Kennedy was scheduled to arrive in Dallas, that Oswald learned for the first time that the president of the United States would drive past his work-place.
The distance between an open window on, say, the fifth, sixth, or seventh floors and Elm Street was too great to fire a pistol at a Stationary target below, let alone at a moving car.
A pistol’s short barrel could not guarantee sufficient accuracy at that range.
But Oswald would have known from his military training that someone would need to use a rifle to hit someone from such a distance.
Three of them—Abraham Lincoln, James Garfield, and William McKinley—had all been murdered at close range— no more than several feet—by lone gunmen firing pistols in 1865, 1881, and 1901.
In 1912, former president Theodore Roosevelt had been shot in the chest with a revolver during his campaign for reelection as a third-party candidate, but he survived the wound.
On February 15, 1933, an assassin in Miami, Florida, fired a pistol at a convertible car occupied by president-elect Franklin Roosevelt.
The gunman missed his target but wounded the mayor of Chicago, Anton Cermak, who was standing next to Roosevelt.
And on November 1, 1950, two Puerto Rican nationalists who wanted complete independence from the United States tried to assassinate President Harry Truman by fighting their way with pistols into Blair House, the government guesthouse where he was living during White House renovations.
Four years later, on March 1, 1954, while Congress was in session, a gang of four other Puerto Rican nationalists sitting in the visitor’s gallery of the House of Representatives opened fire with semiautomatic pistols wounding, but not killing, five congressmen.
To this day, bullet holes from this attack scar the furniture in the House chamber.
SO ULTIMATELY John Kennedy and Lee Harvey Oswald were brought together by a staggering coincidence.
It is likely that Oswald would never have thought of killing Kennedy at all if the publicized motorcade route had not taken JFK to the doorstep of Oswald’s place of employment.
He had learned to shoot in the United States Marine Corps, and he owned a rifle.
Sometime between the moming of November 19 and the afternoon of November 21, Oswald decided to assassinate President Kennedy.
It could have been as early as the morning of Tuesday, November 19, but only if he broke his habit and read the moming paper the same day it came out.
If he followed his usual custom, then he would not have read Tuesday’s paper until the following day, the moming of November 20.
Once Oswald read the day-old paper, perhaps he also consulted Wednesday’s Dallas Times Herald, the afternoon paper, which confirmed the motorcade route.
Then, on Thursday, November 21, to make sure that the public knew where to go to see the president, the morning paper published a map of the route that Kennedy’s limousine would follow.
WHEN AIR Force One landed at San Antonio International Airport, Jackie Kennedy was first to disembark, ahead of her husband.
Waiting to receive them was Vice President Lyndon Johnson, along with various dignitaries.
Johnson had flown from his ranch to San Antonio on his own private plane, arriving about an hour before the president.
He killed the time by having lunch with his wife and getting a haircut.
Also waiting was the presidential limousine, flown in the night before from Washington.
It was a Lincoln convertible that had been custom-built by the Ford Motor Company.
A second car had also been flown to San Antonio—a 1955 open-top Cadillac that followed close behind the president’s car in motorcades and that the Secret Service had nicknamed the Queen Mary.
One hundred twenty-five thousand people lined the motorcade route, including a large number of high-school students carrying flags and friendly signs.
In honor of the president’s visit, merchants had put up their Christmas decorations one week early.
As in da Vinci’s painting of God touching his fingertip to the form of man to give him life, Jackie touched the woman.
John Kennedy gave an invigorating speech on the challenges of the future.
It is an era which calls for action, and for the best efforts of all those who would test the unknown and the uncertain in every phase of human endeavor.
From Brooks Medical Center, the Kennedys rode in a half-hour motorcade to Kelly Field, a military airfield adjacent to San Antonio International, where Air Force One had been moved.
They boarded the plane at 3:48 pm. for the forty-fiveminute flight to Houston.
EVEN BEFORE John Kennedy had touched down in San Antonio at 1:30 PM. on the afternoon of November 21, Oswald had already decided to kill him.
On the morning of November 21, he ate breakfast at the Dobbs House restaurant.
He was not in the habit of eating breakfast out, and he couldn’t afford to do it.
Depending on the exact timing of his decision, Oswald had about twenty to fifty hours to make—and carry out—his scheme.
He was a trained and experienced rifleman who would have known that a successful assassination required careful advance planning.
No, a proper sniper attack combined angles, timing, stealth, concealment, and patience.
One of the upper floors, high over the street, would place him above the sight lines of parade watchers and the passengers in the multicar motorcade.
That way he could position himself to shoot down at the president, from an angle that would make it difficult for witnesses to spot him.
A portion of the wood flooring was being refurbished, so workers had moved many heavy cardboard cartons full of books to the south side of the floor, near the row of windows looking down upon Elm Street.
Stacks of them obstructed a clear sight line across the room and would shield anyone who wanted to remain hidden from anyone else on that floor.
It would be as easy as a child stacking building blocks to move some of those cartons and arrange them into a wall on November 22.
There was almost no chance he could descend five flights of stairs without encountering coworkers or any policemen or Secret Service agents who might storm the building after they heard the shots.
Even if he didn’t pass anyone while escaping the building, he could hardly expect to stroll unnoticed down Elm Street with a rifle slung over his shoulder.
No criminal wants to leave a murder weapon behind at the scene of the crime.
The inside grooves of a rifle barrel leave unique marks on a bullet so that a spent round can be identified later as having been fired from that particular weapon.
A brass cartridge case ejected from a rifle after the bullet has been fired can bear telltale signs that match it to the weapon from which it came.
There was still a chance that lawenforcement officials could trace the weapon to him, but that, he figured, should take a while.
The would-be assassin had now chosen his floor and his method of disposing of his weapon.
Fourteen large, tall double-hung windows ran along the south wall facing Elm Street.
At some point he might have rehearsed his plans, performing a walk-through of the assassination.
Perhaps he walked the length of the wall, peering down to Elm Street through each window, assessing the suitability of its angle of view.
At the last window on the left, Oswald must have noticed its two advantages over all other windows on the floor.
First, it looked straight down Houston Street, the route that Kennedy’s limousine would follow to Elm Street on November 22.
As Oswald watched the traffic come up Houston Street, he had to have seen what an easy target a car on that road would be.
In other words, for one block, the president would drive directly toward the Depository, up Houston Street, and toward that window.
From Kennedy’s point of view, the window was the one on the far right end of the sixth floor.
Second, right below the Depository, the president’s car would have to slow almost to a stop to make the hairpin, tight-angled left turn onto Elm Street.
No other window on the sixth floor offered an earlier look at the president’s approach up Houston Street or a longer look at the back of the car once it turned onto Elm.
BY THE afternoon of Thursday, November 21, Oswald was willing but not yet equipped to carry out an assassination the next day.
Oswald was spending weekdays at a Dallas rooming house at 1026 North Beckley Street, while Marina lived in Mrs.
He kept his .38-caliber snub-nosed revolver and its leather belt holster in his room.
Police-style revolvers, unlike Oswald’s, had longer barrels, which made them more accurate but harder to hide from view.
Paine’s house, in her garage, lying flat on the floor, wrapped in a blanket.
But it was a Thursday, not a Friday, and he was not supposed to drop in at Ruth Paine’s unannounced.
Lee, who did not own a car or have a driver’s license, asked Buell Wesley Frazier for a ride to Irving.
Between eight and ten o’clock on Thursday morning, Oswald approached Frazier at a first-floor work table, handling orders.
Frazier’s house, at the corner of Westbrook and Fifth, stood about half a block east from Ruth Paine’s, both on the north side of Fifth.
Frazier realized it wasn’t Friday, Lee’s customary day to visit Marina for the weekend.
Frazier asked Oswald if he would also like a ride home after work tomorrow afternoon too, on Friday afternoon after work, but Lee said no, he did not need a ride on November 22.
It usually took until 5:20 P.M. to 5:35 PM. to get there, depending on traffic and the length of stops at train crossings.
During the trip, neither man mentioned President Kennedy’s visit to Dallas.
Oswald’s morning conversation with Frazier offers a clue that Lee had decided by no later than ten A.M. on Thursday, November 21, to assassinate President Kennedy.
And the fact that he did not bring his revolver to work that morning is persuasive evidence that he had not decided by the night of Wednesday, November 20, to commit the murder.
So Thursday morning was Oswald’s last chance to carry the revolver from his rooming house and sneak it into the Depository.
He could not go to his Dallas rooming house on Thursday evening to get it—that night he needed to drive with Wesley Frazier to Irving to get the rifle from Mrs.
There was another enthusiastic reception committee, another three-dozen gorgeous yellow roses for Jackie, another eager, straining crowd held back by a railing.
The Kennedys worked the line, reaching over the top and shaking hands as they walked.
Several women grabbed both of Jackie’s hands simultaneously, making it seem as if they might lift her off the ground and pull her over the railing.
She called out to Congressman Albert Thomas, whom JFK would honor that night at a huge dinner.
Thomas and some of the other dignitaries rescued her and escorted her toward the car.
In Houston, she and the president would not ride in their Lincoln limousine.
It had been flown ahead to Dallas for the big, forty-five-minute motorcade that would happen there tomorrow.
When the Kennedys arrived at the Rice Hotel, they retired to their suite.
WHEN LEE Oswald showed up at Ruth Paine’s home in Irving, Marina was surprised, and not too happy, to see her quarrelsome, violent husband.
She was not pleased to find him at her home on a day he was not supposed to be there.
Marina was exasperated because she had discovered that Lee was living under an alias at the Beckley Street rooming house.
Recently, when she had telephoned there to speak to him, she was told that no one by the name of Lee Oswald lived there.
It reminded her of his behavior when he had attempted to assassinate General Walker.
She had demanded that her husband explain why he was using a false name again.
Oswald’s visit was a pretext to go into the garage and retrieve his Mannlicher-Carcano.
He planned to spend Thursday night in Irving and then on Friday morning bring it to work.
Perhaps the sight of his attractive young wife, his two-year-old daughter, and his newborn baby girl softened his murderous heart.
Lee told Marina he loved her and asked her to move back to Dallas and live with him there.
He said he would rent a nice apartment for them and the children where they could begin their lives anew.
It was hard for her to keep up with the laundry for two small children.
When he agreed to do it, she rebuffed him and said she didn’t want it after all.
Marina told him it would be better if he spent the money on something else, for himself.
If Oswald was not reconsidering killing Kennedy, he would have had no reason to find a better apartment or purchase a washing machine.
Like a lot of married couples that day, the Oswalds discussed President Kennedy’s forthcoming trip to Dallas.
Lee did not tell Marina that she could go to Love Field to watch the president’s plane land.
He did not tell her that she could catch the motorcade as it crawled through downtown Dallas.
Marina did not know that Lee knew exactly where to find President Kennedy.
Nor could she know that her treatment of him tonight would help him decide to follow through with his plans to see the president tomorrow.
Lee told her that he was lonely because he had not been to visit her the previous weekend.
WHILE THE Oswalds were bickering about their family life, John and Jacqueline Kennedy rested in Houston’s Rice Hotel and dressed for the evening.
He liked to look good, and he was in the habit of changing clothes several times a day, even when home at the White House.
His personal valet, George Thomas, was with him on the Texas trip and took care of all of his wardrobe needs.
Her dark hair and the dark fabric framed her pale face and seemed to make her skin glow.
Now, dressed for the big dinner they would attend that night, the president of the United States and his wife sat down together in their hotel suite and dined alone.
It was impossible for any president to eat a meal in peace at a political dinner.
So many people wanted to talk to him that he never had a moment even to raise a fork or spoon to his mouth, let alone chew the food.
They did not know it, but this was to be their last private dinner together.
John Kennedy could not have known it, but that night another man having his last dinner with his wife was still planning to bring his rifle to work tomorrow.
After the First Couple finished their meal, Lyndon Johnson visited their suite for an animated private talk about the political rivalries and bruised egos that existed among Texas elected officials and were causing some ill will on this trip.
Jackie went to another room to practice her speech, but she could hear loud voices on the other side of the door.
Then, apropos of nothing, Jackie said she could not stand Texas governor John Connally.
I just can’t bear him sitting there saying all these great things about himself.
The president gave his wife a brilliant piece of advice that revealed what an astute political psychologist he was.
But for heaven’s sake don’t get a thing on him, because that’s what I came down here to heal.
A fugitive piece of lost but recently discovered amateur film footage taken that night with a home movie camera, without sound, shows how excited the audience was.
From the Rice Hotel ballroom, the Kennedys drove to the Houston Coliseum for the huge dinner honoring Congressman Thomas.
Instead he gave more of a breadand-butter talk designed to flatter local interests and leaders, especially the honoree.
Indeed, it was so fine that it seemed out of place in what was otherwise a pedestrian effort.
The Kennedys left the Coliseum at a little after nine thirty pM. and drove to the airport.
At 11:07 pm., Air Force One landed at Carswell Air Force Base, outside Fort Worth.
Air Force One had closed the distance in geography and time that separated John F Kennedy and Lee Harvey Oswald.
LEE WATCHED television for a while and then went to bed before Marina and turned off the light.
But when Marina joined him, she sensed that he was still awake, only pretending to be asleep.
And when she, in a gesture of intimacy in the darkness of the night, extended her leg to touch his, he kicked it away.
And now, as the night lengthened on November 21, 1963, he had failed in love.
If Marina had told him this evening that she loved him, that he was a good man, that she and their daughters would live together again—then tomorrow Lee might look for a new apartment for his family instead of carrying a long package of “curtain rods” to work.
But tonight, without her approval, he was helpless, alone, and drifting toward oblivion.
It was Oswald’s habit to copy sentimental Russian-language poetry into journals.
Some evidence suggests that she read some of them and annotated a few of the pages in her own hand.
Or maybe Lee just wanted to practice his Russian comprehension and handwriting.
From the hundreds of lines he copied into his commonplace books, one phrase leaps out.
It reads as though he was describing himself on the night of November 21, 1963.
NEAR MIDNIGHT on Thursday, November 21, John Kennedy prepared to turn out the lights in his bedroom in Fort Worth’s Hotel Texas.
In one day, he had flown from Washington, D.C., to San Antonio, Texas; had driven in a motorcade; had given a speech to twenty thousand people; had toured a hospital; had flown from San Antonio to Houston; had spoken at a reception; had spoken at a major political dinner; and had flown from Houston to Forth Worth, where Air Force One had landed at 11:07 pm.
Then he had been driven to the Hotel Texas in Fort Worth, where he found himself now.
Tomorrow, on November 22, the president faced another tough schedule, which included informal remarks on the street outside his hotel; a breakfast and talk at the hotel; the flight to Dallas; the long motorcade from Love Field to the Trade Mart for a big political lunch and speech; then back to the airport for the flight to Austin, another motorcade, and another speech at a major Democratic dinner that evening.
In late summer and fall of 1960, he had spent weeks just like this on the campaign trail.
This trip to Texas was a dress rehearsal for next year, and it had proven what an asset Jackie was going to be during his second presidential campaign in the fall of 1964.
I’ve got to speak in the square downstairs before breakfast, but stay in bed.
They did not know that this was the last night they would spend together.
SOMETIME THAT night, after John and Jackie Kennedy had gone to sleep—no one knows exactly when—Lee Oswald slipped into Mrs.
Paine’s garage, turned on the light, and lifted up the blanket and its deadly contents.
Later that night, probably not until long after midnight, Lee Harvey Oswald drifted off to sleep.
The president had just been handed a copy of the November 22 edition of the Dallas Morning News, and he was irate.
But the ad was bordered in black, the way a newspaper might announce a tragedy or a death.
As the president read further, he saw a long list of complaints attacking him and his administration.
The ad demanded that Kennedy answer twelve defamatory questions that accused him of being soft on Communism and unpatriotic.
Then the ad claimed that “Thousands of Cubans” had been imprisoned, starved, and persecuted as a result of Kennedy’s policies.
The ad even accused the president of selling food—“wheat and corn’—to communist enemies engaged in killing American soldiers in South Viet Nam.
The handbill resembled an Old West-style reward poster with front and side mug shots of the “criminal” on the loose—in this case the thirty-fifth president of the United States.
To ease tensions, the Dallas police chief had already gone on television to ask his fellow citizens to receive the president with respect.
Kenneth O’Donnell—JFK’s longtime aide and a trusted member of the “Trish Mafia” trio that had guided his political career for years, and who was with the president in Texas that morning—agreed with that sentiment.
There were a lot of people pressing near them, and some of them had gotten too close for JFK’s comfort.
In 1960, when he was president-elect, a madman had plotted to blow him up with a bomb in Palm Beach, Florida.
Perhaps JFK recalled a letter he wrote in 1959, the year before the election.
Kennedy replied to a man who wrote to him about the “thought-provoking .. . historical curiosity” that since 1840 every man who entered the White House in a year ending in zero had not lived to leave the White House alive.
John Kennedy was a fatalist who lived with a sense of detachment and ironic humor.
One of his favorite poems was one written by a fellow Harvard graduate, Alan Seeger, who had been killed in the First World War.
But he also believed he was lucky and that luck had taken him all the way to the White House, where, at age forty-three, he was the youngest man ever elected to the presidency.
He had been president of the United States for two years, ten months, and two days.
As John Kennedy spoke in the safety of his Fort Worth hotel suite about rifles and assassins, a man who wanted to kill him was already waiting for him in Dallas.
ON THE morning of November 22, Lee Harvey Oswald woke up early and was out of bed before Marina.
He placed $170 in cash, almost all the money he had in the world, on the top of the dresser for Marina.
And in a porcelain cup she had brought with her all the way from Russia, Lee Oswald left his wedding ring.
Buell’s sister, Linnie Mae Randall, lived there too with her husband and three daughters.
Last night, Linnie remembered, her brother told her “that Lee had rode home with him to get some curtain rods from Mrs.
Friday morning, after Linnie made breakfast and while she was packing Buell’s lunch, she saw Oswald cross Westbrook Street, then cross her driveway, and walk toward the carport.
Linnie watched Oswald go to Buell’s car, open the back door, and lay the package down.
Then Oswald approached the house and peered through the kitchen window while Buell was sitting down eating his breakfast.
It was the first time Oswald had ever walked to Frazier’s house and peered through the window.
Usually Frazier just picked him up on the street while Oswald was walking to his house.
Paine’s garage, the brown paper bag he used to carry the rifle on his way to work, and the disassembled Mannlicher-Carcano.
Buell noticed Lee did not bring his usual small paper sack containing his lunch.
Frazier had no way of knowing it, but Oswald did not need curtain rods.
His small room at the boardinghouse was already fully furnished with blinds, curtains, and curtain rods.
President Kennedy, Governor Connally , and Vice President Johnson (far right) outside the Hotel Texas.
Unbeknownst to Buell Wesley Frazier, he was chauffeuring an assassin—and his murder weapon—to the scene of a crime that had not yet happened.
Oswald jumped out of the car, reached into the backseat for his package of “curtain rods,” and began walking fast toward the Depository, getting as far ahead of Frazier as he could without breaking into a run.
Frazier also noticed that Lee carried the package in an unusual manner, vertically, with one end tucked under his right armpit and the other end in his cupped hand.
The billowing sleeve of Oswald’s jacket almost concealed the package, so that it was almost invisible to anyone—including Frazier—walking behind Oswald.
Then he went to the sixth floor, using either the staircase at the rear of the building or one of the two freight elevators.
He probably took the stairs to avoid riding in an elevator with any curious coworkers who might ask questions about his package.
It is possible he assembled the rifle that morning before hiding it, in case something later prevented him from doing so during the critical moments before Kennedy’s motorcade arrived.
With a screwdriver it would have taken between two and two and a half minutes to assemble the weapon.
But Oswald did not need a tool to remount the barrel to the stock—a thin dime would turn the screws and transform the rifle into firing condition.
With his rifle concealed from view, Oswald picked up his clipboard and began filling orders for books, just as he did on any other normal day at work.
At least for the next three hours until the presidential motorcade approached Elm Street, he would earn his pay.
He was scheduled to go downstairs soon to deliver brief remarks to a crowd that had assembled in a parking lot across the street.
The president’s limousine had already been sent there ahead of Kennedy, so it would be in position when he landed at Love Field.
The car was a convertible, and the agents wondered if they should install the plastic bubble top to protect the president from the rain.
John Kennedy preferred to ride in an open car so the people watching the motorcade could get a better look at him.
Jackie did not like the open car—the wind would play havoc with her stylish hair.
If a madman jumped from the curb and fired shots, the bullets could penetrate the metal doors of the car.
During Kennedy’s trip to Berlin, two women had broken through the security cordon and ran right up to his car in a motorcade.
The president went downstairs without Jackie at 8:45m. to speak to the cheering crowd standing outside in the rain.
It takes longer, but, of course, she looks better than we do when she does it.
Ie gsttn,9 a President Kennedy greeting the crowd outside the Hotel Texas in Fort Worth on the morning of November 22, 1963. [jete President Kennedy speaks to the crowd outside the Hotel Texas in Fort Worth.
Back in their hotel room, as Jackie got dressed, she was able to hear his voice over the loudspeakers.
At 9:00m., the president returned to the hotel to speak at a public breakfast in the ballroom.
Kennedy told one of his Secret Service agents to call her room and tell her to get down to the breakfast as soon as possible.
When Secret Service agent Clint Hill escorted her downstairs in an elevator, she thought he was taking her to the car.
Jackie had arrived, and the crowd shouted its approval as she marched to the podium.
Wall Street Journal reporter Al Otten took cynical amusement in Jackie’s service as a political prop.
She was wearing a bright pink, nubby wool jacket faced with dark blue lapels, with a matching pink skirt and a pink pillbox hat.
She wore short, bright white cotton gloves, a fashionable accessory for women at that time.
It was one of the most flattering outfits in her wardrobe, and she had worn it on several prior occasions.
The colorful suit seemed almost to glow and created a striking contrast against her rich black hair and pale white skin.
After the Chamber of Commerce breakfast, the Kennedys went upstairs to their suite to rest before leaving Fort Worth.
President Kennedy’s motorcade left the Hotel Texas for Fort Worth’s Carswell Air Force Base.
But that would have eliminated the ceremonial glamour of a presidential arrival of Air Force One at Love Field.
The landing of the beautiful jet, the emergence of Jack and Jackie from the rear door, the welcoming committee, the crowds, the photographers, and the television cameras—all enhanced the excitement and appeal.
It was an hour later in the nation’s capital, and most officials in Washington were at lunch.
Several members of the cabinet were out of the country, aboard a plane flying to Japan for trade talks with government officials.
At Love Field, reporters and television cameras prepared to cover the president’s arrival.
But the reporter failed to mention how many windows—more than twenty thousand—the motorcade would drive past on the way to the Trade Mart, before the president would have the opportunity to be protected there from chewing a piece of poisoned steak.
The Secret Service planned to select John Kennedy’s plate at random from among the two thousand meals that the kitchen prepared.
To kill the president, an assassin would have to outdo the legendary poisoner Lucrezia Borgia.
The plane parked near a reception committee of dignitaries standing on the tarmac.
None of the people at Love Field had been searched, not even the suspicious ones displaying unfriendly signs.
All that separated the spectators from the president was a hiphigh chain-link fence.
Most of the employees would start their noontime descent from the upper floors to congregate in the lunchroom on the second floor or the “domino room” on the first floor, or to go outside and watch President Kennedy drive by on Elm Street.
The biggest crowds waiting to see the president—tens of thousands of people— had already gathered downtown, choking the sidewalks several bodies deep before Kennedy had even landed.
Hundreds of people had perched in windows and now looked down on the route.
The Secret Service and the Dallas police did not have the manpower—or the desire—to search every building, to scrutinize every window, or to analyze every face.
But here, in Dealey Plaza, where the motorcade would cover the last leg of its ten-mile route before it picked up speed and took the highway to the Trade Mart, the crowds were much thinner.
It was easier for the scattered spectators to stake out a spot right at the edge of the curb and stand just a few feet away from where the president’s limousine would soon pass.
Indeed, people standing on the right side of the car would be closest to Kennedy, in some cases less than six feet from him.
AT LOVE Field, the president looked out one of the plane windows and saw the enthusiastic crowd.
Jack and Jackie stood by the rear door of Air Force One, waiting for it to open.
The president and First Lady exited Air Force One and descended the portable stairs that airport workers had rolled out to the plane.
As she stepped out ahead of the president the crowd seemed awestruck, then started applauding and... squealing.” yi, Jackie and JFK disembark Air Force One in Dallas.
Waiting for them on the ground were a number of local dignitaries and politicians, including Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, who had flown to Dallas ahead of the Kennedys.
Protocol dictated that LBJ, a Texan, would welcome the president at each stop within the state.
The yellow rose was the official state flower, but so many of them had been ordered for the various events the Kennedys were attending in Texas that local florists had run out of them.
The combination of colors seemed to intensify the hue of each, rendering them almost fluorescent.
While the Kennedys greeted the members of the airport reception committee, the journalist encouraged listeners to throng the motorcade route.
He had not brought a portable, battery-powered transistor radio to his window perch.
When the spectators one block away at the far end of Houston Street saw the motorcade coming up Main Street, they would begin to wave and cheer.
It will go Mockingbird Lane to Lemmon Avenue, then travel south on Lemmon to Turtle Creek, Cedar Springs, through the downtown area to Main.
The reporter said there was some kind of delay, but he could not discover its cause.
JOHN KENNEDY Saw that a few thousand people had tumed up behind a chain-link fence at Love Field to greet him.
Someone brought a Confederate battle flag, a possible sign of protest against the president.
Kennedy, who was treating the whole Texas trip like a campaign stop in preparation for the November 1964 election, made an impulsive decision to work the fence line.
At that moment, a news photographer named Art Rickerby, who had gotten ahead of the Kennedys, turned around and took a series of color photographs of the couple as they walked side by side toward his lens.
The president’s trim bluegray suit and blue tie and Jackie’s bright pink suit and red roses saturated the camera’s color film.
Behind them was the big red, white, and blue American flag painted on the tail of Air Force One.
The decorative blue highlights painted on the fuselage of the plane matched the color of the bright blue Texas sky.
When the people in the crowd realized the president of the United States was coming over to visit them, they went wild.
Kennedy strolled right up to the crowd and plunged his hands and arms over the hip-high fence.
Jackie, having just been presented a bouquet of red roses at Love Field in Dallas.
As Jackie walked the line, women begged to touch her and shrieked with delight if they succeeded.
Jackie, who could be timid in crowds, smiled and shook hands with people too.
Charles Roberts, White House correspondent for Newsweek magazine, asked Jackie how she liked campaigning.
The Kennedys and Texas governor Connally smile at the crowds as the motorcade makes its way from the airport.
Nellie Connally is on her husband’ left. (© by Tom Dillard Collection, The Dallas Morning News/The Sixth Floor Museum at Dealey Plaza) “Security is tense at this time but is going beautifully,” gushed the radio reporter.
Earlier that morning, the agents gambled that the gray skies and rain would disappear by noon.
In front of the Kennedys, sitting at a slightly lower level in folding jump seats that also faced forward, were the governor of Texas, John Connally, and his wife, Nellie.
In the front seats sat the driver, Secret Service agent Bill Greer, and the head of the Secret Service detail, Roy Kellerman.
Behind the president’s car, the Queen Mary convertible was filled with Secret Service agents.
Following behind them were several other vehicles, whose passengers included Vice President Lyndon Johnson and his wife, Lady Bird, several Texas politicians, members of the press, and White House staff, including the president’s personal secretary, Evelyn Lincoln.
As the motorcade got under way, preceded by a pilot car that drove ahead to spot any trouble, and followed by police motorcycles and a white car carrying the Dallas chief of police, Jesse Curry, a television news camera filmed the Kennedys’ departure from Love Field.
It appeared that Secret Service agent Don Lawton, trotting behind the presidential limousine, was about to reach for the handholds on the back of the car and step up onto the footholds attached to the rear bumper.
In that position, he could stand behind the president as the car moved at a slow speed through downtown Dallas.
It would be an extra precaution that placed an agent closer to the president.
If a spectator rushed the car, Lawton could leap off and intercept him.
And if the agent stood erect on the bumper, he could stand between the president and anyone who might try to take a shot at him from behind.
Then a Secret Service agent in the trail car, Emory Roberts, stood up and shouted to Lawton.
He knew that JFK did not want any agents riding on the limousine, and Lawton thought it would be funny if he pretended to defy the president’s order.
The camera continued to track the limousine until it vanished from sight.
The route was ten miles long, and it would take about forty-five minutes to drive it.
Kennedy’s impromptu visit with the crowd at the airport had put him a little behind schedule.
He would not deliver informal, off-the-cuff remarks as he did that morning in Fort Worth when he stepped outside into the rain to speak to the crowd.
Like the breakfast speech he gave inside the Hotel Texas, his words for the lunch at the annual meeting of the Dallas Citizens Council—his third talk of the day—had been prepared in advance.
He would speak about American exceptionalism—the nation’s role in the world, national defense, foreign aid, and the strength of American science, industry, education, and the free-enterprise system.
The speech ended with a full-throated appeal for peace through strength.
That must always be our goal, and the righteousness of our cause must always underlie our strength.
Let us not quarrel amongst ourselves when our Nation’s future is at stake.
He was in the habit of revising his typewritten speeches with his undecipherable handwriting, often at the last minute.
Later in the day, before he gave them, he might look them over once more at the Trade Mart, and on the trip to Austin.
BACK IN Dealey Plaza, the electric digital clock on the big, yellow Hertz-Rent-aCar sign atop the Depository roof flashed the time.
Buell Wesley Frazier had skipped lunch, and he was already standing near the top step of the Elm Street entrance to the Depository.
While most of Lee Oswald’s coworkers came down from the upper floors for the lunch hour, he proceeded to the sixth floor.
A few asked him if he was having lunch or planning to watch the president with them.
He retrieved his rifle, either in pieces from inside the brown paper bag, or already fully assembled.
He walked to the southeast corner of the building and settled into his position at the window, behind stacks of book cartons.
If the lower window pane was not already open, he slid it up now and secured it in position.
If he had looked down Houston Street, he would have heard no sounds nor seen any signs that the motorcade was near.
No police motorcycles were in sight yet, and people on the street were not fidgeting or craning their necks the way excited crowds do when a president approaches.
If he heeded the warnings drilled into him by his Marine Corps training, he would have switched the safety mechanism of his rifle to the on position.
That device would prevent the weapon from firing a round accidentally if the shooter dropped and jarred it or snagged the trigger.
As long as the safety was engaged, squeezing the trigger would fail to release the firing pin, and the rifle could not fire the chambered round.
Once the president came within sight, Oswald could, by disabling the safety with the flick of a thumb, render his weapon lethal in an instant.
The only sounds were the occasional voices that floated up from the street below before they faded into nothingness.
The journey through downtown Dallas was more of a parade than a motorcade.
On November 22, John Kennedy did not want anyone in Dallas to miss seeing him because his car was traveling too fast.
Accordingly, the Secret Service had slowed the limousine to parade pace of ten to fifteen miles per hour.
When the car was topless, as it was today, the agents preferred to ride the running boards— retractable metal shelves protruding from the side of the car.
Having agents stand on the Lincoln gave the president at least some protection.
Once, on another trip, someone tossed a bouquet of flowers into the car.
This was especially true of the two men assigned to stand on the back steps behind the trunk.
The presence of these agents would make it almost impossible for a sniper to shoot the president from behind.
Had a Secret Service man been standing on the right rear step when John Kennedy drove through Dealey Plaza, and had Lee Harvey Oswald chosen to shoot the president from behind, the agent’s body would have obscured Oswald’s sight line.
But President Kennedy did not like having his bodyguards ride on the car because he thought it made him look less approachable to the people.
He often told his “Ivy League charlatans’—his affectionate nickname for them—to get off his car.
Today in Dallas, all the men in the security detail knew they risked irritating the president if they rode on the outside of the car during the trip from Love Field, through downtown, through Dealey Plaza, and to the Trade Mart.
There were no ugly incidents, and people cheered extra loudly whenever the president drew near.
But her husband told her to take them off—the people wanted to see her face, he said.
O’Donnell noticed that “the President seemed thrilled and fascinated by the crowd’s noisy excitement.
Many snapped photographs or took home movies, which in that era did not record sound.
At one point along the route, JFK turned around and looked over his right shoulder in the direction of someone making a home movie.
The president smiled, and with a playful hand gesture he beckoned the cameraman to follow along.
Children held up a homemade sign that asked the president to stop and greet them.
When Kennedy spotted the sign, he shouted to his driver to step on the brakes.
In the middle of a motorcade surrounded by thousands of onlookers, the gleaming Lincoln limousine halted.
The Secret Service agents went on high alert, fearing the president was about to get out of the car and stand up.
Kennedy was famous for plunging into friendly crowds and leaving nervous bodyguards behind in his wake.
If he did that now, then thousands of excited people would rush forward to try to shake his hand.
On this street, no barrier separated the president from the throng, just feet away.
In 1958, when Vice President Richard Nixon visited Venezuela, an anti-American mob intercepted his car, smashed the windows, almost tipped it over, and came close to murdering him and his wife.
At a couple of points, Secret Service agent Clint Hill hopped off the trail car and stepped onto the back of the presidential limousine, assuming a crouching position behind Jackie.
From that location he could leap off the car to intercept any pedestrian who rushed the Lincoln, and if he stood up straight, his body would shield her and absorb any bullet fired at her from behind.
But Hill did not stand up, perhaps to avoid an admonition from the president or the head of the Secret Service detail.
After a short time, agent Hill stepped off the car and jumped back onto the running board of the trail car.
Farther along the route, JFK spotted some Catholic nuns standing curbside.
Kennedy remained in the car and soon bade farewell to the delighted nuns.
He never indicated later what was in his mind while, for the second time in his life, he prepared to kill a man.
That night he was certain he had his target fixed in the center of his telescopic sight, but his first shot struck the framing of the window screen and that deflected the bullet’s trajectory.
The morning after the Walker shooting, Oswald wondered how he possibly could have missed.
Oswald left behind no journal, diary, or manifesto, no last-minute letter of explanation or justification to his wife or to the country.
Whenever his eyes searched Houston Street for the first signs of the motorcade, he had to be careful to not hold the rifle high in his hands.
Someone on the ground might spot a man with a rifle and warn the authorities.
Finally, the police motorcycles, their red lights flashing, trailed by the lead car carrying the Dallas chief of police, reached the corner of Main and Houston and then turned right onto Houston.
Then he could see what he had been waiting for—the big, gleaming, midnight-blue limousine carrying the president of the United States.
From the moment Oswald saw that car turn onto Houston Street, he knew that one of its six occupants had to be John F Kennedy.
Even from a distance, if Oswald fixed his gaze on the car, he must have noticed what appeared to be an unusually bright pinpoint of color toward the right rear of the vehicle.
It was Jacqueline Kennedy, her pink suit and pillbox hat glowing like a signal beacon.
Inside the limousine, Nellie Connally was delighted with how well the day had gone.
The motorcade had passed through the cheering crowds in downtown Dallas without incident.
FROM THE moment Oswald saw the presidential limousine, he knew the odds that he would be able to successfully assassinate President Kennedy had just tipped in his favor.
Oswald would have never stalked him on a presidential trip to another city.
It was pure chance five weeks earlier, on October 16, before the details of Kennedy’s Dallas trip had even been planned, that Oswald would start a job at a building that would turn out to be on the motorcade route.
But JFK would drive by during lunch hour, when the employees would vacate the upper floors and go down to eat or leave the building to watch the president pass by.
By a little after noon, Oswald could expect to have the entire sixth floor to himself.
As the limousine got closer, Oswald could see that the bubble top was off.
This plastic top was not exactly bulletproof, but it would have been protective because a bullet would have needed to penetrate it at a perfect angle in order to get through without being deflected.
He could also see that no Secret Service agents were standing on the back of the Lincoln.
Williams remembered that they had planned to watch the parade from the sixth floor.
He had gone downstairs to retrieve his lunch—a chicken sandwich, a bag of Fritos, and a soda.
Then he went back up to the sixth floor, sat by a window along the Elm Street side of the building, and ate his meal while he waited for his friends to come back up.
What Williams could not see, concealed just a few dozen feet away from him, behind stacks of book cartons, was Lee Oswald hiding with his rifle.
Lee didn’t make a sound, and Williams never realized that someone was lurking near the corner window.
Williams finished his lunch and, impatient for his tardy friends to join him, he took an elevator down to the fifth floor to search for them.
If he did not find them there, he planned to go to the first floor and watch the motorcade from street level, in front of the Depository.
But there were Norman and Jarman standing along the windows facing the Elm Street side.
Hank Norman was right below Oswald’s window, Junior Jarman was two or three windows over, and Williams took a position between them.
They had staked out the windows closest to the far southeast corner of the building, knowing it would give them a great view straight up Houston Street as the president’s car drove toward the Depository and then turned left onto Elm right under their window.
Their perch there gave them a commanding, unparalleled view of Dealey Plaza, better than anyone else waiting for Kennedy that day.
Only Oswald—on the sixth floor, right above their heads—could see the president better.
A man on the street had noticed Jarman, Norman, and Williams looking out the fifth-floor windows.
Arnold Rowland was an eighteen-year-old newlywed high-school graduate, taking classes in preparation to attend college and working part time as a pizza maker at Pizza Inn.
We went early so we could see the President’s motorcade,” Rowland recalled.
They arrived about 11:45m. and spent the next fifteen minutes walking five or six blocks to find a good vantage point.
Frustrated, they tried out several locations but could not find one that suited them.
They noticed a lot of policemen and commented on the security precautions being taken.
Amold’s watch read 12:14, but when he looked up at the Hertz clock atop the Depository, he observed that his timepiece was running one minute behind.
More than most people in Dealey Plaza that afternoon, the Rowlands took an unusual and keen interest in presidential security.
This appeared to me to be a fairly high-powered rifle because of the scope and the relative proportion of the scope to the rifle, you can tell what type of rifle it is.
The man stood still, grasping the rifle with both hands, and holding it in front of his body at a forty-five-degree angle, with his right hand near his waist and his left hand near his left shoulder.
Rowland thought that the man was standing three to five feet back from the window to avoid being seen but still close enough for the sun to shine on him.
At that moment, the Rowlands noticed a man in Dealey Plaza who was suffering an epileptic fit.
Rowland said she wished she could have seen him, speculating that he had gone to another part of the building to watch the crowd.
The young couple continued discussing the rough treatment that Adlai Stevenson had received in Dallas a few weeks ago.
He was Howard Leslie Brennan, a forty-five-year-old steamfitter employed by the Wallace and Beard construction company.
That day he was working on a fabrication for pipe at the Republic Bank Building.
A couple minutes later, about twenty yards away from the corner, he noticed the man having an epileptic fit.
Then Brennan walked over to a retaining wall of a little park and jumped up on the top ledge.
Soon another bystander making a home movie of the motorcade captured an image of Brennan sitting atop the wall, wearing his dark gray construction worker’s hard hat and gray khaki work clothes.
Brennan did not see anyone else at any of the other sixth-floor windows.
Brennan had just spotted Junior Jarman, Bonnie Ray Williams, and Harold Norman.
Just then the motorcade approached Dealey Plaza, and Brennan turned his eyes to the parade.
Oswald could see a whole line of them now—the Secret Service car bearing eight agents—four in the car and four standing on the side running boards—plus longtime JFK aides Dave Powers and Ken O’Donnell, then the car carrying Vice President Johnson, then the other vehicles filled with the reporters, White House staff members, and others.
And Oswald had a clear view of the president, who was now within range and getting closer with every passing second.
Soon Oswald could raise his rifle, place the crosshairs of his scope on Kennedy’s forehead, and squeeze the trigger.
Rowland did not realize he had seen something much more important than John Kennedy.
Police officers might have run into the street to stop the motorcade in its tracks.
It was a historic but fleeting opportunity to save the life of the president of the United States.
Rowland was more interested in looking at Jackie Kennedy than the mystery man in the sixth-floor window.
The couple was still discussing Jackie’s outfit as President Kennedy’s car drove away from them.
IN DEALEY Plaza, another man waited to get President Kennedy in his sights.
He owned a portable color 8mm Bell & Howell movie camera, a popular compact recorder that served as the unofficial memory maker of the 1960s.
Zapruder walked over to Dealey Plaza with one of his female employees, after another one had encouraged him to bring his camera and film President Kennedy.
To get a better view above the heads of people gathering to see the president, Zapruder stood on top of a low concrete pedestal.
He asked his employee to hold his legs and steady him once the president’s car came into view.
From here, Zapruder would enjoy a panoramic vista of the limousine from the time it turned onto Elm Street until it disappeared below the Stemmons Freeway underpass and out of sight.
When the police motorcycles leading the motorcade turned onto Elm Street and came within sight, Zapruder held down the RUN button of his camera and started shooting.
To hit a passenger in a vehicle moving at so close a distance, Oswald would have to lower the barrel of his rifle in a dipping, continuous motion to keep his target sighted.
If he shot too low, he risked hitting the windshield or the metal horizontal crossbar above the middle of the car used to attach the top.
If his aim was a little better, he might hit Governor John Connally, who was sitting in a jump seat in front of the president.
To fire a frontal shot, the assassin would have to step forward and poke his rifle through the open window.
Even before he aimed and fired, he would be visible, in plain sight, to anyone in Chief Curry’s car, in the presidential limousine, or in the Secret Service trail car.
Kennedy’s driver might take evasive action, swerving or accelerating to disrupt Oswald’s aim.
If the police or Secret Service were quick to pinpoint Oswald’s location, he risked capture or death before he could even run down the stairs from the sixth floor to the first.
Oswald held his fire as he watched the president’s limousine drive straight at him, until it reached the corner of Houston and Elm and slowed to make its hairpin left turn onto Elm.
If he leaned out of the window now, aimed down, and fired as the president’s car slowed to almost a stop to make the turn, he could hardly miss.
But that would expose his position to the rest of the motorcade and to the people in the street.
It must have been difficult for the impulsive Oswald to restrain himself.
Kennedy was so close that if Oswald had wanted to, he could have thrown a hand grenade out of the window and it could have landed in the president’s lap.
Six floors below Oswald, standing on the front steps of the Depository, Buell Wesley Frazier—the man who had driven Oswald and his rifle to work that morming—got a great view of the president too.
Oswald readied to take full advantage of his well-chosen sniper’s nest.
Now the shiny Lincoln entered Abraham Zapruder’s field of vision, and the amateur cameraman started filming again.
Jackie Kennedy shifted her eyes away from the crowd and looked ahead a few blocks to the spot where Elm Street merged into the triple underpass.
Amos Lee Euins, a fifteen-year-old high-school student, was in Dealey Plaza standing at the corner of Houston and Elm directly across the street from the Depository.
Euins’s mother drove him from Franklin D Roosevelt High School to a spot near the motorcade route.
As Oswald peered out the sixth-floor window and looked to his right, he was facing the president’s back.
Oswald positioned his body in a shooting stance—he was either standing or kneeling before he took his first shot—and thrust the barrel of his rifle through the open window.
He pointed down and aimed for the back of John Kennedy’s head—the only sure kill shot.
By now several eyewitnesses on the ground had seen the barrel protruding from the window.
Never jerk the trigger back with a quick pull, he learned in the Marine Corps.
When that pressure reached a few pounds, his trigger released the firing pin.
It struck the rear of the bullet in the chamber, instantaneously igniting the gunpowder in the brass cartridge case.
The rifle spit a 6.5mm conical, jacketed lead bullet traveling at 1,700 or 1,800 feet per second at the president of the United States.
Abraham Zapruder’s finger maintained constant pressure on his camera’s RUN switch, and he continued filming.
Through his telescopic sight, Oswald expected to see the evidence of his deed.
But the president’s body displayed no reaction to being hit by the bullet.
He did not hit Jackie, who was sitting a few feet to the president’s left, nor did he hit Governor Connally, who was sitting in front of Kennedy.
The shot was so off the mark it had even failed to hit the car, which, at this close range, was a huge target in Oswald’s scope.
At that moment he stopped waving to the crowd and lowered his right arm.
She had been looking to her left at the people standing along the curb.
At the sound of the gunfire, she spun her head to the right and looked to her husband’s side of the car.
Some people traveling in the motorcade— and many bystanders along Elm Street—thought it sounded like a firecracker.
Jack Bell, a reporter for the Associated Press wire service riding in the press-pool car, thought to himself, My God, these Texans don’t ever know to quit. . . they are shooting off firecrackers and cherry bombs.
To the pigeons atop the roof of the Depository, it was a sound of danger that caused them to flee to the skies.
To others—some of the policeman, Secret Service agents, ex-military men, or hunters in Dealey Plaza that day—it sounded like something else.
It caused him to jostle his camera involuntarily, almost imperceptibly.
Through his viewfinder, he, like Oswald, observed no signs of distress to the president or the other passengers.
He continued to film the car, keeping it in his sights as it moved slowly in front of him from left to right.
James Worrell, a high-school senior, had decided to cut class to see the president.
At around eightm., he had hitchhiked a ride to Love Field to watch John Kennedy’s arrival.
So he caught a bus from the airport to downtown Dallas with the hope of intercepting the motorcade as it drove through town.
When President Kennedy’s motorcade drove by, Worrell was standing with his back to the building, about four or five feet from the wall, facing Elm Street.
When the president’s car had moved “oh, at least another 50, 75 feet on past me,” Worrell heard the sound too.
The student tilted his head up at a ninety-degree angle and looked straight back over his head, toward the sky.
Then when the first shot was fired, I started looking around, thinking it was a backfire.
Bonnie Ray Williams remembered, “After the President’s car had passed my window, the last thing I remember seeing him do was—it seemed to me he had a habit of pushing his hair back.
The same man who had failed to assassinate General Walker had just failed in his attempt to assassinate the president of the United States.
Lee was too good a rifleman and the limousine too close for him to have missed it completely.
Even if, in his excitement, he had rushed the first shot, he should have hit someone or something in the car.
Chance had played a role in saving General Walker, and it had just saved President Kennedy from the assassin’s first bullet.
For a few seconds, the tree’s branches had acted as a semitransparent screen that stood between Oswald and Kennedy.
Looking between the branches, Oswald could still see the president, so he had fired that first shot.
But before it could find its target, the bullet had probably nicked a tree branch, which deflected its trajectory and probably stripped it of its outer metal jacket.
Instead, the bullet struck a concrete curb beyond the limousine on the far side of Elm Street.
It is also possible that the bullet had glanced off the horizontal beam of a traffic signal light.
The impact showered fragments into the air that hit a bystander in the face and made a small cut in his cheek.
If Kennedy’s driver hit the gas and accelerated the car from its present speed of 12 to 15 miles per hour to just 25 or 30 miles per hour, he could carry the president away from further danger.
It might have been enough to just swerve the car violently from right to left.
The leader of John Kennedy’s Secret Service detail, sitting in the front passenger seat, could have ordered the driver to race out of Dealey Plaza.
The president himself—a decorated World War II navy veteran who had heard gunshots before—could have shouted orders to get him out of there.
He could run away, just as he’d done that night at General Walker’s house.
Lee Harvey Oswald could go home that night and scold himself for yet another failed attempt to become part of history.
At the limousine’s present speed and direction, the president would be within range for the next ten to twelve seconds.
With his right hand, Oswald grasped the bolt, raised it, pulled it back, and ejected the empty brass cartridge casing, which popped into the air and made a hollow ping when it landed on the wood floor.
The ejection of the cartridge caused a spring in the clip to push another round into position in front of the bolt.
Oswald slammed the bolt forward, chambered the round, and turned the bolt handle down.
He had practiced this movement countless times and had distilled it into one quick, fluid motion.
On the floor below him, Junior Jarman, Harold Norman, and Bonnie Ray Williams had heard the first explosion a few feet above their heads.
The loud shot sent a vibration through the floorboards and produced a shock wave that rattled the windows.
The car was traveling at a slow speed in almost a straight line down Elm Street away from the sixth-floor window.
Thus Oswald did not have to swing his rifle from left to right to track a target moving horizontally.
The car’s speed and direction created for Oswald the advantage of an optical illusion in which the car seemed to be almost a stationary object that was slowly getting smaller.
For the second time, Oswald took aim at the back of John Kennedy’s head.
For a few moments, Kennedy disappeared from Zapruder’s viewfinder—a large Stemmons Freeway roadside sign temporarily blocked his view of the limousine and President Kennedy.
Through wide cracks between the floorboards above their heads, loose debris drizzled down on them.
WITH HIS second shot, Oswald missed the president’s head, but the bullet struck Kennedy in the upper back, to the right of his spine, bored a tunnel through his body at a downward angle—because Oswald was shooting from high above the car—and exited through his lower throat.
John Kennedy’s tissue absorbed some of the bullet’s energy, and it exited his body at a slower speed—1,500 to 1,600 feet per second—than it had entered it.
Oswald’s bullet had traveled through the bodies of two men and had inflicted serious wounds to both.
These multiple impacts had flattened and deformed the bullet’s shape, but it was still in one piece.
Although they had just been shot, President Kennedy and Governor Connally were still alive and conscious . . . and might survive.
If the president had heard this shot, his auditory senses did not register it until after he felt the bullet’s impact.
And if he had heard it, he would have known it was a rifle and he was in the process of being assassinated.
Side view of the bullet that struck President Kennedy and Governor Connally.
In other words, down Elm Street, away from the Depository, in the direction of the railroad underpass.
But Frazier had already done something that would soon make him a subject of suspicion.
Five hours earlier, as he drove to work that morning, the rifle that was shooting at the president was lying flat in the backseat of his car.
And the man who would fire it had been sitting in the front seat next to him.
A moment after the second shot, a news photographer, James Altgens, snapped a picture of the front of Kennedy’s limousine and of the Secret Service trail car, freezing the agents in position with their heads turned back to the Depository.
The impact of the bullet propelled President Kennedy’s elbows and forearms up, parallel to the ground, and pushed his clenched fists, thumbs in, toward his throat.
He could not move his arms from this position—they were locked in place by nerve damage.
In the photo, a white-gloved hand—Jackie Kennedy’s—touched the president’s left forearm.
Dave Powers, riding in the Secret Service car just a few feet behind the president’s, turned to Ken O’Donnell.
Abraham Zapruder did not capture on film the moment the president was shot.
Kennedy was uninjured when he disappeared behind the Stemmons Freeway sign.
When he emerged from behind the sign, he had already been hit and had raised his arms.
A Secret Service agent riding in the trail car saw the bullet hit the president and tear a hole in the back of his suit coat.
Puzzled, she looked at Governor Connally, who was twisting strangely in his seat.
Lee Harvey Oswald operated the bolt of his rifle and ejected a second brass cartridge onto the floor.
But he would probably not have the opportunity to fire it before Kennedy’s car drove out of range, especially if it sped up to interfere with his aim.
Secret Service agent Clint Hill, riding the left-front running board of the trail car, knew what was wrong.
Fellow agents rooted for him to close the distance before the sniper could fire a third shot.
Kennedy from the beginning and had protected her on trips all over the world.
She was sitting so close to the president that another rifle shot might blow her head off.
If only Hill could get between the Kennedys and the sniper before he fired another shot.
Hill, who was not wearing a bulletproof vest, could block the bullet with his own body and save the president.
Just a few more yards, and he could grab for the big handle on the trunk and yank himself up on the rear foothold.
If he could do that he would be a human shield—the assassin would have to shoot through him to get the president.
Only Jackie’s agent could save John Kennedy now—the president’s own Secret Service agent had not yet left the trail car.
Many soldiers in World War II and the Korean War had survived worse injuries.
If the driver gunned the engine and increased the car’s speed to 80 miles per hour, the president could be in the emergency room of nearby Parkland Hospital in less than ten minutes.
The Newman family, two young parents and their two small children, were standing just a few feet away from the president.
Bystander Mary Moorman raised her Polaroid camera and prepared to click the shutter.
After he heard the second shot, he did not take his eyes off the Depository.
After the first two shots, the teenager was afraid he might get shot too.
Euins saw that the barrel was tracking JFK’s car as it moved farther away from the Depository.
As the distance grew, the gunman thrust more of the rifle out of the window.
When Euins first saw the barrel, only the tip protruded from the window.
By the time Oswald was ready to fire for the third time, it looked to Euins like three feet of rifle was visible.
The Marine Corps had taught Oswald to shoot at targets with fixed, iron sights—without the aid of a telescopic sight—at distances of two hundred, four hundred, and even six hundred yards.
The accuracy of Oswald’s third shot would determine if the president of the United States lived or died.
The third would determine whether he was remembered as a failure who missed his chance or as aman of history who changed the future.
AT THE third shot, Bob Jackson, a photographer riding in the same press car as Tom Dillard, glanced at the upper floors of the Depository.
Then he saw Oswald’s gun. “y eyes went up to the next window, and I could see the rifle on the ledge and I could see it being drawn in.
That caused him to miss what would have been one of the most dramatic and important pictures in American history—the assassin’s rifle shooting at the president, and possibly an image of Lee Harvey Oswald firing it.
Tom Dillard brought his camera up in an instant and snapped a photograph.
All he got was a picture of the empty sixth-floor window and of the Depository employees still in the windows one floor below.
The third bullet hit John Kennedy in the back of the head and sliced through his thatch of thick, reddish brown hair.
It tore a neat hole through his scalp and punched a round hole through the back of his skull.
The right rear side of the president’s skull blew out—exploded really—tearing open his scalp, and spewing skull fragments, blood, and brains several feet into the air, where they hung for a few seconds, suspended in a pink cloud.
It splattered the motorcycle windshield and face of a police officer riding close to the left side of the car.
To Clint Hill, the impact resembled the squashing sound of a melon being smashed on cement.
His wife’s mouth opened wide in shock as his limp body began to tip toward her.
She was so Close to her husband when Oswald shot him in the head that her hair, face, white gloves, and pink suit were all stained with gore.
Powers and O’Donnell watched it happen from just fifteen or twenty feet behind Kennedy’s car.
OSWALD, HIS eye glued to his rifle scope, must have seen the spray of red mist.
Then he lowered the stock from his right cheek, operated the bolt, ejected the third cartridge case, and chambered the fourth round.
He could not take as much time as he had between the second and third shots.
He would have to aim this shot by instinct, and maybe even use the iron sights and not the scope.
Locating the car in the telescopic sight might take a fraction of a second too long.
Jackie and Clint Hill presented finer targets, and by now Oswald had a better chance of hitting them than the president.
The disappearance of the shooter from the window did not convince Brennan that no more shots would be fired in Dealey Plaza.
THIS WAS not a suicide mission for Oswald, despite his ritualistic behavior that morning at Ruth Paine’s house.
Leaving behind his wedding ring and almost all of his cash symbolized a shedding of worldly things, a fatalism that suggests that Oswald believed he was about to undertake a dangerous—even suicidal—task from which he might never return.
But this morning, although he had left his ring and cash, he left no note, letter, or political manifesto on the bedroom dresser.
His survival instincts kicked in and whisked him away from the sixth floor window.
He had summoned all the will and the discipline buried inside him to shoot John F Kennedy.
And he had done what no man had ever done before—he had become the first presidential assassin to ever commit the act from long distance, with a rifle.
Ti Lebel Trees 77h us SK i am [tN Photograph taken moments after Oswald fired the third shot and disappeared from the sixth-floor window. (© by Tom Dillard Collection, The Dallas Morning News/The Sixth Floor Museum at Dealey Plaza) JACKIE KENNEDY panicked.
She saw that something had fallen onto the dark blue, mirrored finish of the limousine trunk.
She rose from the backseat, turned around, kneeled on the blue upholstery, and reached for the top of the trunk.
If Oswald had lingered in the window and desired to fire a fourth shot, he could have used his last bullet to kill Jackie.
Still kneeling on the backseat, she stretched her body toward the skull fragment.
The president, she might have convinced herself, would need that piece of his head when the doctors fixed him at the hospital.
If the car accelerated now, Jackie might be thrown onto the trunk, slide off it, fall to the pavement, and get run over by the Secret Service car.
He lunged forward and caught the left handle mounted on the back of the limousine.
But at that moment, the car lurched forward, and Hill lost his footing.
Unless he released his grip, in another second the car would drag him down to the pavement.
The “Queen Mary,” traveling just a few yards behind SS-100-X, would run him over and kill him.
He mustered all the strength he had and pulled hard against the handle, yanked his body up, and caught a tenuous foothold on the step.
Then he launched his body across the trunk, gathered Jackie in his arms and pushed her back into the car.
As the car sped away, other agents saw Hill pound his fist on the trunk and shake his head in despair.
The president’s car accelerated and, along with the trailing Secret Service car, reached the shadows of the triple underpass and disappeared from the view of the dumbfounded witnesses in Dealey Plaza and the rest of the motorcade.
Abraham Zapruder was so shaken by what he had just seen, he lost the ability to speak coherently.
In Vice President Johnson’s car, Secret Service agent Rufus Youngblood yelled “Get down,” climbed from the front seat into the back, pushed LBJ to the floor, and covered him with his body to protect him from gunfire.
Inside, Lyndon Johnson had no idea whether President Kennedy was dead or alive.
Parkland Hospital—there has been a shooting—Parkland Hospital has been advised to stand by for a severe gunshot wound.
I repeat, a shooting in the motorcade . . . the president’s car is now going past me.
Now, as he raced down the stairs, he possessed no evidence that would link him to the shooting.
Oswald descended the floors—fifth, fourth, third—and encountered no one coming up.
When he reached the second floor, he must have heard someone below him ascending the Stairs because he ducked into the lunchroom.
A Dallas policeman, the first one to enter the Depository after the shooting, found the building manager, Roy Truly, and together, they hurried up the stairs.
When the policeman reached the second floor, he spotted Oswald through a window in the lunchroom door, ordered him to stop, and asked the manager if Oswald worked there.
When Truly answered yes, the policeman let Oswald go and continued racing to the roof.
It was a spectacular error for the officer to assume that the assassin was not an employee at the Depository.
REID had hurried back to the front door of the Depository after the third shot.
She passed through the lobby, went up the stairs, and, within two minutes of the last shot, Mrs.
That office had two doors—the one she had just entered and another in the back.
Within a minute or two, the police and Secret Service might seal off all the exits.
Reid walked several feet past her desk, a man entered the office through the back door.
Oswald strode past her, walked out the front door of the office, and descended the stairs to the first-floor lobby.
OSWALD COULD have chosen to escape via the back door, the one through which he and Buell Wesley Frazier—and the rifle—had come in to work that morning.
A man with something to hide might have preferred to sneak out the back way and run.
But evidently Oswald shared Frazier’s philosophy—if you run, people will just think you are guilty.
To avoid suspicion, Oswald decided to walk out right through the front door.
At that moment, a man grabbed Oswald—the assassin thought the man was a Secret Service agent—but he only asked Oswald where he could find the nearest telephone.
Seven months after his failed attempt to slay General Walker, his second attempt to shoot a man had proven more successful.
In the press-pool car, Merriman Smith of United Press International, a news service that distributed reports to media outlets all over the world, grabbed for the radiotelephone mounted near him in the front seat.
Another reporter sitting behind him, Jack Bell from the rival Associated Press news service, grabbed for the phone too.
The two newshounds struggled over their only link to the outside world.
Each wanted the credit for transmitting the first news of the shooting to the world.
He said they saw policemen and others, “running, scared, running—there are some tracks on the west side of the building, railroad tracks.
But since everybody was running... to the west side of the building, towards the railroad tracks, we assumed maybe somebody was down there.
If they had quickly run across the fifth floor and bounded up the staircase, they might have encountered Oswald on his way down.
Even if Oswald had already descended below the fifth floor, they would have been close enough to him on the staircase to have heard him running down it.
THE ROUTE to Parkland Hospital would take President Kennedy right past the Trade Mart, where a thousand people awaited his arrival.
Ron Jenkins, a reporter for Mobile Unit 6 at station KBOX, was in position outside the Trade Mart.
As Jenkins watched the motorcade speed past him, the wail of multiple sirens almost drowned out his voice.
BACK IN Dealey Plaza, Arnold Rowland and his wife already knew something was terribly wrong.
If Lee Harvey Oswald had succeeded in assassinating General Walker seven months ago in April, perhaps his thirst for blood would have been sated.
And if Marina Oswald had reported that attempted murder to the police, perhaps on November 22 her husband would have been languishing in jail instead of lurking in a sixth-floor window.
If Lee Oswald had obtained permission that fall to return to Russia or enter Cuba, perhaps he would not have been in Dallas this day.
If Marina had disposed of her husband’s rifle when she had discovered it in Ruth Paine’s station wagon after her trip back home from New Orleans to Texas, perhaps Lee would not have bought another one.
If on the night of Thursday, November 21, Marina had agreed that she and the girls would move to a new apartment in Dallas with Lee, perhaps that gesture of love would have turned his heart away from murder.
If Marina had just moved the rifle from its hiding place in Ruth Paine’s garage, perhaps Lee would not have found it in time to bring it to work on the morning of Friday, November 22.
If on that morning the weather forecast for cloudy skies and precipitation over Dallas had proven true and the Secret Service had installed the rainproof plastic bubble top on the president’s limousine, perhaps it would have deflected any bullets fired at the car.
If John Kennedy had not been so stubborn about his habit of riding through cities in a convertible, perhaps Oswald would have never tried to kill him.
If Kennedy’s agents, the “Ivy League Charlatans,” had disobeyed their boss and had stood on the back of the open car during the motorcade, perhaps Lee Harvey Oswald might never have had a clear shot at the back of JFK’s head.
If Bonnie Ray Williams and Harold Norman had gone up to the sixth floor to watch the parade with Jarman, perhaps they would have stopped Oswald from ever firing a second shot—or a third one.
If Arnold Rowland had told someone that there was a man with a rifle in the window, perhaps the assassination might have been prevented.
And if Special Agent William Greer had swerved or accelerated the limousine after the second shot, perhaps the president would have survived his wound and Oswald would have missed the third shot, just as he had the first.
CBS did not possess the technology to interrupt scheduled, pretaped programming and get a reporter’s face on the air immediately.
The television camera needed twenty minutes to warm up, and it was not even in the vicinity of the news desk.
Marina Oswald, knowing that the president was in Dallas, had been watching television all morning.
The black-and-white images flickering on the screen were a poor substitute for the full-color, live, and in-person sights she would have enjoyed if Lee had granted her wish to see the president’s motorcade.
When Ruth Paine left the house earlier in the morning to take her children to a doctor’s appointment, she had left the television on for Marina.
She told Marina, who could hardly speak English, that the announcer on TV had just said the president had been shot.
Seconds after Cronkite announced the news, another printed bulletin was thrust into his hands.
President Kennedy shot today just as his motorcade left downtown Dallas.
Everyone knew the story of PT-109 and John Kennedy’s close brush with death during the Second World War.
Millions of people began to hope and pray that Kennedy’s wounds were not fatal.
Only a handful of people—Clint Hill and some of the Secret Service detail and Merriman Smith and a few other journalists—knew the awful truth.
But Smith was reluctant to report it without official confirmation from the White House staff.
Once the CBS network was able to broadcast both image and sound, Cronkite appeared on camera for the first time and continued to read news bulletins.
Within one hour of the shooting, more than three quarters of the American people knew what had happened.
AS LEE Oswald walked down Elm Street, the driver of President Kennedy’s car raced to Parkland Hospital, and Dallas police officers radioed ahead to advise the emergency-room staff to stand by to receive the victim of a severe gunshot wound.
In the minds of the five unwounded passengers, it seemed to go on forever.
The two Secret Service agents in the front seat could do nothing to help the president other than get him to the hospital as fast as possible, reaching speeds of more than 80 miles per hour.
In the jump seats behind the agents, Nellie Connally tended to her stricken husband.
His wounds were painful, he was losing blood, and he lapsed in and out of consciousness.
As Nellie held him in her arms, she promised him that everything would be all right.
Behind the Connallys, the backseat was a tangle of intertwined arms and legs and bodies.
After Clint Hill had saved Jackie from falling to the street and pushed her back inside the car, she grabbed the president and held him close.
Hill sprawled on top of Jackie and the president to shield them from any further gunfire.
In his awkward, spread-eagled position over Kennedy and his wife, it was hard to hang on as the car reached top speed.
Under Hill’s human shield, the Kennedys rode to Parkland in contorted, sideways positions, lying partly on the backseat and partly on the floor.
She remembered the puzzled, astonished look Oswald’s bullet had frozen on the president’s face.
LESS THAN ten minutes after the third shot, the presidential limousine careened into the emergency-room driveway at Parkland Hospital, followed by the Secret Service trail car and the vice president’s vehicle.
There were no medical carts awaiting the stricken president at the entrance.
They lifted the broken body of Governor Connally from his seat, and his wife exited the vehicle.
The president’s bodyguards wanted to snatch him from the backseat as quick as they could and rush him inside.
Once Clint Hill got out of the car, the other agents got a clear view of the backseat for the first time.
Agents bent over Kennedy to lift him out of the car, but Jackie would not let him go.
She had wrapped her arms tight around him and cradled his head in her lap.
Please, they told her, they needed to get the president inside so the doctors could treat him.
Clint Hill, the agent she trusted most, beseeched her to release her husband.
During the wild ride from Dealey Plaza, the Secret Service had already assigned some of the president’s agents to Johnson.
In the car, Johnson’s agent Rufus Youngblood told him, “An emergency exists.
As soon as the vice president’s car arrived at the hospital, Youngblood and other agents hustled him inside.
JFK was still in his limousine, and the agents did not allow Johnson to approach the president’s car.
Lady Bird glimpsed a splash of color—a pink suit—as she was rushed into Parkland.
Youngblood asked a hospital staffer to lead the Johnson party to a quiet, out-of-the-way room.
When they got there, LBJ leaned against a wall and gazed into Lady Bird’s eyes.
When the first reporters arrived at Parkland, the president had still not been removed from the limousine.
Merriman Smith was the first journalist to see the wounded John Kennedy.
We were standing literally a couple feet from the car, starring down at Kennedy.
He was lying with the side of his head exposed and his head in Jackie’s lap.
I was not conscious of any wound to the head, so that part of his head was hidden, probably deliberately by Jackie.
CLINT HILL’S intuition and close relationship with Jackie told him why she was covering her husband’s head with her arms and her body.
Now no one standing there would see the president’s horrible wound or his eyes fixed wide open in a Stare.
Jackie released her hold, and Secret Service men lifted John Kennedy’s unconscious body from the backseat.
KBOX reporter Ron Jenkins had chased the president’s limousine from the Trade Mart to Parkland.
By the time his mobile unit got there, police officers had blocked the entry.
We do not and cannot confirm the reports at this time that the president has been shot.
One witness says that he definitely was shot—that he was shot twice—that he saw the president slump in his seat.
The journalist had managed to slip inside the building before police sealed it off.
LEE HARVEY Oswald was on the run—and he did not have much of an escape plan.
If he had owned a car, he could have driven himself out of the city and as far away from Dallas as he could get, possibly fleeing the country to Mexico.
After Abraham Lincoln’s assassination, Booth had a fast horse standing behind Ford’s Theatre, a planned escape route, and the names and locations of sympathizers who might help him during his escape south from Washington.
He walked seven blocks on Elm Street, then at 12:40 P.M. , he flagged down a passing city bus that was headed in the direction he wanted to go.
Although Oswald was not standing at a scheduled bus stop, the driver opened the door and let him board anyway.
But before the bus could get near the Depository, heavy traffic slowed its pace to almost a standstill.
The night he tried to murder General Walker, it was dark, and traffic was light.
The man who had just shot the president of the United States was stuck in traffic, trying to flee on a public bus.
Realizing the ridiculousness of his position, Oswald stood up, walked to the front of the bus, took a transfer, and asked the driver to let him off.
Within a few minutes, at about 12:47 pm. , he caught a taxi to his rooming house.
Oswald did not want the driver to know where he lived, so he did not give him his numbered address but had the taxi drop him a few blocks away from his rooming house.
When he arrived, the proprietor of the rooming house was watching news of the assassination on television.
He hurried to his room, changed jackets, picked up his revolver and some ammunition.
Then, after a couple of minutes, he left at 1:03 pm. without saying a word.
Perhaps he hoped to get to the bus station and buy a ticket to Mexico—he still had enough money on him for that, although not for much more.
AT THE Trade Mart, a rumor spread from table to table that President Kennedy had been shot.
AT PARKLAND, the Secret Service agents and hospital staffers rushed the president into trauma room one.
Assistant White House press secretary Malcolm Kilduff watched as Jackie Kennedy, “her hair flying and dripping with blood,” helped push the stretcher through the halls.
They lifted the president from the cart and laid him on his back upon the examination table.
From throughout Parkland Hospital, doctors rushed to the emergency room.
Others were unneeded voyeurs who wanted only to lay eyes upon the president so that one day they could say that they had been there.
Without official confirmation, Smith did not want to report what Clint Hill had told him—that the president was already dead.
An unknown sniper has fired three shots at President Kennedy in Dallas.
While doctors worked on the president, some of the Secret Service agents worked on the car.
To prevent curiosity seekers from peering into the backseat or news reporters from snapping photographs of the blood and gore, agents mounted a top—a hardtop, not the clear plastic bubble top—to the convertible.
Then they got steel buckets filled with water and towels and began to wash the backseat and the floor.
A young man, I assume he was a Secret Service man, with a sponge and a bucket of red water . . . was trying to wipe up the blood and what looked like flakes of flesh and brains in the back seat.
The red roses were in the front seat.” rl TS srt ‘ al i i The president’s limousine at Parkland Hospital.
Secret Service agents attached a hardtop and tried to wash away the president’s blood.
Everything in it, including possible bullet fragments, should have been left as is and preserved for the investigation that was sure to follow the assassination.
It was as though they believed, through some faulty logic, that if they could just wipe away the evidence of the crime, they could turn back the clock and pretend it had never happened.
Jackie walked into the room where desperate surgeons worked to save her husband’s life.
The appearance of the president’s wife, a haunting pale figure in the bright pink suit, shocked the doctors.
Blood streaked her face, saturated her white gloves, and stained her suit and stockings.
She nudged one of the doctors, and without speaking she held out her cupped hands.
If John Kennedy had been any other patient, the doctors would have already pronounced him dead, perhaps even dead on arrival at Parkland Hospital.
But this was the president of the United States—they had to try everything.
As a last resort, one of the surgeons began to massage the president’s heart, hoping to stimulate a rhythmic beat.
They contained John Kennedy’s suit coat, pants, shirt, tie, and other garments.
As the room emptied, Jackie Kennedy approached the table on which her husband lay dead.
Then she removed her wedding ring and slipped it onto one of his fingers.
Assistant White House press secretary Malcolm Kilduff needed to find Vice President Lyndon Johnson to tell him that John Kennedy was dead.
Kilduff went to the holding room where the Secret Service had hidden Johnson from view.
LBJ’s bodyguards had kept him far from trauma room one, so he had no personal knowledge of the president’s condition.
No, LBJ told him, it would be better to wait until after he had left the hospital for Love Field and returned to the safety of Air Force One.
Agent Rufus Youngblood decided he should escort the new president to the plane with as little fanfare as possible.
There would be no entourage, no big motorcade accompanied by police cars and motorcycles with their screaming, attention-getting sirens.
And Youngblood dared not put Johnson in SS-100-X, the presidential limousine.
Instead, Johnson got into an unmarked car that gave no outward clue to the identity of its precious passenger.
At Parkland Hospital, at 1:33 pm. , Mac Kilduff walked into a room to make a statement to the journalists who awaited him there.
There are strong indications that he may have already expired, although that is not official.
The sound of papers rustling in his hand—the latest bulletins from United Press—went over the air.
At 1:38 PM. , a visibly shaken Walter Cronkite appeared on CBS television and made this announcement.
Just a few weeks ago he had enjoyed the privilege of conducting a one-onone, sit-down television interview with President Kennedy.
THROUGHOUT THE nation, people at home that afternoon sat in their living rooms, riveted by television and radio alerts.
Others gathered in quiet groups around office televisions sets and radios.
Millions of people working that day were out to lunch when Kennedy was shot, and they heard the news when restaurants tuned their TVs and radios to news broadcasts.
On the streets, many people gathered in front of appliance stores and watched the silent televisions on display behind plate-glass windows.
Drivers stopped in traffic and got out of their cars to talk to other drivers.
When newspapers started publishing special editions that afternoon, frantic customers snapped up the copies as soon as they were delivered to newsstands, drugstores, and other outlets.
In Nashville, Tennessee, the way that word of the assassination came to David Lipscomb High School was representative of how the news arrived at schools across the nation.
Tommy Ingram, editor in chief of the school newspaper, the Pony Express, reacted fast to the breaking news.
Lola Sue Scobey, secretary of the student body said, “We don’t realize how historical this day is.
Principal Damon Daniel summoned his stunned students to an assembly program.
Ingram had one of his staffers take photographs in the halls and at the assembly, and those reaction shots captured weeping teachers and dazed students.
Later, the National Scholastic Press Association honored the Pony Express by giving the paper its coveted All-American rating and naming it a Medalist, the association’s highest award.
Tommy did not know it, but Seigenthaler was a friend of John and Robert Kennedy.
While it was on its way, hospital staffers washed the president’s body and wrapped his head in towels and sheets of plastic so his blood would not stain the silk lining of the coffin.
When the coffin arrived, funeral-home workers wheeled it into the emergency room.
Robert Kennedy had insisted on setting up the line so that J Edgar Hoover could not avoid taking his calls.
Hoover had great antipathy for all the Kennedys, but he disliked Bobby most of all.
The director judged the Kennedys to be hypocrites and moral failures, and Hoover knew all about the president’s indiscretions with women, going back to the young naval officer’s World War II affair with a probable Nazi spy, the beautiful Danish blond journalist Inga Arvad.
The director, a veteran of decades of Washington intrigue and turf battles, bristled at the presence of the special phone on his desk.
But the attorney general was his superior in rank, and Hoover had to submit to what he believed was a humiliation.
Robert Kennedy was in McLean, Virginia, having lunch at his expansive home, Hickory Hill, on the outskirts of Washington, less than a half-hour drive from the Department of Justice at Ninth and Pennsylvania Avenues.
Bobby, his wife Ethel, and two Justice Department lawyers, United States Attorney Robert Morgenthau and his assistant, were sitting by the pool and eating sandwiches.
AT THE United States Capitol, press liaison Richard Riedel walked onto the floor of the Senate and said, “The president has been shot.
JFK’s brother, Senator Edward “Ted” Kennedy, happened to be presiding over the chamber.
Whenever the president of the Senate—Vice President Lyndon Johnson—was absent, senators took turns wielding the authority of the gavel.
He did not know that Bobby had already heard what he was about to tell him.
Earl Rose, Dallas County medical examiner, told agent Roy Kellerman that the corpse could not be removed until after an autopsy was performed in Texas.
I am Special Agent in Charge of the White House Detail of the Secret Service.
Admiral George Burkley, the president’s physician, joined the argument, telling Rose that they could not keep Mrs.
A justice of the peace, who had the authority to overrule Rose, showed up.
At 2:08 pm. , the agents began to roll the coffin through the emergency room to the white hearse waiting outside.
As much as JFK’s Irish mafia, the agents on his detail had grown to love him.
They marched right past the State officials, out the door, and to the hearse.
John Kennedy’s loyalists had no way of knowing that they had made a serious mistake.
Their obstructions and the resulting failure to conduct an autopsy in Dallas within a few hours of the murder would come to haunt the history of John Kennedy’s assassination for the next fifty years.
The intense display of emotions by Kennedy’s grieving staff and Secret Service detail at Parkland Hospital, although understandable, served the nation poorly, and would, in time and for decades to come, create widespread suspicion and mistrust about the facts of the assassination and encourage many wild theories about the murder.
By coincidence, a Dallas policeman driving his car through the neighborhood spotted Oswald walking on the sidewalk.
Oswald matched it in a general way, so Tippit decided to pull over to the curb and have a word with him.
The thirty-nine-year-old policeman stopped the car and called out to Oswald through the open passenger-side window.
In a casual way, he leaned on the top edge of the passenger door, looked inside, and conversed with Tippit.
Witnesses who saw the encounter were too far away to overhear the exchange.
Whatever Oswald said, it must not have satisfied Tippit, because he swung open his car door and got out.
When he stood up in the street, he did not reach for his holster and place his hand on the butt of his revolver.
Tippit started to walk around the front hood of his car, toward the curb where Oswald waited for him.
A moment later, at 1:15 pm. , Oswald pulled his revolver from his jacket pocket, aimed it at the policeman’s chest, and opened fire.
He had taken Tippit by surprise and shot him three times before the policeman could even draw his own pistol.
Then Oswald pointed his pistol at the helpless officer, took aim, shot him in the head, and killed him.
Yes, Oswald had already committed a horrible crime—he had murdered the president of the United States.
The rifle was an impersonal, antiseptic weapon that allowed Lee to remain detached from the ugly reality of his crime.
He did not have to look into the backseat of the car at the blood and brains.
And he did not see the surprised, eyes-wide-open stare his third shot had frozen on the president’s face.
But now, an hour later, Lee Harvey Oswald committed murder of another kind—up close and personal.
When he leaned on the top edge of the passenger side door, he had bent down and chatted with the officer; he was close enough to the policeman to smell him.
Then, when Tippit stepped out of the car, Oswald had shot him at close range.
As Tippit lay dying on a city street, his lungs emitted a gurgling sound.
He no longer had the strength to grasp his revolver, raise his arm, and shoot his assailant.
Oswald raised his arm and pointed the barrel of his revolver at Tippit’s head.
He walked away, swung open the cylinder of his revolver, pulled out the four empty cartridges, and tossed them on the ground.
One man heard him mutter “poor dumb cop” or “poor damn cop” as he fled.
Some of them followed him, and then, from a safe distance, began chasing him.
Less than one hour after the assassination of President Kennedy, but without knowing they were in pursuit of the president’s killer, a small posse of several citizens was chasing Lee Harvey Oswald through the streets of Dallas.
As he ran, Oswald loaded four fresh bullets into his pistol and pushed the cylinder into firing position.
The only logical reason for Oswald to murder a police officer was to avoid immediate arrest.
As soon as they reported the shooting, the whole neighborhood would be crawling within minutes with police officers and detectives hunting for him.
If Oswald had not killed Tippit, he would have had more time to carry out his escape.
He had not yet been identified by name as a suspect in the assassination of the president.
Once they discovered Oswald’s absence, they would have sent men to his boardinghouse; they would discover that he had already been there and gone.
Then, within a few hours, they would have discovered strange things about him —his discharge from the Marine Corps; his interest in Russia, Cuba, and Communism; and his defection to the Soviet Union and return to the United States.
Buell Frazier would tell them about the curtain rods that morning, and he could lead them to Ruth Paine’s house and to Oswald’s Russian-born wife, Marina.
Also, once they found the rifle, they could begin tracing its serial number to the place that sold it and to the name of the person who bought it.
Enough to give him at least a couple hours, and maybe more, as a head start.
If Oswald was lucky, the authorities might not name him as a suspect or show his picture on TV until late that afternoon or the evening.
The newspapers might not even print his name and photograph until the next morning.
Not until he killed a policeman did he become the object of a furious manhunt.
LYNDON JOHNSON waited aboard Air Force One for the hearse carrying Kennedy’s body to arrive at the airport.
Some of Johnson’s political advisers were urging him to fly back to Washington right away and leave Mrs.
Kennedy behind to catch Air Force Two, the vice presidential jet, later in the day.
Nothing was more important than protecting the life of the new president.
The best way to do that was to get Lyndon Johnson back to the capital as soon as possible.
If this was a conspiracy, and if LBJ was the next target, he needed to get out of Dallas.
In one of his first acts as chief executive, he decided they would not fly back to Washington immediately and abandon Mrs.
Because she refused to leave without her husband’s corpse and because Johnson refused to depart without her, he ordered Air Force One to wait.
Johnson also decided that he would take the oath of office on the ground in Dallas before the plane took off.
Jackie refused to be separated from her husband, so she sat in back, next to the casket.
The modest motorcade—the white Cadillac hearse followed by four cars—from the hospital to the airport was not as grand as the one that had left Love Field for downtown Dallas just two hours ago.
They had broken off the bouquet during the mayhem in the presidential limousine.
Secret Service agents and members of President Kennedy’s staff carry his casket aboard Air Force One.
At the airport, Kennedy’s aides and Secret Service agents carried the heavy burden up the stairs of an airline ramp and onto the plane.
They could barely lift it—it weighed eight hundred pounds, not counting the added weight of the president’s body.
To make the coffin narrower, they had to break the carrying handles off its sides so they could push it onto the plane.
They secured it in a small cabin near the back, where some seats had been removed to accommodate it.
Although the coffin was now on board, Lyndon Johnson did not want Air Force One to depart Dallas until he took the oath of office and was sworn in as the thirty-sixth president of the United States.
Johnson, a Texan, had summoned an old friend, a local federal district court judge named Sarah T Hughes, to rush to Love Field to swear him in.
This was all a great bit of historical drama, because in fact the swearing in was a formality to confirm what had already happened.
Johnson did not need to take the oath in order to assume the office— by authority of the United States Constitution he had already become president upon the death of his predecessor.
But Lyndon Johnson wanted to take the oath at once as a symbol of the continuity of the American government.
And he wanted the ceremony photographed to transmit that symbol around the world.
A White House photographer, Captain Cecil Stoughton, was aboard the plane.
He loaded two cameras with film and planned in his head where he and the new president should stand in the cramped cabin to create the most solemn and impressive photograph.
The image would convey that Johnson was now in charge of the government.
By tradition, when a president took the oath of office, he stood alone, raised his right hand, and repeated the words of the oath spoken to him by the chief justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.
It was a bold and, in the opinion of some of President Kennedy’s staffers, an outrageous and offensive request.
Johnson realized that his request demanded sensitivity, delicacy, and tact.
Before he became vice president, when he was a United States senator and held the powerful post of majority leader, he was renowned for his legendary skill at persuading other people to do what he asked.
But it was one thing to strong-arm a fellow politician in a backroom deal over a piece of legislation in Congress, and quite another to handle the bereaved and beloved First Lady of the United States, who was still in a state of shock after seeing her husband murdered in front of her eyes.
Lyndon and Lady Bird Johnson went to Jacqueline Kennedy’s private compartment to offer their condolences.
Johnson explained that he had summoned a federal judge to administer the presidential oath aboard Air Force One before the plane flew back to Washington.
Believing she had agreed, Johnson left her alone to compose herself until Judge Hughes arrived.
Her suit, white gloves, and stockings were caked with dried blood—the bright red, wet blood spilled two hours ago had, after exposure to oxygen, solidified and taken on a darker color.
To prepare for the swearing-in ceremony, she retired to her small bathroom.
Johnson spotted two of Kennedy’s aides and said, “Do you want to ask Mrs.
She emerged from her room and entered the cabin where Lyndon Johnson, Judge Hughes, the photographer, and a number of the passengers awaited her.
Merriman Smith was on the plane as a pool reporter and watched the scene unfold.
Cecil Stoughton had started taking pictures of the scene even before Jackie walked in.
Kennedy walked down the narrow corridor from her bed chamber and into the lounge.
Her appearance startled everyone—they had assumed she would change into a fresh outfit.
Stoughton raised one of his cameras, and then, as Judge Hughes read the oath and Johnson repeated it, the photographer took several shots before switching to his second camera.
The only other sounds in the cabin were the clicking shutters of the cameras. * -_* , , k a a <i.
Ra Cpuses Hy eter ay. be an oe a al Rag. ‘ iL cee Let] Lyndon Johnson being sworn in aboard Air Force One before it departs Dallas.
Jackie’s appearance horrified Stoughton, who aimed his lens high to crop out the lower part of her body to hide the bloody skirt and stockings.
At 2:38 pM. , Johnson raised his right hand and was sworn in as the thirty-sixth president of the United States.
Lyndon Johnson had already been president for almost two hours, but when the oath was done, his presidency officially began.
And Stoughton had taken what remains, to this day, perhaps the most iconic, riveting, and harrowing photographs in all of American history.
After the swearing in, Jackie returned to the back of the plane, to the casket, where she found Ken O’Donnell, Larry O’Brien, and Dave Powers.
Before Air Force One left Dallas, Stoughton hurried off the plane with his cameras and film.
It was his job to rush to develop the pictures so they could be published in the evening newspapers throughout the country.
Within a few minutes, Air Force One hurtled down the runway and took flight for Washington.
BY THE time Oswald made it to a commercial district on West Jefferson Boulevard, he had lost the people who had followed him from the Tippit murder scene.
When he heard a police siren, he turned his back to the street and pretended to study a display of footwear behind the plate-glass windows of a shoe store.
If anyone had followed him there, one telephone call would summon a dozen police cars to the scene.
Police departments were, and still are, relentless in pursuing a criminal who has shot one of their own.
Even if Oswald had evaded his pursuers, his failure to buy a movie ticket might provoke theater employees to call the police to report a nonpaying customer.
Either way, Oswald could find himself trapped inside a building with no escape.
When he saw Oswald duck inside, he persuaded employees there to call the police.
Now he sat in the darkness of a theater watching a matinee showing of a movie about World War II titled War Is Hell.
Several police cars pulled up in front of the theater, and detectives ran inside toward the screen and climbed onto the stage.
One of them grabbed his arm and tried to twist the revolver out of his hand.
At 1:50 pm. , one hour and twenty minutes after the president had been shot, Oswald was in custody.
They were not sure they had caught Kennedy’s killer— although they had their suspicions—but they were convinced they had just apprehended the cold-blooded murderer of Officer Tippit.
Oswald kept refusing to identify himself, so a policeman pulled the wallet out of his pocket and searched it for identification.
When the car arrived at the City Hall garage, the police advised their suspect that he might want to turn his face away from the journalists and TV cameras waiting for him there.
LEE HARVEY Oswald was about to face the first of several police interrogations.
He would be pitted against a savvy homicide detective, Will Fritz, a department legend and veteran master of extracting confessions.
He would become the suspect’s principal interrogator in what would become a multiday game of catand-mouse with the chatty assassin.
From his first encounter with Oswald, Fritz’s intuition told him this was the man who had murdered the president.
In the hours ahead, Dallas police, FBI, and Secret Service would not be the only ones allowed to question him.
Others who had no business doing so, who could help spoil the legal case against Oswald, would soon have access to him too.
By 2:00 pM., the arresting officers at the Texas Theatre had brought Oswald to police headquarters.
When detectives took him into an interrogation room, a man there recognized Oswald at once.
In his wallet, one piece of identification said his name was Hidell, and another said it was Oswald.
At 2:20 pm. on Friday, November 22, Oswald was moved to the office of Captain Fritz.
The Dallas district attorney, Henry Wade, had jurisdiction over the Tippit case, as he did over all murders in Dallas.
Even when it became obvious that Oswald was also a suspect in the murder of President Kennedy, Wade and the Dallas police retained control of Oswald.
No federal statute made killing a president a federal crime, so the United States attorney and the FBI had no power to seize Oswald from the custody of the Dallas Police Department.
Captain Fritz entered the office and, by 2:30 pM., the first interrogation of Oswald had begun.
Oswald told him that a lady he knew recommended him for the job, and that he got it through her.
He wanted to warm Oswald up with a series of routine questions to get him talking.
No, Oswald said, he lived on Beckley in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas.
One was James Hosty, the special agent who had called on Marina Oswald a few times after she and Lee had moved to Texas.
Just when the homicide detective was having a calm chat with his prisoner and getting to know him, the FBI barged in and infuriated Oswald.
Free of the cuffs, he might spring from out of his chair, tackle one of the detectives or special agents, and grab for a gun.
Fritz settled on a compromise, telling his men to remove the cuffs and recuff Oswald’s hands in front of his body.
Now that Oswald appeared to have calmed down, Fritz hit him with his first serious question.
Hosty interrupted Fritz’s line of questioning and asked Oswald if he had ever been to Mexico.
He did not want the FBI agent to take the interrogation off track or anger Oswald.
He asked Lee if he had a Russian wife, if he had ever been to Russia, and for how long.
It was obvious to Fritz that allowing the FBI agent to question the suspect was counterproductive.
Whenever the police detective soothed Oswald and got him talking, Hosty provoked him.
AT THE Paine house, Ruth and Marina watched television coverage of the assassination.
Soon the police, following up Depository employment records, drove out to Ruth’s house.
When they arrived, the screen door was closed but the front one was open.
One of the policemen reached down to pick up the blanket and its contents.
Top aides to John Kennedy took turns visiting her at the back of the plane, where they reminisced and told stories of happier days.
Dave Powers told stories about the president’s trip to Ireland that June.
Surrounded by the men who would miss Jack the most, Jackie was overcome with emotion.
During the flight, passengers divided into two camps, those who had served President Kennedy, and those who worked for Lyndon Johnson.
For the duration of the flight, an uncomfortable tension filled the air.
Some Kennedy aides had never liked LBJ, whose chief nemesis had been the president’s own brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
Some of President Kennedy’s staffers were snobs who believed that Johnson, who had attended a teacher’s college in Texas, not an elite, Ivy League university as many of them had, was their social and intellectual inferior.
Behind his back, they called him “cornpone” and mocked him as a crude country hick from the Texas Hill Country.
In truth, Johnson was a master politician with a record of important achievements.
Johnson’s earthiness was a mask that often concealed his sophisticated grasp of events and his keen understanding of the minds and behavior of others.
Without Johnson as his vice presidential running mate in 1960, it is unlikely that John Kennedy would ever have been elected president in the first place.
In their anguish, some Kennedy staffers now resented Johnson for becoming president.
Forty thousand feet below the jet carrying home the body of John Kennedy and the new president, Lyndon Johnson, was a stunned nation grieving its fallen leader.
By midafternoon, almost everyone in America knew about the assassination.
On the flight back, Jackie Kennedy began to plan her husband’s funeral.
Before she was done, she would oversee the biggest, most majestic public funeral in American history since the death of Abraham Lincoln ninetyeight years earlier.
IN DALLAS, at 3:40m. , Captain Fritz returned to his office and continued to question Oswald.
Oswald said that he didn’t want to stay there all the time because Ruth Paine and her husband did not get along too well.
Fritz asked Oswald some questions about his schooling, his background, and whether he owned a car.
It was part of Fritz’s interrogation style to shift from one subject to another, unrelated one, to keep a suspect off balance and never allow him to get too comfortable.
Another of Fritz’s tactics was to ask a suspect a question he already knew the answer to, and which the suspect could answer truthfully without incriminating himself.
Observing how a suspect behaved while he was telling the truth would help Fritz intuit when he was telling a lie.
Fritz asked what part of the building he was in at the time the president was shot.
He was a master at questioning murder suspects, and Oswald would not have been the first one he had lulled into confessing his crime.
I hit the officer in the show, and he hit me in the eye and I guess I deserved it.
Fritz asked Oswald what he did in the Soviet Union, and Lee told him he worked in an electronics factory.
The detective might have been curious to see if Lee would lie about the sixth floor.
Oswald told Fritz that the books were kept on the third through sixth floors.
A detective walked into Fritz’s office to tell him that some Secret Service agents, including Forrest Sorrels, were waiting to speak with him.
But the police detective had already learned several things about the suspect.
He was not one of those people who, once in custody, would clam up and refuse to say a word.
His disdain for the authorities oozed from his voice, facial expressions, and body language.
Agent Hosty had gotten under Lee’s skin and caused him to lose his temper.
Fritz concluded that he, and not the FBI or the Secret Service, should remain Oswald’s principal interrogator.
Too much direct interaction between Lee and the men from those federal agencies might be counterproductive and ruin the trust that the wily old Texan cop was trying to build with Oswald.
After decades on the job, Will Fritz had a sixth sense about innocence and guilt, and truth and deception.
The detective led the Secret Service agents to a room behind his office, and then had Oswald brought in.
Sorrels said no, but informed Oswald that he was free to be represented by the attorney of his choice.
He got Oswald talking about his time in the Soviet Union, but Lee became impatient.
LBJ was uncomfortable and wanted to get off the phone as soon as possible.
Rose Kennedy did not want to linger on the phone any more than the Johnsons did.
IN DALLAS, Captain Fritz had wanted to send Oswald downstairs for a lineup.
At 4:10 pPMo., three detectives escorted Lee out of the Homicide and Robbery office and into the hall filled with reporters, photographers, and a television camera.
Anyone in that hallway, outraged by the president’s murder, could pull a pistol from a pocket or a camera bag and shoot Oswald.
It was a classic Oswald response, one that harked back to his New Orleans radio interviews.
That August, when asked whether he had tried to renounce his American citizenship, Oswald evaded the question and did not give a direct answer.
Instead, he said people who renounced their citizenship were not allowed to reenter the United States.
He had attempted to do that very thing as soon as he had arrived in the Soviet Union.
Now, in police custody, Oswald had just exhibited the same verbal and logical tic.
They found in his left pants pocket five bullets for his .38-caliber revolver.
It was obvious that since his arrest Lee had not undergone a proper search.
On his person the detectives also discovered his bus transfer, a few insignificant documents, and thirteen dollars and eighty-seven cents.
Crowds of mourners had flocked there to watch the jet land and to see Kennedy’s flag-draped coffin removed from the plane.
It was not unlike the scene earlier that day when the president landed at Love Field in Dallas.
Robert Kennedy, members of the cabinet, and senior government and military officials stood and watched.
The president’s brother rushed to the plane and boarded it through a front door.
He ran down the aisle, brushing past everyone in his path, including the new president.
There was only one person in the world Bobby wanted to see, and she was at the back of the plane, sitting by a flag-draped coffin.
The American people were about to get their first look at Jackie Kennedy since the assassination almost five hours ago.
All across the country, millions of people staring at their television screens gasped when they saw the bloodstains on her clothing.
Jackie had still not changed out of the clothes she had worn in Dealey Plaza.
She wanted them to bear witness to the bloodstains on her jacket, skirt, and stockings.
On television screens, as she walked to the navy ambulance, viewers saw that her legs were smeared with copious amounts of blood.
She wanted to sear these images into the collective memory of the American people so that they would never forget.
To this day, decades after the assassination, the mere sight of an image of her in that suit triggers flashbacks in the minds of every person who remembers November 22, 1963.
President Lyndon Johnson strode toward the lights, microphones, and cameras.
On the night of November 22, President Johnson composed two handwritten letters.
They were not orders to important United States government officials or communications to world leaders.
Instead, LBJ addressed them to the two children who had lost their father.
IN DALLAS, another plane departed Love Field after Air Force One had taken off.
It was the C-130 cargo plane that had ferried the president’s Lincoln Continental limousine to Texas.
Secret Service agents had driven the car from Parkland Hospital back to Love Field.
At the hospital, an agent removed the two flags— one bearing the presidential seal and the other the American flag—that had hung from the flagpoles on the hood during the motorcade.
Upon the car’s arrival in Washington, agents drove it to the White House garage, where it was hidden from view.
Color photographs taken of it there reveal bloodstains on the two-tone blue leather upholstery.
FROM ANDREWS Air Force Base, President Kennedy’s body was not yet ready to go home to the White House.
First, accompanied by Jackie, a navy ambulance took him to Bethesda Naval Hospital, across the Maryland border from Washington.
Kennedy had been a naval officer, so Jackie, even before Air Force One had touched down, chose Bethesda Naval Hospital.
When Jackie entered the hospital, she was taken to a waiting room on the seventeenth floor.
As she settled in for a long night, the president’s brother Robert told her that a suspect had been arrested for her husband’s murder.
EST, the “little communist” was back in Captain Fritz’s office for more questioning.
At 7:28 PM., Oswald was questioned for ten minutes by federal agents, then was led out into a hall crammed with reporters.
In front of the cameras, Oswald remained evasive and did not give a direct answer.
The detective asked if he brought one with him when he came back to Dallas from New Orleans.
Oswald retorted that the people will forget that within a few days, and there will be another president.
AT BETHESDA the president’s casket was placed on a cart and wheeled to the room where pathologists and technicians waited to examine him.
Attendants removed his body from the casket, laid him on a table, and unwound the plastic wrapping.
They photographed his face, which had been undamaged by the bullets, and his head, which had been ravaged by one.
They photographed his neck wound, then rolled him over to photograph his back wound.
Doctors did not need to saw off the top of his head to recover what remained of his brain.
After examining it, they sealed it in a Stainless-steel container with a screw-top lid.
Hours passed, but Jackie Kennedy, still waiting on the seventeenth floor, refused to leave or to sleep.
IN BETHESDA, after the pathologists finished their work, the morticians arrived to prepare the president for burial.
Kennedy would choose an open-or closed-coffin viewing before the funeral, the undertakers prepared the president’s corpse for an open-coffin viewing.
They concealed the tracheotomy incision that the Dallas doctors had made in his neck.
Then they labored on their most difficult task, reconstructing the side of John Kennedy’s skull that the fatal bullet had blown open.
A White House courier brought a selection of eight of the president’s suits, four pairs of shoes, plus shirts and ties for the morticians to dress him.
As surgeons cut open President Kennedy’s corpse, Lee Harvey Oswald was giving a press conference in a hall in the Dallas police station.
Nobody has told me anything except that I am accused of, ah, of murdering a policeman.
The expression on Oswald’s face changed in an instant, to an appearance of stunned despair.
LEE HARVEY Oswald’s first official press conference had lasted six minutes.
It was odd that the prime suspect in the murder of the president of the United States was giving a press conference at all.
Oswald was taken back to his cell, only to be called out again for a second fingerprinting session.
Then, late in the night, Oswald was given a paraffin test to determine if he had fired a gun.
Oswald told him that he was wasting his time and that he did not know anything about the murders.
At 1:35 A.M., Lee Harvey Oswald was roused from his cell and taken to see a man on the fourth floor of city hall.
This early-morning summons could mean only one thing, and Oswald knew it.
He was told again that he would have the opportunity to contact the lawyer of his choice.
The morticians did not finish until after three A.M. on Saturday, November 23, but once they had, Jackie could take the president’s body home to the White House.
Jackie got in the gray navy ambulance and sat next to her husband’s coffin.
The driver, Bill Greer, the Secret Service agent who had driven the presidential limousine in the motorcade in Dallas, was behind the wheel.
The ambulance and a small motorcade left Bethesda at 3:56 A.M., making its way down Wisconsin Avenue to Massachusetts Avenue, then to Twentieth Street on its way to the White House.
In the middle of the night, those in the motorcade were surprised to see people standing vigil on the sidewalks and cars pulled over along the route.
Impromptu as it was, this was the slain president’s first funeral procession, the first of several in the days to come.
Taz Shepard, Kennedy’s naval aide, telephoned from the White House to the United States Marine Corps barracks at Eighth and I streets.
The Commander in Chief has been assassinated, and I want a squad at the White House double-quick.
At the barracks, a contingent of Marines awoke, donned their dress blue uniforms in record time, and arrived at the White House in seventeen minutes.
Flaming torches illuminated their path as they marched through the gate and onto the White House grounds.
They were in place before the ambulance carrying the president’s body arrived.
At 4:34m. , a military honor guard carried the coffin up the steps of the portico, through the hall, and into the East Room, where the body of Abraham Lincoln had once lain in repose.
It was the first public clue about what kind of funeral Jackie Kennedy had in mind.
This eerie scene, unfolding in silence in the middle of the night, was sad but touching in its simplicity.
For now, she went upstairs to the family suite on the second floor of the White House.
There in the privacy of her bedroom, she undressed, removing her suit, stockings, and other garments, stained by the tragedy she had suffered that day.
Under normal conditions, the Executive Mansion would be dark and almost empty at this hour.
But tonight a military honor guard in the East Room stood watch over a dead president through the night.
Every guest bedroom was occupied by Kennedy family members or close friends.
Jackie’s mother, at her daughter’s insistence, slept in the president’s bedroom.
The president’s children had been put to bed hours ago knowing that their father was dead but without the comfort of seeing their mother.
Cabinet members, military officers, and friends of Jackie roamed through the halls, held quiet conversations, took catnaps on furniture, ate sandwiches, or tried to do something.
One of them, Charlie Bartlett, had introduced young Jack and Jackie all those years ago at a dinner party at his home.
Anyone, and fortunately there were many, who knew him briefly and over long periods, felt that a bright and quickening impulse had come into his life.
He had uncommon courage, unfailing humor, a penetrating, ever curious intelligence, and over all a matchless grace.
He will not be replaced, nor will he be forgotten, for in truth he was a kind of cheerful lightning who touched us all.
We will remember always with love and sometimes, as the years pass and the story is retold, with a little wonder.
That lightsome tread, that debonair touch, that shock of chestnut hair, that beguiling grin, that shattering understatement—these are what we shall remember.
At eight fifteen on the morning of Saturday, November 23, she met with her children to talk to them about their father’s death.
She knew she would not arrive home before their bedtime, so Jackie’s mother deputized the children’s beloved nanny, Maud Shaw, to tell them.
Shaw did not want to do it and begged to be relieved of the responsibility of telling two young children their father was dead.
At 10:00m. on the twenty-third, Jackie attended a private mass in the East Room for the president’s friends and family.
Elsewhere in the White House, staff members were already busy cleaning out the Oval Office in the West Wing.
A tearful Evelyn Lincoln, John Kennedy’s personal secretary since his years in the Senate, gathered papers and personal mementoes from his desk.
A pair of JFK’s famous rocking chairs was removed at 1:31 P.M., loaded onto a handcart, and rolled across a driveway to the Old Executive Office Building, an annex of the White House.
A photograph of them, one turned upside down and stacked upon the other, became a symbol of the rapid transition.
There was a lot of grumbling among some of President Kennedy’s staffers about the new president.
A number of officials had advised Johnson to occupy the presidential office at once as a symbol of the continuity of government, and he had done so.
Johnson’s actions caused Kennedy staffers to murmur that it was unseemly and in poor taste for the new president to move into the White House so quickly.
But the Oval Office is in the West Wing, which is in a separate building that is connected to the main house by a colonnade.
Lyndon Johnson had not moved into the White House, which contained the historic rooms as well as the president’s private living quarters.
Johnson was emphatic that Jackie and her children should continue to live there as long as she wished.
Mary Todd Lincoln had stayed on in the White House for more than a month after her husband’s assassination, and Lyndon Johnson believed that Jackie Kennedy, and not he, should decide when she should move out.
As Jackie’s plans for the funeral evolved, she decided her husband should be buried at Arlington National Cemetery, the historic graveyard established during the Civil War on General Robert E Lee’s estate, across the Potomac River from the White House.
Thousands of soldiers from the Civil War, World War I, World War II, and the Korean War had been buried there.
On the way to Arlington, the motorcade stopped at the Pentagon to pick up Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara.
It was cold and raining when Jackie Kennedy arrived at Arlington Cemetery to inspect the proposed site for her husband’s grave.
It was a lovely spot of ground in front of the old Lee mansion, and it enjoyed a panoramic view of Washington.
Jackie remembered that when John had visited this spot a few months before, he said it was so beautiful that he could stay there forever.
IN DALLAS, Lee Harvey Oswald woke up on Saturday, November 23, after his first night in police custody.
Soon, through the unique serial number stamped into the weapon, the FBI would discover records proving that Oswald had ordered it by mail from a sporting goods store in Chicago.
They found the order form and also the postal money order Oswald had used to pay for the rifle.
After Oswald’s arrest, detectives subjected him to a total of twelve hours of questioning.
He actually seemed to enjoy the attention as he toyed with the Dallas police, FBI, and Secret Service interrogators.
At 10:35m. on Saturday, November 23, Oswald was brought to Captain Fritz’s office, and the questioning continued.
When he got off he got a transfer and used it to take another bus to the theatre where he was arrested.
There was no reason for him to lie about taking a cab—it would have been a harmless admission.
Fritz asked if he brought curtain rods to work on the morning of the assassination.
Oswald denied having a conversation with Wesley Frazier about curtain rods or taking them into the Depository.
And he did not tell Frazier that he was in the process of fixing up his apartment.
Or that the reason for his visit to Irving on the night of November 21 was to obtain some curtain rods from Mrs.
One was named “Junior” and he could not remember the name of the other one.
Fritz asked Oswald what friends or relatives of his lived nearby and whether he’d ever had any visitors at his rooming house on Beckley Street.
Oswald said he had never ordered guns, and did not have any receipts for any.
If Oswald had no receipts, he implied, then that must be proof that he had ordered no firearms.
Oswald admitted he bought it about seven months ago but refused to answer any more questions about the revolver or any other guns until he talked to a lawyer.
According to one witness to the interrogation, Oswald could not resist showing off his knowledge and superiority.
Oswald boasted that he was familiar with all types of questioning and would not make any statements.
Oswald said that the FBI was abusive and impolite when they spoke to Marina three weeks ago.
Oswald knew where the detective was going and wanted to foreclose any hint of motive.
He said he would not take one for the FBI in 1962, and he would not do it now for the Dallas police.
Fritz confronted Oswald with one of two Selective Service cards that he carried in his wallet at the time of his arrest.
But authentic United States military Selective Service cards did not use photographs, so this card was an obvious forgery.
Oswald refused to admit whether he signed the card with the name Hidell.
He conceded that he carried the card but refused to say for what purpose.
Fritz allowed Secret Service inspector Thomas Kelley to ask a question.
Oswald had been isolated from other prisoners and had not been allowed to watch television or see newspapers.
Unless a policeman, FBI agent, or Secret Service agent had told Oswald about Connally’s wounds, Oswald would not have known he had shot him too.
If Oswald replayed the assassination in his head, he might have wondered how he had managed to shoot a man he had never had in his sights.
WHILE JACKIE Kennedy was selecting a grave site for her husband, Marina Oswald was allowed to meet with her husband for the first time since the assassination.
She had not seen him for about thirty hours—enough time for him to ruin their lives.
Marina was afraid—afraid that her husband had finally gone and done something crazy, that he had actually murdered the president of the United States and a policeman.
And having grown up in a totalitarian state, she was afraid the United States government might imprison her or deport her to the Soviet Union.
Worse things than that have happened to innocent people in Communist countries who had any connection to enemies of the state.
At 1:15 pm. , Marina and her mother-in-law were taken to the fourthfloor visiting room.
He must have known his life with Marina and the children was over forever.
At worst, he would be put to death in the electric chair, probably within a year.
A few years earlier, Marina was an unsophisticated Russian teenage girl who found herself smitten with a minor immigrant celebrity who sweet-talked her into marriage and then into leaving her family and immigrating to America.
But life here was not what he promised, and he was not the man he had pretended to be.
Now, after she had entrusted him with her life and had borne him two children, his unstable nature had taken him on a quixotic psychological journey that had climaxed in the murder of the president of the United States.
As the wife of the accused assassin, she was fast becoming the most notorious woman in America.
If Lee Oswald had any sense of the enormity of what he had done to her— setting aside for a moment the crime he had committed against the president—he gave no sign of it now.
He remained calm and spoke as though nothing had happened, as though he was in jail for a traffic offense or a shoplifting charge.
That was the same advice he had given her in his note before he set out to assassinate General Walker.
But she did not need to see him again to reach a conclusion about his guilt.
He did not complain of mistreatment by the authorities, and that was not like him.
He was always a complainer, and now he sputtered no outraged proclamations of his innocence.
When Marina looked into her husband’s eyes, she knew, as she later told investigators, that he had killed the president.
AT 1:07 pm., a few minutes before Lee and Marina began their reunion, District Attorney Henry Wade gave an impromptu interview to the press on the fourth floor of the city jail.
In the spring and summer of 1865, a military court of nine judges tried eight of John Wilkes Booth’s alleged co-conspirators in the assassination of Abraham Lincoln and the attempted murder of Secretary of State William Seward.
That court sentenced four of the defendants to death, and they were hanged.
At 2:05 pM., Captain Will Fritz followed Wade’s comments with some of his own.
I can tell you that this case is cinched—this man killed the president.
FINALLY, AT 3:37 PM., Robert Oswald was allowed to see his brother, in the same room where Lee had met with Marina.
Look, they’ve got your pistol, they’ve got your rifle, and they’ve got you charged with shooting the president and a police officer.
Lee was under arrest for a double homicide, and his mind was distracted by the trivial subject of footwear for a toddler.
DALLAS POLICE paraded Lee Harvey Oswald many times before newspaper reporters and television cameras.
In a crowded hallway, they allowed him to make several public statements that were filmed and broadcast across the country.
The prosecutor discussed the case against Oswald in front of reporters and pronounced him guilty.
At one point, Oswald raised his handcuffed hands and, for several seconds, clenched his right fist into what appeared to be a Communist salute.
Another time, Oswald complained to journalists that his “fundamental hygienic rights” were being violated because the police would not allow him to take a shower.
He told reporters he had a cut above his eye because a policeman had hit him.
He asked for a lawyer several times, but the police and prosecutors ignored him.
A policeman walked through a crowded hallway holding Oswald’s rifle above his head like a cheap bowling trophy.
The Dallas Police Department allowed its headquarters to deteriorate into a carnival-like spectacle.
Shouting, pushing reporters packed the halls and, like jackals, became frenzied whenever the police teased them with a glimpse of their prisoner.
Then Oswald claimed, “I’m just a patsy,” by which he meant that he was the fall guy for whoever committed the crime.
When a third reporter asked if he was the gunman—“Did you fire that rifle?”—Oswald uttered an emotional denial.
No one checked IDs or searched the journalists who crowded the hallway.
The assassination had stained the city’s and its police department’s reputations.
There was disturbing talk that the people of Dallas shared some kind of collective guilt for the murder.
The police wanted the reporters to say good things about Dallas, so they gave the press free rein.
It was a fateful decision that impeded their investigation and put Oswald’s life in danger.
ELSEWHERE IN Dallas on November 23, word had gotten out about Abraham Zapruder’s home movie.
Journalists desperate to purchase the rights to his film went to his office to meet with him.
BACK AT the White House, after Jackie returned from Arlington Cemetery, she remained in seclusion.
Aside from the morning mass, she participated in no other events that day.
In two days, on Monday, November 25, she had to be ready to preside over two events that would test her body and soul.
With meticulous attention to detail, Jackie Kennedy threw herself into planning the event.
They uncovered historical details that had been forgotten since the Civil War, including the exact way that the White House entrances and East Room chandeliers had been draped in mourning with ribbons of black crepe paper.
In two days, on the day of his father’s funeral, he would be three years old.
ON THE afternoon of Saturday, November 23, at 4:45 pm., President Lyndon Johnson read to the nation over live radio and television his proclamation of a national day of mourning for President Kennedy.
Now, therefore, I, Lyndon B Johnson, President of the United States of America, do appoint Monday next, November 25, the day of the funeral service of President Kennedy, to be a national day of mourning throughout the United States.
I earnestly recommend the people to assemble on that day in their respective places of divine worship . . . and to pay their homage of love and reverence to the memory of a great and good man.
On the night of Saturday, November 23, reporters begged Police Chief Jesse Curry for a tip on when Oswald would be transferred from the jail in City Hall to the County Jail about a mile away.
Friday, through the middle of the night, and then all day Saturday into the evening.
They wanted to leave so they could take a break and rest, but they worried that the prisoner would be moved in the middle of the night when they were gone and that they would miss out on the story.
The chief told them it was safe for them to leave—and promised that the suspect would not be moved tonight.
Curry stepped out of Fritz’s third floor office to talk to the press to confirm that Oswald would be moved tomorrow morning.
ALL THROUGH the day of November 23, and into the night, the body of John F Kennedy lay in repose at the White House.
THE DEATH threats against Oswald began after midnight on Sunday, November 24.
Then at 2:30 A.M., an anonymous man called the Dallas FBI office and warned, “I represent a committee that is neither right nor left wing, and tonight, tomorrow morning, or tomorrow night, we are going to kill the man who killed the president.
The night man at the office who had taken the message informed an agent, Milton L Newsom, of the threat.
The purpose of the call was to warn the sheriff’s office in advance so no deputies would get hurt when Oswald was shot to death tomorrow.
Agent Newsom also called the Dallas Police Department and reported the threats to Captain William B Frazier.
At 5:15 A.M., Frazier called Captain Will Fritz at home, who told him to notify Chief Curry.
In the meantime, Deputy Sheriff McCoy had reported the threats to Sheriff Bill Decker, who became alarmed.
He told McCoy to call the Dallas police and tell them he wanted Chief Curry to call him right away.
Decker thought the Dallas Police should drive Oswald over to the county jail right now.
That way, the transfer will be over before the reporters—or potential assassins—can gather at City Hall.
Talbert reached the assistant chief of police, who told him to send men to Curry’s house.
Around 7:30M., Talbert also called FBI agent Newsom, the man who, more than four hours ago, first spread word of the threats.
Talbert said that Chief Curry would not be in the office until 8:00 or 9:00m.
He said he did not think there would be any effort to sneak Oswald out of the city jail because the police wanted to maintain good relations with the press.
The media had set up extensive coverage to cover the transfer, and he did not think that Chief Curry would want to “cross” the media.
BEFORE OSWALD went anywhere that morning, Captain Will Fritz wanted to see him for one last time.
After two days of trying, Fritz knew he could not break Oswald’s willpower, frighten him, or trick him into confessing.
Yes, he had exploded in occasional flashes of anger and frustration, but he always reeled himself back in to a state of calm.
Not even the sight of his wife or brother weakened him or compelled him to confess.
This Sunday morning was Captain Will Fritz’s last chance to speak freely with Oswald before he was transferred from the city jail, before he got a lawyer , and before the next stage of the case, when the grand jury, the prosecutor, and the trial would claim center stage.
Indeed, the first-day evidence alone was enough to indict Oswald and put him on trial.
But the old detective wanted the psychological satisfaction of hearing it from Oswald’s own lips.
This was the most notorious case of Fritz’s career, but the legendary lawman had failed to break the president’s assassin.
But that kind of threat was for the federal authorities, not Fritz, to make.
Fritz showed Oswald one of the “backyard” photographs of him holding the rifle he claimed he never owned.
The detective hoped that once Oswald saw this undeniable proof, he might confess.
Again, he denied any involvement in or knowledge of the Kennedy or Tippit shootings.
Oswald said he had rented it at the main post office a few months before moving to New Orleans.
AT ABOUT 10:20 A.M. on Sunday, while Captain Fritz and others conducted their latest interrogation of Oswald, Chief of Police Curry gave a hallway press conference.
On Saturday night he had already told reporters the approximate time his men would transport Oswald to the County Jail on Sunday.
Now he even revealed what special methods he would employ to keep his prisoner safe from harm.
The reporters wanted to know if the police had discovered any accomplices.
But Curry did not go so far as to deny the possibility of a conspiracy.
The journalists kept questioning Curry, but he had nothing more to say.
Inspector Kelley asked Oswald if he believed in what the FPCC stands for.
Oswald denied that he had moved to Dallas to start an FPCC chapter there.
Oswald said he doubted that the attitude of the United States government would change.
Fritz asked the same question Oswald answered on the New Orleans radio shows.
Secret Service agent Kelley asked if Oswald subscribed to any Russian magazines or newspaper.
Oswald revealed when he was standing in front of the Depository, about to leave, a young crew-cut man rushed up and said he was from the Secret Service, showed him a book of identification, and asked where the phone was.
Oswald pointed him toward the pay phone in the building, and he started toward it, and then Oswald left.
Fritz switched to a subject guaranteed to infuriate Oswald, the circumstances of his parting with the Marine Corps.
It was changed later because he attempted to renounce his American citizenship while living in Russia.
Because he never changed his citizenship, he wrote a letter to secretary of the Navy John Connally to have this discharge reversed, and after considerable delay, he received a “very respectful” reply in which Connally stated that he had resigned to run for governor of Texas, and that his letter was being referred to the new secretary.
Fritz asked about a map that was found in Oswald’s room at the boardinghouse.
He knew what Fritz was implying, that the map was evidence that he had planned the assassination in advance.
He had used that map to plot out his route when he went from place to place in search of employment.
The X that he penned in front of the Depository did not foreshadow the assassination.
Soon Oswald would be taken to the basement garage of City Hall and driven to the County Jail.
Captain Fritz asked Oswald one more time about the hours preceding the assassination.
Oswald knew that Wesley and his sister had already told the police all about his large paper bag.
He tried to discredit the accuracy of their recollections by creating ambiguity about its size.
Fritz pursued the subject, asking where Oswald put the sack when he got into Frazier’s car.
Fritz told Oswald that Wesley Frazier says that he brought a long parcel over to his house and put it in the backseat of his car.
Fritz asked Oswald to tell him again where he was in the Depository at the time of the assassination.
The detective was curious to see if Oswald would tell the story in the same way he had during a prior interrogation.
He stopped in the second-floor lunchroom to get a Coke, and it was there, Oswald said, that he encountered a policeman.
On November 22, he told Captain Fritz that during the assassination, he was eating his lunch on the first floor of the Depository and then he went up to the second floor to buy a Coke.
In this new version, Oswald did not go down to the first floor to eat his lunch.
Now he says the assassination and all the “commotion” happened before he had a chance to go down to the first floor and eat his lunch.
Oswald had just confessed that he was not on the first floor of the building when the president was shot.
During the assassination of President Kennedy, Lee Harvey Oswald was not on the first floor.
It had taken Fritz almost two days and several rounds of interrogation to get to this moment, but Oswald had slipped up at last.
The suspect had placed himself alone on one of the upper floors of the building from which the president was shot.
Given several more hours of questioning, Fritz might be able to coax Oswald into making more mistakes and admissions.
Secret Service agent Forrest Sorrels asked Oswald about the mysterious Alex Hidell.
You took notes, just read them for yourself, if you want to refresh your memory.
Despite the incriminating evidence of the card he kept in his wallet, he would not admit that he used the name under which he ordered the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle.
Assistant Chief of Police Charles Batchelor walked up the inclined loading ramp to the mouth of the garage entrance and selected the best truck, the one with room for two guards to ride with Oswald.
Batchelor and the driver decided to leave the vehicle at the top of the ramp with the front end protruding onto the sidewalk.
Oswald would have to walk through the basement garage and then up the ramp to reach the back of the armored car.
But if the truck were backed all the way down the ramp, the steep incline might cause it to stall on the way up the exit ramp.
Captain Fritz told Chief Curry he was ready to bring Oswald down as soon as the seventy policemen in the basement had secured the area.
Anyone who tried to get Oswald would find themselves attacking an empty armored car.
Fritz planned to cut out of the caravan at Main Street, drive west on Main to Houston, then make a right turn to the county jail.
It would have been a lot easier to protect Oswald if the basement was cleared of everybody but law enforcement officials.
He had suggested to Fritz that they take Oswald out on the first floor and put him in a car on Main Street.
Assign a small contingent of reliable detectives to march Oswald right out the front door.
Fritz wondered if the number of men needed to guard Oswald could be squeezed into the elevator.
And he was sure Chief Curry would insist on letting the press see the transfer.
Oswald was dressed in a T-shirt, and Fritz worried that Lee might get cold.
Fritz sent a man to bring some of the clothing the police found at 1026 North Beckley Street in Oswald’s little room.
At first Lee asked for what he described as a black “Ivy League” shirt.
Lee pulled the sweater over his head and pushed his arms through the sleeves.
It was the last of many warnings not to expose the prisoner to unnecessary danger.
OUTSIDE ON the street, a pasty-complexioned, unattractive man wearing a dark suit, white shirt, dark tie, dark hat, and dark shoes approached the mouth of the driveway and the armored car parked at the top of the ramp.
He slipped through the narrow space between one side of the truck and the wall.
He proceeded down the ramp until he found himself in the basement garage.
He mingled with the scrum of journalists and others and melted into the crowd.
Other men in the basement, the ones who knew him, either did not spot him or did not care.
This uninvited guest was just one of dozens of well-dressed men waiting for Lee Harvey Oswald.
The second pair connected one of his wrists to one of Detective Leavelle’s so that the two men could not be separated, and Oswald could not run and make a break for it.
But the handcuff arrangement would also make it hard for Oswald to duck if someone took a shot at him.
Pettit’s gullible comments echoed the statements that the naive reporters who had covered JFK’s arrival in Dallas had made about security.
JIM LEAVELLE and his prisoner stepped into the elevator and rode it down to the garage level.
When Oswald emerged with the trademark smirk on his face, and his body pinned between Leavelle and another detective, excited reporters and photographers pressed forward.
Amoment after Pappas spoke, the man in the dark suit and hat who had walked down the driveway a few minutes earlier and had melted into the crowd emerged from it and took a lunging step toward Oswald.
The detective and his prisoner continued to look straight ahead, oblivious to the danger.
No one stood between the president’s assassin and the man in the dark suit.
In another moment the man would be close enough to Oswald to touch him.
One witness thought that was exactly what was about to happen—an outraged cop or reporter was going to punch Oswald in the face.
Oswald had no idea that he was a split second away from being assassinated.
Ruby squeezed the trigger and fired one round from his .38 caliber snub-nosed revolver.
A second photographer, Bob Jackson, snapped his shutter a split second after the bullet’s impact.
Ruby wanted to shoot Oswald again, but before he could get off another shot, policemen tackled him to the ground before he could pull the trigger again.
Ike Pappas dropped to his knees so he would not be hit by more gunfire, but he kept reporting.
There’s absolute panic, absolute panic here in the basement of the Dallas police headquarters.
The shooter’s tone was as amiable as if he were handing out complimentary passes to his nightclub, or delivering a bag of fresh cored beef sandwiches to a police station or broadcast studio, two favorite tricks he employed to befriend cops and radio hosts.
Ruby’s aim was good enough to hit his target without shooting the detective.
Leavelle reached down and unlocked the handcuffs that bound him to Oswald.
Once he had freed himself, he unlocked the second pair around the prisoner’s wrists.
Detective Combest bent over Oswald, pulled up the black sweater, and searched for a wound.
Although he had been shot just seconds ago, Oswald was already incoherent and appeared to be unconscious.
He had screamed in pain when the bullet struck him, and he was moaning now.
This might be Oswald’s last chance to claim credit for his infamous crime.
To declare that he, Lee Harvey Oswald, lifelong loser and nobody, had finally done something worth remembering.
Oswald appeared to shake his head a little from side to side, but it was hard to tell if it was in response to the question.
For two days, he had enjoyed matching wits with Captain Fritz during their cat and mouse battle.
Indeed, it had been almost impossible to stop Oswald from talking while in police custody.
He might not want to confess, but it was in Oswald’s character to say something now, if only to tease Leavelle and congratulate him that Ruby had been such a good shot, or to ask who did it, or to complain that his guards had failed to protect him, or to send a final message to Marina.
No, if Oswald did not speak now, it must have been because his grievous wound had silenced him.
Police officers carried Oswald away from the excited journalists and the spot he was shot.
Outside the Dallas County Jail, a crowd of several hundred people had assembled across street.
This crowd was bigger than the spontaneous mob that had gathered outside the Texas Theater on Friday afternoon and that was waiting for Oswald when he emerged.
Today’s crowd wanted to jeer him, and hoped to get a glimpse of him as he drove past.
This was the second time in two days that a crowd had gathered on Houston Street to watch a famous man drive by.
When Sheriff Bill Decker got word that Oswald had been shot before his motorcade had gotten under way, Decker walked into the street and announced the news.
LIKE PRESIDENT Kennedy, Lee Harvey Oswald looked dead on arrival at Parkland Hospital.
But unlike the president, who had suffered a catastrophic head wound, Oswald exhibited a tenacity for life.
The wounded assassin was wheeled inside where some of the same people who treated President Kennedy would now try to save the life of his suspected assassin.
Out of respect for President Kennedy, who had been pronounced dead in this room less than fortyeight hours ago, the staff refused to treat Oswald there.
It would be obscene to try to save the assassin’s life on the same table on which the president had died; to employ the same medical instruments to save the man who had stained their hospital gowns with the president’s brains and blood.
So they rolled Oswald to trauma room two, where doctors had saved the life of Governor John Connally.
Although Jack Ruby had gotten off only one shot, he had inflicted a devastating wound.
Because he shot his victim from at an angle, the bullet passed sideways through Oswald’s entire torso, wreaking havoc with several internal organs.
Whatever their personal feelings, they would do their utmost to save him.
Only if President Kennedy’s assassin survived his wound could Curry salvage his own reputation, and that of his department.
If Oswald died, they would be stained forever as the fools who allowed him to be killed right under their very noses.
A dead suspect was of no use to one of the top interrogators in the history of the Dallas Police Department.
The press wanted him to live—Oswald was a great story, and worth massive coverage in the weeks ahead.
And, despite the howls of delight outside the county jail, most of the American people wanted Oswald to survive this day.
True, it was hard not to take some pleasure in the knowledge that John Kennedy’s murderer has suffered a kind of Old Testament or western vigilante justice for his great crime.
The bullet had damaged several vital organs, and Oswald had suffered a massive loss of blood.
Lee Harvey Oswald expired in the same hospital where President Kennedy had died.
Without regaining consciousness, without speaking any last words, and without confessing his crime, Lee Harvey Oswald died at 2:07 pM. , just after the memorial service for President Kennedy at the Capitol had begun.
Even if he had remained conscious long enough to speak, Oswald was not the sort of man to clear his conscience with a death-bed confession.
It would have given him pleasure to carry on the game from the grave, where his silence would torment his interrogators, and force them to fit all the puzzle pieces together by themselves.
NBC Television had broadcast the murder of Oswald on live television to the entire nation.
He was a middle-aged club owner and low class creature from a world of sleazy nightlife, where men drank stiff drinks and paid women to dance and strip for them onstage.
Like Oswald, he was another fringe character, an impulsive, moody, and violent man and, even more than Oswald, given to wild, unstable, emotional and often dangerous mood swings.
It was unwholesome, almost profane, that for the rest of the day, news of Oswald’s shooting competed with coverage of John F Kennedy’s memorial events.
At 2:25 pm., Marina Oswald came to Parkland Hospital to view her husband’s body.
Then she blabbered that Lee should be buried in Arlington National Cemetery.
On the day he died, Lee Harvey Oswald left behind another victim—the city of Dallas.
Within hours of the assassination, Americans began to blame an entire city or state for the murder.
People remembered that Texas crowds had once spat at Lyndon and Lady Bird Johnson at the Adolphus Hotel.
They remembered how in October 1963, hecklers disrupted a speech by Kennedy’s ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson.
The political situation there was too volatile, and he was not liked there.
Kennedy bristled at the suggestion that any part of the United States was too dangerous for a president to visit.
Then there was that menacing WELCOME TO TEXAS newspaper ad and the WANTED FOR TREASON handbills.
On November 20, Dallas Chief of Police Jesse Curry had to go on television to beseech the citizenry to treat the president with respect.
Rumors spread that in Texas classrooms, schoolchildren cheered when they heard that Kennedy had been shot.
Other stories claimed that adult Texans, upon hearing the news, had rejoiced in the streets.
Outside of Texas, politicians, newspaper editors, and others beat the drumbeat of collective guilt.
Of course such emotional criticism ignored the fact that most of Dallas had given the Kennedys a friendly reception.
No one in that motorcade could have concluded that cheering Dallas crowds “hated” JFK and wanted him to die.
Two days after the assassination, at the congressional memorial service in Washington, D.C., Chief Justice of the United States Earl Warren upset the solemnity of the occasion with a wild and shocking indictment of the climate of hate he said had caused the assassination.
John Fitzgerald Kennedy . . . has been snatched from our midst by the bullet of an assassin.
What moved some misguided wretch to do this horrible deed may never be known to us, but we do know that such acts are commonly stimulated by forces of hatred and malevolence, such as today are eating their way into the bloodstream of American life.
He was a leftist who hated the right wing, and who had tried to murder an ultraconservative army general.
Everybody knew that Warren was also talking about Dallas, the city that boasted a big billboard that read impeach earl warren.
But it was the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald while in police custody that really turned the nation against Dallas.
The assassination of the president came like a bolt of lightning that struck without warning from bright blue sky.
On a dozen occasions, the police department had displayed their prisoner to the press in crowded, unsecured hallways.
Death threats against the prisoner came in, but security at the jail remained lax.
Nonetheless, detectives transferred Oswald to another location in the middle of a media circus in a poorly secured basement.
Negligence and incompetence had pushed the assassin offstage before he could perform his starring role—defendant in the trial of the century.
They wanted to hear from the witnesses and see the evidence presented in a court of law.
ON SUNDAY, November 24, at 12:34m. , Jackie Kennedy and her brotherin-law Robert entered the East Room and approached the closed, flag-draped coffin.
At her request, the honor guard removed the American flag, and the casket was opened.
Then it was sealed and draped again with the national colors. if he — Al 1— Fall —— —$_a _—i ) "" 4 nN yi The president’s coffin at the East Front of the United States Capitol.
Military pallbearers in immaculate dress uniforms lifted the casket and carried the late president through the White House and outside to a waiting artillery caisson drawn by six gray horses.
Then, at 1:08 pM., the cortege left the White House for memorial ceremonies at the United States Capitol.
Military musicians, the usual crisp rat-tat-tat sound of their drums muffled by shrouds of black cloth wrapped around them, beat the mournful sound of the funeral cadence.
And tens of thousands of people lined the route along Pennsylvania Avenue.
It was just like Abraham Lincoln’s funeral procession to the Capitol on April 19, 1865.
When the procession arrived at the East Front, the honor guard carried President Kennedy up the steps and past the very spot where, on January 20, 1961, he had taken the oath of office.
They carried him into the rotunda and laid his coffin under the Great Dome, upon the very spot where Abraham Lincoln’s coffin had once rested.
John Kennedy had begun his political career at this place, first as a congressman, then a senator.
One of the speakers was Senator Mike Mansfield, one of the lions of the Senate.
His eulogy, a tribute to both John and Jackie Kennedy, stunned listeners.
There was a wit in a man neither young nor old, but a wit full of an old man’s wisdom and of a child’s wisdom, and then, in a moment it was no more.
There was a man marked with the scars of his love of country, a body active with the surge of a life far, far from spent and, in a moment, it was no more.
There was a father with a little boy, a little girl and a joy of each in the other.
In a moment it was no more, and so she took a ring from her finger and placed it in his hands.
There was a husband who asked much and gave much, and out of the giving and the asking wove with a woman what could not be broken in life, and in a moment it was no more.
And so she took a ring from her finger and placed it in his hands, and kissed him and closed the lid of a coffin.
Of all the words of tribute spoken and written about President Kennedy, she loved none more.
At the conclusion of the ceremony, Jackie and her daughter, Caroline, kneeled by the coffin to say good-bye.
Now the American people would have their turn to pay homage to the fallen president.
The bronze doors of the East Front were thrown open to all comers who wanted to view the coffin.
By 8:00 P.M., two hundred thousand stood in a line that stretched all the way down East Capitol Street and, twelve blocks away, past Lincoln Park, where a bronze sculpture of the Great Emancipator—Abraham Lincoln—beckoned a freed slave to rise.
That night at 9:04m., Jackie and Robert Kennedy made a surprise return visit to the rotunda.
She approached the catafalque and then, in full view of everyone in the rotunda, dropped to her knees.
She did not want to get into the car waiting at the base of the East Front.
Then she and her brother-in-law walked outside, among the crowd, to the north side of the Capitol, and then west along Constitution Avenue for a while, almost to the foot of Capitol Hill, before they got in their car and returned to the White House.
People did not notice her because they found it so improbable that she would walk in public among them.
After a few people realized it was her, Jackie walked to the street, got into her car, and returned to the White House.
A Christian shouldn’t think that, but the—the utter senselessness—the meaninglessness—it—you know, we all of us down here know that politics is a tough game, and I don’t think there is any point in being Irish if you don’t know that the world is going to break your heart eventually.
BY TWO am. on Monday, November 25, the line to get into the Capitol was three miles long, and by nine A.M., 250,000 people had filed past the coffin.
There was no more time to admit everyone else still standing in the long line.
The viewing could not continue because now it was time for the president’s funeral.
Jacqueline Kennedy could have waited at the White House while her husband’s coffin was removed from the Capitol and brought to the mansion.
Wherever he went, she would follow, until she would take him to the place where she could follow no more.
Jackie, escorted by the president’s two brothers, ascended the East Front steps and walked into the rotunda.
Then the military casket team lifted the coffin from the catafalque, carried it out of the rotunda, and descended the stairs to the East Front.
Kennedy and her husband’s brothers Robert and Edward lead the procession from the White House to St.
From there, starting at 11:35m., Jacqueline Kennedy led a procession on foot to St.
Many heads of state from around the world—kings, presidents, prime ministers, and more—plus distinguished diplomats had traveled to Washington for the event.
Mourners included French president Charles de Gaulle, British prime minister Sir Alec Douglas-Home, Irish president Eamon de Valera, and Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie.
The Secret Service begged Lyndon Johnson to ride in a car and not march in the procession—it was too dangerous, they warned, and they did not want to lose another president.
More than one thousand people attended the service, a low mass conducted by the famous Catholic priest Richard Cardinal Cushing of Boston.
The sacred music, the religious incantations, and the somber setting proved too much for Jackie.
That phrase, “May the angels, dear Jack . . .” unleashed in her fresh spasms of emotion, and she began to sob and shake again.
Her daughter, Caroline, took her hand and said, “You’ll be all right, Mummy.
After the service, Jacqueline Kennedy and her children, standing outside the cathedral, watched the honor guard carry the coffin down the steps.
John Kennedy Jr. saluted his father’s coffin just as he had seen soldiers in uniform do.
It was a heartbreaking gesture that became one of the most unforgettable images of the funeral.
THAT NIGHT Jacqueline had expected to preside over a White House dinner for West German chancellor Ludwig Erhard.
She had scheduled the event weeks ago and had mailed the invitations before the trip to Dallas.
By all rights, she should be supervising last-minute preparations for a delightful social event, not her husband’s funeral.
Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara was one of the invited dinner guests.
He had expected to pass through the Southwest Gate of the White House that day, not the gates of Arlington Cemetery.
At 1:30 pMo., the horse-drawn caisson bearing President Kennedy departed St.
It sounded as though the instrument itself were weeping, which heightened the drama of the scene.
Riflemen fired three volleys overhead, an eerie echo of the three shots fired in Dallas.
Soldiers removed the flag from the coffin, folded it into a triangle, and presented it to Jackie.
At 3:13 pM., Jacqueline Kennedy used a taper to light an “eternal flame” beside the grave.
She said she wanted to light a flame at the climax of the service in Arlington that would burn forever in memory of her husband.
She recalled the day when she and the president had toured the Civil War battlefield of Gettysburg.
There, at the Eternal Light Peace Memorial dedicated by President Roosevelt in 1938, she had seen an eternal flame—a gas-powered fire that burned day and night, around the clock—that illuminated the top of the tall monument.
At Arlington, army engineers had one built at ground level next to President Kennedy’s grave site in less than twenty-four hours, and it was ready in time for Jackie to light it on Monday afternoon.
Jacqueline Kennedy watches as the flag from her husband’s coffin is folded.
When the service was over, she got into her limousine to return to the White House to greet the funeral guests.
After leaving Arlington, her car pulled away from the rest of the motorcade.
It drove on alone to the Lincoln Memorial, where Jackie looked through the window and gazed up at the sculpture of Father Abraham, who had perished from an assassin’s bullet ninety-eight years earlier.
Then she returned to the White House, where she stood in a receiving line and greeted guests from around the world.
Tippit was buried with full honors; more than one thousand people attended the service.
And that afternoon, Lee Harvey Oswald was buried in Texas in a cheap, cloth-covered pine casket.
The timing was shocking—the same day as the funerals for the two men he was accused of murdering, President Kennedy and Officer Tippit.
At Oswald’s hurried, tenminute graveside ceremony, the more than seventy-five reporters, photographers, and law enforcement officials far outnumbered the handful of mourners.
Aside from his family, no one who knew him wanted to be seen at his funeral.
News reporters volunteered to carry the assassin’s lonely casket to its resting place.
Only Oswald’s family—his wife, Marina, and their two daughters, his mother, Marguerite, and his brother Robert—came to mourn him.
Life magazine published photographs of the funeral, including a large, double-page image taken at dusk that made it appear that heaven itself—with dark, gloomy, and threatening skies—had cursed Oswald in the grave.
That night, watchmen stood guard over the assassin’s final resting place to prevent distraught citizens from, under the cover of darkness, desecrating the grave.
After his burial, bootleg copies of gruesome photographs of his body—taken at the autopsy—leaked out and were published widely.
In the days ahead, morbid curiosity seekers would flock to his grave, and someone stole his tombstone.
Years later, in a bizarre attempt to verify that Oswald was really in the coffin (and not an imposter switched with the true Oswald, an outlandish claim pressed by extremist conspiracy buffs), his remains were exhumed and the corpse photographed again.
THAT NIGHT at the White House at 7:00M., Jacqueline Kennedy hosted a little birthday party for her son.
We Mourn Our Loss ABEBRBAAAARAARRERLERRRREREERRERURRRRRE ere nt John F Midi AGL A MAA ATTN TE A memorial banner printed in Chicago within a few Mh of the assassination.
A 2 g Ss A 2 e 8 g g g A 4) g CO A 4) B A 4 o) o 4) O yr) & y od Z 4 y K g oO 4 oe er a r g Cy Op A 4) Oy Z Fd Es p | N \ N N XN \ \ “Ask not what your country can do for you ---Ask what you can do for your country” JOHN FITZGERALD KENNEDY Another of the many memorial banners.
At midnight, after everyone had gone, she returned to Arlington Cemetery to bid her husband a private and final farewell.
By now the casket had been lowered into the grave and covered with a mound of earth.
THE NEXT morning Lyndon Johnson found a handwritten letter from Jacqueline Kennedy on his desk.
She thanked him for walking behind President Kennedy’s coffin in the previous day’s procession from the White House to St.
Of course Bobby hated him and, while JFK respected him, the former rivals from Harvard and the Texas Hill Country were always men from different worlds.
Eternal 4 Fiame nf light te remember The electric Eternal Flame night-light.
As a politician’s wife, Jacqueline Kennedy knew how her husband’s defeat of Johnson in the race for the 1960 Democratic presidential nomination must have been a humbling experience for the powerful master of the Senate.
It had not been easy for LBJ to live with the door prize of the vice presidency.
Jackie planned to move out of the White House in ten days, on December 6.
She confided to Johnson that after she had gotten home yesterday from the funeral, and after she had greeted the last guest, she went in search of memories.
She walked through the Treaty Room, the library and more, and finally the Oval Office in which her husband had risen from his chair for the flight to Texas just four days earlier.
Haha TS Tay HIS SECRET SASL HIS VICIOUS Hit COLLECTOR'S COPY Gea amt ap Even Lee Harvey Oswald got his own magazine.
Even in her profound sorrow, Jackie could not suppress one of the traits essential to her nature—her love of design and aesthetics.
Jackie had run a little White House school for a small group of children, including her own.
Johnson told her that it must go on, assuring her it was not an imposition.
As after the murder of Abraham Lincoln ninety-eight years earlier, the American people coveted souvenirs and relics of the assassination.
All over the country, people saved newspapers from November 22, 23, 24, 25 and 26, and in no city was any newspaper more desirable than the first edition that announced the assassination.
Entrepreneurs manufactured celluloid, pin-back memorial buttons by the millions, as well as JFK banners that were printed on black felt or on white fabric.
One brazen opportunist in Dallas created a three-dimensional Dealey Plaza desk ornament, complete with ballpoint pen and paper-clip tray.
Publishers flooded newsstands with dozens of different John Kennedy commemorative magazines.
Portrait in Red), while others issued dozens of memorial albums of JFK’s speeches or of the radio and television coverage of the assassination.
Two days after the funeral, on November 27, 1963, President Lyndon Johnson addressed a joint session of Congress.
The greatest leader of our time has been struck down by the foulest deed of our time.
Today John Kennedy lives on in the immortal words and works that he left behind.
I profoundly hope that the tragedy and torment of these terrible days will bind us together in new fellowship, making us one people in our hour of sorrow.
So let us here highly resolve that John Fitzgerald Kennedy did not live—or die—in vain.
Johnson wanted the commission to finish its work well before November 1964, so that no uncertainties plagued him during the presidential election.
If Lyndon Johnson wanted to discover the truth about John Kennedy’s death, Jacqueline Kennedy wanted to preserve her version of the truth about his life.
On the same day that LBJ created the Warren Commission, Jackie unveiled an enduring myth that forever defined her husband’s presidency.
The November 29 Washington Star newspaper carried an article by Jack and Jackie’s old friend Charlie Bartlett.
Up until then, most journalists had focused on the late president in their editorial tributes.
Yes, the press had heaped praise on Jacqueline Kennedy for her brave and dignified behavior during the four days from November 22 to 25.
That night, during a drenching New England storm, just a week after her husband was slain in her arms, Jacqueline Kennedy had a plan to transform her husband into a legend.
White and John Kennedy had gotten to know each other, and the president had admired him.
But when White called the Secret Service he was, he wrote, “curtly informed that Mrs.
Kennedy was no longer the President’s wife, and she could give them no orders for cars.
So White hired a car and driver and headed north into the New England storm.
He called his editors at Life to tell them about his exclusive scoop, but they told him the next issue was about to go to press.
They warned him it would cost $30,000 an hour to hold the presses open for his story.
This meant that the most important photojournalism magazine in America would be standing still and delaying the printing of its next issue for a story that had not yet been written and would be based on an interview that had not yet even been conducted.
Still, an exclusive interview with First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy was so coveted, Life was willing to do almost anything.
Jackie welcomed him and instructed her houseguests, who included Dave Powers, Franklin D Roosevelt Jr., and JEK’s old pal Chuck Spalding, that she wanted to speak with him alone.
Jackie complained that “bitter people” were already writing stories, attempting to measure her husband with a laundry list of his achievements and failures.
White asked her to explain, and then, for the next three and a half hours, she delivered a jumbled, almost stream-of-consciousness narrative about Dallas, the blood, the head wound, the wedding ring, the hospital, and how she kissed him good-bye.
She was talking about the popular Broadway musical fantasy about King Arthur’s court.
President Kennedy was dead and buried in his grave, and she told the journalist she wanted to step out of the spotlight.
Around midnight White went upstairs to write the story—Life needed it tonight, before he left Jackie.
He came down around 2:00m. and tried to dictate the story over a wall-hung telephone in her kitchen.
One of his editors caught the stress in his voice and suspected Jackie.
It was Jacqueline Kennedy’s tour de force, her finest hour—actually more than five hours—of press manipulation.
She had summoned an influential, Pulitzer Prize-winning author to do her bidding—and like so many men she had mesmerized before, he did it.
White violated all standards of journalism ethics by allowing the subject of a story to read it in advance—and edit it.
But he was not acting as a journalist that night—he was serving as the awestruck courtier of a bereaved widow.
An Epilogue,” which ran in the December 6 issue of Life, Camelot and its brief shining moment became one of the most celebrated and enduring myths in American politics.
To Jackie, the assassination symbolized an end of days, not just for her husband, but also for the nation.
UNBIDDEN, OTHER journalists placed themselves in the service of the newborn Kennedy legend, offering their own personal contributions to the story.
History will best judge John Kennedy in calmer days when time has made the tragic and grotesque at least bearable.
And surely history will judge him well—for his wisdom and his compassion and his grace.
Their life together began as it ended—in a hospital—and through sickness and loneliness there grew the special love that lights up the soul of the lover and the loved alike.
John Kennedy is dead, and for that we are a lesser people ina lesser land.
That month, Look, the Saturday Evening Post, and the Saturday Review all published worshipful JFK tributes.
Today it is difficult to fathom or exaggerate the cultural influence these now vanished, oversize-format, photo-news magazines once had.
But no publication became more synonymous with the “Four Days” the nation had suffered than Life magazine.
On December 12, CBS presented to its employees as a memento a nineteen-page pamphlet documenting their hard work over the past three weeks.
The pamphlet was illustrated with forty-eight small television screens depicting iconic images from the time of the assassination to the president’s funeral.
From Dallas to Arlington, broadcast to the nation on the night of Monday, November 25.
It was time, thought CBS president Frank Stanton, for some tasteful selfcongratulation.
There followed, for the next four days, what was certainly the longest uninterrupted story in the history of television and possibly all broadcasting.
EVEN BEFORE the funeral, Jacqueline Kennedy had decided she did not want to remain living in the White House for long.
Mindful perhaps of public gossip about Mary Lincoln’s drawn-out, emotional, post-assassination occupancy of the Executive Mansion, Jackie was determined to avoid similar criticism.
Despite President Johnson’s gracious invitation to remain as long as she wished, Jacqueline Kennedy wanted to be out of the mansion within two weeks of the assassination.
She longed to return to her former neighborhood in Georgetown, but she and the president had sold the house at 3307 N Street NW after the election.
On the night of November 22, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara had offered to get it for her.
W Averell Harriman, the famous American diplomat and elder statesman who had held several posts in the Kennedy administration, offered her the use of his elegant residence at 3038 N Street NW, a few blocks from the old Kennedy place.
But before she left the White House, there were several things she wanted to do.
On December 3, just eleven days after the assassination, Jackie attended a Department of the Treasury ceremony honoring Secret Service agent Clint Hill with the Exceptional Service Award for his bravery on November 22.
Her memories were fresh and painful, and it was difficult to relive that day, but she had grown close to Hill, and she wanted to show by her presence that she did not blame her trusted guardian for her husband’s assassination.
She also informed the Secret Service that she wanted Hill to stay on as her personal agent.
She also handwrote thank-you notes to members of the White House staff.
Jackie Kennedy’s self-imposed two-week deadline for leaving the White House—Friday, December 6—coincided with the Presidential Medal of Freedom ceremony, which had been scheduled long before the assassination.
The printed program included some of the words President Kennedy had intended to say that day.
Over the past two weeks, our Nation has known moments of the utmost sorrow, of anguish and shame.
In the shattering sequence of events that began 14 days ago, we encountered in its full horror man’s capacity for hatred and destruction.
I want particularly to thank you for reminding us that whatever evil moments may pass by, we are and we shall continue to be a people touched with greatness called to high destiny to serve great purposes.
John Fitzgerald Kennedy, 35th President of the United States, soldier, scholar, statesman, defender of freedom, pioneer for peace, author of hope—combining courage with reason, and combatting hate with compassion, he led the land he loved toward new frontiers of opportunity for all men and peace for all time.
No one attending the event knew it, but Jackie had watched the ceremony from a spot where she was hidden from view.
It was a bittersweet honor to watch another president award the medals her husband had looked forward to presenting.
On the day she left the White House, Jackie left a note and flowers for the new First Lady, Lady Bird Johnson.
John sat on his desk while Jackie, putting on a brave front for the camera, smiled.
Then Jacqueline Kennedy left the White House, returning to her beloved Georgetown, where her life with Jack had begun.
On December 11, 1963, the McNamaras sent over a gift to Jackie at the Harriman house.
Jackie confided that she could not even bear to display photographs of her husband.
The picture was on the floor, “propped up against the wall at the little study outside my bedroom.
Jackie suggested that the McNamaras take back the painting and donate it to the Kennedy Library several years down the road, after the institution was built.
Throughout his life, he had malice toward none; he had charity for all.
We buried Abraham Lincoln and John Kennedy, but we did not bury their dreams or their visions.
They are our dreams and our visions today, for President Lincoln and John Kennedy moved toward those nobler dreams and visions where the needs of the people dwell.
On this eve of Christmas, in this time of grief and unity, of sadness and continuity, let there be for all people in need the light of an era of new hope and a time of new resolve.
She should have been supervising the decoration of the White House tree and the historic rooms and hosting festive receptions.
Now, after only two Christmases there, she was living in a strange and empty house.
But she had not forgotten the handful of people who had meant the most to her and the president.
So she selected special gifts—books, photos, personal mementos—for her intimates.
To the secretary of defense, she gave a specially bound copy of Inaugural Addresses of the Presidents of the United States from George Washington 1789 to John F Kennedy 1961.
Jackie inscribed it “To Robert McNamara—The President was going to give you this for Christmas—Please accept it now from me—With my devotion always for all you did for Jack.
She also gave him a framed set of three black-and-white photographs of Powers playing with John Jr.
She inscribed the mat “For Dave Powers—Who gave the president so many of his happiest hours—and who will now do the same for his son, John Jr.
In January 1964, Jacqueline Kennedy went to the imposing, fortresslike headquarters of the Department of Justice, which occupied an entire city block of the south side of Pennsylvania Avenue between Ninth and Tenth streets.
She rode an elevator to the fifth floor and stepped into a hallway decorated with huge, vintage WPA-style hand-painted murals depicting scenes from 1930s America.
She proceeded to a doorway marked by a wood sign painted with gold letters.
It was the office of the attorney general, her brother-in-law Robert Kennedy.
She took her seat in a leather club chair placed near a fireplace hearth.
The homey setting and crackling fire made it look as though she was anywhere but in a government office building.
The crew switched on the lights and aimed the cameras at Jackie, and she began to speak.
It was for a short film—less than three minutes long—to thank the American people for their condolences and expressions of love for her husband.
She thanked them for their letters, promised they would be archived at the Kennedy Library, and said all the usual niceties one might expect a widow in her position to say.
Then she caught viewers off guard with an emotional remark that revealed how much she missed him.
The knowledge of the affection in which my husband was held by all of you has sustained me, and the warmth of these tributes is something I shall never forget.
Each and every message is to be treasured, not only for my children, but so that future generations will know how much our country and people in other nations thought of him.
Your letters will be placed with his papers, in the library to be erected in his memory along the Charles River, in Boston Massachusetts.
I hope that in years to come many of you and your children will be able to visit the Kennedy Library.
It will be, we hope, not only a memorial to President Kennedy but a living center, of study of the times in which he lived, and a center for young people and for scholars from all over the world.
May I thank you again, on behalf of my children, and of the president’s family, for the comfort that your letters have brought to us all.
Jackie had decided to make Georgetown her permanent home, and in February 1964 she bought a house of her own at 3017 N Street NW, near the Harriman place.
Indeed, on the day she had moved into the Harriman house, news photographers and filmmakers were waiting outside to snap pictures and make movies of her.
A sad image from that day shows her in a black mourning dress, her head held high as she tried to put on a brave smile, while she led her children into their new home and their new lives.
In the days ahead, people stopped on the sidewalk and gaped, hoping to peek through the windows or, better yet, to glimpse Jackie entering or leaving the premises.
Photographers staked out the house day and night, hoping to take a salable photograph of the widow and her children.
Some photographers even snapped images of other photographers photographing the house.
Photojournalists not only stalked her at her home, but began following her wherever she went.
Jackie could not leave her home without taking the risk that intrusive—and possibly dangerous—strangers might accost her in the street.
It happened all over again when she moved from the Harriman place to her new house across the street.
To raise support for the future Kennedy Library, Jackie helped organize a traveling exhibition of JFK’s favorite mementos.
Once again, Life magazine, just as it did so many times when the Kennedys were in the White House, put her picture on the cover and published her essay about the exhibition.
In March 1964, National Geographic published a special issue devoted to the assassination.
The magazine was a monthly with a long lead time, so it came out much later than the weekly December 1963 and January 1964 issues of Life, Look, and the Saturday Evening Post.
The Geographic’s esteemed president and editor, Melville Bell Grosvenor, wrote, “His life was such—the radiance he shed—that if we live to be a hundred, we will remember how he graced this earth, and how he left it.
Only the future can assign to John Fitzgerald Kennedy his true place in history.
IN JULY 1964, Jacqueline Kennedy announced that she was selling her Georgetown house.
Her decision shocked the political and social elites of the nation’s capital.
The assassination had transformed Jackie Kennedy into a national obsession.
Yes, she had enjoyed great popularity as First Lady, but this was something more.
She had hoped that one day soon she could stroll the streets of Georgetown, visiting her favorite bookshops, florists, antique shops, and grocery stores as she did in the old days when Jack was a senator.
But the harassment got worse every month, until she could no longer endure it.
So less than a year after the assassination, in an effort to reclaim her private life, Jacqueline Kennedy abandoned the capital.
She said good-bye to her Washington days and moved to Manhattan, where she had spent many happy times before her marriage.
She promised herself to honor the vow she had made when she had moved out of the White House—she would never set foot there again.
One relentless photographer specialized in stalking her and made a career out of taking pictures at unguarded moments.
For the rest of her life, Jackie Kennedy remained an iconic figure, forever an unwilling star in the spotlight on the American stage.
FOR FOURTEEN months, between November 22, 1963, and January 20, 1965, America did not have a vice president.
The Constitution made no provision to create a new one when Lyndon Johnson was elevated to the presidency.
Johnson was uncontested as the Democratic nominee for president in 1964, and speculation over whom Johnson might choose as his running mate became one of the most popular guessing games in political circles.
He was expected to make the announcement at the Democratic convention in late August 1964.
He viewed it as a springboard that might launch him to the presidency one day, possibly in 1968 or 1972.
Bobby campaigned for it and, in a face-to-face meeting with Johnson, had almost begged for it.
His loathing for LBJ had always been obvious, and he had never made much effort to hide it.
He had no intention of making John Kennedy’s little brother his vice president.
But Johnson worried that Jackie might be promoting Bobby for the spot behind the scenes.
The president considered him one of his most trusted advisers, and he sent him on a secret mission.
For Johnson, Jacqueline Kennedy had always been the elusive and mysterious object of his desire.
Not sexually, of course, but in the sense that he craved her support, her friendship, her presence, and her essence.
His frequent calls to her after the assassination, preserved when LBJ recorded them, document his pursuit.
But ever since the assassination, Jackie had proven resistant to his charms.
She had politely declined his various invitations to return to the White House.
Jackie well knew that the most effective way to resist Johnson was from a safe distance, before his cajoling voice or physical presence could work their magic.
Jackie had always been flattered and attracted by the attentions of older, powerful men.
In his first year in office, Johnson suffered in John Kennedy’s shadow.
Now he was haunted by the ghosts of Camelot in exile, personified by Robert Kennedy.
Thus, Johnson reasoned, he must never allow Bobby to become his running mate in the presidential election of 1964.
The president had been told by one or more individuals that Jackie had repeatedly stated to Bobby he must run for the Vice Presidency and that it was at her insistence, rather than any desire of his own, that was moving him toward that objective.
There was no bitterness toward the president, and she not only was not pressuring Bobby to move toward the vice presidency, but she repeatedly questioned whether it would be wise for him to accept the nomination if it were offered.
Delegates were treated to a worshipful documentary about President Kennedy.
When Bobby Kennedy appeared at the podium, he received a thunderous, twenty-minute-long standing ovation.
When he shall die Take him and cut him out in little stars And he will make the face of heaven so fine That all the world will be in love with night, And pay no worship to the garish sun.
It was his announcement that from this moment on, he was the leader of a Kennedy party—or royal court—in exile.
Ten months after the assassination, on September 24, 1964, the Warren Commission completed the report of its investigation.
Almost three hundred thousand words long, it was accompanied by twenty-six volumes containing seventeen thousand pages of testimony, photographs, and exhibits.
Its central findings were that Lee Harvey Oswald had assassinated John F Kennedy, that two of the three shots he fired had struck the president, that the assassin had acted alone, and there was no evidence that he was part of a conspiracy.
That fall, on November 3, 1964, President Lyndon Johnson got his mandate.
His victory was total, and he had done it without Bobby Kennedy, whom he had left behind in his wake, rejected and humiliated.
A FEW weeks later, the press inundated the American people with its coverage of the first anniversary of the assassination.
Life magazine had already given Jackie Kennedy what she wanted last year—the legend of Camelot.
This year she cooperated with rival Look magazine for a special feature and interview.
They could not love a new president who they believed was their inferior in culture and style.
Chief Justice Earl Warren and members of his commission present their report to President Johnson, September 1964.
Like Mary McGrory, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Charlie Bartlett and others who echoed the “things will never be the same” and the “we will never be young again” themes, the journalists who mythologized Kennedy emphasized his intangible star quality—a style, an attitude, a mood—over the details.
In their swooning eulogies, none included something so practical and unromantic as a list of his failures and accomplishments.
When King had attended President Kennedy’s funeral, the civil rights leader told his wife, Coretta, that one day this would happen to him.
Now, five years later, Jacqueline Kennedy attended his funeral and comforted his widow.
His massive escalation of the war in Vietnam turned much of America against him.
Senator Eugene McCarthy challenged him for the nomination, and when Robert Kennedy saw that LBJ was vulnerable, Kennedy joined the race.
In March 1968, Johnson surprised the nation by announcing that he would not seek reelection.
Robert Kennedy rejoiced, believing that Johnson had reinvigorated his own campaign for the Democratic nomination and had perhaps handed him the presidency.
In June, Robert Kennedy’s days ended in the pantry of the kitchen of the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles the night he won the California primary.
His murder by an assassin’s pistol shots brought back all the old feelings.
Since her husband’s assassination, Bobby had been her closest friend and adviser.
Now, five years after she had lost Jack, Bobby had also been taken from her.
Jackie was worried that Harvard would have too much control over the institution.
Her choice of husband, the older, dodgy Greek shipping millionaire Aristotle Onassis, horrified many of her friends and shocked the American people.
To her fans, it was a desecration of JFK’s memory—the death of Camelot.
Once upon a time she had been one of them, the “Inquiring Camera Girl” from the Washington Star newspaper.
Once, she had enticed some of the best photographers in America—Lowe, Avedon, Shaw, and others—to employ their art in her service.
She had manipulated the most prestigious photojournalism magazines in the country to present her and Jack in the best possible light.
She gave no interviews about the assassination, appeared in no television specials, and refused to commemorate the event.
Every five years, when the national media marked the fifth, tenth, fifteenth, twentieth, twenty-fifth, and thirtieth anniversaries of her husband’s death, she remained in seclusion and maintained a sphinx-like silence.
Despite her substantial talent as a writer and her subsequent work as an editor, she wrote no books or memoirs.
She survived the president by nearly thirty-one years, dying in May 1994 at the age of only sixty-four.
In Arlington National Cemetery, she lies buried beside her husband, near the eternal flame she lit in November 1963.
The building was fortunate to survive the aftermath of the assassination of President Kennedy.
To them, the building was an ugly landmark of the day that Dallas could never forget, one that they feared would scar the city’s reputation forever.
Once a controversial and unwelcome reminder of Dallas’s worst day, today the museum is an important part of the city’s cultural landscape and has attracted millions of visitors.
It is not a shrine to an assassin and does not sensationalize the crime.
Instead it is a responsible museum that frames the events in Dallas within the broader context of President Kennedy’s life story, American politics, and the history of 1960s America.
What a mistake it would have been, fifty years ago, in the heat of passion, to have torn the building down.
As Oswald did, you can take an elevator to the sixth floor, and there you can retrace his footsteps to the wall of windows facing Elm Street.
But you can no longer gaze out the window from which he shot the president.
To protect the sniper’s nest from vandals and souvenir hunters, a Plexiglas barrier now surrounds Oswald’s corner window.
You may, however, stand at the window beside it, look down to the street, and imagine what Oswald must have seen on that beautiful fall afternoon of November 22, 1963.
How close President Kennedy must have appeared to him in the eyepiece of the rifle’s scope.
Indeed, in person, all of Dealey Plaza is smaller than it appears to be in photographs.
Tippit; and from there his footsteps to the Texas Theatre, where he was captured.
From Elm Street, tourists gaze up at the sixth-floor window, calculating the trajectory of the shots.
The conspiracy-minded lurk behind the fence on the Grassy Knoll, speculating about a second gunman and whether he could have fired upon the presidential limousine from there.
At the decorative roadside pergola along Elm Street, they mount the low concrete pedestal where Abraham Zapruder once stood as they pan with their own cameras from left to right while they replay the famous assassination home movie in their heads.
Then they step into the middle of Elm Street, dodging traffic in order to stand on the painted X that marks the exact spot where President Kennedy was shot in the head.
Inside the museum, they approach the sniper’s nest, listening for the echo of the three rifle shots and the hollow ping of three empty cartridge cases bouncing on the wood floor, sounds heard by several of Oswald’s coworkers that day.
Once a year, on November 22 at 12:30 PM., on the date and time of the anniversary, Dealey Plaza resembles a flea market or a street bazaar.
Vendors push trinkets and souvenirs, including bootleg autopsy photographs of John F Kennedy’s corpse.
Authors peddling conspiracy theories hawk books and magazines to passersby.
Assassination buffs make annual pilgrimages to attend conspiracy-oriented conferences, as if these annual rituals—through a kind of harmonic convergence—will finally reveal the truth.
There is nothing else like it in America—Dealey Plaza is the liveliest assassination site in the nation.
In contrast, in Washington, D.C., on every April 14 at around 10:15 pM., the anniversary of the murder of Abraham Lincoln, the street in front of Ford’s Theatre is deserted.
Only a handful of people —no more than five or ten—come to maintain a nighttime vigil at the place where Lincoln was shot or to sit on the steps of the Petersen House where he died.
One person, in homage to Walt Whitman’s poem, usually leaves a bouquet of fresh lilacs there for Father Abraham.
IN THE fall of 2013, America’s basements, attics, and closets will disgorge millions of mementoes of the Kennedy assassination.
Long-hidden souvenirs overlooked for decades will be resurrected for the fiftieth anniversary.
On November 22, 1963, the American people experienced the assassination of John F Kennedy as a shared event.
On the same day at the same time, an entire nation read the same stories, saw the same photographs, listened to the same radio broadcasts, and watched the same images on television.
For four days straight, the three national television networks—CBS, NBC, and ABC— immersed the American people in a shared moment of national grief.
For the first time in United States history, the medium of television unified a nation through its coverage of a historic event.
Similarly, the great weekly picture magazines, Life and Look, published photos and stories seen by tens of millions of people.
The nation’s newspapers, some printing several editions per day, published several hundred million copies.
Once the story was over, people did not throw away their old newspapers, magazines, and commemorative publications.
Instead, they preserved them as iconic family heirlooms, as time capsules for future generations.
There is no better way to experience the utter shock, disbelief, and horror caused by the assassination of President Kennedy than by returning to these original sources and imagining what it was like to be alive and reading the afternoon editions of November 22, 1963.
Other relics of the Kennedy assassination—those suppressed for the last half century—are unlikely to see the light of day for the fiftieth anniversary.
Unlike the major relics of the Lincoln assassination, which the National Park Service displays in its museum at Ford’s Theatre and which the American people have been able to see since the early 1900s, the principal relics of the Kennedy assassination have been hidden from the American people by the National Archives for fifty years.
The museum also displays Lincoln’s coat and bloodstained pillows from the Petersen House.
The United States Army Medical Museum displays the bullet that killed Lincoln, medical instruments used on the president, and bloodstained shirt cuffs worn by one of the doctors who treated him.
The National Archives has, in contrast, thrown a veil of secrecy over the artifacts of the Kennedy assassination.
The evidence of the assassination remains buried in the vaults of the Archives in an annex building in suburban Maryland.
The other Warren Commission exhibits are stored there too, including Lee Harvey Oswald’s rifle, his pistol, his letters and writings, and his clothing, including the bullet-damaged sweater he wore when Jack Ruby shot him.
Also hidden away in the Archives is another relic, perhaps the most iconic symbol of the assassination, Jackie Kennedy’s pink suit, and her other clothing and accessories.
The Archives seeks to suppress these from public view for another century.
For the next three decades, Jacqueline Kennedy never sought to regain possession of the clothes, supporting the conclusion that they were donated to the Archives in the 1960s.
But in 2003, the Archivist of the United States yielded to Caroline Kennedy’s claim of ownership, and executed an agreement banning all access to the material.
Not all of the evidence from the assassination is at the National Archives.
One unique, macabre item from the collection is missing—President Kennedy’s brain.
During the autopsy, doctors removed it and sealed it in a leakproof stainless-steel cylindrical container with a screw-top lid.
They failed to place his brain back in his head for the funeral, and so John Kennedy was buried without it.
Then it was put in a footlocker with other medical evidence and transferred to the National Archives, where it was placed in a secure room designated for the use of JFK’s former secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, while she organized his presidential papers.
Then, on some day prior to 1966—no one knows when—the locker, with all its contents, disappeared.
Lyndon Johnson’s attorney general, Ramsey Clark, ordered an investigation, which failed to recover the brain but did uncover compelling evidence suggesting that former attorney general Robert Kennedy, aided by his assistant Angie Novello, had stolen the locker and its contents, including not only his brother’s brain but also a number of medical slides and tissue samples.
Robert Kennedy did not abscond with these materials to hide evidence of a conspiracy to kill the president.
It is much more likely that he took them to conceal from the American people any evidence of the hitherto unknown extent of JFK’s serious health problems, illnesses, and medications.
LIKE ARTIFACTS from the Lincoln assassination, relics from the Kennedy assassination have become prized collector’s items.
When the Secret Service sent the Lincoln Continental limousine back to the manufacturer to be refurbished, one or more souvenir hunters sliced bloodstained swatches of blue upholstery from the backseat and sold them to eager buyers, complete with letters of authenticity.
The limousine is now in a museum, but first it had been altered substantially after November 22 for use by the new president, Lyndon Johnson.
A car blanket from JFK’s limousine, embroidered with the presidential seal, has been offered for private sale.
And recently the American and presidential flags that flew from the front fenders during President Kennedy’s last motorcade were sold to a private collector for several hundred thousand dollars.
The revolver Jack Ruby used to slay Lee Harvey Oswald, valued at several hundred thousand dollars, reposes in a private collection, as do the suit, hat, and even the shoes Ruby wore the day he committed the murder.
On December 1, 1963, Jacqueline Kennedy sent a handwritten letter to Nellie Connally in care of Parkland Hospital, where the wounded governor remained bedridden.
Connally refused to publish the rest of it in her 2003 memoirs of Dallas.
He knew he had crossed the ethical line that divided journalist from hagiographer.
Fifteen years later, in the epilogue to his memoir, In Search of History, he was still in Camelot’s thrall.
Except for the sadness and the personal ache, all seemed as it had been before.
Passing time and a litany of unwholesome revelations about President Kennedy’s private life have not extinguished the myth.
The truth once hidden behind the wizard’s curtain may have tarnished the legend, but the forces that Jacqueline Kennedy unleashed to preserve and romanticize the memory of her husband are too powerful to ever put the “one brief shining moment” back into the bottle.
IN THE aftermath of the Warren Commission, many people found it hard to believe such an inconsequential man as Oswald could change history in such a monumental way.
Many thought, and still think, this crime was too great to be explained by random chance.
For more than two and a half centuries, Americans have turned to numerous conspiracy theories to explain catastrophic events or troubled times.
In the 1960s, many found Oswald’s journey to the Soviet Union and his interest in Cuba suspicious.
These and other questions provoked some critics to doubt the conclusions in the Warren Report, and to question even the most simple, obvious, and persuasive evidence of Oswald’s guilt.
Many of the conspiracy theorists have devoted their lives to proving that John F Kennedy was the victim of one plot or another.
Many of their theories—and there are a dizzying number of them— contradict one another.
According to the most popular ones, the president was killed by a Russian or Cuban Communist conspiracy, anti-Castro Cuban exiles, the anticommunist American right wing, organized crime—the Mafia, the CIA, the FBI, the United States military, Texas millionaires in the oil business, the “militaryindustrial complex,” or even Vice President Lyndon Johnson.
Some conspiracy theorists claim that Oswald fired no shots in Dealey Plaza.
They argue—despite the considerable evidence against him—that he was framed.
Others admit that Oswald fired the shots but insist he was not the lone gunman, and that additional snipers—two, three, four, or more—fired as many as sixteen rounds, even though most witnesses said they heard only three shots.
One theory asserts that there were two Oswalds—the real one, and the other an imposter sent back from Russia.
Some theorists believe the same master conspiracy behind the Kennedy assassination controls other important and nefarious events in American life, including other subsequent assassinations.
They reject the proven role that chance, luck, randomness, coincidence, or mistake have played in human history for thousands of years.
Just as the conspiracy theorists have questioned everything about the assassination, so must a reader question their writings with equal skepticism.
Today we know much more about the assassination of President Kennedy than the members of the Warren Commission did.
More information and sophisticated advances in science and technology have illuminated the crime and its evidence in new ways.
Indeed, in the future—fifty or one hundred years from now—it is more likely that the discovery of any new evidence, along with further scientific advances, will only strengthen the case against Lee Harvey Oswald as the lone gunman.
Oswald did not tell his wife, mother, or brother when they visited him in jail.
He did not reveal his motives to the Dallas police, the Secret Service, or the FBI when they questioned him.
Perhaps, embittered, he killed the president to impress Soviet officials who placed so little value on him after his defection.
But by the fall of 1963, Oswald had long soured on life in Russia and had renounced the corruptions of Soviet Communism.
Or maybe Oswald was one of America’s first glory killers, obsessed with Kennedy’s glamorous, movie-starlike celebrity.
By killing the president, Oswald’s deluded mind sought to merge their identities, hoping that some of the magic Oswald never possessed— effervescence, popularity, wealth, success, and even greatness—might rub off on him.
If he could return today to the scene of his crime, he would be pleased to see that, half a century later, he remains the subject of endless fascination and speculation.
He taunts us still, defying us to solve the mystery of the why that he left behind.
Unlike John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of Abraham Lincoln, Oswald did not leap to the stage, boast of his crime, and wave a bloody dagger before our eyes.
The assassination of President John F Kennedy on November 22, 1963, is as compelling as any drama written by William Shakespeare.
JOHN F KENNEDY’S unfinished life was cut short before he could fulfill his potential.
The nation mourned the death of its young president, not only for the loss of what he was—but also for the loss of what he might have become.
If he had lived and won reelection in 1964, he would have served until January 20, 1969.
One can only speculate what he might have accomplished if he had had more time.
Many people, especially those who lived through it, saw the Kennedy assassination as a dividing line in our history and November 22, 1963, as the day when something went terribly wrong in American life.
We can look back in wonder, but we will never know the ways in which the death of President Kennedy altered the future course of American history.
A YEAR after the assassination, reflecting on her husband’s life, Jacqueline Kennedy said, “I realized that history was what made Jack what he was.
She recognized that the assassination had transformed him into a hero too.
IN GEORGETOWN the house from which John and Jacqueline Kennedy set out on the journey that began on January 20, 1961, and ended on November 22, 1963, still stands.
If you go there today, perhaps on a chilly fall evening in late November, when the crisp, fallen leaves crinkle underfoot, the twin lamps beside the front door still burn, still glowing in the darkness of the night.
Despite her busy life as a professor, author, and mother, Andrea helped shepherd all three books in my presidential trilogy—Manhunt, Bloody Crimes, and End of Days—to publication.
She read every page of this book more than once, from first to final draft, and her editorial comments, from overall storytelling advice to meticulous line edits, were indispensable and improved the book in countless ways.
Our boys, Harrison and Cameron, also helped me tell this story by assisting on my book for young adults—The President Has Been Shot!—that preceded End of Days.
It is impossible to think about the death and funeral of John F Kennedy without recalling the death of another president ninety-eight years earlier.
The upheaval that followed the assassination of Abraham Lincoln, and the unprecedented national mourning unleashed by the events of April 14 and 15, 1865, was not seen in this country again until November 22, 1963.
Indeed, the parallels connecting these stories are so striking that I began to think of them as bookends to one great sad, American tale of loss, legend, and myth.
My previous books on the assassination of Abraham Lincoln, the chase for his killer, his funeral, and the national death pageant that transformed him from man to martyr made it possible for me to write about John Kennedy.
A number of people helped bring my version of John—and Jacqueline—Kennedy’s end of days to print.
Regarding Jackie it is easy to forget that, although she survived the gunfire in Dealey Plaza, the life she knew ended that day.
Collins, and David Lovett read the manuscript early on and offered many helpful comments and insights.
Michael, former Congressional staffer, White House veteran, and former executive director of the national Abraham Lincoln bicentennial commission, brought his extensive knowledge of the presidency and the modern executive mansion to bear to my advantage.
Ron, one of the nation’s preeminent experts on the First Amendment, is a prolific author of books not only about law, but also on American legends of another kind, including Lenny Bruce and the Beats.
David Lovett, Washington lawyer, lobbyist, and association executive, scrutinized the manuscript with exquisite care and went far above and beyond the call of duty to assist me.
He is more knowledgeable than anyone alive about the bibliography and historiography of the Kennedy assassination.
We have been friends for almost thirty years, and he is the only person I know who matches my obsessive zeal for tracking down obscure historical rarities.
In the words of Abraham Lincoln, David gave his “last full measure of devotion” to this project, and for that I thank him.
My friend Richard Thomas narrated all three audio books in this series.
He is one of the finest actors of his generation and, whether he was busy in theater, television, or film, Richard always took the time to lend his great American voice to my words.
The late Wesley J Liebeler, my professor and mentor at the UCLA School of Law, served as an assistant counsel on the Warren Commission.
Jim had an irreverent and irrepressible sense of humor, and I wish he were around today to read how some of the more outré conspiracy theorists have theorized that I, as Jim’s protégé, must be part of the government conspiracy to cover up the true history of the Kennedy assassination.
Not only did Jim pass on to me the secrets of the Warren Commission, he gave me something far more precious.
Fellow UCLA Law alumnus Vincent Bugliosi is one of the finest prosecutors in American history.
The Assassination of President John F Kennedy, is one of the most important books about the event.
He is a remarkable and generous friend, and I have enjoyed our long conversations about the events surrounding November 22.
Thanks to former editor of the Los Angles Times Shelby Coffey III and the great investigative journalist Edward Jay Epstein for an unforgettable conversation about Lee Harvey Oswald and the evidence against him.
Ed is a brilliant historian of the assassination and his books are essential reading.
I am indebted to Clinton J Hill, United States Secret Service, for several conversations about what he saw and did on the afternoon of November 22.
John talked about what it was like to know John and Robert Kennedy, and he shared stories about being alone with them in JFK’s last house in Georgetown.
John speaks with touching eloquence about what it felt like to live through November 22.
Thanks to Tom Ingram, former editor in chief of Nashville’s David Lipscomb High School newspaper, for providing me with an original issue of the Pony Express extra that covered the Kennedy assassination.
Jessica Kline assisted me with gracious expertise and good humor whenever I needed help with computer problems.
Amy Hart was invaluable in producing all the printed materials I needed to revise the manuscript from first to final draft.
My literary agent and good friend Richard Abate worked tirelessly to bring End of Days to publication.
The great agents believe that once they sell a book, their work is not done—it has just begun.
On all of them, Richard has stood beside me and he has, with great taste, humor and a historian’s eye, made them better books.
My editor Henry Ferris has been with me on all three of my books about presidential history.
By now I have inflicted upon him a century’s worth of American tragedy, death, and mourning.
Until then, I owe him my thanks for his patience, kindness, and invaluable contributions along the way.
Henry’s lieutenant Cole Hager assisted in gathering the photos, bringing the manuscript to final draft for publication, and getting it into production.
During a hectic process he was always cool under fire, and I thank him.
Sharyn Rosenblum has been with me on all my books and remains the best publicist in the business.
I have fond memories of a memorable dinner at Martin’s Tavern, where we outlined the campaign for this book, and then went on a midnight walk past John and Jackie Kennedy’s last Georgetown house a few blocks away, before strolling down to the old C & O Canal.
Martin’s still serves customers at the same tables once occupied by Lyndon Johnson, Sam Rayburn, Richard Nixon, and a young unmarried senator named John F Kennedy.
Legend has it that he proposed to Jacqueline Bouvier at another window booth in the restaurant.
My friends at Martin’s—owner Billy Martin and manager Joseph Filosa—have for years been hospitable hosts to me, and to the ghosts of Camelot who still dine there.
At the Monocle, the famous Capitol Hill restaurant and watering hole for several generations of American political and government leaders, owner John Valanos and manager Nick Selimos gave me a home away from home during the time I wrote End of Days, and all my other books.
Thanks to my first-class legal team of Eric S Brown and Michael I Rudell, and also Jonathan D Lupkin.
Thanks to my friend and fellow Washingtonian Mark Vargas for his energetic promotion of my books.
We have spent hours in conversation discussing our mutual fascination with 1960s American politics, John Kennedy, Lyndon B Johnson, and Jacqueline Kennedy.
Sean Langille explained to me the mysteries of social media and other new forms of communication.
It was Douglas Brinkley who first suggested, one day in the summer of 2007 as we stood together on a Washington, D.C., street corner, that I write about the Kennedy assassination someday.
On another occasion, we enjoyed a marathon dinner where we talked about the life and legend of Jackie Kennedy.
I remember nothing of November 22, although that afternoon I must have been at home, watching news coverage with my mother.
Across the street from our house lived my two favorite childhood playmates, Ourania and Evanthia Malliris.
The girls were a few years older than I Their father was a conservative Greek grocer who did not allow them to watch television.
His daughters, he dreamed, would attend prestigious universities one day—Harvard was one of the ones he mentioned—and idling in front of a TV screen had no part in that plan.
On Sunday, November 24, my mother told me that the girls were coming over to our house because they had received special permission to watch something on television.
My mother said that the president of the United States had died, and that we were going to watch a horse-drawn carriage carry his coffin to the United States Capitol and then watch the memorial service there.
She was a painter, and these were some of her references and sources for ideas.
When I was eight or nine years old, I discovered a treasure trove in that closet—her time capsule of materials that she had collected about the assassination of president Kennedy.
Mesmerized, I paged through old Life and Look magazines from the fall of 1963.
With care, I opened long-folded newspapers, their pages browned and brittle, and read their frightening headlines.
I did not know much about President Kennedy, and did not understand the significance of everything I saw, but I knew from my mother’s tears that something terrible had happened.
Every year, when late November came around, my father, Lennart Swanson, shared with me his memories of the day President Kennedy was shot and entranced me with stories about where he was at 12:30 P.M.—in Larsen’s restaurant on the northwest side of Chicago—and what had happened there and in the city that afternoon and evening.
He bought me the Kennedy “Eternal Flame” plug-in, electric night-light pictured in this book.
He also gave me the bright-red steel Chicago American newspaper vending rack that I wrote about in the book and that remains, to this day, filled with a stack of copies of the edition from that unforgettable Friday afternoon.
And so I thank my parents, who inspired me long ago to tell the story that you now hold in your hands.
James L Swanson Edgartown, Massachusetts August 1, 2013 BIBLIOGRAPHY A NOTE ON SOURCES The bibliography of the Kennedy assassination is enormous.
There are thousands of books, magazines, pamphlets, and articles on the subject.
One of the finest and most extensive collections in the world is not even in a public institution, and is the private library assembled by Washington, D.C., attorney, lobbyist, and association executive David Lovett.
In addition to these published sources, millions of pages of documents in government files and elsewhere pertain to the assassination of President Kennedy.
Thus, any general reader who wishes to learn more about the subject must be selective.
On the same day and at about the same time, almost the entire nation read the same stories, saw the same photographs, and watched the same televised images.
For four days straight, the three national television news networks—CBS, NBC, and ABC—immersed the American people in a shared moment of national grief.
For the first time in United States history, the medium of television unified a country through saturation coverage of a historic event.
Similarly, the great weekly photojournalism magazines, Look, Life, and the Saturday Evening Post, published images and stories seen by tens of millions of people.
Once the story was over, people did not throw away their old newspapers and magazines.
All over the country, people put them away in basements, closets, and attics, where they can still be found today.
There is no better way to learn how America experienced the assassination of President Kennedy than by going back to these original sources.
As you turn the pages of these old publications, now unparalleled artifacts of how the death of the president was reported and experienced, you will travel back in time and know what it was like to be alive on November 22, 1963.
Later, the two major wire services released oversized, commemorative hardcover books that seemed to find their way into half the households in America.
Across the nation, local newspapers mailed millions of copies of these low-priced books to their subscribers.
Published in 1964 by the official United States government commission appointed by President Lyndon B Johnson to investigate the Kennedy assassination, and chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren, the Report consists of one volume of findings supported by twenty-six volumes of testimony, evidence, and exhibits.
The Warren Commission concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald killed President Kennedy, that he acted alone, and that there was no evidence that he was part of a conspiracy.
The publication of the Warren Report inaugurated a deluge of books on the Kennedy assassination that has not subsided to this day.
The following bibliography lists most of the books that I consulted while researching End of Days.
The twenty-seven volumes published by the Warren Commission remain an essential source.
Often dismissed by critics as out of date or ridiculed by the conspiracy minded as part of the cover-up, these volumes cannot be ignored, and contain vital information.
The unwieldy set occupied an entire shelf, and the books were expensive and difficult to cross-reference.
Today, the work of the Warren Commission is available in searchable, electronic form.
The majority of books published on the Kennedy assassination advance one conspiracy theory or another.
Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of JFK and Vincent Bugliosi’s Reclaiming History: The Assassination of President John EF Kennedy.
For readers deterred by the titanic size of the Bugliosi book, I recommend his shorter account, Four Days in November.
For a brief and excellent introduction to the subject, on how it was reported, and for insightful commentary on the history and psychology of JFK assassination conspiracy theories, see Peter Knight’s The Kennedy Assassination.
Investigative journalist Edward J Epstein remains one of the most important scholars of the Kennedy assassination.
The Warren Commission and _ the Establishment of Truth, Epstein—neither a conspiracy theorist nor an apologist for the Warren Commission —has asked skeptical questions about the events of November 22, 1963.
The two pioneering and encyclopedic books on November 22 to 25, William Manchester’s Death of a President and Jim Bishop’s The Day Kennedy Was Shot,are as compelling today as they were when they were published in the 1960s.
For a compelling narrative on the odd life of Lee Harvey Oswald, written by a journalist who knew Oswald and his wife, Marina (and, strangely, John F Kennedy too), see Priscilla Johnson McMillan’s Marina and Lee.
Marina and Lee and Oswald’s Tale remain two of the best five or six books ever written on the Kennedy assassination.
Paine’s Garage and the Murder of John F Kennedy remains one of my favorite books on the subject.
More than almost any work on the subject, it resurrects the emotions of that terrible day in Dallas, fifty years ago.
The White House Conversations of Lyndon B Johnson Regarding the Assassination, the Warren Commission, and the Aftermath.
Dealey Plaza National Historic Landmark Including the Sixth Floor Museum.
An Account of the Clay Shaw—Jim Garrison Affair in the City of New Orleans.
Seventy Hours and Thirty Minutes, as Broadcast on the NBC Television Network by NBC News.
Stored Away for 30 Years in an Old Briefcase, New Evidence Is Now Revealed by Former Dallas Police Crime Lab Detective R W Livingstone.
Final Report of the Select Commission on Assassinations, and the accompanying 12 hearing and appendix volumes on the JFK Assassination, 95th Congress, 2nd Session.
Memorial Addresses in the Congress of the United States and Tributes in Eulogy of John Fitzgerald Kennedy, a Late President of the United States.
Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President John E Kennedy. vols.
Report of the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President John F Kennedy.
The Kennedy Assassination, the Media, and the Shaping of Collective Memory.
An In-Depth Investigation into the Mysterious Deaths of the Witnesses in the JFK Assassination.
The Warren Omission; A Micro-Study of the Methods and Failures of the Warren Commission.
The Assassination of John F Kennedy and the First Generation Critics of the Warren Report.
Jim Garrison, JFK’s Assassination, and the Case That Should Have Changed History.
Disinformation, Misinformation, and the “Conspiracy” to Kill JFK Exposed.
Aftermath of an Execution; The Burial and Final Rites of Lee Harvey Oswald as Told by His Mother.
An Electronic Probe into the Murder of John F: Kennedy and the Dallas Coverup.
An Examination of the Contradictions and Omissions of the Warren Report.
The Governmental Conspiracy to Conceal the Facts about the Public Execution of John Kennedy.
A Survivor’s Story—Why We Will Never Know the Truth About the JFK Assassination.
Whitewash; Whitewash II; Photographic Whitewash; Whitewash IV; and Postmortem.
Wilber, Charles G The Medicolegal Investigation of the President John F Kennedy Murder.
Charles C Thomas Publisher, 1978 Wrone, David R The Zapruder Film: Reframing JFK’s Assassination.
Bealle, Morris A Guns of the Regressive Right or How to Kill a President.
SOURCE NOTES The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition from which it was created.
To locate a specific passage, please use your e-book reader’s search tools.
Shaw was a freelance photographer whose Kennedy photos were made while he was on assignment by Life magazine.
There were several other books written, edited, or illustrated by this photographer.
Unfortunately, forty thousand of his negatives documenting the Kennedy presidency were destroyed in the September 11, 2001, attack on the World Trade Center.
The Smith & Wesson .38-caliber revolver was purchased through a mail-order coupon from Seaport-Traders, Inc., a mail-order division of George Rose & Co., Los Angeles.
Although it was ordered under an alias, handwriting analysis confirmed that the purchase order was in Oswald’s handwriting.
The rifle purchase actually was confirmed by the FBI on the evening of November 22, 1963.
For instance, he read American Rifleman, Field and Stream, Argosy, and Guns and Hunting, which were lying around on the coffee table in the waiting room of the Cresent City Garage next to the Reily Coffee Company, where Oswald once worked.
The House Select Committee on Assassinations verified the authenticity of these photographs taken from Oswald’s camera by Marina Oswald.
As early as his service in the military, one fellow Marine remembered seeing in the mailroom Oswald’s subscription to the Worker.
At the time of the Walker shooting, Oswald had subscriptions to both of these publications.
These newspapers can be seen in the backyard photos with dates before the time the photographs were taken.
The Warren Commission also confirmed his subscription to these publications.
The Oswalds fought often, and their relationship can best be described as abusive.
In Marina and Lee, McMillan documents numerous quarrels, including those before friends and acquaintances.
Even after the assassination attempt, Oswald continued to be fascinated with General Walker’s activities.
In July 1963, Oswald was invited by his cousin, Eugene Murret, to speak about his experiences in Russia, before fellow seminarians at Spring Hill College in Alabama.
The notes by Oswald in his own handwriting, which he made to prepare for this speech, mentioned General Walker’s right-wing activities.
Also, Oswald wrote several letters to the Worker, including one undated, but postmarked November 1, 1963, claiming that he attended a meeting where General Walker spoke on October 23, 1963.
Michael Ralph Paine remembered Oswald going to this speech and specifically was questioned about it.
Rifleman Takes Shot at Walker,” Dallas Morning News, April 11, 1963, 1.
The day after the shooting, April 11, 1963, the first, early city edition of the Dallas Morning News contained no mention of the shooting at all.
That edition probably was put to bed well before news of the shooting emerged the evening of April 10.
A front-page story—Hughes, “Close Call”—appeared in the “Three Star” final morning edition.
The next day, two days after the shooting, the story was reprinted on page five.
Oswald expressed disappointment over the lack of coverage of his actions.
However, it is possible, because of his habit of reading day-old morning newspapers, that Oswald might have not have read about the shooting until two days later.
Marina Oswald testifies that her husband heard nothing on the radio that night but did buy a paper the next day and found out what he had missed.
On one of the backyard photos, Oswald wrote a handwritten inscription, “For George, Lee Harvey Oswald” and gave it to de Mohrenschidt.
Several experts confirmed that all the backyard photos were genuine, taken by Oswald’s own camera, and that the handwriting was indeed Oswald’s.
The note that Oswald left for his wife on the evening of the shooting, the photographs found among Oswald’s possessions after the assassination of President Kennedy, firearm identification of the bullet found in Walker’s home, and admissions and other statements made to Marina Oswald by Oswald concerming the shooting.
The Rivalry That Shaped Postwar America , and David Pietrusia, 1960: LBJ vs.
There are numerous works that touched upon Oswald’s early childhood, adolescence, Marine service, life in the Soviet Union, and marriage to Marina.
Oswald used his mother to request a dependency discharge from the Marines.
Robert Oswald stated that his mother indeed had an accident reaching for a glass of candy.
In addition to McMillan, who happened to interview Oswald in the Soviet Union, one of the best sources for information on Oswald’s activities in Russia was Norman Mailer, who interviewed some of Oswald’s acquaintances and identified some of his interactions in Russia.
From the time Oswald arrived back in the United States on June 13, 1962, he was unable to keep steady employment.
He quit or was fired from the four low-paying menial jobs he held up until November 22, 1963.
While he was out of work, he appeared at both the Texas Employment Commission and the Louisiana Department of Labor offices in his efforts to find a job, and he collected unemployment compensation.
His acquaintances tried to help him find work, and he was interviewed for jobs he did not obtain.
There were numerous witnesses from the Texas Employment Commission, and Commission exhibits related to Oswald’s employment history.
At the police station, Oswald also was interviewed by FBI agent John Lester Quigley.
In his own handwriting, Oswald discussed his activities in New Orleans.
Stuckey interviewed Oswald for almost thirty-seven minutes, but the interview edited for broadcast was only four and a half minutes.
Several professionals, including those who interacted with him, attempted to develop a psychological profile and assess his capacity for violence.
See the testimony of Marina Oswald, WC 1, 65, and McMillan, Marina and Lee, 362.
In her second appearance before the Warren Commission, Marina confirmed this threat.
Her memory was less solid as to whether there were locks on the door or whether Lee could get out when he wanted.
The FBI indentified and interviewed numerous people who interacted with Oswald.
Several individuals remembered Oswald on the bus to Mexico and spoke with him.
From Marina Oswald’s testimony, as well as the documents she produced, it was confirmed that Oswald had indeed visited Mexico City.
In a typed note, signed by Oswald on November 9, 1963, he recalled his failed efforts during his visit to Mexico City to get a visa to go to Cuba.
See the testimony of Roy Truly, WC 3, 237; Donald Jackson, “Evolution of an Assassin,” Life, Feb., 1964, 78; and Bugliosi, Reclaiming History, 1455.
He was very happy at the birth of another daughter and even wept a little.
Hosty destroyed this note, and it was not known until around the time of the HSCA investigation.
In June 1963, Kennedy convened a private meeting with both LBJ and Governor Connally in El Paso, Texas.
Neither Johnson nor Connally wanted the president to visit or meddle in local Texas politics.
JFK viewed this visit, among other things, as a fund-raising opportunity.
There was an October 4, 1963, meeting at the White House with Connally—Johnson was excluded.
A five-city visit was planned, San Antonio, Houston, Fort Worth, Dallas, and Austin, concluding with JFK staying overnight at the LBJ Ranch on the evening of November 22, 1963.
See “Why Kennedy Went to Texas,” by Governor John Connally Jr., Life, Nov., 1967, 86.
Because of right-wing extremism in Dallas, both LBJ and Governor Connally urged Kennedy to make only a quick luncheon speech in Dallas but no public appearances.
See John Connally Jr., “Why Kennedy Went to Texas,” Life, Nov., 1967, 86.
The dressmaker of Jackie’s pink suit also was surrounded with some mystery.
Although from the 1950s Jackie was a client of Coco Chanel, the world-renowned French fashion designer, Mrs.
Kennedy received some bad press because of her shopping spree while visiting Paris.
There are photographs of Jackie wearing this dress or something very similar several times prior to November 22.
According to the testimony of Paul Roderick Gregory (an acquaintance of the Oswalds who visited their home as a student studying Russian in the late summer of 1962), the Oswalds “always” had a copy of Life magazine in their living room with a picture of John F Kennedy on the cover.
She was explaining why Lee borrowed so many books about great leaders for the library.
In addition, from the records of the New Orleans Public Library, it was determined that in July 1963, Oswald borrowed William Manchester’s book on JFK, Portrait of a President, and JFK’s Profiles in Courage.
The complete motorcade route was revealed to the public by the two Dallas newspapers on Tuesday, November 19, 1963.
Coworker Charles Douglas Givens stated that he never saw Oswald buy a newspaper and that he would read yesterday’s papers.
However, Givens also stated that two of Oswald’s coworkers, Harold Norman and James Jarman, brought in the Dallas Morning News every day , so it is possible that Oswald read a paper or two on the same day.
This phenomenon, the “zero-year curse,” was finally broken in 1981, when President Ronald Reagan survived an assassin’s bullet outside the Washington Hilton Hotel in the District of Columbia.
The first documented assassination attempt on a sitting United States president was the attack on Andrew Jackson outside the United States Capitol on January 30, 1835, after he attended the funeral for a member of the United States House of Representatives.
Both pistols of the assassin, Richard Lawrence, misfired, and Jackson began to beat him with a cane.
The prosecutor at the trial was Francis Scott Key, and Lawrence was quickly found not guilty by reason of insanity.
Lawrence was housed at various institutions and eventually was moved to St.
This rare work is the first freestanding pamphlet or book published on the assassination or attempted assassination of a United States president.
One of the few copies that exist can be found in the rare book collection of the Library of Congress.
Because the president was visiting so many cities so quickly, the Secret Service was unable to transport the presidential limousine to all the cities.
Instead, the Ford Motor Company provided additional Lincoln town car convertibles.
See testimony of Marina Oswald, WC 1, 65, and McMillan, Marina and Lee, 414.
In Miami in December 1962, she also joined the president and spoke in Spanish at the Orange Bowl to members of Brigade 2506, which participated in unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion.
Robert Alan Surrey, a business partner and political associate of General Walker, was the author of this handbill.
About five thousand copies were printed on “cheap colored newspaper print” and then were inserted in some morning newspapers or put on car windshields.
They concluded that there was no graceful way to retract the invitation to JFK and instead had the mayor, Earle Cabell, and the Dallas police chief, Jesse Curry, appear on local TV and radio stations, as well as give interviews in newspapers.
They called on the citizens of Dallas to act according to law and warmly welcome the president.
They condemned violence and warned that there would be a response to any misbehavior or protests.
The Secret Service expressed fears of JFK riding in a motorcade with an open car.
Even then, if somebody had the advantage of looking down on the motorcade and was a good enough marksman to hit the president with the first shot, there was little an agent could do.
See “Political Auction,” Potomack Company, Nov., 2008, sale 15, lot 100.
In her diary, Evelyn Lincoln, Kennedy’s secretary, said that she found a note written by JFK in 1961 that suggested that the president had a premonition of his own death.
In October 1953, when they returned from their honeymoon, Jack read to Jackie what he said was his favorite poem, by Alan Seeger.
The Secret Service had been assigned to protect the president after the McKinley assassination.
While the Secret Service agents in 1963 were dedicated, conscientious professionals, it really was not until after the assassination attempt on President Reagan that the protection of the “package” in the motorcade was really secure.
With few exceptions, such as presidential inaugurals and State of the Union addresses, the motorcade route is varied and almost never publicized.
At presidential inaugurals , when the president gets out of the car to walk on Pennsylvania Avenue, it is usually where governmental buildings, the FBI and Justice Department, are on either side of the street.
Frequently, the president wears a bulletproof jacket at public functions.
The Secret Service is not shy about putting up bulletproof glass to prevent sharpshooter snipers from firing from great distances.
Today a sharpshooter with a modern sniper rifle accurately can hit a target from a mile away.
Even up until John Hinckley Jr.’s attempted assassination of Reagan, the “zoneof-protection” was inadequate.
In 1964, the Warren Commission made several recommendations to improve presidential protection.
Even the early afternoon November 22, 1963, edition of the Dallas Times Herald contained a first-page story with the headline secret service sure all is secure.
Experience the Moment-to Moment Account of the Four Days That Changed America , 15.
In 1964, many long-playing 33 rpm records were commercially released that replayed the events of November 22.
For the Secret Service code of names of some individuals in the motorcade, see Manchester, Death, and Blaine, Kennedy Detail.
Presidential Motorcade Schematic Listing; November 22, 1963, Dallas, Texas.
In the chaos of the events and the “whistle stop” nature of the President’s visit to Texas, there are different, and sometimes, conflicting accounts as to the exact location of some of the individuals in this Dallas motorcade.
This is especially true of the three buses and the location of some members of JFK’s staff.
The Advance car * Dallas Police Captain Perdue William Lawrence, Assistant in Charge of motorcade detail (Testimony—WC, Vol.
George L Whitmeyer, Jr., East Texas Section Commander of the Army Reserve (middle rear seat) * Jacob L Puterbaugh, Democratic National Committee Advance Man Three two-wheel advance motorcycles (WC, Vol.
Brewer * Dallas Police Officer Leon E Grey * Dallas Police Officer Harold B Freeman * Dallas Police Officer William G Lumpkin The lead car (WC, Vol.
XVHI, CE 1026—Secret Service Memoranda; and Manchester, Death, 134) * Secret Service Agent William Robert Greer (Testimony—WC, Vol.
XVIII, CE 1024, 723) * Secret Service Special Agent in Charge of Dallas Detail Roy H Kellerman Mrs.
John F Kennedy President John F Kennedy Motorcycle escorts for the Presidential limousine (WC, Vol.
XVIII, CE 1026—Secret Service Memoranda; Manchester, Death, 134; and Trask, Pictures of the Pain, 63) Secret Service Agent Samuel A Kinney (Statement—WC, Vol.
XVIII, CE 1024, 760) The Vice Presidential limousine (numerous sources, including WC, Vol.
XVIII, CE 1024 and 1026—Secret Service Memoranda, and Manchester, Death, 134) Texas Highway Patrolman Hurchel D Jacks Secret Service Agent Rufus Wayne Youngblood Senator Ralph Yarborough Mrs.
XVII, CE 1024 and 1026—Secret Service Memoranda; and Manchester, Death, 134) * Texas Highway Patrolman Joe Henry Rich (Statement—WCG, Vol.
XVIII, CE 1024, 800) * Vice Presidential aide Clifton C Carter (Affidavit—WC, Vol.
XVII, CE 768, 615) * Texas Highway Patrolman Milton T Wright (Statement—WC, Vol.
James Darnell, WBAP-TV (In Underwood’s testimony in WC) Malcolm O Couch, WFAA-TV Robert Hill Jackson, photographer, The Dallas Times Herald (WC, Vol.
Albert Richard Thomas (Mary Ferrell’s Chronologies, Vol., November 22, 1963, Narrative, 371) Rep.
Joe Savage, Continental Trailways bus driver (Oral Interview, Sixth Floor Museum—stated he drove the first press bus) Bo Byers, Houston Chronicle, reporter (C-Span broadcast, “Journalists Remember the JFK Assassination,” November 20, 1993.
Two Motorcycles * Dallas Police Officer R Smart * Dallas Police Officer Bobby Joe Dale The Western Union car (WC, Vol.
Secret Service Assistant to the Special Agent in Charge Emory Roberts waved off Secret Service Agent Don Lawton.
This was in some way a poor attempt at an inside joke, since Lawton knew that JFK did not want agents to block the view of the crowds, and he also knew that his assignment was actually to stay behind to keep Love Field and Air Force One secure.
Instead, Secret Service Agent Clint Hill was crouched on the running board behind the president’s car for much of the motorcade.
Although there have been unconfirmed reports that most of the copies of the twenty-page dinner program for the Texas Democrats Welcome Dinner were picked up from the printer and then destroyed that afternoon, many of these programs continue to find their way into the collector marketplace.
However, as journalist Max Holland noted, this retelling may not be a true account.
The Warren Commission testimony of some of Oswald’s coworkers demonstrated that they all knew that the presidential motorcade was going to pass by their building, and that they planned to watch it.
Secret Service Agent Rufus Youngblood stated that the motorcade began with a speed of 20 to 25 miles an hour, and Secret Service Agent Gerald Blaine believed that the motorcade began at a speed of 25 to 30 miles per hour.
But the presidential car slowed considerably as the crowds began to form and especially when the motorcade proceeded west on Main Street.
As the crowds thinned, the motorcade was going about 10 miles per hour when it began to turn onto Houston Street.
Through the years, Nellie Connally often quoted herself, and slightly varied these remarks.
For instance, in her statement to the press at Parkland Hospital on November 24, 1963, she said, “I had just turned around and said to him, you can’t say Dallas doesn’t love you, Mr President.
In her Warren Commission testimony in the spring of 1964, she changed this slightly, and remarked that “after we got off Main Street . . . the receptions had been so good every place that I showed much restraint by not mentioning something about it before.
These three individuals, all coworkers of Oswald, were in the closest proximity to him when the shots were fired.
They all heard the shots coming from above them on the sixth floor, heard the sound of cartridge shells dropping on the floor, and experienced some cement falling from the ceiling.
Years later, Brennan would also write about his observations before and after the assassination.
Initially Abraham Zapruder, manufacturer of ladies’ dresses, did not bring his camera to work.
At the urging of his secretary, Lillian Rogers, he returned home and retrieved his “high end” 8mm Bell & Howell 414PD Director Series camera.
Around 11:30m., he began to consider the best location from which he could film the motorcade.
Finally Zapruder and his receptionist, Marilyn Sitzman, decided that the best location would be to stand on top of a four-foot-high concrete pedestal, which extended to the left of the pergola on the north side of Elm Street.
Today, there is always a “pool” camera covering the president’s public movements.
Nevertheless, there were many amateur and a few professional photographers and filmmakers in Dealey Plaza.
Other important films include those taken from the other side of the Grassy Knoll by Orville Nix and Marie Muchmore.
Also, important still photographs were taken by Phil Willis, James “Ike” Altgens, and Mary Moorman.
Copies of the Zapruder film were first “bootlegged” by Penn Jones Jr., publisher of the Midlothian Mirror, after Jim Garrison subpoenaed it as a part of his New Orleans investigation.
Dan Rather of CBS News gave an audio narration of the film on TV in 1963.
The first TV viewing of the film occurs on Geraldo Rivera’s Good Night America on ABC in 1975.
Many who viewed the Zapruder film believed that the camera shakes at the point where Zapruder is startled by the first shot.
In addition to governmental activities, there have been numerous independent studies as well as reenactments, confirming the number of shots and trajectory.
At the time of the assassination, there were over two hundred witnesses in Dealey Plaza.
The majority of these witnesses thought that they heard no more than three shots and that they came from behind JFK’s car.
Some of these witnesses and others believed that they initially heard the sounds of fireworks or motorcycles that backfired before they realized what had happened.
Those closest to the sixth-floor window all testified that they heard and felt three shots.
While some of the witness testimony changed over time and not all testimony was consistent, credible investigations both governmental and independent that reviewed the totality of the evidence concluded that the shots came from behind JFK and were fired from the sixth-floor window.
Viewed by itself and without corroboration from other evidentiary sources, eyewitness testimony can be unreliable in many cases.
While this recording was widely perceived to be contemporaneous, this audio was actually a recreation made by the station a few days after the assassination.
A coworker of Jenkins, Sam Pate, who began this broadcast, told the FBI in 1964 that it was a re-creation.
In an interview, Pate, Jenkins, and the sound board engineer all recalled interrupting the original KBOX broadcast on November 22, 1963.
Merriman Smith received a Pulitzer Prize for his coverage of the assassination.
This bus driver gave Oswald a bus transfer that was found on his person at the time of arrest.
Oswald’s former landlady happened to be on the bus as well, and she identified him.
Also see his taxicab manifest for November 22, 1963, WC 16, CE 370, 966.
Roberts was the person who rented Oswald the room and also encountered him shortly after the assassination at the rooming house at 1026 North Beckley.
Warren Commission Assistant Counsel David W Belin speculated that Oswald may have been on his way to catching a bus to Mexico before his encounter with Officer Tippit.
This hypothesis was in draft chapter 6 of the Warren Report but was excluded in the final version.
Barker mentioned that three shots were fired in Dealey Plaza but in error reported that a Secret Service agent was killed.
Clint Hill told Smith of Kennedy’s death, but the reporter would need official confirmation before he communicated this over the UPI wire service.
After the broadcast on television that the president had been shot and had been taken to Parkland Hospital, a decision quickly had been made at Holy Trinity Catholic Church.
Independently, Jackie Kennedy requested hospital officials to get a priest.
In fact, the church’s pastor, the Very Reverend Oscar L Huber, C.M., was already on his way there in a car driven by his assistant pastor, Rev.
They were concemed about the traffic, but Thompson had a “secret way” to get there quickly.
Since Parkland Hospital was surrounded in the chaos of onlookers, vehicles, and police, Rev.
Thompson let Father Huber out of the car while he parked it, and Huber was escorted by police to the emergency room.
Kennedy was very concerned that since her husband was already dead, it was too late to perform this religious ritual.
Huber assured her that the president’s soul had not yet left his body, as the pastor removed the sheet already covering the president’s limp body.
Father Oscar Huber also personally signed typed copies of his recollections of this day.
The assistant press secretary, Mac Kildruff, addressing LBJ, as Mr President, requested that he be able to make the official announcement to the press.
At this time, private concerns were first discussed about a possible conspiracy to attack other officials, including the vice president.
At the time of the assassination, the Speaker of the House was next in line to succeed President Lyndon Johnson.
But there was no constitutional directive for replacing the vacancy of the vice presidency due to JFK’s death.
Also, there was no guidance for addressing the problematic situation of a disabled president, should Kennedy have lived.
This situation would result in the 1967 ratification of the 25th Amendment to the United States Constitution.
With a few motorcycles leading the way, Dallas Police Chief Jesse Curry drove LBJ back to Love Field in an unmarked police car.
Thomas sat in the passenger seat, and in the backseat, the new president crouched in the middle between Rep.
Thornberry (who followed LBJ as the congressman representing the 10th Congressional District of Texas) and Secret Service agent Rufus Youngblood.
A few cars raced behind them, one carrying Lady Bird Johnson and several Secret Service agents.
Behind them was a car with more agents, along with Chief Warrant Officer Ira Gearhart, who held the “football,” the codes to launch a nuclear attack, and Liz Carpenter, executive assistant to the vice president, who began to draft Johnson’s statement, which he would deliver to the American people that evening.
The last car in this group included Jack Valenti, a political consultant to Johnson, Cliff Carter, LBJ’s aide, and Captain Cecil W Stoughton, JFK’s photographer.
The Dallas Times Herald issued four editions that afternoon, three on the assassination as further information became available.
The very first edition of the Dallas Times Herald was printed before the assassination and is the scarcest of all the newspapers from that day in Dallas, but not as desired by collectors.
Inasmuch as the Dallas Morning News was a morming newspaper, there is the November 22 moming edition with no coverage of the assassination, and the Saturday, November 23, 1963, edition with its up-to-date reporting of the shooting.
Hoover used to say that presidents were going through his administration.
Helen Markham, William W Scoggins (he did not see the shooting, but identified him as the man running away), Mrs.
The cartridges and bullets from the revolver were traced to Oswald’s gun, which was in his possession when he was captured.
Years later, the House Select Committee on Assassinations would again conclude that Oswald shot Officer Tippit.
To view the photographs taken by Cecil Stoughton on Air Force One, go to the “November 22, 1963 and Beyond” Web page of the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum at www.lbjlib-utexas.edu/johnson/kennedy/index.htm.
Also see Richard B Trask, “The Day Kennedy Was Shot,” American Heritage 39, no. , www.americanheritage.com/content/day-kennedy-was-shot.
To demonstrate to the nation that a new president was now the commander-in-chief, Stoughton immediately raced off the plane with the recording and his camera.
See the testimony of Dallas Police Sergeant Gerald Lynn Hill, WC 7, 58.
In the almost forty-eight hours Oswald was in custody, he was interviewed for more than twelve hours by several individuals from the Dallas police, FBI, Secret Service, and the United States Post Office— often by more than one at the same time.
Even Dallas Police Chief Jesse Curry would admit in his testimony before the Warren Commission that there should not have been so many people in a room at once when questioning Oswald.
Many judge Oswald’s interrogation by the Miranda warning rule adopted by the Supreme Court in 1966 and other subsequent protections of a suspect’s rights.
This was definitely not the case in 1963, and the custodial interrogation of criminal suspects was very different.
When Oswald mentions a few times, including to the press, that he was hit by an officer, it is difficult if not impossible to know whether this was only during the struggle in the Texas Theater.
Some police officers who testified stated that Oswald was not struck in the theater, but there was a scuffle.
Recognizing the concept of “the thin blue line,” it is difficult to assess Oswald’s treatment.
The tactics used in 1963 would not meet the rigorous standards of today, and it is doubtful that any official would have admitted to some of these approaches if they had occurred.
In 1963, under Texas state law, the police were required to inform the suspect in custodial interrogation that there was the right to remain silent and that anything said could be used against him in a court of law.
Caster was unable to identify all the workers who might have seen his weapons that day, since they were removed from a carton in the hallway in front of the entrance to the warehouse.
It is not in his testimony, but it is possible that Oswald may have seen these weapons as well.
Castor stated that he showed them to them to Truly and William Shelley, another employee in the building.
William Shelley remembers the seeing the two weapons, and mentions actually holding the .22 but not the Mauser.
In early historical works, authors seemed to side with one group or the other.
See also United States Army Center for Military History, www .history.army.mil/books/Last_Salute/ch23.htm.
In this brief conversation, the first LBJ made aboard Air Force One, Mrs.
Johnson was apparently “choked up” in this brief exchange and handed the telephone over to Lady Bird to finish the call.
Because Joseph Kennedy had suffered a stroke, it was the decision of the family not to immediately tell the patriarch about JFK’s death.
For the audio recording of the president’s remarks, including his handwritten notes on his statement, go to the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum Web page at www.lbjlib-utexas.edu/johnson/kennedy/Remarks%20at%20Andrews/remarks. htm.
These quotes come from interviews with William Alexander, assistant Dallas district attorney, by Gerald Posner and Vincent Bugliosi.
Several factors inhibited the ability to perform a thorough autopsy and gather all evidence that should have been available to make the determination as to the direction of the bullets fired and ultimately the cause of JFK’s death.
However, we had a great deal of concern on many levels as to how the autopsy was performed, beginning immediately with the assumption of jurisdiction by what appears to be the Federal Government and the family of the President, intruding into what was at that time a State crime, homicide.
The effect of that was to remove the body from Dallas, the jurisdiction which had a very competent forensic pathologist in charge, Dr.
See the testimony of Justice of the Peace David L Johnston, WC 15, 507, and Bugliosi, Reclaiming History, 194.
At this time, a decision had not yet been made whether there would be an open casket.
All the previous assassinated presidents, Lincoln, Garfield, and McKinley, had state funerals with open caskets.
In fact, especially in the nineteenth century, it was the practice to have open caskets with a public viewing.
Prior to JFK’s death, every president who lay in repose in the United States Capitol, and many others who did not, had open caskets.
This all changed with JFK, and it is now the more common practice for closed caskets, especially for coffins that are in repose in the United States Capitol Rotunda.
At around fourm. in the East Room, Bobby Kennedy opened the casket and viewed his brother.
Although reluctant to do so, Maud Shaw, at the request of Jackie’s mother, Janet Auchincloss, told the children.
There may have been a miscommunication and/or misunderstanding, since Jackie wanted to be the one to convey this tragic news.
This perhaps was the beginning of Shaw’s ultimate termination of employment.
The relationship, or lack of one, between Robert Kennedy and LBJ was well known.
Similar to the strained interaction between the Kennedy and Johnson camps, historians shortly after JFK’s death tended to side with one group or the other.
More recently, historian Robert A Caro has assessed fairly the misunderstandings in the immediate few hours and days after the Kennedy assassination.
In addition to RFK running past LBJ on Air Force One immediately after it landed, and the miscommunication on occupying the Oval Office, there were tensions about Johnson’s decision to hold a cabinet meeting on Saturday and to give an address to a Joint Session of Congress so soon after Kennedy’s death.
On November 25, 1963, Life magazine purchased the rights to the film plus royalties for $150,000, of which Abraham Zapruder donated $25,000 to Officer Tippit’s widow.
In 1975, the rights to the film, which was stored at the National Archives, were transferred back to the Zapruder family for the price of one dollar.
In 1999, a special arbitration panel awarded the Zapruder family $16 million in compensation for the government’s possession of the film.
Later that year, the family donated all the copyrights of the film to the Sixth Floor Museum at Dealey Plaza in Dallas.
For the timeline of the activities concerning this historical film, see the Web page of the museum at www.jfk.org/go/collections/about/zapruder-film-chronology.
See testimony of Dallas Police Detective James R Leavelle, WC 7, 267; WC 20, Kelley Exhibit A, 443; and WC 24, CE 2003, 269.
See WC 24, 490, and testimony of Postal Inspector Harry Holmes, WC 7, 298.
The Kennedy Assassination —Beyond Conspiracy, ABC News special, Nov., 2003.
Jack Ruby was well known by the Dallas Police Department and frequently visited the station.
He was seen standing with the press during Oswald’s brief news conference.
However, the actual shooting resulted from a series of coincidences that placed Ruby in the building when he made the impulsive decision to shoot Oswald.
Oswald’s transfer was delayed by the last interrogation and the decision to change his clothes.
Ruby’s contact with a stripper and his desire to send her money placed him in the nearby Western Union office late that morning.
So a longer line would have delayed him, and he would have missed the transfer of Oswald.
In addition, the decision to move Oswald in an unmarked car gave Ruby the opportunity to jump in front of this vehicle just as it was backing up, actually blocking others and giving him a better opportunity to lunge forward.
Finally and perhaps most important, Ruby left his beloved dog, Sheba, in his parked car.
Given Ruby’s strange obsessive love for this dachshund, he would have never left his dog in a car, if he intended not to return.
Robert Jackson of the Dallas Times Herald won a Pulitzer Prize for his photo capturing Oswald the moment he was shot.
The Real Story of Jack Ruby and His Trial ; Elmer Gertz, Moment of Madness: The People vs.
Some individuals viewed Dallas as a city dominated by right-wing extremists and Kennedy-haters.
Many civic leaders were faced with the challenge of repairing the national perception of somehow the entire city being responsible for JFK’s death.
On New Year’s Day 1964, Stanley Marcus, whose father founded the Dallas-based department store Neiman-Marcus, purchased a full-page ad appearing in national newspapers with the store’s logo.
The message, with the headline what’s right with dallas, was signed by Marcus.
Eulogies to the Late President Delivered in the Rotunda of the United States Capitol, November 24, 1963.
For an account of the long lines, forty blocks long and four abreast, of people waiting to pay their respects to the fallen president, see the comments of CBS News reporter Roger Mudd in Trost, President, 238.
The World Pays Tribute to President Kennedy (Washington, DC: National Geographic, 1964), 346.
Robert McNamara was Jackie Kennedy’s personal representative at Arlington National Cemetery when the site of JFK’s final resting place was chosen.
Lieutenant General Walter K Wilson Jr., as chief of the Army Corps of Engineers, was responsible for carrying out her wishes for the creation of the eternal flame, and Colonel Clayton B Lyle was actually assigned this task.
A special fund was established for Marie Tippit and his three minor children, which received over $600,000 in contributions.
Tippit, and Lee Harvey Oswald, which occurred on Monday, November 25, 1963, see Nov., Twenty-Five Years Later, pullout section , www.writespirit.net/wpcontent/cache/supercache/www.writespirit.net/soulful-tributes/politicalfigures/presidentkennedy/funeral-timeline-kennedy-john.
Lee Harvey Oswald’s brother, Robert, had opposed this action, and after a more-than-two-year legal battle, the exhumation occurred early in the morning of October 4, 1981.
Shortly after this event, a press conference was held, which indeed confirmed that the corpse was Lee Harvey Oswald.
His identification was based largely on dental records and other forensic evidence.
See Linda E Norton, James A Cottone, Irvin M Sopher, and Vincent J Dimario, “The Exhumation and Identification of Lee Harvey Oswald,” Journal of Forensic Sciences 29, no.
Today, the Shannon Rose Hill Cemetery in Fort Worth still discourages visitors to Oswald’s burial site.
Since the cemetery was not providing any help with directions to Oswald’s grave, a living comedian purchased the plot adjacent to the plot where Lee and his mother are buried.
This adjacent tombstone has the inscription nick beef to aid individuals trying to find Oswald’s grave.
While today the cemetery refuses to provides directions to this tombstone, for those so inclined there are several written and video sources of directions.
This original, more ornate headstone contained Oswald’s complete name and years of birth and death.
She stored the original in her basement, where it was forgotten until found by a new owner of her house.
It subsequently was sold to a museum in Illinois, but the ownership of this item was being challenged.
An entire book can be written on all of hundreds, perhaps thousands, of souvenirs and other “relics” regarding the JFK assassination.
Especially in the age of the Internet and eBay, most of these items, even those that were once thought to be scarce, are quite common and appear frequently on the marketplace.
There are several different versions of this item, with and without the paper clip well.
This is very hard to find in the original packaging, and it is likely that few were made.
Inarco produced three-piece figurine dolls with a large Jackie head in a mourning veil accompanying smaller figurines of the two children, Caroline and John Jr. saluting.
There were several different phonographic records, but they essentially provided the same material.
No one yet has published a complete discography of all of the long-playing records, 45 rpm singles, reel-to-reel tapes, and CDs that have been released.
After her son’s death, Marguerite Oswald engaged in some commercial efforts.
During the last fifty years, there have been hundreds of serial magazines with images of the Kennedys printed on the cover.
Life magazine, perhaps more than any other, was especially smitten with placing the Kennedys on its covers.
This is perhaps because of the relationship Henry Luce, the publisher of Life, and his wife had with Joseph and Rose Kennedy.
JFK, his wife, other family members, and even their children, appeared on the covers of Life nineteen times up until November 22, 1963.
Including memorial and other special issues, the Kennedys have appeared on the cover of Life over seventy times.
Scores of specialty individual magazines were issued to cover the Kennedy presidency, his life and death, his funeral, various aspects of the JFK assassination, Oswald’s life, and the Ruby trial.
Stanley Marcus of the Dallas-based department store Nieman Marcus commissioned a very special limited edition of five hundred copies of JFK’s undelivered Dallas Trade Mart speech.
In the years immediately following the assassination, many countries issued commemorative JFK stamps, perhaps the most unusual being a series of eight stamps issued by Umm Al Qiwain of the United Arab Emirates depicting scenes from Kennedy’s funeral.
One of the more unusual commemorative coins was issued in Germany by Deutsche Numismatikin in various sizes in gold and silver with JFK being shot on the obverse and Ruby shooting Oswald on the reverse.
For instance, ABC produced a two-disc long-playing record, November 22nd, 1963, for internal use by their staff.
Even TV Guide published a special issue on the television coverage of Kennedy’s assassination.
Local newspapers imprinted their own names on these wire-service editions, and some entrepreneurial newspapers, such as the Kansas City Star, actually printed their own dust jackets to cover the AP edition.
Many newspapers also issued special pamphlets touting their own coverage, and of course just about every newspaper had a special pullout section.
There were scores of these types of publications, some of which were reprinted for anniversary editions.
The Story of a Mother and Her Daughter, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis , 232.
See “The White House Years of Robert S McNamara,” Sotheby’s Auctions, Oct., 2012.
On January 14, 1964, Jacqueline Kennedy appeared in a newsreel, which preceded the featured film in movie theaters throughout the country, to thank the nation for its outpouring of sympathy.
In 1964, the trustees, hoping to raise funds for the John Fitzgerald Kennedy Library, launched a traveling exhibit.
Though she avoided the press and public comments, hundreds of articles and numerous books were written after Jackie’s White House years.
Galella’s claim against the Secret Service agents’ aggressive response to his presence when he was near Jackie’s family was dismissed.
In 2010, the cable television company HBO produced a documentary, Smash His Camera, on this paparazzo photographer—the titled borrowed from Jackie own request to her Secret Service detail as to how to respond to Galella’s intrusive behavior.
Almost immediately after the assassination, Senator Hubert H Humphrey perceived a political opportunity to ingratiate himself with Johnson—especially on the civil-rights issue—perhaps with the hope of securing the number-two spot on the Democratic ticket in 1964.
His first meeting with LBJ, along with other congressional leaders, occurred almost immediately after Johnson returned to his office in the Old Executive Office Building.
As the widow of an American serviceman, Jackie Kennedy Onassis was entitled to be buried next to the president.
While ill with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, she decided that this would be her final resting place.
At this site in the cemetery, she is buried next to JFK, her unnamed stillborn daughter, and their infant Patrick.
Much like Ford’s Theatre, where President Lincoln was shot, the Sixth Floor Museum provides a somber, thoughtful, and historical response to the JFK assassination.
However, the visit to Dealey Plaza itself is a very different experience.
Historical Journal (reprinted numerous times, as a “a Dealey Plaza special edition” or a special anniversary edition), or one might spot a well-known conspiracy theorist lecturing on the Grassy Knoll.
One such individual and perennial vendor of books in Dealey Plaza is Robert Groden.
He has waged a legal battle against the city after being ticketed repeatedly next to the pedestal on the Grassy Knoll where Abraham Zapruder filmed.
Groden was arrested in 2010 for selling his assassination literature at this location.
Everyone saved newspapers and magazines that were printed in the hundreds of thousands, sometimes the millions.
The plane is on display in the Presidential Gallery at the National Museum of the United States Air Force in Dayton, Ohio, www.nationalmuseum.af.mil/index.asp.
Today the wall tiles and contents of trauma room one are the property of the National Archives and remain in its underground storage facility in Lenexa, Kansas.
JFK’s presidential limousine was rebuilt and is now on display at the Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn, Michigan, www.hfmgv.org/museum/limousines.aspx.
In 2011, this auction house also sold to a private collector the “alleged” ambulance that carried JFK’s coffin from Air Force One to the Bethesda Naval Hospital.
However, the John F Kennedy Library and Museum stated that the car was a fake, the real vehicle having been donated to the institution in 1980 and then destroyed in 1986.
Odditorium in San Antonio, Texas, www.ripleysnewsroom.com/worlds-largest-and-most-interactive-ripleys-believe-it-or-not-odditoriumopens-in-san-antonio.
It was offered by him in Las Vegas in 2008 through Guernsey’s Auctioneers and Brokers, but it was not sold, failing to meet the reserve price of more than $1 million, although at the same auction, the hat that Ruby wore when he shot Oswald and some other artifacts were sold.
Before they left for Dallas, Jack and Jackie began to inscribe Christmas cards to be mailed upon their return from Dallas.
Many of these cards, which have a picture of a créche nativity display in the East Room of the White House, were in the possession of JFK secretary Evelyn Lincoln and were later given to Kennedy collector Robert White.
Several of these cards have been sold individually at auction and continue to emerge in the marketplace.
It is believed that Kennedy inscribed his last documented signature when he signed the November 22, 1963, edition of the Dallas Morning News for a maid at the Hotel Texas.
This newspaper was sold at Heritage Auctions in Dallas in 2009 for $38,837.
See “20th Century Icons Autographs,” Heritage Auction Catalog, Nov.—7, 2009.
Many of the principals involved in the Kennedy administration, especially participants in various events (such as Judge Sarah Hughes and the Secret Services agents), signed envelopes with the first-day issue November 22, 1964, postmark of the JFK commemorative stamp.
Controversial commercially released items considered to be beyond bad taste.
In 1999, a board game, Conspiracyland was sold by the “Patsy Brothers Company” in Dallas.
In 2004, a computer game, JFK Reloaded, produced by Traffic Software in Scotland, allowed participants to play the role of Oswald and shoot at Kennedy from the sixth-floor window in Dealey Plaza.
The participant was then able to keep score on the accuracy and number of shots fired.
For autopsy photographs, X-rays, and other similar material, permission must be obtained by JFK’s family through their representative, Paul Kirk.
Since the time the JFK assassination occurred, the basic conspiratorial motifs largely have remained the same.
Some works focus on single theories, while others weave or provide multiple conspiracy views of the assassination.
Entire books have focused on certain aspects of these recurring themes.
Almost immediately after the assassination, United States government officials were concerned that there was a Soviet plot to kill the president.
Oswald’s activities in the Soviet Union have been the primary subject of several works.
Because of the full page welcome mr. kennedy to dallas ad in the Dallas Morning News, as well as the wanted for treason handbills, the right wing was a major suspect in having a hand in the assassination.
Because many perceive the CIA to be the least cooperative agency with regard to the assassination, and with many files still being withheld, this has been fertile ground for conspiracy theories.
Though originally self-published in very rare signed and numbered limited spiral-bound editions, these works have been reprinted numerous times.
Martin’s Press, 1992), accusing a Secret Service agent of accidentally firing the shot that killed Kennedy.
While the suit was dismissed on technical grounds, the retired Secret Service agent settled with St.
In addition, there have been numerous Freedom of Information Act lawsuits and requests, producing thousands of additional documents.
While there have been some inconsistencies and new documents have emerged, the essential findings and conclusions of the Warren Commission have stood the test of time and have not been contradicted.
The initial FBI Investigation and multivolume report, December 9, 1963.
Several congressional hearings and reports in the 1960s and 1970s on the preservation of evidence of the Warren Commission and on FBI oversight.
United States Senate, 94th Congress, 2nd Session, Final Report of the Select Committee to Study Government Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities in the United States (Sen.
Although there have been more than thirty freestanding bibliographies on JFK assassination books, pamphlets, and articles, no one source is complete, and many of the early works contained numerous errors.
Also, unlike the Lincoln assassination, while there are several JFK assassination specialty collections being amassed, especially the Sixth Floor Museum in Dallas, as well as a few university libraries, there is no institutional library whose collection comes even close to completeness.
Joesten became a prolific writer on the JFK assassination, producing several additional books in German, French, and English, all published outside the United States, as well as a self-published newsletter and mimeographed essays printed in English from his home in Germany.
Immediately after the Warren Commission Report was published, thousands of conspiracy-inclined authors produced works, and bestsellers emerged in every decade and every generation.
Weisberg also turned out to be a prolific writer on the JFK and Martin Luther King Jr. assassinations, self-publishing, publishing revised editions, and commercially publishing more than ten works on the assassination and creating many more unpublished manuscripts.
A Legal Brief” was published in the December 19, 1963, edition of the National Guardian, and since the subsequent request by Marguerite Oswald to represent her son before the Warren Commission, Lane has been immersed in writing about the JFK assassination and similar subjects.
He also produced a documentary movie based on the book, along with a longplaying phonographic record.
Assassination of a Head of State and cowrote the screenplay that was made into the movie, Executive Action.
Lane created “The Citizens Commission on Inquiry” and was on the lecture circuit for decades.
Before the House Select Committee on Assassination, Lane also happened to represent James Earl Ray, the assassin of Martin Luther King Jr.
Perhaps even more coincidental, Lane was the legal counsel to Jim Jones in Guyana when the People’s Temple mass suicide occurred in 1978.
At the same time, Representative Leo Ryan, visiting Jonestown, became the first congressman killed while conducting official business while in office.
Mark Lane is only one of the many conspiracy theorists that have written several books on the assassination of JFK, joining the ranks of individuals such as Robert B Cutler, Penn Jones Jr., Robert J Groden, and others.
INDEX The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition from which it was created.
The 12-Day Chase for Lincoln’s Killer and its sequel, Bloody Crimes: The Funeral of Abraham Lincoln and the Chase for Jefferson Davis.
Manhunt won an Edgar Award for the best nonfiction crime book of the year.
Swanson’s other books include the bestselling classic Chasing Lincoln’s Killer, an adaptation of Manhunt for young readers, and Bloody Times, the young adult version of Bloody Crimes.
Their Trial and Execution, is an acclaimed photo history of the crime, the pursuit of the conspirators, and their fates.
He was awarded a Historic Deerfield Fellowship in Early American History, and he serves on the advisory council of the Ford’s Theatre Society.
Follow him on Twitter @JamesLSwanson. www.JamesLSwanson.com Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite HarperCollins authors.
By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen.
No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.
