Cuba and the Missile Crisis* PHILIP BRENNER On 16 October 1962, President John F Kennedy learned that the Soviet Union was building bases in Cuba for ballistic missiles that could destroy major United States cities.
In the days that followed, United States officials focused nearly all their attention on strategies for removing the Soviet missiles, on Soviet motives, and on the Soviet Union's reaction to the naval quarantine.
Cuba was the locus of this most dramatic superpower confrontation, but Cuban perceptions, motives, and reactions were largely ignored.
Analyses of the missile crisis have also tended to frame it as a US-Soviet standoff, in which each of these two nuclear powers had to calculate its strategy principally in terms of the other.
Cuba has been accorded little regard as a meaningful actor in the crisis.
It is considered to have * An earlier version of this article was presented at the 1989 Annual Meeting of the Society for Historians of American Foreign Relations.
Douglas Dillon, Humphrey Johnson and James A Nathan, and the anonymous referees of the journal of Latin American Studies.
John F Kennedy in the White House (Boston, 1965), ch.-1; R Hilsman, To Move a Nation , chs.-16.
More frequently, it is seen as an outpost of the Soviet Union with little autonomy.
As a consequence, Cuba's behaviour and perspective during the missile crisis generally have been treated as only peripheral to an understanding of any important issues.
New information about the missile crisis has come to light now which challenges the prevailing view about Cuba's importance.
It indicates that Cuba was very much a part of the Cuban missile crisis, and it suggests that our ability to learn from the crisis is fundamentally impaired without a full appreciation of the way Cuba affected the history of this unprecedented confrontation.
Before 22 October 1962 If the United States had not been bent on liquidating the Cuban revolution there would not have been an October crisis.
This was first demonstrated with economic aggression and then with the organization of subversive forces against Cuba, the Bay of Pigs invasion.
And this thought determined the setting up of strategic missiles in Cuba.
Edited transcripts and analyses of the first two conferences can be found in Blight and Welch, On the Brink.
The first included nearly all the living members of the ExComm (Executive Committee of the National Security Council, formed by President Kennedy on 16 Oct.62) and the second included many of these men and three Soviet experts.
Soviet leaders seem to have shared the Cuban judgement, though it is not clear if the Soviets arrived at this view independently or largely as a result of Cuban intelligence and analyses.
This belief framed the Cuban interpretation of each hostile United States action during the eighteen months after the Bay of Pigs, and led inexorably to the conclusion that an invasion was coming.
Shortly thereafter, Castro received a report from Aleksei I Adzhubei, the editor of I^yestia and Premier Nikita Khrushchev's son-in-law, about an interview Adzhubei had had with President Kennedy.
The Soviet editor reportedly derived a strong impression from the interview that an invasion was being planned.
A few weeks later, in April, Miro Cardona, head of the Cuban Revolutionary Council , told journalists that President Kennedy had indicated to him in a White House meeting that the Administration wanted to invade Cuba with an exile army headed by Cardona.
Certainly, Soviet leaders relied on several sources of intelligence to develop their analysis of an impending United States invasion.
While the Soviet conclusion seems to have coincided with the Cuban assessment, it is not clear how much influence the Cuban view had.
Alfred MacAdam , 185, claims that Adzhubei gave Castro the report in person.
Matthews, Revolution in Cuba, 208, writes that Castro received Adzhubei's information from a copy of a report submitted to Khrushchev that was sent to Havana.
For a report of earlier comments by Cardona see Dinerstein, Making of a Missile Crisis, 141.
The first, Lantphibex 1—62, involved a marine assault using the island of Vieques off the coast of Puerto Rico.
The second, called QUICK KICK, was a massive set of naval manoeuvres with 79 ships and more than 40,000 troops off the southeastern United States coast.
Meanwhile, the United States attempted to extend its economic embargo by threatening to cut off aid to countries that traded with Cuba, by refusing to purchase goods that had the possibility of containing any Cuban materials and by pressuring United States allies to end commercial ties with Cuba.
A recently declassified progress report about the economic campaign against Cuba confirmed that 'diplomatic means were used to frustrate Cuban trade negotiations in Israel, Jordan, Iran, Greece, and possibly Japan'.11 These activities were interpreted by Cuban officials as part of a well developed plan to destabilise and destroy their government.
In fact, the efforts were coordinated by an interagency working group chaired by a State Department representative.
Cuban unease was reinforced by the campaign that may have been the most threatening portent of an invasion.
In an incredible historical irony, the target date for the revolt was set as October 1962, when the missile crisis did occur.
Notably, though, planning for the revolt began before either the Cubans or Soviets ever discussed missiles.
Operation Mongoose was the largest operation that the CIA had ever undertaken.
Four hundred agents, and many more ' assets' and operatives, were assigned the task of destroying the Cuban government.
Run out of headquarters in Miami, it deployed paid Cuban exiles on raids into Cuba from South Florida, Puerto Rico and Central America.
By the end of July 1962 the CIA claimed to have infiltrated 11 teams into Cuba to support' guerrilla forces', and that 'guerrilla warfare could be activated with a good chance of success, if assisted properly'.16 Their efforts were supported by clandestine radio broadcasts to Cuba on a station called Radio Americas, the successor to Radio Swan which had supported exiles in the Bay of Pigs invasion.
The Cubans seem to have viewed the exile attacks as integrally coupled to the several attempts that were made during this period to assassinate Castro.
Sergo Mikoyan explained the logical link in 1988, by arguing that there would have been no reason to assassinate Castro only to have him replaced by Che Guevara.
The logic was that Castro's death would be followed by an invasion of United States troops.
Cuban officials did not believe that the exiles themselves would overthrow the Cuban government, because Cuba was far better armed in 1962 than it had been in April 1961.19 If the United States were unaware of this fact, and there is little evidence that Cuba believed United States planners were so badly informed, Castro underlined it with an interview in Pravda in January 1962.20 There is some indication from recent interviews with Cuban officials that Cuban agents had infiltrated the Mongoose sabotage teams, and that 14 ' T h e Cuba Project,' 2.
However, there is no information yet available about Cuban knowledge of the overall Mongoose plan itself, or about the precise bases for Cuban assessments that the United States was involved in pre-invasion activities.
What we know is that Cuban leaders generally anticipated an invasion, that Mongoose activities were a significant factor in shaping this assessment and that events in early 1962 almost certainly stimulated the Cuban decision in May to accept Soviet ballistic missiles on the island.
Cuban fears of a United States invasion in the weeks just before the United States discovered the missiles may have been related to what now appear to be real threats posed by the United States.
Also see his 'Before the Missiles of October', Tie Boston Phoenix, 8 April 1988.
However, other factors may have led the Cubans to believe an invasion was imminent before the end of 1962.
An important one could have been Defence Department publicity about large scale military exercises off the coast of Puerto Rico planned for October.
Named Philbriglex-62, it included an 'invasion' of Vieques in a mock overthrow of a leader named Ortsac, or 'Castro' in reverse.
On 24 August, the emigre terrorist group, Alpha 66, strafed a hotel near Havana and killed several Soviet technicians and Cubans.
He thereby left the impression that he would be for it in the near future.
At about the same time, Hugh Thomas notes, the Defence Department 'announced that Cubans enrolled in the United States army could be used against Cuba'.28 Cuban officials were probably sensitive to the announcement, because they had been troubled when the United States began drafting Cuban exiles in late 1961.29 Clearly Cuban leaders knew about the strident calls throughout September and early October, in the media and by members of Congress, for an attack against Cuba.
It has reproduced, after 18 months, the outward conditions that preceded the Bay of Pigs invasion.
T h e exercises began on 21 October, at which point they were in reality no longer exercises but prepositioning for a possible invasion.
There are now many versions of why and how Cuba came to have Soviet missiles.
But a consensus has emerged that the idea originated with the Soviets, and that it was accepted by the Cubans as an act of' socialist solidarity' and as a means of deterring a United States invasion.
There are also varying accounts that describe some of the key actions taken by Cuba before 22 October, and the decisions made by the Cuban leadership.
However, there is little information about Cuban perceptions of the way in which the United States officials viewed Cuba's behaviour.
It may be that Cuban leaders did not care about what the United States perceived; nevertheless, even allowing for this sensitivity on the question of sovereignty, they would have needed to familiarise themselves with the attitudes of United States leaders, because of the potential threat posed by the United States.
We do not know, for example, how Cuban officials imagined the United States would react to the Second Declaration of Havana.
In that 4 February 1962 speech Castro asserted, 'The duty of every revolutionary is to make the revolution', and he provided the basis for a policy of supporting armed struggle in Latin America.
It may have been that the Cuban leaders surmised that their particular behaviour did not matter to the United States anymore, that United States policy was fixed on a course of overthrowing the Cuban government regardless of what it did.
They seem not to have considered that United States policy might be accelerated by their actions and declarations.
The Cubans may have calculated that the United States would accept their presence in Cuba with equanimity, because the Soviets had sent them elsewhere without much reaction.
Presumably Cuban leaders believed that these new weapons would deter a United States invasion.
The prevailing view is that neither the Cubans nor Soviets gave much thought to the United States reaction, and had no contingency plan for it.
The Cubans do seem to have been surprised by President Kennedy's 22 October revelation about the missiles, although apparently they were not as complacent about the secret as the Soviets.
Indeed, Castro's 26 July speech, in which he said that Cuban weapons would be able to cause untold casualties in the United States, and Dorticos's 8 October UN speech suggest that they assumed the United States would or did know about the missiles, and that they were offering a warning to the United States.
Yet military preparations appear to have been made only to counter the feared United States invasion that Cuban leaders had seen coming many months earlier.
There is no evidence that they connected the seeming invasion plans to their own introduction of ballistic missiles.
Cuban leaders may have assumed, then, that the United States would accept the presence of missiles once they were operational, as the Soviets had accepted United States missiles in Turkey.
Yet if this were the case, it would be important to know why they misinterpreted President Kennedy's two September warnings against the introduction of offensive capabilities in Cuba.
While we have an obscure picture of Cuban perceptions of United States views about Cuban behaviour, our portrait of Cuba's perception about Soviet views is even fainter.
We do know that relations between the two countries were strained in the early part of 1962 and that Soviet military aid was provided at a reduced level until June.
One authoritative Soviet view of President Kennedy's statements by Anatoly Gromyko, the son of the Soviet foreign minister at the time focused only on the aspects of bellicosity in what Kennedy said, and ignored any mention of the implicit warning against placing ballistic missiles or combat troops in Cuba.
On the other hand, they may have viewed the missiles as an offer they could not refuse on pain of straining the relationship even further.
We know that the Cubans wanted to be included under the Soviet nuclear umbrella in 1962, and were seeking a way to sharpen Khrushchev's vague i960 threat to let missiles fly if the United States were to attack Cuba.
They may have seen emplacement of the missiles as an acceptable alternative to joining the Warsaw Pact.
Since then the defence of Cuba has been included as a second Cuban motive.
Questions arise, though, as to what 'strengthening the socialist camp' meant.
It may have meant that Cuban leaders perceived the missiles in terms of a strategic deterrent that would enable the Soviet Union to counter a potential United States first strike.
In this sense, the defence of one important country in the socialist camp would thereby keep all socialist countries safer.
But we do not know what Cuba's assessment was of the likelihood of a United States first strike against the Soviet Union, or whether he even made such an assessment.
Castro, it is safe to assume, understood the missiles as part of the US-Soviet equation, in which the Cuban-based weapons might have enabled Khrushchev to bargain more effectively for socialist gains elsewhere, such as in Europe.
In addition, for Cuba to stand up to the United States would weaken the United States image as an invincible power, and in a zero-sum world the missiles would have strengthened the nonwestern camp.
Castro is likely to have believed that if an avowedly socialist country were able to resist United States attacks, then it would encourage similar resistance elsewhere.
This construction would have been consistent with the Second Declaration of Havana.
However, the Soviet Union did not endorse Cuba's enthusiasm for Third World revolution, especially in Latin America.
There is also uncertainty about the way Cuban leaders calculated the missiles would contribute to the defence of Cuba.
Liquid propelled and requiring eight hours to fuel and arm with a nuclear warhead, they would have been of little use in responding to a nuclear attack, and of uncertain use in response to a conventional one.
As Barton Bernstein observed about the United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey, it would be more likely that they 'would draw, not deter, an attack'.48 Cuban officials may have understood this because Castro remarked in 1974 that Cuba had an obligation in effect to make itself as much of a target as other socialist countries.
From their viewpoint, he suggested, missiles were better still, and were a reasonable means of defence.
The estimate of time necessary to prepare a missile for firing was made by Soviet military officials at the 1989 Moscow 49 conference.
Still, there is the possibility that Cuban leaders did expect the missiles might be used.
They may have anticipated that a direct invasion by US forces would trigger the missiles.
Castro has said that he drew little distinction between a conventional assault on Cuba and a nuclear retaliation, because from the Cuban perspective a conventional attack would cost Cuba millions of lives and would thus affect Cuban society much the way a nuclear attack would ravage the United States.
Thus, while we know the stated motives for Cuba's decision, we do not have a precise understanding of what the statements mean.
Fidel Castro, Raul Castro, Che Guevara, Bias Roca, Osvaldo Dorticos, and Aragones.
The six formed the Secretariat of the Integrated Revolutionary Organisations , the ruling party at the time.
A trip to Moscow by Raul Castro in July served to develop details of the plan and during those two weeks a formal agreement was drafted and initialled.
Four on his list are the same as on Aragones's, but Franqui's list deletes Aragones and Bias Roca, and includes Ramiro Valdes.
Yet it is uncertain how the July draft agreement refined the initial Soviet-Cuban understanding.
For example, we do not know whether Cuba requested that military equipment other than the ballistic missiles be provided in a way that enabled them to be under Cuban control.
The best evidence indicates that the Soviets controlled the surface-to-air missiles throughout the crisis, because the Cubans had not been sufficiently trained at the time to use them.
Cuban pilots had been trained to fly the IL-28S, but Cuba never took full possession of the bombers.
The IL-28S were considered to be virtually obsolete as an offensive weapon, but would have been useful in defending Cuba against commando raids or in attacking commando bases.
By the end of October there were more than 40,000 Soviet military personnel on the island, about half of whom were troops.
We do not know if the Cubans requested this large number, whether they sought even more, or how they considered the troops would be used.
Such a significant Soviet military contingent in itself would likely have prompted a United States attack, because it would have made Cuba a major Soviet base.
With such a large contingent, the Soviet stakes in a United States attack would also have been enormous.
Were the Soviet troops overrun by United States forces, Premier Khrushchev might not have survived the ensuing humiliation.
Che Guevara and Aragones travelled to Moscow on 27 August to 65 Garthoff, Reflections , 18.
According to the CINCLANT Account , 42 bombers were shipped to Cuba, and 11 were completely assembled and two were partially assembled when Cuba agreed to return them on 20 Nov.
Castro noted on 19 November 1962, that 'owing to their limited speed and low flight ceiling, they are antiquated equipment in relation to modern means of anti-aircraft defence', Office of Public Information, United Nations, 'Text of Communication dated 19 November 1962 from Prime Minister Fidel Castro of Cuba to Acting Secretary-General U Thant', Press Release SG/1379, 20 Nov.62, 2.
Sergo Mikoyan said in an interview on 30 January 1989 that none of the nuclear warheads on the island could have been refitted as bombs for the IL-28S, and that there were no nuclear bombs delivered to Cuba.
Aragones asserted in 1989 that he sought to make the agreement public immediately.
The Cubans reasoned that an announcement about the missiles would gain them more security than the secret installation of offensive weapons.
Indeed, former White House official Theodore Sorensen reflected at the 1989 Moscow meeting that it would have been more difficult for the United States to compel withdrawal of the missiles had the agreement been made public, because then the situation would have paralleled United States agreements with countries on the Soviet periphery.
Cuban officials were eager in August 1962 to secure a public defence link to the Soviet Union.
From their perspective, a public agreement in itself would have had a deterrent effect, similar to membership in the Warsaw Pact, by making an attack against Cuba equivalent to an attack against the Soviet Union.
Cuba did not take Soviet protection for granted, and it sought to manoeuvre the Soviet Union into an embrace at the same time Cuba sought to protect itself from the United States.
Such an alliance was precisely what the Soviets had resisted, because of the difficulties that would be entailed in sustaining a conflict with the United States so far from the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev refused to make the agreement public, and proposed to announce the accord in November, once the missiles were operational.
While the review of the period before 22 October already has invalidated the metaphor, the notion that Cuba had little impact on events during the height of the crisis may have been the most serious oversight in earlier studies.
T h e agreement, which was to be a five-year renewable pact, allegedly stipulated that the Soviets had n o right of sovereign immunity over the missile bases.
But Franqui contends that the land o n which the missiles were based became Soviet property.
Sergio del Valle Jimenez, then Cuban army chief of staff, recalled in 1989 that the Cuban leaders anticipated there would be massive United States bombing with an invasion, and they had ordered the erection of ramparts and the digging of trenches.
This may have been due to the sense that the danger to Cuba this time was from a direct United States attack, not from subversive forces.
Sergo Mikoyan remarked in an interview after the 1989 conference that he found it' incredible that the Cubans and Soviets in Cuba were ready to die to the last man' during the crisis.
Indeed, there appears to have been an atmosphere of defiance and toughness throughout the country, in part stimulated by the Cuban media.
The US expectation was that the main fighting would have been over in ten days, and that United States forces would have sustained 18,484 casualties.
However, in Moscow in 1989, Cuban Political Bureau member Jorge Risquet argued that major guerilla warfare would have gone on for years, and del Valle estimated that there would have been 100,000 civilian and military casualties in the short term.
If that were the case, it is conceivable that the increasingly bloody and prolonged conventional war against Cuba might have escalated to a nuclear level in response to a range of pressures on both the Kennedy Administration and the Soviet leaders.
One indication of the ferocity of the Cuban position, and the willingness to throw caution to the wind, was Castro's order on 27 October to open fire on any hostile aircraft in Cuban airspace.
That morning a Soviet officer, who may have been responding to Castro's general command instead of following instructions from Moscow to avoid provocations, fired a SAM that downed a U-2 surveillance aircraft.
On the afternoon of the 27th, at the height of the crisis, 37 mm Cuban guns hit a low flying F8U-1P plane that was on a reconnaissance mission.
Had the F8U-1P been unable to return to base, it is likely that the threatened United States attacks would have commenced.
There already was pressure on President Kennedy from several of his advisers and from the Joint Chiefs of Staff to launch an attack, at least against the surface-to-air and ballistic missiles.
Interestingly, at the Moscow conference del Valle's estimate was translated initially as '800,000', and this was readily accepted by US participants as credible once they learned that there were 40,000 Soviet military personnel in Cuba.
During the crisis, the United States estimate of Soviet military strength on the island ranged from 10,000 to 16,000.
See Adela Estrada Juarez, 'The General Who Gave the Order to Fire', Granma Weekly Review, 23 April 1989, 8.
The CINCLANT Account reported that the guns were 5 7 mm, and that no low level plane had been hit.
By Saturday the 27th, there was a clear majority in the ExComm in favor of taking military action.
Alekseev recounts that there were daily communications between Castro and Khrushchev from 23 to 27 October.
Castro, he recalls, encouraged the Soviets to remain firm in keeping the missiles in Cuba.
But it is not clear whether the Cubans were informed fully abut Soviet deliberations and intentions, or even whether the Soviets may have misinformed the Cubans intentionally or inadvertently.
Castro seems to have interpreted this answer to mean that all of the missiles were in Cuba, all were operational, and that each missile was configured with a warhead ready to be fired.
It is not clear what he understood by 'all' the missiles to mean at the time.
By 22 October, 42 missiles had arrived in Cuba; eighty had been planned for delivery.
All 42 were 'medium range' ballistic missiles, with a range of 1,020 miles.
Six undelivered missiles were also SS-4S, and 32 were 'intermediate range' missiles, with a range of 2,200 miles.
Soviet participants at the 1989 Moscow conference said that the 20 warheads allegedly on the island were at some distance from the missiles, and that it would have required eight hours to fuel and prepare a missile for firing.
Moreover, by 24 October only nine missiles reportedly were in place and fully assembled.
In contrast, McGeorge Bundy and Robert McNamara argued that the likely response to a continued stalemate would have been a 'turning of the screw', an extension of the quarantine to include nonmilitary items.
Alekseev, 'Karibskii krizis', 82 Confirmation of this comes indirectly from Alekseev.
In ' Karibskii krizis', he claims that all 42 missiles and warheads for them were in place.
In an interview on 28 January 1989 he said that Castro reviewed the manuscript of his article prior to publication, and had corrected any errors of fact.
Presumably, then, Castro believed even until recently that all the missiles and warheads were on the island.
An indication of why this is important comes from the controversy surrounding the most publicised (though not yet public) cable, sent on 26 October by Castro.
Khrushchev's son, Sergei Khrushchev, allegedly said that Castro had called upon his father in that cable to fire the missiles.
But he also has said that this version was a misinterpretation by those to whom he told the story.
It may be that the cable indicated Castro was highly agitated, fearing an imminent invasion, though that would contrast with several reports about his general calmness.
He may merely have reported his assessment that an invasion was imminent, and an excited Khrushchev interpreted this in an extreme manner.
Whatever the case, the cable seems to have contributed to the Soviet leader's calculation that a speedy termination of the crisis was essential to avoid a major conflagration.
In short, it is certain that Cuba was more than a passive stage during the crisis.
However, our knowledge of Cuban behaviour, intentions and assessments during the height of the crisis remain spotty.
Cuban leaders understood that President Kennedy was using the press to send signals of United States intentions, in effect, to communicate ultimatums indirectly.
But we do not know what the Cubans expected the United States reaction would be to the use of anti-aircraft.
They may have judged that by 27 October US decisions were firm about invading Cuba.
Thus the anti-aircraft would not have precipitated United States action, in their view, but would merely have served to protect Cuba.
Low level reconnaissance planes are often used just prior to an invasion for the purpose of establishing precise targets.
We also do not know whether Ambassador Alekseev was the only channel of communication between Cuba and the Soviet Union, though Sergo Mikoyan affirms that Alekseev was the principal one.
At the 1989 conference, Alekseev claimed to have helped draft the cable, and that n o such demand was in it.
Franqui reports that Cuban uncertainty about a United States invasion increased tension, and he claims that this led Castro to fire the Soviet S A M missile that b r o u g h t d o w n the U-2.
That claim now is accorded little credence, in part because he locates the firing in western Cuba, hundreds of miles from the actual SAM missile site in Oriente Province.
But as an apocryphal story, it may suggest why Castro initiated the use of anti-aircraft guns.
This nomenclature is used to signify that the period in October, when the United States and Soviet Union were on the brink of nuclear catastrophe, was only one of several crises that took on catastrophic proportions for the Cubans.
In reality, the crisis did not end on 28 October for either the United States or the Soviet Union.
The Kennedy-Khrushchev agreements had to be implemented and Cuba became very much a part of that process.
Until 20 November, the United States Strategic Air Command remained on alert at Defence Condition 2 , other forces were held at DefCon 3, and the naval quarantine was maintained in place.
Just as any of several incidents before 28 October might have led to an escalating exchange, so too the situation until 20 November remained very dangerous.
The United States asserted that the Kennedy—Khrushchev agreement required on-sight UN inspection in Cuba to assure that the offensive weapons were being dismantled and returned to the Soviet Union.
Cuba in turn insisted that it would not permit inspection on its soil, and that the IL-28S were Cuban property, given to Cuba by the Soviet Union.
Castro asserted that the Soviet Union had no authority to negotiate with the United States about inspection or about the return of the bombers.
Yet there was no equivalent demand, Castro told U Thant, that the United States pledge not to invade Cuba be verified.
Indeed, he reported Castro declaring, 'the United States would not give up their intention of launching another aggression.
He declared that ' the danger of war would renew itself, because the conditions that propitiated North American aggression against Cuba would endure'.92 Cuban negotiations with Mikoyan led the Soviets to back down on their initial willingness to remove all 40,000 troops.
Apparently at Cuban insistence, the Soviets agreed to maintain 3,000 troops in Cuba.
There is no question that Castro was furious about the KennedyKhrushchev agreements.
This speech by Castro included a transcription of the 30 October meeting with U Thant.
In his notes of that meeting, U T h a n t said that the remarks were those of Castro, n o t Dorticos.
There is also the possibility that Cuban troops surrounded the ballistic missile sites from 28 October to 3 November, which would suggest that they were prepared to fight to prevent the removal of missiles.
When Anastas Mikoyan arrived in Havana on 2 November, Castro grudgingly met him at the airport, but then did not meet with him again for nearly a week.
During their negotiations, Castro 'disappeared' for days at a time, or allegedly came to an agreement one evening only to renege on it the next day.
The graphic stories of Castro's anger have tended to enshrine a conventional wisdom that his response to the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreements was rooted primarily in personal pique.
At the 1989 Moscow conference, Cuban participants acknowledged that the necessity 'of time' made the lack of consultation understandable.
Castro asserted in a letter to U Thant on 15 November that despite the removal of the missiles, United States officials 'do not consider themselves bound by any promise'.100 Indeed, as early as November 1962, the United States began to back away from the 27 October pledge contained in President Kennedy's letter to Premier Khrushchev.
Raymond Garthoff reports that the United States leader would not give the Soviets firm assurances of no invasion, because on-sight inspection in Cuba and safeguards with respect to future military ties had not been met.1 However, it is unclear whether Cuban officials based their distrust of the United States on specific statements by United States policy makers, or even whether the Soviets reported to the Cubans how weak the United States assurances were.
Castro's sense at the time was that the bargain was struck too readily, without adequate assurances, and that the United States would take advantage of loopholes to undermine Cuban security.
This apparently was confirmed for him when the United States included the IL-28S in the demand for removal of offensive weapons, and later when Komar patrol boats were on the list Ambassador Adlai Stevenson presented to Anastas Mikoyan.2 Similarly, on 8 November a Mongoose terrorist squad bombed a Cuban factory.
Its action was supposedly unauthorised, because Mongoose activities had been suspended on 30 October.
Apparently the group had been dispatched to Cuba before the official suspension of activities, and could not be recalled.
The attack undoubtedly reinforced the Cuban belief that the United States could not be trusted.
Their first inclination would have been to conclude that the United States destabilisation campaign was still at work.
It is also possible that they viewed the attack as a ploy in the US-Soviet negotiations about the removal of the IL-28S and on-sight inspection.
However, since Cuba was not party to the negotiations, Cuban officials would have been unlikely to interpret the Mongoose bombing merely as a negotiating tactic.
In part it was concern over Mongoose raids that led Cuba to be adamant about the violation of airspace, because United States surveillance planes had been used to support sabotage operations.
Clearly, Cuba saw the flights as continued preparation for an invasion and Castro warned that surveillance craft would be destroyed.5 Notably, Cuba did make an offer — on 25 November, after the crisis ended — to allow UN inspection on its soil.
But it was based on the pointed condition of a reciprocal inspection of emigre training camps in the United States and Puerto Rico, to assure that they were being dismantled.6 The agreement with Kennedy left no room for Cuban participation and offered Cuba no opportunity to bring the United States to the bargaining table over matters of vital Cuban interest.
A simple demand that the United States talk to Cuba — at the moment when the world stood at the brink — would have been difficult for Kennedy to reject.
Castro no doubt found it difficult to fathom why Khrushchev would not include such a demand in his deal.
This probably contributed to Castro's anger as much as the fact that Khrushchev did not notify him before announcing that the missiles would be removed.
Had Castro been involved in negotiations, there is little doubt that a resolution of the crisis would have been more difficult.
Some argue that his 'adventurism' led to the very placement of the missiles in Cuba,108 and from this point of view he would have been an irascible negotiator.
Personality aside, though, had Cuba been included in negotiations, its interests would need to have been taken into account.
Not only were the missiles to be removed, non-offensive weapons, such as the IL-28S and Komar patrol boats, as well as all Soviet troops, were also to be withdrawn.
Cuba viewed the bombers and patrol boats as key weapons in the fight against terrorist attacks.
In this light, Cuban resistance to the accords must be seen as rather more than mere obstinacy or pique.
Still, we do not have much more than impressions about Cuban perceptions during this period.
Notably, the Soviet Union did propose direct US-Cuban negotiations ' regarding the removal of the Guantanamo naval base', in a joint Cuban-Soviet protocol offered on 15 November to settle the November crisis.
The Cuban factor in this equation, though, is largely missing, particularly during the period from 28 October to 20 November, when Cuba acted most independently and had the greatest potential to generate a major conflict.
For example, we have little information about the Cuban analysis of why the United States sought the removal of the IL-28S and Komars, or about Cuban expectations of a United States attack before 20 November.
We do not know much about the negotiations between Anastas Mikoyan and the Cuban leaders, whether the Soviet leader provided details on Soviet negotiations with the United States,110 or how Cuba assessed the alleged Soviet commitment to continue defending Cuba.
The extent of Cuba's attentiveness to Latin America during the crisis is also unknown.
Castro was contemptuous of the OAS's unanimous endorsement of the US position on 24 October, but Cuba must have been aware of the rumours that the Latin Americans' support was coerced.
Cuba also sought at the time to maintain good relations with several countries in the hemisphere, such as Brazil and Mexico, which had publicly opposed a United States attack against Cuba.
But it is unclear what advice the Latin American countries offered Cuba, and how the advice was received.
He went on to note that President Kennedy wisely 'instructed all members of the ExComm and government that no interview should be given, no statement made, which would claim any kind of victory'.113 Yet at the same time there seems to have been, if not delight taken over Cuba's sense of vulnerability, at least an enormous blind spot about it.
Indeed, though there were CIA analyses that pointed to Cuba's fear of a United States invasion, there is no evidence that the ExComm considered offering a no invasion pledge to Cuba during the legendary thirteen days as a way of defusing the crisis.
The only negotiating ploy contemplated was vis-a-vis Soviet concerns, namely the missiles in Turkey.
One conclusion from this investigation is that, on the contrary, Cuba had its own interests and acted on them.
Cuban decisions and assessments had a bearing on the way in which the crisis developed, evolved and ended, and on how close it brought the world to oblivion.
This new perspective on the missile crisis also forces us to reassess the consequences that flowed from the crisis.
There has been considerable analysis about the consequences for the superpowers,116 but little detailed analysis about Cuba and the crisis aftermath.
The general view is that the crisis led to significant strains between Cuba and the Soviet Union.7 Even during Castro's 1963 trip to the Soviet Union which followed on the heels of a favourable trade agreement that signified that the Soviet Union recognised that Cuba was fully in the socialist camp118 — the Cuban prime minister implicitly chided the Soviets for abandoning armed struggle.
He mixed his gracious appreciation for Soviet willingness to risk nuclear war in defence of' a small nation' with references to the necessity for the socialist camp to struggle 'against the colonial yoke of imperialism'.119 Sergo Mikoyan related in an interview how he felt the tension between the two countries as late as 1971, three years after Cuba endorsed the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia and relations supposedly had improved.
Notably, the ExComm was sensitive to Turkish and NATO concerns about a withdrawal of missiles without consultation, but United States officials did not extrapolate this sensitivity to the parallel circumstance of the Soviet Union and Cuba.
An alternative explanation, of course, is that the Kennedy Administration did not want to abandon its hope of destroying the Cuban revolution.
After all, Cuba still relied heavily on the Eastern bloc for economic support.
It may have been more closely related to Cuba's sense of national security.
Cuban officials seem to have concluded that the Soviet Union would not risk its own security ' for the sake of Cuba', as Anastas Mikoyan reportedly admitted to Warsaw Pact ambassadors on 30 November 1 9 6 2 . m If Cuba could no longer count on the Soviet Union for its defence, and it still feared a hostile United States, then the development of an allied bloc of third world countries, especially in Latin America, might have been one way to provide for its defence.2 On the surface, Cuba had good reason to fear the United States.
In October 1963, 13 CIA major actions against Cuba were approved for the next two months alone, including the sabotage of an electric power plant, a sugar mill and an oil refinery.
Authorised CIA raids continued at least until 1965, as did CIA attempts on Castro's life.
By adding a Cuban perspective to the picture of missile crisis decision-making, it becomes even clearer that the potential for miscalculation was great.
Cuban leaders were new to ' h i g h ' politics, as one Cuban delegate to the Moscow conference said in a 1989 interview.
They did not have experience in dealing with matters that had global implications.
The emerging view about how the missile crisis was managed has led to a new dictum.
Even in 1962 this was appreciated, and the so-called 'hot line' was installed soon after the crisis.
However, when we add Cuba to the crisis equation, this prescription does not seem as potent.
Improved communications can reduce misunderstanding, but Cuba seems to have understood United States intentions quite well.
This suggests a lesson from the crisis that has been overlooked, because prior analyses have focused only on the two superpowers.
For a small power, conventional warfare may be as threatening as nuclear warfare is to the United States, and a small power is likely to take whatever steps are necessary to reduce the threat.
Thus when the United States deals with small countries, the use of force or the threat of force to achieve political ends can have destabilising consequences for all the parties involved.
To be sure, this may be overstating the lesson that we can derive by including the Cuban perspective in the analysis of missile crisis.
At each point, improved communications might have reduced the potential for unintended conflict and even the hostility between the countries.
With the limited information we have about Cuban motives, calculations and decisions, however, we are handicapped in assessing how improved communications might have affected the crisis.
Despite the gaps in our knowledge about Cuban perceptions, motives and behaviour during the missile crisis, it is not too early to conclude that only by reintroducing Cuba into the Cuban missile crisis, can we hope to develop a picture of the full significance of the crisis itself.
