Fifteen newly declassified letters between the United States president and the Soviet premier show that the threat of war between the United States and the Soviet Union lingered well beyond Khrushchev's Oct. vow to withdraw nuclear missiles from Cuba.
The State Department released the letters yesterday, nine months after Soviet officials approved their distribution.
For five years, United States officials refused legal efforts to free the documents, which give details of the gambits and musings of two strong-willed leaders of the Cold War.
The documents were released in advance of an unprecedented conference scheduled to begin today in Havana, Cuba, which is bringing together participants and historians from all three nations involved in the crisis.
Kennedy demanded the removal of Soviet bombers from Cuba, calling them ""offensive weapons,"" and Khrushchev persistently sought a formal promise that the United States would never invade Cuba.
Although the Soviets eventually withdrew their Il-28 bombers, Cuba in the decades to come acquired much more sophisticated MiG fighter planes capable of menacing the United States.
And, despite verbal assurances, Kennedy ultimately refused to sign a vow not to attack Cuba.
The letters began Oct., 1962, two days after Khrushchev gave the all-important order to begin dismantling the nuclear missiles capable of reaching targets up to 2,000 miles away.
Khrushchev repeatedly reminded Kennedy of his ""concessions"" that led to the Soviet drawdown.
For the next 30 years, Castro would keep his people in a constant state of preparedness in fear of a U.S. invasion.
Khrushchev continued their battle of wits and bravado in a series of ``pen pal'' letters.
The State Department released the letters Monday, nine months after Soviet officials approved their distribution.
For five years, United States officials refused legal efforts to free the documents, which detail the gambits and musings of two strong-willed leaders of the Cold War.
The documents were released in advance of an unprecedented conference scheduled to begin today in Havana, which will bring together participants and historians from all three nations involved in the crisis.
Just days after Soviet ships carrying weapons to Cuba respected a United States blockade and steamed home, two issues arose to muddle the U.S.-Soviet compromise, the letters show.
Kennedy demanded the removal of Soviet bombers from the island, calling them ``offensive weapons,'' and Khrushchev persistently sought a formal promise that the United States would never invade Cuba.
And, despite oral assurances, Kennedy ultimately refused to sign a vow not to attack Cuba.
The letters were sent between Washington and Moscow through Dec., 1962.
Kennedy would ``give assurances'' against a United States invasion of Cuba but not promise that it would not occur.
For the next 30 years, Castro would keep his people in a state of agitation and preparedness in fear of a United States invasion.
Khrushchev, who is believed to have written his letters personally, tried to save face and strike the best arrangement for Castro's Cuba.
He tried to cajole Kennedy into accepting ``a gentleman's word'' that he would withdraw the Il-28s.
Khrushchev did not bring up Castro's primary list of demands, which included an end to United States overflights, until several weeks after the October showdown.
The conference in southwest Moscow is the first on the topic to bring together representatives of the United States, Soviet Union and Cuba -including former United States Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and former Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei A Gromyko.
Each side has its own version of events of what happened in October 1962, when the Soviets deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba, and the United States imposed a quarantine on the island and demanded and obtained the rockets' removal.
At Friday's session, the Cubans complained that the Soviets did not consult them sufficiently during the crisis, a participant said.
The session was closed to reporters, and the participant spoke on condition of anonymity.
The participant said they also complained that the United States should have used diplomatic channels to express its demand that the Soviet missiles be withdrawn and to clarify United States intentions.
Georgy A Arbatov, head of the U.S.A.-Canada Institute, a Kremlin think tank, told the conference that Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev erred in shipping nuclear missiles to Cuba because he had not anticipated the United States reaction and humiliated his country, the participant said.
Other Soviet officials at the session, however, praised Khrushchev as a ''great statesman'' who succeeded in getting the Americans to pledge not to invade Cuba.
McNamara and other United States participants -including McGeorge Bundy, Theodore Sorenson and Pierre Salinger -are exchanging thoughts with Soviets including Gromyko, Arbatov and Anatoly F Dobrynin, the former Soviet ambassador to Washington.
The conference in southwest Moscow is the first on the topic to bring together representatives of the United States, the Soviet Union and Cuba -including former United States Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and former Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei A Gromyko.
Each side has its own version of what happened in October 1962, when the Soviets deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba and the United States imposed a quarantine on the island and demanded and obtained the rockets' removal.
The participant said they also complained that the United States should have used diplomatic channels to express its demand that the Soviet missiles be withdrawn and to clarify American intentions.
Georgy A Arbatov, head of the U.S.A.-Canada Institute, a Kremlin think tank, told the conference Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev erred in shipping nuclear missiles to Cuba because he hadn't anticipated the U.S. reaction and humiliated his country, the participant said.
Seated around an oval table topped with blue felt, McNamara and other United States participants -including McGeorge Bundy, Theodore Sorenson and Pierre Salinger -are exchanging thoughts with Soviets including Gromyko, Arbatov and Anatoly F Dobrynin, the former Soviet ambassador to Washington.
William B Ecker, who led low-level sorties over Cuba in October 1962 and provided photographic evidence of Russian missile installations that almost led to a nuclear confrontation between the Soviets and the United States, died Nov. at a hospital near his home in Punta Gorda, Fla.
By the time the fighter pilot commanded an aerial reconnaissance squadron over Cuba on Oct., U-2 spy planes had started to document Soviet attempts to ship missile parts to the island nation.
But the images were taken from too great an altitude to prove definitively the Soviets' intentions in the communist country.
Ecker's close-up pictures, taken over a site near the town of San Cristobal in western Cuba, were credited with showing beyond a doubt the existence of the missiles.
The black-and-white images captured missile equipment, fueling vehicles and other related materials.
The evidence, combined with a United States naval blockade of Cuba, worsened a nuclear standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union.
On Oct., Adlai Stevenson, then United States ambassador to the United Nations, reportedly displayed some of Capt.
Ecker's aerial photographs at a meeting of the United Nations Security Council and demanded an answer from the Russian ambassador about placing missiles on Cuban soil.
The crisis deepened before a resolution days later, when the Soviet Union agreed to remove the missiles, and President John F Kennedy said the United States would remove missiles from Turkey.
Ecker went on to direct Naval photography and reconnaissance in the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations.
He received the Distinguished Flying Cross in 1962 for his quick but risky flight over Cuba.
From 1988 to 1998, he was a docent at the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum's facility in Suitland, Md., for the preservation, restoration and storage of aircraft, spacecraft and other artifacts.
Ecker was portrayed by actor Christopher Lawford in the 2000 Hollywood film ""Thirteen Days,"" starring Kevin Costner as an aide to Kennedy during the Cuban missile crisis.
The next year, he traveled to Cuba as part of a United States delegation commemorating the missile crisis.
He expressed little regard for Cuban leader Fidel Castro -""just kind of a four-flusher,"" he said -but admired the country's skill at making cigars.
Former United States Defence Secretary Robert McNamara and other aides of President John F Kennedy, protagonists in the 13-day crisis over the secret deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, are taking part in the three-day conference whose opening was attended by Cuban President Fidel Castro.
McNamara ultimately credited Castro, Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev with saving the world from destruction.
Bush, a Republican, invoked the Cuban missile crisis in a speech Monday to justify a possible preemptive attack on Iraq, suspected of hiding weapons of mass destruction.
After Bush's speech, Massachusetts Democratic Senator Edward Kennedy replied that his brother avoided a pre-emptive strike on Cuba by imposing a naval quarantine.
Kennedy White House aides historian Arthur Schlesinger and speechwriter Theodore Sorensen said Bush had taken Kennedy's words out of context and was misreading history.
Krushchev, noting that JFK was killed in 1963 and his father deposed by Leonid Brezhnev in 1964, said the mutual trust and desire for peace that Kennedy and his father developed during the 1962 crisis could have continued to change history.
Krushchev, former Kennedy advisers Theodore Sorensen and Arthur M Schlesinger Jr., and Josefina Vidal, first secretary of the Cuban Interests Section in Washington D C., presented Russian, American and Cuban perspectives on the 1962 crisis.
All agreed the 43-year-old United States embargo of Cuba should be lifted.
Krushchev, Sorensen and Schlesinger also criticized the Bush administration's adoption of a pre-emptive strike policy against Iraq over the containment and deterrence policy the United States has exercised throughout the nuclear era.
Steve Heyser of Apalachicola had flown the first U-2 overflight of Cuba 10 days earlier.
As I climbed out I viewed the peaceful, beautiful blue Florida sky with a few puffs of brilliantly white cotton ball clouds below me with a background of green coral sea surrounding the Florida Keys blending into a deep blue.
As I coasted in over Cuba I looked directly below me through the periscope viewfinder.
The deep green Cuban forest quickly replaced the blue of the sea outlined by a thread of white beach.
I turned my viewfinder ahead and found my first target to photograph just west of Havana.
There it was, straight ahead, the white scars where the earth had been torn asunder in order to receive the emplacement of Soviet nuclear tipped ballistic missiles.
Nearby were the scars of the surface-to-air missile sites emplaced to shoot down intruders into Cuban airspace.
Their traditional signature outline looked like a black and white drawing of the flower we call a daisy.
The length of the strobe showed me whenever I was in their 25-mile lethal range of their surface-to-air missile sites surrounding each radar.
Our country needed to know the status of the nuclear missile sites' construction.
Those nuclear missiles would soon pose an unacceptable threat to our country.
Both trails rising vertically from the missile site had a starburst of white at the top of each.
Instantly I realized the Soviets had fired two missiles at me, but had missed.
I made my coast out radio call and knew that in a little over an hour I would land at McCoy Air Force Base near Orlando.
In the perspective of our world's history, I guess it was a day just like any other day, but not for me.
Gerald E Milmoyle ""Venice"" Marine Corps birthday celebration The Charlotte County detachment of the Marine Corps League is playing host to the annual celebration of the Marine Corps birthday on Nov. at the Italian-American Club of Charlotte County, 25250 Airport Road, Punta Gorda.
Festivities will include an ""attitude adjustment hour"" at 5m. with a cash bar, the traditional cake-cutting ceremony at 6m., and a sit-down dinner beginning at 7m. featuring prime rib or chicken.
There will be champagne toasts, music for your dancing pleasure and giveaways and other surprises.
Dress is semi-formal, and veterans are encouraged to wear their respective uniforms.
Co pyrig ht 20 0 3, 20 0 5, De s o to Sun Cit at ion DON MOORESenior Writer, 'A flight on the wild sideGen.
Defense Secretary Robert McNamara in Havana, Cuba, to discuss the missile crisis that nearly sparked a nuclear war 40 years ago.
Theodore C Sorensen, former special counsel to President Kennedy, listens to Cuban President Fidel Castro on Friday during the opening day of a three-day conference to discuss the 1962 missile crisis with Cuban officials in Havana, Cuba.
Cuban President Fidel Castro listens to former United States Defense Secretary Robert McNamara across a conference room Friday in Havana, Cuba.
Photos by JOSE GOITIA / Associated Press Officials revisit the Cuban missile crisis HAVANA -As President Bush ponders striking Iraq, former United States officials who considered attacking Cuba 40 years ago this month sat down Friday with Fidel Castro to reflect on the missile crisis that nearly sparked a nuclear war.
Former Kennedy aides Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorensen are also attending, as well as former CIA analyst Dino Brugioni, who interpreted American spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Castro, McNamara and other Cuban and American protagonists in that Cold War drama were studying newly declassified documents on the role United States covert action played in months leading up to the crisis.
Fernandez said most studies of the events had concentrated on the two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, and expressed hope that more would be understood about Cuba's role.
McNamara said on the eve of the conference, outlining some of the questions he hoped would be answered.
The key Cuban participant at the conference is 76-year-old Castro, who at the time of the conference was a young revolutionary leader in power for just three years.
Those attending the conference will travel to sites related to the crisis, including a missile silo in the western province of Pinar del Rio.
CAROL ROSENBERG Herald Washington Bureau Section: FRONT 1137 Words Page: 18A OpenURL Link The Cuban air force pilots who shot down two American Cessnas in the Florida Straits showed a startling lack of professionalism under pressure in a rare test of Cuba's air combat skills, according to experts consulted on the event.
They cheered when rockets fired from their state-of-the-art, Sovietmade fighter jets annihilated the small civilian aircraft -the air force equivalent of a gorilla stomping ants.
You've got what's acting more like a motorcycle gang flying supersonic jets out there operating in a nonprofessional way,"" said Ben Lambeth, an expert on fighter pilots at the Rand Corp., in Santa Monica, Calif.
United Nations Ambassador Madeleine Albright emphasized that the pilots shouted ""cojones,"" or balls, after blowing the first Cessna out of the sky.
Orestes Lorenzo, a former Cuban fighter pilot who defected to the United States with his MiG-23 in 1991 and now lives in Orlando, attributed the behavior to the political atmosphere whipped up inside Cuba in the days before the downing.
Lorenzo described the elder Perez, Alberto, as ""a bully"" who easily could have banked his plane and made the missile miss the Cessna, but chose to give it a direct hit.
The Cuban officer who authorized the shootdown may have been the nation's air force chief, Lorenzo said.
The officer identified himself on the radio to his men as ""020,"" a code number that has traditionally belonged to the commander of the air force, he said.
He said other possibilities were that it was Defense Minister Raul Castro or two other air force generals.
You are authorized to destroy,"" a voice said from the Havana control tower, as the MiG-29 locked one of its air-to-air missiles onto one of Cessnas.
Lorenzo said when he was part of the Cuban air force, pilots weren't permitted to talk in the manner of the two MiG pilots.
Uri Dromi called ""the Soviet doctrine,"" meaning air traffic control calls the shots -guides the pilots to their targets and authorizes the airmen to strike.
Cuban Air Traffic Control, in excruciating detail, guides the pilots to their targets and, after considerable back and forth, delays in giving the Perez Perez brothers authorization to shoot.
While they're in the sky, uncertain about what to do, the two brothers briefly discuss between themselves whether to buzz the Brothers to the Rescue plane, rather than rocket it.
Because some vessels are approaching there, I'm going to give it a pass.
It is unclear from the transcript whether the controllers heard the brothers discuss the pass -which Lorenzo says clearly describes an intent to buzz the aircraft, rather than shoot it down.
Had they done that, he said, the MiGs would have clearly scared the Cessnas away, or could have forced them to land.
From the moment ground control reasserts its directing authority, the plan to shoot down the civilian aircraft is back on.
Lorenzo says it is clear the pilots knew they would be destroying an unarmed civilian aircraft.
If the pilots were ordered to destroy the planes, as Lorenzo believes, he said their careers as pilots would have been sorely damaged -if not ended.
Before the MiG29 fired on it, according to the transcript, the pilot told ground traffic control the target was a Cessna 337.
Once the authorization came, and the MiG destroyed the plane the brothers began chanting ""cojones,"" in exultation.
Lorenzo said the word has become an expression of antiAmericanism since Castro personally led a demonstration by tens of thousands of Cubans outside the United States Interests Section in Havana five or six years ago.
Roberto Robaina, who is now foreign minister, at one point grabbed the microphone and led the group in the chant.
During another exchange between ground control and the Perez brothers, after the pilots have identified and been authorized to shoot down the second Cessna, there is more agitation, which Watts read as a classic example of the pressure of the mission.
True, he said American and Western combat pilots were known to cheer their successful attacks on Iraqi targets, sometimes including civilian targets.
But, Lambeth said, ""They weren't rubbing their hands with glee that they had ripped the cojones out of this hapless Cuban emigre.
A Soviet general confirmed for the first time that one-third of his country's nuclear warheads designed to strike the United States were on Cuba at the time.
However, he and another Soviet official said the warheads had not been mounted on missile launchers and were not ready for firing.
The revelations came during a review of the Cuban missile crisis at a conference over the weekend at a trade union center in southwest Moscow.
But this was the first joint meeting with Cuban officials who guided their country through the crisis.
Premier Nikita Khrushchev eventually withdrew the missiles in exchange for President Kennedy's pledge not to invade Cuba.
At a news conference wrapping up the conference Sunday, McNamara said the figures on Cuba's war readiness and casualty estimate were provided by Jorge Risquet, a member of Cuba's ruling Politburo.
They were determined to fight to the death of every man, and they believed there would be 100,000 Cuban and Soviet casualties,"" McNamara told reporters.
It was not clear whether the 100,000 casualty estimate included deaths and injuries and whether it referred to losses among soldiers and civilians.
Other American officials said privately the Cubans had said the casualty count could have reached 800,000.
McNamara said that of the troops, 40,000 were Soviet, four times higher than United States intelligence estimates at the time.
Associated Press, '270,000 CUBANS, SOVIETS POISED FOR WAR IN '62 CRISIS', St.
Garthoff, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution and a State Department participant in the crisis, based his article on Soviet sources who under the policy of greater openness, or ""glasnost,"" are beginning to publicly discuss formerly taboo subjects.
Perhaps the most eye-opening revelation in Garthoff's article is the presence in Cuba of 42,000 Soviet troops in the fall of 1962.
Sergo Mikoyan has now confirmed that the full Soviet military complement in Cuba in October 1962 totaled 42,000 men,"" wrote Garthoff.
