Submarine B-59's position is indicated by the bright red rectangle outside the map itself, at top center of the margin.
The newly published documents in the posting include the original Soviet Navy map of the Caribbean showing the locations of the four ""Foxtrot"" diesel submarines that had deployed from the Kola peninsula northwest of Murmansk on October 1, 1962, bound for Mariel port in Cuba to establish a submarine base there.
Unknown to the United States Navy, each of the subs carried a nuclear-tipped torpedo, with oral instructions to the captains to use them if attacked by the Americans and hulled either above or below the waterline.
The documents include the never-before-published after-action report prepared by Soviet Northern Fleet Headquarters after the four commanders' return to Murmansk in November 1962, describing the atrocious conditions aboard the subs, which were not designed for operations in tropical waters.
The State Department communicated this procedure to ""other Governments"" including the Soviet Foreign Ministry, but the Soviet submarine commanders, in a series of interviews in recent years, report they never received the message.
A fascinating sub-plot of the underwater missile crisis involves United States efforts to locate the Soviet submarines.
Since 27 September 1962, the United States Navy had been tracking the subs using listening posts that detected electronically-compressed ""burst radio transmissions"" between Soviet Navy command posts and the submarines themselves.
The messages could not be deciphered but the location from where they were transmitted could be identified.
While United States Navy analysts had assumed that the subs were on their way to the Barents Sea for exercises they discovered that they were in the North Atlantic on their way to Cuba.
Another high-tech method for tracking subs was the Sound Surveillance System that detected the noise made by submarine engines.
The Navy also used ""mad contacts"", referring to magnetic anomaly detection , and ""Julie"" and ""Jezebel"" sonobouys.
Video of Soviet signals intelligence officer Vadim Orlov from the historic 2002 40th anniversary conference on the Missile Crisis, in Havana, Cuba.
Orlov served on the B-59 submarine and witnessed how close the sub's commander came to arming the nuclear torpedo aboard.
John Peterson at the 2002 Havana conference, describing the hunt for Orlov's submarine, acknowledging that the ""signaling depth charges"" he and his crew dropped on the Soviets might have sounded very different to the Soviet sailors down below Peterson's destroyer.
Finally, today's posting includes the Navy cables, deck logs, Flag Plot charts, and photographs from the October 27 tracking and surfacing of B-59, excerpted from the Archive's previous publication which established the precise date and time of the confrontation with submarine B-59.
DOCUMENTS, MAPS & PHOTOS New Evidence on the Soviet Submarines 1) Soviet Navy map depicting Foxtrot sub locations near Cuba, late October 1962.
Digital image by Svetlana Savranskaya 5) Recent photo of Soviet submariner Anatoly Petrovich Andreyev.Source: Photo by Svetlana Savranskaya 6) Recent photo of Ryurik Ketov, captain of Soviet submarine B-4.
Photo by Svetlana Savranskaya Vadim Orlov's and John Peterson's Recollections 7 ) Recollections of Vadim Orlov , ""We Will Sink Them All, But We Will Not Disgrace Our Navy,"" Orlov's account includes the controversial depiction of an order by Captain Valentin Savitsky to assemble the nuclear torpedo.
Orlov provides an updated account of his unhappy experiences in submarine B-59.
Peterson's recounting gives the American perspective on the United States Navy's attempts to surface Soviet subs.
Cony, DD 508, also part of TG 83.2, showing its role in tracking, signaling, and surfacing submarine C-19.
CHF, 21 SS/ASW Contacts -1 Flag Plot Charts of Naval Activity: 27 October 1962 17) Caribbean As of 27 October 1962 0600Q Source: Washington Navy Yard, Naval Historical Center, Operational Archives, Flag Plot Cuba Missile Crisis 31-2, file: Misc.
Washington Navy Yard, Naval Historical Center, Operational Archives, Flag Plot Cuba Missile Crisis 31-2, file: Misc.
Other accounts were not aware of this detection capability via the interception of burst transmissions.
Magnetic anomaly sensors ""detect the natural and manmade differences in the Earth's magnetic field""; the passing of large ferrous objects such as ships and submarines through the earth's magnetic field produce detectable changes.
To detect such a change or anomaly an ASW aircraft must be practically overhead or very close to a submarine's position.
Julie and Jezebell are types of sonobouys that use sonar technology to detect a submarine either actively , or passively, by detecting sound, for example, with hydrophones.
Most sonobouys are small and cylindrical in shape and are distributed by aircraft or ships.
Julie sonobouys release charges that explode at predetermined depths to provide echo-ranging data, while Jezebel sonobouys are airborne devices that detect low-frequency sounds originating from underwater sources of energy.
