The head of the DPR, Alexander Zakharchenko, believes that the result of Victoria Nuland’s visit to Kiev was the monstrous shelling of Elenovka which caused the death of innocent people.
The leader of the republic stated this in a briefing to a correspondent of Novorossiya Information Agency.
Ukraine does not want to pass the laws which they are obliged to according to the Minsk Agreements, such as the law on elections to local self-government bodies, the special status, and a new Constitution.
Hopefully, the Kremlin counted the silver before the United States delegation left.
With Nuland, Tefft and company, no telling what they would lift as souvenirs.
The President of Russia Vladimir Putin met with United States Secretary of State John Kerry after his talks in Moscow with Russian foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov.
In the meeting, which lasted more than three hours, the Russian side was also attended by the Russian presidential aide Yuri Ushakov, on the American side assistant Secretary of state Victoria Nuland, special assistant to the United States President for Russia Celeste Wallander and the United States Ambassador to Russia John Tefft.
The parties agreed to continue work on compiling the list of terrorist organizations operating in Syria.
The parties agreed that the agreements reached in Vienna on Syria was approved by a UN resolution.
At the conclusion of the talks, Kerry said United States President Barack Obama about Russia’s isolation and explained that they were caused by the situation with the Crimea.
Also the parties expressed unanimity in commitment to the Minsk agreements on settling the situation in Ukraine.
The United States assistant Secretary of state for Europe and Eurasian Affairs, Victoria Nuland, has arrived in Ukraine and traveled to the security Service of Ukraine, “Ukrinform” reported.
As a reminder, the United States Vice-President Joseph Biden, on December 8th, will speak in the Verkhovna Rada during his visit to Ukraine.
Poroshenko was also quoted there as saying, ”It is important not to give Russia a chance to break the world’s pro-Ukrainian coalition,” which indirectly insulted Kerry for his having criticized Poroshenko’s warnings that he intended to invade Crimea and Donbass.
Right now, the Minsk II ceasefire has broken down and there are accusations on both sides that the other is to blame.
What cannot be denied is that at least three times, on April 30th, then on May 11th, and then on June 5th, Poroshenko has repeatedly promised to invade Crimea, which wasn’t even mentioned in the Minsk II agreement; and that he was also promising to re-invade Donbass, something that is explicitly prohibited in this agreement.
Furthermore, America’s President, Barack Obama, did not fire Kerry’s subordinate, Nuland, for her contradicting her boss on this important matter.
Kerry was reaffirming the position of Merkel and Hollande, the key shapers of the Minsk II agreement; and Nuland was nullifying them.
Poroshenko can continue ignoring Kerry and can blatantly ignore the Minsk II agreement; and Obama tacitly sides with Poroshenko and Nuland, against Kerry.
In effect, Obama is telling the EU that they can get anything they want signed, but that he would still move forward with his own policy, regardless of whether or not they like it.
Kerry, for his part, now faces the decision as to whether to quit — which would force the EU’s hand regarding whether to continue with United States policy there — or else for Kerry to stay in office and be disrespected in all capitals for his staying on after having been so blatantly contradicted by his subordinate on a key issue of United States foreign policy.
If he stays on while Nuland also does, then, in effect, Kerry is being cut out of policymaking on Europe and Asia , altogether, and the EU needs to communicate directly with Obama on everything, or else to communicate with Nuland as if she and not Kerry were the actual United States Secretary of State.
This would be far more embarrassing to those leaders than John Kerry would be embarrassed by his simply resigning from the United States State Department.
It might even turn the tide and force the Ukrainian Government to follow through with all of its commitments under the Minsk II accords.
The nations of Europe already know everything they need to know about Barack Obama.
