All the other assessments come down to bogeyman stories that articles about the fact that the Ukrainian army will now legally go into the offensive, and all civilians will be declared collaborators and subjected to excesses were hidden somewhere in it.
The fact of inevitable offensive of the Ukrainian army and subsequent ""clearing operations in accordance with the new law on the occupation of Donbass"" is explained by the fact that Ukraine, having adopted the law ""on the reintegration of Donbass,"" withdrew from the Minsk process.
In fact, Poroshenko announced the withdrawal from the Minsk process"", separatist media cites Russian publicist Nikolai Starikov.
No one was bothered to confirm allegations that Ukraine chose the war, and the people of Donbass expect persecution and repression by the quotes from the law under discussion.
For example, Novorossia separatist news agency publishes a comment of its beloved author, whom it respectfully calls the ""founder of the Donetsk People's Republic"", that is, Andrei Purgin.
Ukrainian rulers constantly said that the Donbass residents are third-rate people…The fact of signing this law is of no account for ""Minsk"" as a negotiation platform.
However, the top position on the nonsense of this very name-calling can be for sure awarded to Luhansk historian Dmitriy Krysenko.
Ukraine, living according to the laws of the theatre of the absurd, disposes of the things which do not belong to it in fact by its regular legislative initiative.
Anyway, all other orders of Kyiv junta are illegal, as it runs the country illegally"", Luhansk media cite his senseless messing.
By the way, this ""cicero"" in the ""republics"" is known for the fact that even under the conditions of the most favored regime, he is not able to become a doctor of historical sciences.
The other extreme aspect of discussion about the Donbass reintegration were statements that Russia stole or is about to steal the initiative with the adoption of a sensational law by Ukraine and become the main player in the negotiations with the UN, the USA and Europe.
Russian adviser to the leader of the ""DNR"" Alexander Kazakov was the author of this conception.
I think that a strong political counterblow is being prepared… For example, Russia will submit a draft resolution condemning this law to the UN Security Council.
At the same time, it will propose the Security Council to set aside its resolution, which confirmed the Minsk agreements as an international legal act, on the ground that the law on the occupation of Donbass virtually abolishes the Minsk process.
We have to use it and bring the issue to the highest international level"", he sums up.
The only truly analytical material was published by NEWSFRONT separatist resource.
Russian political scientist Oleg Ignatov notes in it that by recognizing part of the Donbass as an occupied territory, ""Ukraine legally secures the refusal to recognize the DNR and the LNR as parties to the conflict.
Kyiv will use this law not to enter into direct negotiations with representatives of the republics.
In that respect, the author puts questions, answers to which I would like to hear from Ukrainian politicians.
As it is known, Ukrainian negotiators still conduct a dialogue there with representatives of Donetsk and Luhansk through the mediation of the OSCE and Russia.
In this case, there is a reasonable question how is the very fact of Ukraine's participation in the Contact Group accordance with Ukrainian legislation?""the Russian asked.
He is also worried about the changed status of the Russian Federation in the Minsk process.
That is, the number of mutual claims between Moscow and Kyiv will only increase"", he writes.
According to the author of this publication, Russia will tolerate all the ""whims"" of Ukraine and remain the main factor in establishing peace in the Donbass.
Despite the dead end that exists in the Minsk agreements, Russia will continue to participate in the process as long as there are any chances that they will be fulfilled"", Oleg Ignatov draws the image of Russia as a peacekeeper.
However, not all authors of separatist publications advocate the preservation of a fragile peace in eastern Ukraine.
Terrorist Igor Girkin predicts that after Ukraine adopts the law ""on the reintegration of Donbass"", Russia itself will declare about the refusal to implement the Minsk agreements and will revive the project of rejection of the so-called ""Novorossia"" from Ukraine.
The militant, who unleashed a war in the Donbass in 2014, hopes that the conflict will break out with renewed vigor.
It is ordered to get the term ""Novorossia"" from the trash can and start promoting it to the consumers again"", Girkin writes.
But it was possible to frighten Ukraine with this one and a half or two years ago, not now"", the terrorist is sure.
In his opinion, it is necessary not to frighten the leadership of Ukraine, but, in order to avoid complete surrender in the Donbass issue, prepare for a new war.
The choice is between unconditional surrender and the war"", he reflects.
Another militant the creator of the Vostok terrorist battalion Alexander Khodakovsky also urges to use force against Ukraine.
And, although they openly dislike each other, the views of Strelkov and Khodakovsky on the future of the Donbass are very similar.
So, Khodakovsky urged Russia to recognize the ""DNR/LNR"", and after that to deploy military bases in the Donbass.
The militant writes that he doesn’t like diplomatic statements of Russian leaders on the integrity of Ukraine and on adherence to international norms.
Khodakovsky believes that after the occupation of the Crimea, all the talk about a referendum in the Crimea is hypocrisy.
The referendum in the Crimea is a ""political formulation"" of the normal and the only possible step that Russia has committed under the pressure of circumstances"", the militant writes.
He expects that Russia will behave in a similar way in relation to the occupied Donbass.
The militant hopes Moscow will recognize the ""republics"" and will legally introduce its troops there.
But in today's realities, the he fears that without the intervention of the Russian Federation, the ""republics"" are doomed.
I'm afraid for the people who believe in Russia and us, I do not want them to be thrown under the Ukrainian blow.
Ukrainian ruling elite lost its mind so that it can give an order to destroy everything in its path – that is why we can only rely on Russia.
It is not just a sympathetic party anymore... "", he convinces himself and his readers.
