PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME AND ADDRESS Naval Postgraduate School Monterey, CA 93943-5000 8.
DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 12b.
ABSTRACT This thesis compares the irredentist and revanchist actions of Nazi Germany and the contemporary Russian Federation with regard to violent and coercive changes of borders as an element of statecraft.
It presents an analytical comparison of Nazi Germany’s 1938 Anschluss with Austria and Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea with regard to nationalist sentiment and geopolitical aims.
Although the revanchist moves share striking similarities, the nationalist movements, political goals, and methods of annexation differ significantly.
The Hitler comparison is a frequently used political mechanism to simplify issues and galvanize support.
However, using the comparison for Vladimir Putin's behavior impedes serious strategic analysis and frustrates diplomatic dialogues.
Such hasty and ill-founded analogies should be avoided in the interests of analytical clarity and the formulation of effective responses and solutions.
SUBJECT TERMS annexation, Anschluss , Austria, Crimea, Hitler, irredentism, Nazi Germany, Putin, revanchism, Russia 15.
Chair, Department of Department of National Security Affairs THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK IV ABSTRACT This thesis compares the irredentist and revanchist actions of Nazi Germany and the contemporary Russian Federation with regard to violent and coercive changes of borders as an element of statecraft.
OVERVIEW This thesis compares irredentism and revanchism in the cases of Nazi Germany and contemporary Russia with regard to violent and coercive changes of borders and the celebration of war and soldiers as an element of statecraft.
It conducts a critical analysis of the comparisons often made between Nazi Germany’s Anschluss with Austria in 1938 and Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014.
The analysis has relevant implications for United States national security policy through the evaluation of revanchist tendencies in an area with United States national security interests.
SIGNIFICANCE OF RESEARCH Following the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, a body of scholarly work grew comparing the politics and social dynamics of the newly democratic Russian Federation to those of Weimar Germany after World War I While Russia’s intervention in the 2008 crisis in Georgia raised eyebrows and provoked international criticism, Russia did not annex any Georgian territory, but erected puppet states with stalemated territorial conflicts that, nonetheless, compromised Georgian sovereignty.
In other words, Russia occupied two Georgian provinces and recognized them as independent states.
In the next phase of revisionism, the Russian Federation’s annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in 2014 sparked a slew of comparisons between Adolf Hitler and President Vladimir Putin of Russia.
The comparisons were made not only by opinion makers and other journalists, but also by high-ranking politicians and public figures.
The evolution of the comparisons, with the phrase “Weimar Russia” and portrayals of a Hitlerian Putin, gained traction in the West beyond scholarly circles as the Crimean annexation was compared by many in Europe and America to Germany’s Anschluss with Austria in the years 1921-1938.
The comparison shifted from one regarding a government with weak democratic 1 traditions and antagonistic political movements and a desire to be regarded as a great power to that of an authoritarian leader with a revanchist political program.
The comparisons between Hitler’s Pan-German aspirations and Putin’s pan-Russian ones have grabbed attention because they could imply that the Russian case might escalate into further territorial and political expansion and eventually a large-scale war.
On the other hand, Hitler comparisons are easy to make and carry with them a powerful polemical impact with both general and academic audiences.
The Crimean annexation and the Austrian Anschluss are not the only territorial acquisitions based on irredentist claims, just as Vladimir Putin is not the first leader since Hitler to exhibit authoritarian tendencies coupled with the use of force and integral nationalism.
The comparison of these accessions of neighboring land is nevertheless significant and warrants critical analysis.
The objective of this thesis is to evaluate rigorously a contemporary interpretation of a potential threat to the Euro-Atlantic security order from a revanchist power by comparing these two case studies.
LITERATURE REVIEW The body of literature that addresses the proposed thesis topic directly is limited in academic sources.
While comparisons involving Nazi Germany and contemporary Russia are made frequently in both the media and scholarly articles, the analogies are brief and typically address only the broader characteristics of the leaders and their territorial acquisitions.
The fall of the Soviet Union sparked analysis and debate over the similarities and differences between the Weimar Republic in the inter-war years (1919— 1933) and the post-Soviet, ostensibly democratic Russian Federation.
The chronological continuation of this comparison leads to one between Hitler and Putin.
Such comparisons have become increasingly prevalent in commentaries concerning recent Russian foreign policy.
The literature comparing Weimar Germany and post-Soviet Russia is extensive.
While a number of scholars agree concerning certain similarities between these two troubled post-imperial democracies, there is disagreement over the particulars and validity of the analogy.
Most of the literature from the 1990s following the collapse of the 2 Soviet Union concentrated on striking similarities between the two post-imperial democracies and the potential in the latter for a transition into authoritarian rule, which was the end result of the Weimar Republic.
Extensive research into the political landscape of the post-Communist Russian Federation has evaluated the threat of a revanchist regime with certain characteristics similar to fascism taking power.
Hitler and Mussolini comparisons abound in the literature as well as in the rhetoric referring to the German and Italian fascist icons that emerged after the fall of the Soviet regime.
More recent analyses of post-imperial democracies address party ideologies in fledgling democracies and expound on the lack of ideologies other than nationalism and an assertion of moral superiority in post-Soviet Russia.
These analyses minimize the potential for a shift to fascism but acknowledge the authoritarian tendencies of Putin’s regime.
Weimar Russia comparisons expound on the myth of the internal enemy that was infamous in Weimar Germany.
Revanchists in Russia have asserted that there was a betrayal from within by the democrats with the aid of Western forces.
Furthermore, the powerful antiWestern sentiment in rhetoric among nationalist groups in Russia and its spread into wider politics as pro-Western sentiments are branded as anti-patriotic have further parallels with the Weimar Right.
The comparison to Germany’s aspirations toward Czechoslovakia and Austria is particularly limited and not well developed.
Following the 2008 invasion of Georgia by Russian forces and the 2014 annexation of Crimea, the Anschluss analogies abounded.
The Moscow Times ran an article calling the annexation “Putin’s Crimean Anschluss” and directly comparing the West’s response to appeasement in 1938 with its reaction in 2014, while Hillary Clinton, Wolfgang Schauble, Prince Charles, and several other notable figures publicly compared Vladimir Putin to Adolf Hitler.
Analysis of metaphorical mentions relating Vladimir Putin to Adolf Hitler in Western media—particularly Englishlanguage mass media—reveals that the frequency of use of the analogy directly corresponds to aggressive Russian foreign policy actions.
In particular, the scarcity of official information regarding the invasion and annexation of Crimea makes a comprehensive and precise comparison to the Nazi Anschluss with Austria difficult.
Nevertheless, the outward political implications and similarities and the narratives associated with each are relevant in analyzing the nature of the land grabs.
The reinterpretations of the collapse of the Soviet Union and pan-Slavic Russian nationalist rhetoric among Russian politicians 11 are comparable to the ideas expressed by certain post-1918 Pan-German political movements.
Furthermore, both cases involved international agreements that banned the reunification of territories and were disregarded.
The regional distributions of supporters of pan-national movements are similarly parallel as Pan-German sentiment in Austria was limited to Tyrol and other localities, 15 much like pro-Russian sentiment in Ukraine is geographically confined to Crimea and the Donbass.
The preceding political struggles in the capitals (Vienna and Kiev) summon comparable, although divergent, paths.
Contemporary Pan-Slavism,” Eurasian Geography and Economics 53, no. : 576, doi: 10.2747/ 1539-7216.53.5.575.
Popular Sentiment in the Nazi Era, 1938-1945 (Chapel Hill, NC: Univ. of North Carolina Press, 200), 6.
Crisis in Ukraine . 5 pressure from the Nazis as a part of Operation Otto—the invasion of Austria 17 —Putin’s “hybrid war” seizure of institutions in Crimea with unmarked Special Forces appeared to be a reaction to Moscow’s waning influence in Ukraine following the Orange Revolution and Kiev’s diplomacy in pursuit of an association agreement with the European Union.
Popular Sentiment in the Nazi Era, 1938-1945 and Rolf Steininger’s Austria, Germany and the Cold War: From the Anschluss to the State Treaty, 1938-1955, Brigitte Hamann’s Hitler’s Vienna: A Dictator’s Apprenticeship 19 and Jurgen Gehl’s Austria, Germany, and the Anschluss: 1931-1938 20 give further insight.
With regard to the Russian annexation of Crimea, Roy Allison has contributed an extensive account in his article in International Affairs.
Among the primary sources, the March 2014 address by Russian President Putin on the annexation of Crimea stands out.
The initial literature review regarding this thesis topic reveals that, while there is a small swath of literature that has made early comparisons of the two fragile post-imperial democracies, the comparison has not been extensively applied to the current Ukraine crisis and its further implications.
Through a review of the abundant historical works on Nazi Pan-German actions leading to World War II and comparison with recent scholarly work regarding the Ukraine crisis and pan-national sentiment in Russia, this thesis evaluates the validity of the comparisons between Nazi Germany and contemporary 17 Steininger, Austria, Germany, and the Cold War, 7.
How and Why Russia Broke the Rules,” International Affairs 90, no. , doi: 10.1111/1468-2346.12170.
This analytical comparison may throw light on broader issues, including nationalism, militarism, and foreign policy goals and the decision-making of the top leaders.
POTENTIAL EXPLANATIONS AND HYPOTHESES The first and most extreme possible explanation and hypothesis is that the fall of the Soviet Union begat a scenario—similar to that of Weimar Germany in the inter-war years—that was conducive to the rise of authoritarian rule.
This suggests that, in conjunction with other causative factors, additional Russian politico-military campaigns for territorial expansion are possible in the future.
The nationalistic pan-Slavism rhetoric in modem Russian politics and Putin’s security guarantees to Russian-speaking minorities suggest an aspiration to future conquests that may resemble Hitler’s acquisition of Austria and the Czech Sudetenland prior to his invasion of Poland.
On the other hand, further research may show that, despite striking resemblances between Hitler’s and Putin’s undertakings in states in similar socio-political situations, the resemblances are merely indicative of pan-national dictators in general.
The recent references and comparisons to Hitler in the media are effective in portraying authoritarian leaders as aggressive due to the near-universal recognition of the Nazi dictator.
This thesis proposes to investigate the related hypothesis that Putin’s recent ambitions and actions in Russia’s “near abroad” are the result of neo-pan-Slavism and nationalism and an attempt to regain some of the Soviet Union’s former territories using pan-national rhetoric framed as Russian patriotism.
The annexation of Crimea and the 7 Austrian Anschluss bear similarities—as do many land grabs—but do not necessarily indicate a Russian potential for global revisionism.
RESEARCH DESIGN This thesis, as discussed earlier, conducts case studies of pivotal territorial acquisitions by post-Soviet Russia and post-imperial Germany in a focused comparison designed to substantiate or discredit the popular comparisons in the media and political discourse of the policies of these regimes.
In other words, in light of the actions of the Russian Federation in Crimea, the thesis investigates and compares the Pan-German movements leading up to the Nazi acquisitions of Austria before World War II to pan-Slavic and pan-Russian movements.
The character of modern Russian movements is evaluated with regard to rising nationalism and the potential for further territorial acquisitions.
In particular, the sharp rise in analogies in the media and political discourse between the Austrian Anschluss and the annexation of Crimea is investigated in order to assess to what extent the comparison is valid.
While the body of historical works on Nazi Germany is vast, this thesis concentrates on studies that evaluate the popular sentiment in Austria prior to and following the Anschluss and the political events leading to the Anschluss.
The body of work regarding Russian pan-Slavism and recent turmoil is less extensive and more fragmented, but available in academic journals and periodicals.
Chapter II offers a case study of Nazi Germany’s Anschluss with Austria.
Chapter III presents a case study of Russia’s annexation of Crimea, including factors such as the resurgence of Russian nationalism.
In Chapter IV, the annexation of Crimea is analytically compared to the Austrian Anschluss.
That is, the Nazis sought the union of those lands that the Prussians had expelled from the German state in the 19th century and that now longed for unity as a goal of statecraft, not solely limited to the National Socialists.
When this goal was achieved in March 1938, it constituted the most aggressive move of Nazi irredentism since Hitler’s chancellorship began in 1933.
Described somewhat simplistically as “the first victim of Hitler-ite aggression” in the Allies’ 1943 Moscow Declaration, the Republic of Austria was annexed by Nazi Germany in a surprise coup de main in March 1938 that followed five years of more or less cold or hybrid war oriented to accomplishing this end.
The crowds of cheering Austrians that greeted the invading German troops in Salzburg and Vienna and the plebiscite less than a month later, however, suggest an outcome other than simple victimhood.
Although Habsburg loyalists, Socialists, and Jews in 1938 were certainly victimized by invading National Socialists, it is evident that a vast majority of Austrians embraced the Anschluss as righting an old wrong worked by Bismarck and corrected by 23 Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf , 1.
Irredentism and revanchism in Europe make no sense without taking into account the case of Austria in the inter war period and its half-coerced, half-voluntary incorporation into Hitler’s Germany in the spring of 1938.
In order to make sense of this story, however, one must assess a longer record of nationalism in central Europe.
This chapter elucidates the evolution of the idea of Pan-Germanism within the Habsburg Empire and the territories of the First Austrian Republic and analyzes the popular and political sentiment concerning a greater Germany.
This chapter shows how these factors affected the ultimate political actions that resulted in the successful invasion and annexation of Austria by Nazi Germany.
PAN-GERMANISM IN AUSTRIA Despite the efforts of the House of Bourbon and the Porte in Constantinople over a period of centuries until the 18th century, the Habsburg Empire emerged as the leading power of Central Europe with little regard for nations in the modern sense of this term in the 17th and 18th centuries.
Via a policy of peaceful coalitions and warlike alliances and conquests, especially in the wake of Ottoman retreat from the Danube after the 17th century, the Habsburg Empire symbolized the continuation of the 1st German Reich.
It also comprised the nations and nationalities along the Danube and the Balkans in a multinational dynastic empire focused on the estates of the church, the court, the army and its administration.
The Josephine epoch of reform despotism in Enlightenment Europe included the steps of administrative reform and, joined with the French Revolution, presently gave energy to the nationalities conflicts that emerged in the transition from the 18th to the 19th century.
These phenomena were especially fateful in Central Europe and in what eventually went from medieval and classical Germany after 1648 in the early modern period to the modem order of nation states in central Europe with the attempt by the nations of central Europe to become nation states on the western European model.
Here the idea of Greater Germany became a central idea in the process 10 of folklore, propaganda, and mass movement associated with the practice of the cultural nation.
As a prelude to this story, however, in 1784, the reformist son of Empress Maria Theresa, Emperor Joseph II, issued a linguistic decree making German the official language of government and commerce in the Hapsburg Empire.
This edict concerned the estates of administration and economics as well as culture, but was devoid of the nationalist meaning that came to be associated with such a measure in the hyper-charged atmosphere of politics a century later.
The use of German in this regard was akin to the contemporary use of English in the globalized computer or aviation activities, and had no political meaning, per se.
The decree was a measure to increase the efficiency of a multilingual empire, that is, its interoperability, where German was spoken in more provinces than any other language.
In the decades that followed, with the impact of the French Revolution on the nations of Central Europe, the process of folklore, propaganda, and mass movement operated among those social and political groups who identified with the nation as a cultural entity devoid of its home in a strong state.
This process unfolded in French-occupied western Germany and Tyrol, where Vienna had more or less been the leading metropole until 1806, and spread after 1815 to Budapest, Prague, Warsaw, Belgrade and beyond.
The idea of the nation and nation state on the cultural foundation was, in turn, repressed for a generation by the post-1815 Congress Europe led by Prince Metternich in the Habsburg attempt to crush the ideas of the French revolution together with the combined energies of the Northern Courts of Petersburg, Berlin and Vienna.
Popular Sentiment in the Nazi Era, 1938-1945 (Chapel Hill, NC: Univ. of North Carolina Press, 2000), 5; Berend.
National movements developed among the Italian, Czech, and Hungarian minorities of the empire from 1789 until 1848, and the German-speakers grew to feel threatened, especially as the Klein Deutschland concept emerged as an option for German unity with the advent of Bismarck’s chancellery in 1862.
They were now lodged among Slavs and Magyars, with a united Germany towering over them.
The hunger of the subject peoples of the crown lands for their own nation states only became more intense after the Ausgleich of 1866 in which the Habsburg Empire had been divided into its western and eastern halves with the recognition of Hungarian national status.
Role Models of a Dictator In the waning years of the Habsburg Empire after 1866, the presence of pronational Greater German attitudes was evident in day-to-day life.
Pan-Nationalist displays were surreptitiously celebrated with the adornment of cornflowers, the singing of “Deutschland Uber Alles” instead of the imperial anthem, and the display of red, black, and gold colors.
A young Hitler was scolded by Habsburg teachers for arranging his red, black, and gold pencils in a show of nationalist pride in an empire that resisted integral nationalism as it manifested itself after 1880.
The vibrant and vicious Pan-German political movement in Vienna from the late 19th and early 20th centuries had a lasting impact on the civil consciousness of and the future architect of the Anschluss —Adolf Hitler.
Georg Ritter von Schonerer was the most influential personality in the Pan-German movement of the fin de siecle.
Schonerer notably joined anti-Semitic dogma with Pan-German rhetoric in Habsburg Austria after 1890.
Schonerer’s use of ethnic hatred as an explanation for the social and political tribulations of a multi-ethnic empire made anti-Semitic and xenophobic attitudes central to the Pan-German movement.
Although Schonerer lost his parliamentary seat in 1907 and likely never met the future dictator, Hitler was witness to the demagogue’s cult of personality in the Vienna of the turn of the century.
Schonerer’s influence persisted as his young disciples went on to dominate municipal life in multiple provinces as civic figures, 36 as well as political figures in Vienna.
These individuals ensured that xenophobia as the lowest common denominator became a leading feature of political life, with the answer resting with union with the German Reich.
Wolf was a journalist-turned-politician whose successes and view of Czechs as “the main enemy” 41 would eventually distance him from his original patron in Schonerer 42 Stein, a fierce advocate of German workers and founder of the “German National Workers Association,” 43 was known for blatant attacks on the Habsburgs in favor of the annexation of peripheral provinces by the German empire.
The politicians would frequently hurl insults at each other publicly and in propaganda as they vied for similar electoral districts.
Living in Vienna from 1908 to 1913, Adolf Hitler was deeply influenced by these political figures and the anti-Semitic, xenophobic, Pan-German doctrine they espoused.
A young, impressionable painter in the men’s hostels, Hitler would carry these convictions through the rest of his political career.
The Radical Right in the Red City, 1918-1938 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univ.
Interwar Currents of Anschluss In the twilight of the World War I in the phase 1916-1918, the dissolution of the Habsburg Austro-Hungarian Empire presented a brief moment of promise for an Anschluss of the German nation.
Ostensibly the only force keeping German-Austria from unification with the German Reich, the polyglot empire’s death throes proved hopeful for Pan-Germans.
Allied—particularly French—security concerns about a resurgent Germany stymied these aspirations quickly and decisively.
Furthermore, the economic crises of the interwar period served to exacerbate the German nationalist sentiment in Austria fueled by ethnic resentment.
While the radical right in Austria was by no means a united front for an Anschluss with Germany, it fostered an environment that was not hostile to the concept.
The transition from an Empire to a small state aggravated the Austro-German identity crisis and resulted in the deepening of political rifts concurrent with economic discord.
Tyrol and Vorarlberg severed diplomatic ties with Vienna and sent embassies to Switzerland.
Tyrol, Salzburg, and Styria all held plebiscites to join the German Reich with staggering results in the affirmative.
Furthermore, despite reaffirming the Treaty 50 Gehl, Austria, Germany, and the Anschluss, 2.
Germain in order to receive a loan from the League of Nations, Austria coordinated railroad, traffic, probate law, and visa regulations with the German Republic.
The Austrian Army also changed its traditional green uniforms to emulate the German field gray in light of a general admiration of the German military’s prowess.
Nevertheless, when Austria and Germany sought a customs union under the auspices of Pan-European economic cooperation, it was met with resistance from the League of Nations and led to devastating results.
Austria’s “inability to be self-sufficient’’ economically was reflected in its loan request from the League of Nations and its pursuit of customs union arrangements until 1931.
In a display of suspicion and its relatively strong financial position, Lrance withdrew all its assets from the Austrian Creditanstalt and precipitated a ruinous economic crisis 60 that resulted in the near-collapse of the Austrian banking sector, a dramatic slowdown of the Austrian industrial sector, and greater than 30 percent unemployment.
The Pan-German sentiment of the late 19th century was imbued with a heavily xenophobic and anti-Semitic conviction by the conservative icons that championed the German nationalist movement in Vienna and in provinces with markedly German culture.
Growing up on the periphery of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, Adolf Hitler was exposed to Pan-German influences from an early age and later immersed in these political circles during his residency in the capital.
Moreover, European security concerns over a resurgent Germany prohibited any political or economic unions following World War I, despite Austrian and German political will from the left and right.
The dogma of the fiercest advocates of—and opponents to—a united Germany and Austria does not necessarily explain the outpouring of support as Nazi vehicles rolled across the border.
In 58 Bukey, Hitler’s Austria, 11; Steininger, Austria, Germany, and the Cold War, 4.
POPULAR SENTIMENT BEFORE THE ANSCHLUSS Images of masses in Austria waving Swastika flags as they welcomed goosestepping soldiers abounded in the newsreels of Nazi Germany.
Despite these deceptively glowing displays of approval, studies suggest that the majority preferred independence to German rule, but deep political divisions, domestic unrest, and economic strife left Austrians envious of German progress and ready for a drastic change from the struggles since 1918.
The small German Austrian state was not viewed as a viable polity by most Austrians, and unification with Germany was a desired goal in the years from 1918 to 1938, despite the efforts of some Austrians to secure support for a new national identity.
A vicious domestic struggle just short of civil war, however, left the First Republic of Austria vulnerable to its dominant neighbor.
The People Demographic shifts in the late 19th and early 20th centuries instilled a xenophobic attitude in borderlands and the capital that only heightened with the onset of the interwar economic crisis.
As many citizens’ employment was threatened by foreigners, contempt for the political system grew amid social unrest from embattled paramilitary groups and labor organizations.
Although the majority of Austrians did not subscribe to the tenets of National Socialism, they welcomed change and hoped for prosperity.
Nevertheless, the long-standing history of xenophobia and ethnic hatred in Austria was evident as the minority fervently embraced Nazi principles with disproportionate involvement in the regime’s institutions.
Between 1857 and 1910, the Jewish diaspora grew to comprise 8.63 percent of the Austrian population.
Since the Jewish migrants were typically skilled and well educated, the established tradesmen and small-businesses grew to resent their competitors almost instantaneously.
On the labor front, the Austrian working class faced a similar migrant flow due to the growing industrial sector.
With the rise of railroads and modem transportation, the migrant flow—particularly of “unskilled Czechs”—increased sharply.
This perceived threat led to the founding of the Deutsche Arbeiterpartei on the Bohemian-Silesian border.
The discord between German nationalist and Czech politicians in the decades prior to the fall of the Habsburg dynasty was calamitous, routinely escalating to violent brawls in Parliament.
As Czechs grew to comprise one-fifth of the population of Vienna by 1910, German-Austrians began to fear the “Slavization” of their homeland, 68 because the demographic trend was perceived as not just un-German, but anti-German.
Since much of the Austro-Hungarian empire’s wealth was generated from trade, the high tariffs among the successor states and the broken pattern of regional commerce after the war devastated the economy.
Furthermore, the withdrawal of French assets from the Creditanstalt mentioned earlier plunged the banking sector toward collapse in 1931.
Germany was a country whose military might and culture were admired and shared, and the rural and working classes of Austria pined for similar achievements.
In Vienna, though, political rifts were deepening and social unrest was rising toward civil war.
The Politics Although Pan-Germanism was a goal on both the left and the right in Austria following the World War I, such hopes were dashed by the Little Entente with the Versailles and St.
Germain treaties and the affiliation of Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Yugoslavia with French statecraft in Central Europe.
The ensuing political struggle for control between 1918 and 1938 was vicious, bordering on near-civil war.
In-fighting not only between the left and right, but also within the conservative right would eventually pave the way to invasion.
Politicians vied for parliamentary majorities and intellectuals to support their ideologies.
The right bestowed the moniker of “Red Vienna” in order to portray the city as a bastion of socialism and as a caution against Marxist and Bolshevist forces.
While Austrian politics were certainly left-leaning in the interwar period, conservatives maintained a powerful and dynamic opposition.
The early inter-war years were fraught with confusion as the former Habsburg Empire tried to adjust to national identities and new borders set out in the Treaties.
Of the ten and a half million German Austrians in the empire, only six and a half million would remain in the new Austrian republic.
The immediate aftermath of the Treaties saw the aforementioned provincial plight of self-determination in Vorarlberg, Tyrol, Salzburg, and Styria.
Both left and right parties had been organizing paramilitary forces since the early 1920s.
A clash between a veterans’ group and the Social Democrats’ Schutzbund in the village of Schattendorf in the eastern province of Burgenland—itself a site of nationalities conflicts—left a veteran and a child dead.
In response, massive Socialist demonstrations and protests set fire to the Vienna Palace of Justice, an uprising that was only subdued when police opened fire on the crowds, killing 73 Steven Belter, Concise History of Austria , 200.
This violence opened a phase of civil war that only ended in March 1938 with the Anschluss.
When Social Democrats called for a state-wide strike, newly-elected Chancellor Ignaz Seipel “embraced...authoritarian rhetoric” and utilized paramilitary organizations like the fascist Heimwehr to subdue the uprising.
Rising authoritarianism in 1930s Austria saw the growth of a cancerous movement within it, Nazism.
Nevertheless, it started to gain electoral victories in Vienna, Lower Austria, Salzburg, Styria, and Carinthia by 1930, even winning 41 percent of the vote in Innsbruck in 1933.
The Austrian SA and SS 79 resorted constantly to methods of terrorism to reach Nazism’s goal to undermine the government.
The threat from Nazism and the schism it created among conservatives served to accelerate the transition to authoritarianism after 1932.
Following an unpopular loan from the League of Nations, German Nationalists, Nazis, and Social Democrats all called for new elections.
In the face of an impending defeat, Dollfuss suspended the parliament and slid further into fascist rule.
On one front, Dollfuss attempted in 1933-34 to suppress the leftist opposition domestically at the behest of his main supporter and patron—Benito Mussolini.
Pressures on the left broke in February 1934 when Heimwehr forces provoked a socialist uprising in Linz.
In protest of a search for arms, Schutzbund forces opened machine gun fire on police.
When socialist leaders in Vienna called for a general strike, government armed forces and police joined in the violence across the nation.
Vicious fighting ensued for four days, especially in the capital, where more than a hundred government troops and more than 1,000 socialists were killed.
The brief civil war resulted in the disbandment of the Social Democrats, the filling of concentration camps, and the drafting of a constitution that codified a fascist state in the so-called Standestaat.
Terrorist bombings rocked the country, and Berlin imposed a 1,000 RM tourist tax that brought the tourism industry—one of Austria’s most lucrative—to a standstill.
Dollfuss responded with the abolishment of the Nazi party in Austria in May 1934.
Hitler “ordered an end to direct attacks on the Austrian government” in March 1934 and elucidated with Mussolini in Spa in June 1934 that he just wanted Dollfuss replaced, not the annexation of Austria.
Still, the Fiihrer could not control the actions of his Austrian compatriots nor the plotting of his armed formations and a putsch was attempted by Austrian SA and SS in July.
The goal of the coup, led by Austrian Nazis in the ranks of the Austrian Army and police, was to storm the government building, take Dollfuss hostage, and form a Nazi-led government.
Dollfuss was shot in the process of the seizure of power in his office on the Ballhausplatz in Vienna, however, and he was denied a doctor and a priest while he bled to death for two and a half hours.
After the counter attack, the conspirators surrendered later that afternoon.
The action was widely condemned by domestic and international observers, and Mussolini massed troops on the Brenner Pass border and pledged military support for Austria in the event of an attempted German invasion.
Mussolini’s reaction deterred any German opportunism, and Kurt von Schuschnigg succeeded Dollfuss.
The Stcindestaat under both Dollfuss and Schuschnigg exhibited anti-Semitic undercurrents, albeit not the radical measures prescribed by Schonerer and his disciples.
Although the May Constitution officially espoused religious equality, many Jews lost their jobs or were denied promotions after February 1934.
Jews not only represented the outsider threat perceived by most Austrians and the right, but also tended to be leftleaning.
Moreover, several leading intellectuals who supported and advocated leftist policies were of Jewish descent, such as Sigmund Freud and Alfred Adler—who both fled the country in exile.
While fascist Austria was better for Jews than the coming Nazi rule, it still had an intrinsic anti-Semitism that was deep-rooted.
Dollfuss, Schuschnigg, and other “Austrofascists” considered Austria a German state.
However, they conceived it as 89 Gehl, Austria, Germany, and the Anschluss, 100.
There was also a revitalization of Monarchist sentiment as many anti-Habsburg laws were repealed in 1935 and more than 1,000 municipalities granted honorary citizenship to the surviving heir—Otto von Habsburg, the son of the last Kaiser Karl.
The Monarchists also advocated further revanchist claims to former Habsburg territories and had congruent interests with most Pan-Germans, although they were resolutely against an Anschluss and a Prussian-dominated German Reich.
Like the Monarchists, much of the Austrian right advocated an anti-Republican, authoritarian, and anti-Semitic regime, but were not satisfied with the Standestaat and demanded more radical measures.
The Italian dictator’s support gave Schuschnigg’s Standestaat resilience against increased pressure from Nazi Germany.
In July 1936, Schuschnigg signed a “gentlemen’s agreement” with Germany’s Ambassador to Vienna, Franz von Papen, the ex-officer and man of intrigue who had helped Hitler into power a few years earlier.
With Mussolini promising non-intervention in exchange for South Tyrol in September 1937, Germany gained the leverage it needed over Austria.
After Ambassador von Papen invited Schuschnigg to the Eagle’s Nest just across the border, Hitler “terrorized” Schuschnigg and presented him with an ultimatum as well as plans to invade Austria if he was not compliant.
The ultimatum included the release and reinstatement of all Nazis in Austria and the appointment of Arthur Seyss-Inquart—an Austrian Nazi—as Minister of the Interior and Security.
After fulfilling the ultimatum, Schuschnigg scrambled for domestic support, but he was unwilling to hand over the government to Otto Habsburg; and the alreadydiminished left declared that they would unite against Hitler, but not for Schuschnigg.
Schuschnigg’s last effort in defiance of Nazi pressure would force Hitler’s hand and precipitate the invasion of Austria.
Despite opposition from Mussolini, Schuschnigg announced a referendum to the Austrian people.
All three conditions were met by eleven o’clock that evening, and Schuschnigg ordered the Austrian Army not to fire a shot and egress to the east.
Chancellor Seyss-Inquart held his office for only two days before signing the “Reunification of Austria with the German Reich” into law on the 13.
Nevertheless, this glee was not ubiquitous throughout the country as different provinces and cities met the invading soldiers with detached apathy and outright scorn.
Starting on March 12, an extreme and concentrated propaganda campaign rolled out in Austria in preparation for the referendum on April 10 concerning the invasion and Anschluss.
Catholic Bishops and Cardinals hailed the bloodless invasion and defense against “godless Bolshevism,” while even the former Chancellor and Social Democrat, Karl Renner, declared that he would be voting in support of the Anschluss despite his disapproval of its method.
Distraught with economic hardship and frustrated with their own political system, Austrians voted a resounding “yes” at the behest of their religious and political leadership.
Austria was declared as the “first victim of Hitlerite aggression” by the Allies in 1943, but it is evident that the majority of Austrians did not see themselves as such.
The Austrian State was absolutely a victim in 1938, but many of its citizens actively participated in Nazi policies and endeavors.
While the Austrian people certainly suffered under the Nazi regime, the suffering derived from the aerial bombing campaigns of the Allies, service in the Wehrmacht and other Nazi organizations, and Nazi persecution of certain minorities.
Despite the Monarchist, Socialist, “Austrofascist,” and foreign forces within the country battling for Austrian independence, the desire for political change and dissatisfaction with the status quo of the population resulted in a bloodless invasion and active participation in the Nazi regime.
As Ukrainian nationalist movements rose and fell in modern times, different interpretations of the past emerged and vanished with these shifts of power.
The controversy as to whether there is a unique Ukrainian nation or whether Ukraine belongs in the Russian nation has led to a political and cultural rift in modem Ukraine and Russia.
The situation has become confusing for Russians, Ukrainians and people of other nations.
Russia—Ukraine’s more powerful, although arguably “younger” neighbor—considers Ukraine within Moscow’s sphere of influence.
Russia deems itself Ukraine’s national patron and thus of its blood and soil.
Section B evaluates the history of the Crimean Peninsula and how it resulted in markedly different national sentiments and its role in Russian-Ukrainian relations.
Section C chronicles and evaluates the 2014 annexation of Crimea in the context of the previous two sections.
Nevertheless, as Ernest Renan reminded his readers, the idea of a shared destiny in the past and present is essential to form a nation.
Both nations regard the Rus as their founding myth and medieval forebear.
The centuries of Russian imperial rule of the Ukrainians have resulted in a perception of the Ukrainians by the Russians that is central to their national destiny as a great power and to Russia’s singular mission of religion and culture.
Furthermore, since various empires ruled the territory of modem Ukraine, distinct policies on nationality rights led to Ukrainian identities developing asymmetrically, tangentially, or not at all, depending on the region.
This evolution has resulted in significantly diverse political tendencies within Ukraine, including a bifurcation between the western and eastern points of the compass.
The early medieval kingdom of the Kievan Rus is shared by Ukrainians, Russians, and Belarussians as the nascent entity from which these nation states have descended.
The area ruled by the Rus covered western and central Ukraine, most of modem Belarus, and western Russia.
The Rus were a “loose union of principalities” that were nearly perpetually at war with each other, particularly between the northern and southern domains.
Evidence to the unity of the clans, however, lies mainly in the ancient epic poem from the late 12th century, “The Lay of Ihor’s Host,” that portrays the fall of Prince Ihor as he rallies the Kievan Rus to push back the Polovtsian steppe invaders, although unsuccessfully.
The Rus language was closer to modern Ukrainian than to modern Russian.
Since the lower two-thirds of the Rus lands were occupied by the invading Mongols of the Golden Horde, Moscow became the seat of the Grand Duchy and the eventual precursor of the Russian Empire.
Russians consider the Rus to be their forebears and Kiev the “mother of Russian cities” as Moscow was the direct and only successor of Kiev, according to the translatio imperii theory.
As such, the Rus are central to Russia’s origins as a nation; and the Russians project the “tsardom” all the way to Volodymyr the Great of the 10th century, despite his having never used the title himself.
Nonetheless, Kiev—like Moscow—viewed itself as the successor to Kievan Rus.
Although rebuilding was slow without the support of Poland, Hungary, or Serbia against Ukraine’s Mongol occupants, a Ukrainian nation developed in this region.
Furthermore, the Hetmanate declared allegiance to the Russian Empire at the Council of Pereyaslav in exchange for protection against the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1654.
Ukrainian elites became more integrated into Russian society due to relatively similar cultures; and although certain Ukrainian cultural icons and even music were incorporated into Russian culture, the result was an extremely Russified elite caste among the Ukrainian Cossacks and an impoverished peasantry.
Consequently, once the nobility of the Hetmanate became assimilated into Russian culture, the concept of any distinct Ukrainian culture did not exist among the Russian elites.
Tsar Paul I, who reigned from 1796 to 1801, characterized his subjects as either Poles or Russians, Catholics or Orthodox.
At the time of the Northern War, and the rise of Russia into the Pentarchy of the five great powers, in 1708 Hetman Ivan Mazepa and 3,000 Cossacks defected to Charles XII of Sweden when Tsar Peter I would not allocate resources to defend Hetmanate lands from Poland.
According to Mazepa, the Tsar’s refusal to help defend Hetmanate lands was a violation of the Treaty of Pereyaslav, but Mazepa’s support for Sweden was viewed by the Tsar as the ultimate treachery against Russia.
Wary of rebellious elements in Ukraine, Russia’s rulers took action to ensure that the next two hundred years in the Russian empire were markedly anti-Ukrainian.
Even though education in Ukraine was scarce outside of the increasingly Russified nobility, the Ukrainian language was not taught out of fear of its subversive nature.
A counterbalance to any Ukrainian nationalism was also the budding Pan-Slavic movement in the flowering of nationalism in Russia of the 19th century.
Its multi-faceted perceptions and diverse agendas hurt and helped Ukrainian nationalist aspirations.
The Decembrist uprising in 1825 and the suppression of the Polish rebellion in 1830 by Tsarist forces split the forces of Pan-Slavism into pro-Russian and anti-Russian camps.
Leftist Pan-Slavists pursued a Slavic Federation free of the European and Russian dynastic ancien regimes ; this policy was clear in the first Pan-Slavic congress in Prague in 1848.
In contrast, pro-Russian Pan-Slavism swung right with its dynastic foundation and transformed into the concept of a “Slavic Civilization” with Russia as its great protector.
This idea portrayed the Germans and the Austrians as the eternal opponents of the Slavs and strengthened Russian nationalism, state centrism, and imperialism in the course of the 19th century in the face of German unification and the decline of the Habsburg Empire.
Ukrainians under Russian rule experienced a deliberate and coordinated effort to undermine the development of a Ukrainian national identity because Ukraine was unlike other Russian territories.
The evolution under the Habsburgs resulted in something quite different.
The Ruthenian nationalist movement in Habsburg Ukraine, particularly in the region of Galicia, had a mainly linguistic driving force, in addition to cultural and intellectual variables.
Linguists such as Ivan Mohylnytsky maintained that the Ukrainian language was a separate language equal in standing to Czech, Polish, and Russian, instead of merely a dialect.
Habsburg Emperor Joseph II’s political and social reforms made elementary schooling in vernacular languages mandatory in 1781, in contrast to the Romanovs’ less developed education programs.
However, even though the Habsburg system allowed for schooling in the “Slaveno-Rusyn” language—the predecessor of modem Ukrainian—upward mobility was limited.
In Galicia, Polish rulers offered Polonization—assimilation into Polish culture—as the only options for Ruthenians.
Higher education was offered only in Polish or German, so the small Ruthenian elite was quickly stratified into Polonophiles or Ruthenian nationalists, with most choosing the former.
Despite this fragmenting effect, Ruthenians in Galicia established a rather stalwart national identity by the turn of the 19th century.
Many members of the RuthenianGalician elite saw themselves as one nation split between two empires—although a number of the Eastern Orthodox clerical hierarchy saw “their kinsmen in the east” as a separate nation due to the preponderance of Russian Orthodoxy.
Clashing nationalistic sentiments between Galician Poles and Ruthenians in the revolutions of 1848 led the Ruthenians to declare to the Austrian Minister of the Interior that “Poles and Ruthenians, it is clear, cannot live together in peace,” in a request to partition Galicia.
Struggle for National Statehood The modern state of Ukraine was a product of World War I and the dissolution of the empires that had ruled it.
Ukrainians were not referred to as such until their official independence was won in 1918.
Since Ukraine had been invaded by Imperial German forces, Ukraine was able to gain its independence from Soviet Russia via the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk.
As previously mentioned, however, the national movement leading up to this point was not only fractured between two distinctly different groups of people but also almost exclusively confined to the elites that sought to further their socio-political agendas.
Originally “little more than a coordinating committee of Ukrainophile political and cultural organizations,” the Central Rada became the parliamentary body of Ukraine.
In January 1918, the Central Rada declared Ukraine’s independence in order to secure a peace treaty with Hohenzollern Germany and Habsburg Austria for protection from invading Bolsheviks.
The Ukrainian People’s Republic was a “Hetmanate” government that sought to establish a Ukrainian state close to modern Ukrainian borders, excluding Crimea and Western Galicia.
The UNR claimed to represent the Ukrainian people despite the absence of any elected officials or a widely shared concept of Ukrainian identity.
Although a national flag, currency, and language were established, there was still a distinct internal division over language.
Moreover, several political forces were contending within the borders—including Poles, supporters of both the Red and the White factions of the Russian Civil War, and anarchists.
Unable to organize its own military, the UNR secured military alliances with Germany and Austria in exchange for grain to feed their armies.
After forcing out the Bolsheviks, the Germans dissolved the Rada out of fear of its socialist character and installed a leader that favored the landowning class.
The armistice signed on November 11, 1918, however, meant the withdrawal of the German and Austrian troops and the renewed vulnerability of Ukraine.
The Ukrainian independence movement during the civil war and Ukrainian support for the invading Kaiser’s armies in World War I, however, were not forgotten by Soviet leaders.
Although devastating throughout the Soviet Union, Stalin’s collectivization of agriculture in the 1930s was “clearly premeditated mass murder on the scale of millions” in Soviet Ukraine.
Attempting to eliminate the kulak class—affluent landlord farmers—Stalin sent 1. million Soviet citizens to the Gulag, and 300,000 of them were Ukrainian.
Furthermore, the “terror famine” brought on by state requisitioning and sealed borders would kill between six and eleven million Ukrainians.
Any peasant resistance was quashed viciously by Soviet agencies to ensure that no Mazepist tendencies could be fomented.
In addition, the Ukrainian capital was also shifted from the eastern city of Kharkiv to Kyiv, not necessarily to further suppress an already defeated nationalist movement but to create a new bastion of the Soviet proletariat in the heart of Ukraine and the cradle of Russian civilization.
This would eventually backfire as the intelligentsia established a post-war cultural and civilizational symbol in the traditional Ukrainian capital as peasants were migrating to urban areas.
Moreover, Soviet post-World War II policies concerning Ukraine would further contribute to an already existential rift in the population.
In contrast, after the annexation of Western Ukrainian territories in 1940-1941 and 1944-1945 there was no resettlement of Russians to those lands.
Southern and eastern Ukraine—particularly the industrial Donbas region— became a “multi-ethnic melting pot for all the peoples of the Empire” with a distinctly Russian culture.
Concurrently, the Western Ukrainians’ deep-seated hostility toward Russia continued to develop well into the 20th century.
A Ukrainian nationalist movement smoldered through the 1960s and 1970s in Kiev, with several leaders imprisoned and sent to labor camps.
Although the movement met with fervent Soviet opposition, Mikhail Gorbachev’s Perestroika reforms allowed for Popular Fronts and advocacy for the Ukrainian language through the 1980s.
This contributed to the eventual disintegration of the Soviet Union and the subsequent independence of Ukraine and other former Soviet republics in 1991.
An informal coalition of Ukrainian Nationalists based in Western Galicia and “corporate lobbies and local barons” dominate the right-center and see internal Ukrainian divisions as unnatural.
A borderland between different cultural and civilizational zones, it has seen its own proto-kingdom in the Kievan Rus, been under the control of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, and ruled by a minority Cossack Hetmanate only to come under the reign of several states in a relatively short period of time in the 18th to 20th centuries.
Historians have portrayed Ukraine as the progenitor of Russian civilization, replaced its early modern history with that of the Cossacks, and depicted it as a multi-ethnic realm descended from the Rus.
In contrast to what Renan considers “getting history wrong,” Ukraine’s history is rather that of a borderland between Eastern Europe and the Asian steppes it has spent its past shifting between.
Ukrainians regard it as the “Cossacks’ outlet to the sea” and within the sovereign borders internationally agreed upon.
The symbolic and strategic value of the peninsula has made it a historically contested territory between several groups.
When Ukraine achieved independence from the USSR in 1991 with the peninsula included, Crimea became a key aspect of Ukrainian-Russian foreign relations.
From Batu Khan to Brest-Litovsk Invaded in the 13th century by the Mongolian Golden Horde of Batu Khan—the same that sacked Kiev in 1240—Crimea was inhabited by Greek and Italian trading colonies and nomadic peoples of the Eastern steppes.
During the period of Mongol rule, Turkic nomads of the European and Asiatic steppe called Tatars started settling in Crimea.
These Tatars established their own Khanate state as the Mongol empire crumbled around it in the 1420s, maintaining autonomy until the Ottoman conquest in 1475.
The peninsula became the stage of a struggle for the next several centuries as the Ottomans repulsed attacks from the Poles and Russians who vied for the strategic territory until Crimea was eventually annexed by Catherine the Great after a successful invasion in 1783 as part of the imperial expansion that is so central to the Russian sense of identity.
Background and Aftermath of Its 1994 Presidential Election,” PostSoviet Geography 35, no. : 224.
The Tatars had also overwhelmingly adopted the Islamic religion of their Ottoman rulers.
Centuries of conflict with Tatar raiders and the Ottoman Empire manifested itself in a particularly oppressive Russian occupation.
The recently de-feudalized Christian Russians also had a different concept of land ownership than the Islamic nomads and land was seized by Russian settlers.
Despite the difficulties of populating Crimea with Russian settlers due to the remoteness of the peninsula, it marked the first of several waves of Tatar emigration during Russian occupation, mainly to the lands of their ethnographic kin in the Ottoman Empire.
By the turn of the century, the Tatars were only one-third of the Crimean population and the demographic shift continued to their disadvantage throughout the 19th century.
Transition to Soviet Rule and World War II As a result of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty in January 1918, Crimea was included in the territory of the briefly independent Ukraine recognized by the Central Powers, but, once these nations were defeated in November 1918, the Bolsheviks quickly re-annexed Ukraine into the Soviet Union in 1921 after the Russian Civil War.
The Crimean Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic existed from 1921 to 1946, during which time Russian settlers continued to flow to the peninsula.
Nazi and Romanian forces invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, and Crimea was to play a vital part in their strategy.
Taking it would not only deprive the Soviets of their naval presence in the Black Sea and their access to the Mediterranean, but would also provide logistic support for the Nazi invasion of Russia.
The siege of the city and the campaign on the Crimea were costly operations.
As many as 20,000 Tatars fought in the Soviet forces defending the peninsula, and seventeen percent of the partisans that resisted Nazi rule after the invasion were Tatars.
Nevertheless, as did other subject nationalities in the Soviet realm, many Tatar leaders welcomed the Nazis and other Axis powers as liberators from an oppressive Soviet rule.
Nazi occupation also resulted in the brutal persecution of some of the peninsula’s other ethnic minorities, including the Turkic-speaking Krymchak Jews.
In 1954, however, a relatively peculiar and seemingly inconsequential act by Soviet leaders would have major ramifications.
The Crimean Oblast that had been a part of the RSFSR since 1946 was transferred to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic in 1954.
Although there is little documentation about the impetus for the transfer, it was justified as a gift to Ukraine in celebration of the 300th anniversary of the Treaty of Pereyaslav, when Hetman Khmelnytsky declared allegiance to the Russian Empire.
It is clear that the transfer was initiated at the highest levels of leadership, because it took the form of an agreement between the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR and the Chairman of the Presidium of the Ukrainian SSR Supreme Soviet.
When the city councils of Simferopol and Sevastopol were consulted, there was no dissenting voice.
The transfer was regarded as an internal administrative affair, a transfer within a state without significant political or economic impact.
The majority of Soviet settlers were ethnic Russians from either Russia or Ukraine.
The stunning beauty and warm beaches of the Crimean Peninsula resulted in its transition in the 1950s to an “All-Union Resort” and popular vacation destination for Soviet citizens.
The substantial military presence in Sevastopol also contributed to Crimea becoming a retirement locale for high-ranking, mostly Russian, Soviet officers.
Transition to Independence The 1980s and 1990s were a tumultuous and multifaceted time for Crimea as Gorbachev’s reforms allowed the return of the deported minorities amid multiple referenda for independence as the Soviet Union fractured into its composite pieces.
In 1989, Russians made up more than two-thirds of the population in Crimea, Ukrainians just over one-quarter, and Crimean Tatars only one and one-half percent.
Furthermore, almost half of the Ukrainians spoke primarily Russian, meaning that 83 percent of the populace used Russian as their first language.
This ethnic makeup proved confusing and difficult for domestic and international policy-makers to agree upon as post-Soviet borders and politics took form.
Crimeans seemed split and confused regarding their own destiny as well.
Crimea declared itself independent in 1992 and Sevastopol declared itself a Russian Federal City and the stronghold of the Black Sea fleet thanks to the overwhelming Russian loyalty of the officer corps.
Despite Yeltsin’s stance, Russian politicians were divided on the issue at the time.
Aleksandr Rutskoi, then the Russian Vice-President, spearheaded the movement to “restore” Crimea to Russia.
Starting with Gorbachev’s social reforms in the 1980s, the minorities that had been deported or had emigrated over the last century started to return.
The “deported peoples” included Armenians, Bulgarians, Germans, Greeks, Krymchaks, and Karaims, with the largest group being Crimean Tatars.
Returning peoples formed squatter camps and had frequent clashes with local authorities as a result of anti-Tatar prejudices in daily life as well as in the political realm.
Thousands of Tatars protested the celebration of Catherine’s 1783 annexation of Crimea in 1999.
Two people were killed in protests following the seizure of the Crimean Parliament building in February 2014 when pro-Russian crowds clashed with pro-Ukrainian Tatars.
By the mid-1990s, the Crimean Tatar population in Crimea had increased three-fold to more than 250,000 inhabitants.
The severe downturn of the Ukrainian economy disenchanted many on the Crimean Peninsula with the Ukrainian government.
Background and Aftermath,” 229. 45 the fact that Crimea’s dependence on the Ukrainian infrastructure had developed dramatically in the decades since the 1954 transfer.
Crimea received 80 percent of its water, 75 percent of its industrial goods, and 85 percent of its energy from Ukraine.
Furthermore, the socioeconomic divide between the population caused little strife between the Russian and Ukrainian inhabitants, but Crimean Tatars constituted 70 percent of the unemployed populace and their financial hardships caused further marginalization.
Minority populations in Crimea viewed the Ukrainian Government as the “guarantor of their cultural and political rights” and opposed Crimean separatism or reintegration into Russia.
In 1994, however, Ukraine accepted the removal of Sovietmade nuclear weapons from its soil in order to guarantee its territorial borders.
BACKGROUND AND SYNOPSIS OF THE ANNEXATION OF CRIMEA Crimea’s role as a strategic issue in Ukrainian-Russian foreign relations in contemporary history stepped from the political discourse and rhetoric of the 20th and early 21st centuries into the realm of military intervention when further Russian troops started appearing in Crimea in 2014.
The invasion and subsequent annexation were a direct corollary of events in Kiev and the culmination of more than a decade of tense political relations between Russia and Ukraine amid a revolution as Ukraine swung back and forth between Russia and the West.
The events of the Orange Revolution in 2004, the possibility of NATO membership evoked by the NATO Allies at the Bucharest Summit in 2008, potential trade agreements with the European Union rejected by President Yanukovych in November 2013, and his subsequent ouster in February 2014 directly led to overt Russian military involvement on Ukrainian soil in violation of the respect for territorial integrity promised in 1994.
Fraud and Revolution The dramatic shift of Ukrainian politics in 2004 as a result of the Orange Revolution marked a sea change in Russian-Ukrainian relations that would start a struggle between pro-European Union and pro-Russian forces over the next decade.
On November 21, 2004, nonpartisan exit polls showed the pro-European reformist Viktor Yushchenko ahead of the Eastern-Ukrainian-native and pro-Russian Viktor Yanukovych 52 percent to 43 percent, respectively.
When the official results were released the next morning, Yanukovych had miraculously won by a margin of 2. percent.
The preceding campaign was already marred with controversy as Yushchenko was poisoned with dioxin a few months earlier, and had been denied landing clearances at airports before rallies.
A growing middle class in Ukrainian cities and drastic developments in civil society helped by United States and European governments, NGOs, and private philanthropists in the early 2000s resulted in a strong liberal opposition that quickly mobilized.
Yushchenko declared widespread fraud, convened a snap meeting in parliament, and had himself sworn in as president.
On November 27, 2004, the cabinet, standing president Leonid Kuchma, and the parliament declared the runoff invalid and six days later, the Supreme Court annulled the elections.
The next month, under heavy international monitoring, new elections were held and Yushchenko won 52 percent of the vote, with a marked regional division.
Despite heavy support from Russian President Putin via lengthy press conferences and several hundred million dollars to Yanukovych, Yushchenko was elected president and voiced a strong dedication to a democratic Ukraine and closer ties to the European Union.
Several disputes over the price of energy supplied by Russian-owned Gazprom and outstanding Ukrainian debts started shortly after the 2004 elections.
At the summit, although the NATO Allies welcomed the “Euro-Atlantic aspirations” of Georgia and Ukraine, no Membership Action Plan was offered.
Russian fears of further proEuropean Union ambitions in Ukraine would be diminished in 2010, though, with the election of Viktor Yanukovych to the presidency.
His administration was troubled by public political clashes with his Prime Minister, Yulia Tymoshenko, and a reeling economy owing to the global financial crisis that began in 2008.
Yushchenko’s old opponent, Viktor Yanukovych, this time ran on a pro-democratic platform, claiming that although the Orange Revolution had been “to weaken Russia,” it was a popular call for democracy and that he had learned from the mistakes of 2004.
Although he was able to block Ukraine’s movement toward NATO membership in 2010, Yanukovych’s indecision about whether to sign a EU Association Agreement would be his undoing.
Narratives, Identity, Silences, and Energy,” Eurasian Geography and Economics 55, no. : 250, doi: 10.1080/15387216.2014.985241.
Putin had promised Yanukovych a $15 billion loan if Ukraine joined a nascent Eurasian Customs Union in lieu of the EU agreement.
Upon rejecting the EU agreement, small protests started on the Maidan Nezalezhnosti in Kiev.
As government forces drew down resistance for fear of provoking a wider rebellion, President Yanukovych fled the country on February 21, 2014, and appeared days later in Russia.
Prior to fleeing, however, Yanukovych officially invited Russian military forces to help stabilize Ukraine, even though the Ukrainian Constitution only permits the parliament to make such invitations.
The Ukrainian Parliament impeached Yanukovych and installed an interim government until elections could be held.
An Association Agreement with the EU Will Transform Ukraine—and Its President,” Foreign Affairs Special Collection: Crisis in Ukraine (November 2013): 47.
Despite the soldiers’ accents, weaponry, training, and blatant acts in the interest of military intelligence units of the Russian Federation, Putin refused to acknowledge that these troops without insignia were Russian or had received any training or weapons from the Russian Federation.
Although widely recognized throughout the world as Russian forces, they were called “local self-defense units” by President Putin.
Following the appearance of what the Crimeans called “Little Green Men,” local gunmen seized the Crimean Parliament and held several closed sessions, barring and dismissing many representatives.
The Ukrainian military was ordered not to fire on or provoke the Russian forces in order to avoid further Russian involvement.
After appointing Sergei Aksenov—a pro-Russian politician—as the head of the Crimean government, Crimea declared independence from Ukraine and requested incorporation into the Russian Federation on March ll.
Within the week, irredentist efforts staged a referendum for the secession of Crimea on March 16.
On March 18, 2014, representatives from Crimea and Sevastopol signed a treaty for the accession of Sevastopol and the Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation with President Putin and other Russian representatives.
Putin’s speech repeated many of the Russian claims and narratives regarding the crisis.
In the wake of the Russian annexation of Crimea, reports of human rights violations were abundant.
After declaring that all Ukrainian citizens legally residing in Crimea and Sevastopol were Russian citizens, Moscow announced that all residents who did not hold a Russian passport were considered aliens.
Those who oppose the annexation have been harassed and threatened, along with journalists.
Furthermore, Tatar public leaders have been exiled from the peninsula for refusing to acknowledge Russian authority.
In anticipation of the commemoration of the 1944 deportations of the Crimean Tatars, the authorities also pre-emptively banned any public gatherings.
Each one of these places is dear to our hearts, symbolizing Russian military glory and outstanding valour,” Putin remarked in his March 18, 2014 speech at the Kremlin.
Utilizing Tsarist terms like Novorossiia to refer to Ukrainian lands, Putin emphasized the Russian character of the peninsula and the historic landmarks sacred to Russia.
Going back in history to reference the baptism of Prince Volodymyr—the Grand Prince of Kiev and ruler of the Kieven Rus—as the cultural link that unites Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus, Putin lauded Russian military glory and lamented the downfall of the Soviet Union.
Despite Putin’s claims that Moscow’s motive was to protect the Russian minorities in Crimea and Putin’s reference to the invitation to use force by Yanukovych and the Crimean Parliament, grander geopolitical narratives regarding the invasion surfaced.
The Russians employed terms like “Nazi,” “neo-Nazi,” “fascist,” and “junta” to describe the revolutionary forces of the Euromaidan and its supporting agencies.
Putin’s March 18, 2014, speech and the state-controlled Russian media reinforced the propaganda theme of the threat of a fascist invasion from the West that is common in the vernacular of some post-Soviet societies.
Putin’s speech and the subsequent Kremlin doctrine and rhetoric concerning Russian intervention in Crimea essentially disregard the existence of a valid Ukrainian national concept and relapse into Tsarist and imperialist language, claiming Russian historic rights to the territory.
CONCLUSION The invasion and annexation of Crimea in 2014 clearly resulted from President Putin’s Russia pursuing a revanchist and irredentist agenda.
Crimea and the Federal City of Sevastopol are framed as henceforth and eternally Russian territories to be reunified with the motherland after the separation following the collapse of the Soviet Union.
While Russia considers other former Soviet republics with Russian-speaking minorities—such as the Baltic States and Georgia—as within its sphere of interest, Ukraine is deemed vital to Russia’s own national identity.
The 1954 transfer of Crimea to Ukraine was not detrimental to the USSR’s strategic interests in an era when Ukraine’s loyalty to Moscow was undisputed.
The patent rift in social and national identity within Ukraine, a legacy of its rule by different imperial powers, produced a Ukrainian national movement that threatened to drag its future path away from Russia.
In annexing Crimea, Russia has managed to bar Ukraine’s accession to NATO, which Moscow considers to be an existential threat, while at the same time regaining full control over its strategic naval bases in the Black Sea.
The Russian majority and simmering separatist movements made the coup cle main relatively smooth and bloodless.
Parallels between Russia and Germany did not start being drawn only after the Russo-Ukrainian energy disputes in 2005-2009, the Russo-Georgian War in 2008, the Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014, or the War in Donbass since 2014.
Shortly after the fall of the Soviet Union and advent of the democratic Russian Federation, scholars and journalists identified likenesses between the young Russian democracy and the illfated Weimar Republic of Germany whose collapse resulted in Adolf Hitler’s fascist dictatorship.
Experts began preparing scholarly analyses of these young democracies prior to the rise of Vladimir Putin.
Analyses ranged from concerns that Russia would quickly adopt another tyranny after casting one off, to reflection on the difficulty young democracies face without established norms, to discussions of neoimperialist Russian politicians.
Despite the speculative nature of some analyses, the comparison was illustrative and informative as to certain striking similarities.
Experts can point out the implications of weak democratic norms and institutions in formerly powerful states with strong national histories and inform policymakers without jumping to sweeping and ill-informed analogies.
The conspicuous similarities between the newly democratized countries were numerous and identifiable.
Jews and capitalists in Weimar Germany, a clique of reformers funded by foreigners in Russia.
Alsace-Lorraine, the Sudetenland, Austria, and Poland for Weimar Germany, and the Baltic states, Ukraine, Moldova, Belarus, the Caucasus, and Central Asia for the Russian Federation.
While the Weimar Republic battled the rising Communists and Social Democrats on the left and German Nationalists and National Socialists on the right, Russia dealt with resurgent exCommunists and nationalist parties.
The weight of these similarities, however disturbing and apt, diminishes when examined in a richer historical context.
The late 1990s analysis of the analogy by Hanson and Kopstein appears optimistic in retrospect.
Setbacks in NATO-Russia relations owing to events such as the Kosovo conflict in 1998-1999 exacerbated and empowered Russian revisionism.
Paradoxically, public support has galvanized behind Putin despite economic hardship.
As Hanson points out, though, Putin’s lack of an overarching ideology has resulted in an “odd, hollow quality” to his presidential authoritarianism.
To compare the myth of an internal enemy in Weimar Germany and post-Soviet Russia is disproportionate and lopsided.
Hitler’s pursuit of what he perceived to be internal enemies was central to his genocidal policies.
Putin’s intimidation and elimination of political opposition and restriction of human rights pales in scope when compared to Hitler’s behavior.
Relatively modest international resistance and heavy indifference toward the former superpower’s status as a permanent member on the United Nations Security Council have resulted in Russian revisionism and resistance in the guise of revanchism for the sake of public support at home.
Nevertheless, the comparisons fall flat when the implications are drawn out beyond the potential of young post-imperial democracies to relapse in to authoritarianism.
Although the “Weimar Russia” analogy declined in popularity at the turn of the millennium, events in the 2000s would invoke another similar comparison.
REDUCTIO AD HITLERUM Following the appearance of Russian forces in Crimea and the ensuing annexation, several public figures made explicit comparisons to Hitler’s effort to unite the Reich with the German-speaking peoples of Austria and the Sudetenland.
Not surprisingly, comparing people or their actions to Hitler or his actions is not unique to Putin’s annexation of Crimea.
This section reviews the phenomenon of Hitler comparisons since World War II and considers their potential effect on the general populace.
The dissemination of photos of the atrocities perpetrated by the Nazis had a distinct effect on the American psyche and became a metaphor for evil itself.
Through overuse, comparisons to Hitler became vague analogies for any evil acts and were abundant in discussions on ethics.
People had committed mass murder with massive territorial ambitions before—including Joseph Stalin, Genghis Khan, and Tamerlane— but not with the Nazis’ vicious efficiency of industry and concentrated effort to completely eliminate an entire ethnicity.
As a result, the Nazi comparison is used frequently and with great effect.
Politicians, journalists, and others invoke Hitler comparisons in a wide spectrum of circumstances.
However, several American presidents have used it, and to great effect.
Lyndon Johnson compared the expansion of Communism in Southeast Asia to the aggression by Hitler in 1938 when explaining to the American people “why we are in Vietnam” in a 1965 speech.
Against Apocalyptic History (Berkeley, CA: Univ. of California Press, 1994), 158.
Bush launched a barrage of direct and indirect comparisons of Hitler and Saddam Hussein in a campaign to vilify the Iraqi leader.
Putin went on in May to make remarks at a ceremony commemorating Soviet victory in the Second World War that were harsher still, reminiscent of the coldest days of the Cold War, when the “imperialist” West was painted in Soviet propaganda as the successor to Nazi Germany.
Munich 1938, Nicaragua 1979,” Studies in Political Economy 23, no. : 155, doi: 10.1080/19187033.1987.11675570 155.
How to Help Lose a War You Won,” Political Studies 52, no. : 381, doi: 10.11 ll/j.l467-9248.2004.00485.x.
Media coverage of these public comparisons results in the transmission and amplification of these sentiments, which have a direct impact on public opinion and support for specific policies.
Bush’s Hitler-Hussein comparison and amplified the message to the American public.
A study of English-, German-, and Spanish-language media showed that comparisons of Putin to Hitler started immediately after his election into the presidency in 2000, but spiked following his gas disputes with Ukraine in 2005-2009 and the RussoGeorgian War in 2008, and nearly tripled following the annexation of Crimea.
Ironically, President Putin and the Kre ml in have maintained a consistent counternarrative that neo-Nazis and fascists caused the Euromaidan ouster of Yanukovych and are currently in power in Kiev.
Anti-Nazi rhetoric was a staple of Soviet doctrine and has continued to be a part of the post-Soviet vernacular since the fall of the Soviet Union.
In making these comparisons, policymakers influence the general public by associating a person or action with Hitler or the Nazis, who are almost universally decried as evil.
Despite the media’s capacity to act as an independent influence on policymakers and the public, the political elites’ ability to influence the content of broadcasts and publications has a distinct effect on public opinion.
The Hitler comparison is often an example of political elites utilizing the mass media to influence public opinion in order to legitimize existing or desired foreign policy.
Regardless of any inherent inaccuracies in the analogy, the reference evokes a common knowledge and association with evil widely attributed to Hitler.
Policymakers and political elites are therefore capable of evoking a strong emotional response from the public through the invocation of the Hitler metaphor.
Regardless of the apparent similarities or differences, public associations with Hitler and the Nazis can quickly polarize public opinion.
Toward a Theoretical Synthesis,” Annual Review of Political Science 11 : 41, doi: 10.1146/annurev.polisci.l 1.060406.214132.
It is imperative to analyze the differences and similarities between the invasions and annexations of Austria in 1938 and Crimea in 2014.
Revanchism, Irredentism, and Pan-Nationalism The most frequent and pertinent comparison between the German Anschluss with Austria and the Russian annexation of Crimea is the claim of protecting the rights of ethnic kin across borders.
However, a closer inspection of the pan-national movements in Austria prior to the Anschluss and in Crimea prior to the 2014 annexation shows that they are of a markedly different character.
The dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806 and the later fracture of relations between Prussia and Austria in 1866 led to the development of German and Austrian identities that often overlapped.
The Pan-German movement of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries had its origins in xenophobic sentiment resulting from a high influx of Czech and Jewish immigrants.
With the downfall of the German and Habsburg Empires after World War I, the victors feared a stronger revanchist power.
Austrian citizens in the throes of economic hardship saw their German neighbors rising meteorically in prosperity in the mid-to-late 1930s.
Conquered by Tsarist Russia in 1783, Crimea developed its patent Russian character as a result of mass-migration of ethnic Russians to replace emigrating Tatars and other indigenous ethnicities.
Despite being a part of Ukraine’s sovereign territory, Crimea maintained its Russian culture and the vast majority of its residents spoke Russian as their first language.
Since 1991, Crimea has been prominently proRussian, and it had a latent secession movement prior to the annexation in 2014.
The prestige associated with Crimea as one of the former crown jewels in Russia’s empire and the home to its Black Sea Fleet made it an icon of nostalgia for prior Russian power.
PanGermanism in Austria before the Anschluss and Pan-Russianism in Crimea before 2014 were drastically different.
While historic and current cases may resemble one another in some ways, simply being a revanchist or irredentist movement does not imply similar origins, dynamics, ends, or means.
The Wehrmacht and “Little Green Men” The actual events around the two annexations bear striking similarities, although certain key differences diminish the relevance of any such comparison.
Aspects of the annexations resemble each other, but the greater implications of comparisons to Hitler’s regime are absent.
While both Hitler and Putin reacted militarily to unfavorable political developments in Austria and Crimea, respectively, the purpose and nature of the military involvement were drastically different.
Although both initiated referendums for reunification, Austria’s did not require electoral fraud while the validity of the Crimean referendum is surrounded by significant controversy and skepticism.
Hitler’s failure to gain power through his political strong-arm tactics with Dollfuss and Schuschnigg pushed him to mobili z e Operation Otto to prevent a referendum on Austrian independence.
Similarly, the ouster of pro-Kremlin Ukrainian President Yanukovych impelled President Putin to mobili z e Russian Special Forces in Crimea to secure Moscow’s military interests in the Black Sea.
As long as Ukraine remained firmly in the Russian orbit, Putin would recognize its territorial integrity and sovereignty.
In 2010, the lease on Russia’s military bases in Crimea was extended for 25 years from 2017.
While the Black Sea Fleet lease had been extended, full incorporation of Crimea by Russia removed restrictions on the fleet’s expansion.
Almost overnight Russia surpassed Turkey as the most powerful Navy in the Black Sea, owing in part to Russia’s seizure of Ukrainian ships.
While increasing nationalist rhetoric has affected Ukraine-Russia relations since 1991, the nationalist doctrine espoused in official comments concerning Ukraine and Crimea after February 2014 does not explain the policies and actions of the Kremlin.
The existing pan-German attitudes, the endorsement by major public figures, and the elimination and intimidation of the political opposition negated the need for any falsification of ballots.
The Crimean referendum, in contrast, has been shrouded in more controversy.
Within two weeks of the appearance of unmarked Russian forces, “local self-defense units” stormed the Crimean Parliament.
Barring and dismissing several representatives during closed-door sessions, the Parliament issued a declaration of independence and announced a referendum in five days’ time.
President Putin alleged in his March 18, 2014 speech that there was an 82 percent voter turnout, with 96 percent in favor of reunification.
However, the Russian President’s Council on Civil Society and Human Rights reported a 30 percent voter turnout with roughly 50 percent voting in favor of reunification; other sources reported even slighter support.
If the latter numbers are correct, reunification is the preference of only 15 percent of the Crimean population, instead of the 78 percent claimed by President Putin.
The Wehrmacht presence, SS arrests, and political intimidation absolutely did not encourage a safe and fair voting environment.
The conflicting reports of the Crimean referendum cast a skeptical shadow over an already internationally condemned vote.
Despite the aggressive and expansionist nature of the Nazis’ invasion, the Anschluss was the will of the majority, while Russia’s annexation of Crimea was probably not.
Policies of exclusion, exploitation, and extermination of Jews, Gypsies, homosexuals, Slavs, and others were central to the Nazis’ ideology and the basis of their pursuit of domination.
A multitude of emperors, kings, and rulers have conquered lands, massacring and enslaving their inhabitants.
Hitler and the Nazis were the first to do it with industrial efficiency and with the express goal of completely eliminating an entire ethnicity.
Such a genocidal agenda is absent from President Putin’s geopolitical endeavors, despite the extreme expansionist views articulated by Aleksandr Dugin and other Kremlin advisors.
The mysterious appearance in Crimea of Russian special forces without insignia in February and March 2014 initiated a sequence of events that resulted in a series of human rights violations.
A genocidal agenda however, has never been a part of Russia’s occupation of Crimea.
Since the declaration of independence and annexation of Crimea, Russian rule of the peninsula has resulted in a series of transgressions against the nonRussian minorities.
Authorities prohibited public gatherings and exiled Crimean Tatar leaders that refused to acknowledge the annexation.
Nevertheless, while Hitler’s dogma was centered around anti-Semitism and a deep racial hatred, Putin’s rhetoric is completely void of any such verbiage.
The Russian President even acknowledged the mistreatment of the Crimean Tatar populace during Soviet times, promising to aid in the rehabilitation of displaced Tatars.
Putin further stated, “We have great respect for people of all the ethnic groups living in Crimea.
Hitler’s and Putin’s annexations and territorial acquisitions show similarities to other irredentist land grabs in international history.
Although Hitler and Putin exhibited revanchist actions, ill-informed comparisons polarize public opinion and inhibit dialogue.
Nazi atrocities in the 1930s and 1940s remain in a singular category, and comparisons with the Nazis breed resentment and restrict diplomatic relations.
Writing in 1933, Freud fittingly used an analogy of ethnic geography to explain the interactions of the id, the ego, and the superego.
The Germans that herded cattle in the hills were not completely isolated, but intermixed with and influenced the Magyars that grew cereals in the plains and the Slovaks that fished the lakes.
Inevitably, characteristics of the id, the ego, and the superego will diverge just as those of the Germans, the Magyars, and the Slovaks will diverge.
Ernest May demonstrates that when policymakers have used historical precedents to influence their decision-making the results have often been flawed.
In addition to distorting policymaking, the ill-founded comparison can have detrimental effects on diplomatic relationships.
The massive casualties sustained by the Soviet Union while fighting the Nazis deepens the negative stigma in Russia and drawing such a parallel does not foster cooperation.
According to Putin, “When people push boundaries too far, it’s not because they are strong but because they are weak.
Her use of the Hitler comparison could have drastically negative effects on the personal relationship between the presidents of the two largest nuclear powers, should she be elected president.
Regardless of the hypothetical nature of this conjecture, it suggests the possible adverse consequences of such superficial analogies.
Moreover, as noted in Chapter IV, Putin on at least one occasion in 2007 compared the United States to the Third Reich.
Such insulting comparisons do not foster the cultivation of constructive relations between Washington and Moscow.
Nor do Russian characterizations of the Kiev government as ""fascist"" and ""neo-Nazi"" promote positive relations and conflict resolution.
The violent pursuit of nationalist agendas resulted in unprecedented devastation and suffering in the two world wars of the twentieth century, and responsible governments should strive to prevent such a recurrence.
Perspectives from Social Anthropology , 2. 72 with its potential outcomes will not be as effective as remedies adapted to the new challenges.
It is imperative that the nationalist character of each case be individually assessed when addressing foreign policy.
If modem neo-nationalism is analyzed with the model of fascist nationalism utilized by Hitler, then the successful conduct of foreign policy will inevitably be hampered.
Unnecessary barriers to dialogue and cooperation can only aggravate antagonism and postpone potential solutions to security issues.
Analogies to Hitler and the Nazis galvanize public opinion against a potential adversary by oversimplifying complex situations and vilifying the antagonist.
If an ill-founded analogy leads to unsound conclusions, the consequences may be catastrophic.
Daalder, Ivo, Michele Flournoy, John Herbst, Jan Lodal, Steven Pifer, James Stavridis, Strobe Talbott, and Charles Wald.
