Here, in the first ever annual, the Raw Egg Nationalist presents the best material from the years four ground-breaking issues, together with exclusive, new articles.and classic, annual content like games, trivia, and a whole lot more. _200 pages of the finest masculine content, featuring essays and articles by Bronze Age Pervert, Zero HP-Lovecraft, Faisal Marzipan and many more of the finest writers.on.the right side of Twitter.
In addition to the ongoing plight of the country’s female content creators, a second humanitarian crisis is rapidly developing that cuts right to the heart of America’s sacred mission to bring its own brand of sexual freedom to the rest of the world.
Bacha bazi, meaning “boy play’, was once a pervasive practice throughout the tribal areas of Afghanistan.
Young boys, known as “chai boys” , would explore their sexuality with the aid of one or more obliging Pashtun tribesmen.
These entirely consensual explorations would often take place in a festive atmosphere the chai boys would usually cross-dress at parties attended by dozens of men who would help the young boys find themselves over many hours and sometimes even days.
When the Taliban came to power, however, this timeless, valuable educational practice was brought to a swift end.
Legend has it that Mullah Omar was actually inspired to form the Taliban when he came across two local warlords teaching a young tea boy.
The bigotry that inspired Omar was defeated by the American-led invasion, and the subsequent twenty-year occupation became a golden age for bacha bazi, paid for by American taxpayer dollars and the blood of its finest young men.
But now that the Taliban are back in power, the tea boys are once more out of work and in mortal danger of trans erasure.
Pictured left in happier times is “Daniel’, a former tea boy who was forced to flee the capital Kabul after Joe Biden's shameful withdrawal.
He has since relocated to Arizona, where he’s making ends meet by plying his former trade as well as providing nutritional advice on Twitter and Instagram.
His dream, he told us, is to be able to return to Kabul while he is still a child, so that he can once again pursue his vocation in the place he calls home.
The individual today Is as SOVEREIGN as an Individual in any other period of history, perhaps even STRONGER, because as collective powers gain ground, so the individual is SEPARATED from the old established associations and must STAND FOR HIMSELF alone.
MAN'S WORLD continues to go from strength to strength, and it's thanks to you, the readers and the contributors.
Each new issue brings with it the promise of unprecedented amounts of content, and this fifth issue certainly won't be bucking that trend.
Food, fitness, wahmen, politics, history, cars, film and so, so much more.
PULSE SOUL, with COCCHUN SeAair Tallow is the single most Dowerful thing you could put on your face o|ale ml elele\ aD A-A@) lm alelUliKiamelare regenerate your skin.
BLOOD MERIDIAN, MAN’S WORLD SHORTS, MOTORING, NEW WORKOUT WITH THE BLACKSMITH BODYBUILDER, THE FINAL INSTALMENT OF THE JOHN COLD SAGA AND MORE 15 MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 PRISONER IN THE FORBIDDEN LAND GUSTAV KRIST An Austrian soldier of the First World War finds himself captured by Russian forces.
Facing near death at every turn GUSTAV KRIST tells his riveting true story of escapes, recaptures, and his quest to return home by any means.
But while the Russian Revolution would bring an end to the war, the chaos of the communist takeover of Central Asia would only make matters more dangerous.
The kid didn't know why his —, Seen eet penis was so strange looking, and neither did we.
Se wews News For All ALL @NewsForAllUK cal | BREAKING: The Taliban are set to demand the UK Tale Me) dal) mat-l ice) ar-m er-\'me)||ilelalcmi ames) el-lelie) siomne Afghanistan Via @DailyMailUK 4:12 PM Oct 10, 2021 Twitter for iPhone Pa AK B MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 Containing 80+ drawings and interpretations, Draw Me a Gorilla is the personality test everybody's trying.
EG ) vt ME BALLS TO TAKE HIS ; at ees y Re Im a small business owner and as you can imagine, the past two years have been a nightmare for me.
Raw egg nationalism is a physical and political ethic built upon the massive consumption of raw eggs.
Justas no single food has been subject to greater calumnies in our time than the ege, no men have been more politically persecuted than nationalists.
Shakes looked Labs Sicahks Cocktails Recipes for Sauces reais Pur all your oo8s im this basket, coumt your chickens before they hatch. and be the Chad you want to see in the world. Raw Eos Nationalist In hardback exclusively from anlelopehillpublishing.com RICHARD Ill Columba returns with a profile of one of England's most maligned kings, Shakespeare's famous hunchback tyrant ICHARD III WAS BORN ON THE 2ND OF OCTOBER, 1452.
He was the eleventh child of Richard Plantagenet, 3rd Duke of York and the richest man in the realm thanks to the inheritance of his wife Cecily Neville.
He was a sickly child, and is poor health seemed to reflect the state of England as she embarked upon the Wars of the Roses.
The Yorkists, led by Duke Richard, were opposed by the Lancastrians loyal to Henry VI and his wife Margaret of Anjou.
In 1460, the Duke and his eldest son Edmund were slain at the Battle of Wakefield.
Young Richard, only eight years old at the time, was sent with his brother George to the Low Countries.
They weren't there long; their remaining elder brother Edward, himself merely an adolescent, crushed the Lancastrian army at the Battle of Towton, where tens of thousands fought in a howling blizzard.
Richard saw his brother crowned as Edward IV and soon offices rained down upon his young head; Richard was made Duke of Gloucester, Knight of the Garter and Knight of Bath.
A few years later, at the tender age of eleven, he MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 was entrusted with levying troops in the Western Counties.
The Duke of Warwick, insulted by Edward's refusal to marry his brothers Richard and George to the Duke's daughters, allied himself with Henry and Margaret.
This rising was put down at the battles of Barnet and Tewkesbury, at both of which a teenage Richard played a vital role; at Barnet he held the right flank wielding a battle-axe, while at Tewkesbury he led the vanguard.
He did all this despite an increasingly painful case of scoliosis that, 32 contrary to Shakespeare, began to develop in early adolescence.
Though now ostensibly reconciled they continued to bicker about issues of money and property, especially the inheritance of Warwick, about which George made the most violent threats and complaints.
Things came to a head in 1477 when Edward forbade his brother from marrying into the House of Burgundy.
Denied these rich pickings, George became a real threat, and it is in this heady atmosphere that he was accused of treason and executed.
After repeated incursions into the north of England by the Scots, Richard was sent by the increasingly corpulent king to punish them, invading their land and burning their villages.
James III of Scotland was clapped into irons by his own fickle nobles, and Richard seized this opportunity to rout the disorganised Scots and take their strongholds.
This he accomplished extremely quickly; he took Edinburgh without the loss of a man.
He was succeeded by his 12 year old son, now Edward V With George dead and buried, the nobles were divided into two camps; the one represented by Richard, now named Lord Protector; the other by the family of Edward IV's wife Elizabeth Woodville.
It is no surprise that the Woodvilles moved quickly to secure the young king, and it is equally unsurprising that Richard moved quickly to intercept them.
Richard soon had him arrested and taken to Pontefract Castle, where he was later executed on charges of treason.
Richard then set about crippling the Woodville faction, thereby securing his own position.
He accused Lord Chancellor Hastings of treason and had him slain following a confrontation in the Tower of London.
He then got hold of Edward V's brother Richard by convincing his mother to release the boy from sanctuary, ostensibly because his presence was required at Edward's coronation.
They declared that the young Edward was illegitimate, owing to the late king's earlier affair and supposed engagement to one Eleanor Butler.
A petition soon appeared demanding that Richard take up the crown; moving quickly, he accepted and was hailed as king at Westminster on the 6th of July.
Edward and his brother Richard, now nothing but bastards, were confined to the Tower.
There they remained, being seen less and less until, one fateful day, they appeared for the last time.
It seems that the young princes were murdered by their uncle, who had their bodies hidden beneath a flight of stone steps in the Tower, where they lay undiscovered for centuries.
King Richard set out on a royal progress, attempting to drum up support for his new regime.
Unfortunately for him trouble was brewing across the Channel; young Henry Tudor, drawing support from the French as well as from disaffected English nobles, was preparing for war.
He soon landed on the Welsh coast with an army composed primarily of foreign soldiers.
Richard, no stranger to such struggles, levied his own troops and rode to meet the young man in battle.
The armies caught sight of each other south of the town of Market Bosworth, in Leicestershire, on the 21st of August, 1485.
The Duke of Norfolk, one of Richard's allies, held the centre against Henry's troops as long as he could, but things looked increasingly desperate.
Richard, perhaps enraged by the cowardice of Henry, who hid at the back of his lines, or by the inaction of men like the Earl of Northumberland and Sir William Stanley, who sat on the sidelines and refused to join battle, gathered his finest knights and declared his intention to punch straight through Henry's guard and slay the would-be usurper.
Wielding his trusty battle-axe, Richard and his companions led a stupendous charge down the hill that took the Tudor army by surprise.
Richard himself fought most bravely, slaying with his own hands Henry's standard-bearer and unhorsing another of his bodyguards.
The king came within a hair's breadth of young Henry Tudor, hewing all about him with his axe, until he was betrayed; William Stanley, who now resolved to support the Tudors, led a charge into the side of Richard's party.
Treason”, Richard continued to fight until he was absolutely surrounded by enemy soldiers, thrown from his horse, and killed.
Thus perished the last king of England to die in battle, and the last scion of the House of Plantagenet. gy MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 THE VIETRAM MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 } 9,087,000 | 7 A % Say they'd serve again, despite the outcome Number of military rcive datyduringthe.
Due largely to the mobility of the helicopter 7.85 million OUoyotmeymoleyeelokmencejoyocemeyel deXondstaxmaolerelselacKe) mbalelor china.
Affinity for women And sexy Beautiful Girls. inches ameircan, Hangliding.
HONEY ,POWERSTAE ntle i ~ AOC oo ge Dut st ee ay wt yey ot hh See, he told me this one weird trick you just won't believe.
Well, here | am six months later and let’s just say I’m even more of a man than | was before. | can’t believe it.
Now you see why | get all my health and lifestyle advice from anonymous Iwitter accounts.
Stories like 's will change you if you think this is i i pate sane paces who can't take a harmless joke.
While you need a lighter to enjoy a premium cigar, you dont technically need a cutter.
As simple as cutting a cigar might first appear, you can still get it wrong — and you only get one solid chance to do it.
You've destroyed the fine construction and exposed the beautiful tucked-in end of the wrapper leaf, which will cause the cigar to unravel and allow too much air flow.
We will cover four main tools and the associated methods to cut the head of a cigar.
While some will work better, all will work, and all require a bit of practice, as cigars offer many ring gauges and head shapes and forms.
Also, your local tobacconist or smoking parlor may offer some options that are fixed to a counter or piece of furniture, even scissors.
With constant modern updates from numerous manufactures, keep in mind that in terms of tools this is the oldest and most trusted form of cutting the head of a cigar.
Typically, a straight cutter will have a center hole that fits most cigars, which is where two concave blades meet and then cross to complete the cut.
On both sides of the center hole are finger holes built into the frame.
MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / LIFESTYLE 46 You open the cutter by spreading the thumb and finger to open the blades.
Be sure the blades are totally open, and your thumb and finger have extended the two blades fully.
Do not drag the cigar along the blade edge if your cutter keeps the blades exposed — this will tear the wrapper leaf.
This will send both blades through the head of the cigar, snipping off just enough for a solid draw and good airflow.
The entire cigar was made for a good cut, so if the cut is correct and tobacco begins unraveling, it is probably a minor construction flaw.
You will see a cap, a circular piece of tobacco draped over the head, and beneath it a double or triple line of tobacco close together.
You are to cut right on or just below the cap-line, and above the two or three lines of tobacco.
This will expose the area of the cigar which is rounded by being pressed in the mold.
This area is constructed to be exposed and cut, allowing proper airflow.
If you cut too little, you can repeat this option with just a sliver more.
If you've cut too much, try smoking it, but you'll soon realize why cigars are rolled to have a smoking end and a lighting end that is, if the cigar doesn't unravel.
The Punch has become especially popular because of its combining with a key chain, a common accessory sold in cigar shops.
A punch consists of a metal or plastic body and a cylindrical metal tube with a razor-sharp head.
The blade is capped so that you dont slice open your fingers when grabbing it or your leg when the tool is in your pocket.
Once the cap is removed you use your thumbs and index finger, holding the body of the punch with the blade pointed away from the hand.
To cut, hold the punch in your dominant hand and the cigar carefully in the other.
Make sure the cigar is centered on the blade, as you want to drive the punch into the cigar through the center of the cap.
Twisting the punch left and right is a good method if the blade turns out to not be sharp.
Being a little off-center is no big deal, but if you're far from center you could push the double/ triple wrap down or take off the edge of the cap, meaning the remaining part of the cap could come off during smoking.
Once the cigar is lightly pressed against the punch, firmly press the punch into the cigar.
You'll know how much by how long your cutting tube is, as per the manufacturer's suggested specs.
You'll see a perfect cylindrical chunk taken out of the head of the cigar, which creates a very easy draw.
If you then look at your punch, you'll see the removed chunk in the cut tube.
Your cap most likely has a driving rod which goes in the center of the cut tube and will push that tobacco out.
If you don't get a good draw or have damaged the cigar, go to using a v-cutter or fiddling with your fingers to correct the error.
Cigar smoking is delightfully antiquated, but every once in a while, some tech hits the industry, and we get a nifty product.
The V-cutter is exactly that, though it is arguable that this method was used some time ago.
Either way, the contraption is popular for taking a deep, aesthetically pleasing cut of the cigar and lines the cigar up perfectly for what is practically a fail-safe option.
In the device itself is stored the blade, which usually will open with the push of a mechanical button or switch.
This V-blade cuts deep into the cigar’s head, with a clean, V-shaped chunk being removed, and allows for the integrity of the cigar head to remain.
In the body of this tool is a circle clearly made for the head of the cigar to be placed.
This hole will not allow the cigar to pass all the way through, meaning you cannot over-cut.
The process involves holding the V-cutter with one hand, between the thumb on the bottom and the index finger on top to push the blade down.
Some hold the bottom against the heel of their hand and use two fingers to push down.
Once the cutter is open, with one hand firmly holding the cigar against the blade hole, push the blade through the cigar.
The device will typically lock when this is done successfully, as it is spring loaded.
Personally, I don't care for it, because it feels weird on the head of cigar and is also a bulkier tool, not so great for carrying in the pockets.
I find it to be a bit more dramatic too, when the entire art of smoking is to eliminate drama.
If youre a gadget-driven individual, you should definitely look into trying the tool.
The best part of a V-cutter is that you basically can’t A typical V-cutter from Colibri @ailiey make an error when using it.
While this option takes a significant amount of practice (don't worry, it just means you need to smoke more), once you've mastered it, you'll be surprised at how well it plays with the construction of the cigar and how well it works.
Despite what you probably think, many industry professionals don't carry the fanciest of tools or accoutrements, especially those whose work involves tobacco production.
Using the nails of the index finger and thumb, a pinch is made at the head of the cigar, leading with the nails, and then a slight pull removes the right amount of the cap and tobacco in the cigar head.
Holding the cigar in one hand, it is typical to place the thumb and index finger together, with the fingertips on the head of the cigar for a preliminary line-up and measurement remember, many sizes and gauges.
Then once the fingertips are pressed on the cigar, the thumb and index finger roll together, pinching the cap of the cigar.
Pinching some more, right to the point where the nails meet, a quick yet delicate pull is made away from the head of the cigar.
Once you've mastered this method, it is truly astonishing to see that the 100% handmade cigar works perfectly with your hands and nothing else.
The construction of the head and the cap works well with this method for airflow, and after some time you ll find you'll be able to remove the tobacco in a near perfect circular shape.
Of course, not ruining a cigar should be the goal of every smoker, so if you decide to try this method out, do so with caution and always err on the side of a light touch.
THE GREAT WARRIOR-KING PYRRHUS OF EPIRUS, NAMESAKE OF THE PYRRHIC VICTORY. any of us are fascinated with monarchy.
They were debating whether they should invite one of the greatest warrior kings ever, Pyrrhus of Epirus, to help them with a problem.
In the 280s BC, though, it had degenerated a little, at least in comparison to its rivals.
Tarentum was a democracy, and the merchant element was taking over in politics.
They had a strong navy, but on land they relied heavily on allies and mercenaries.
Their timing was not great the Tarentines were in the middle of celebrating a huge annual festival of Dionysus.
Almost all of them were smashed, but not so far gone to miss a fleet of foreign ships MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / THOUGHT sailing across their bay.
Maybe the Romans thought drunken sailors would be less inclined to operate heavy machinery and start troule) ax Nope.
The Tarentines sloshed into their triremes and sped after the Roman fleet.
The Tarentines swooped in, burned and sank the Roman ships in the harbor.
Then they disembarked, plundered the city, got back in and sailed away.
Pyrrhus’ name comes up in the discussions a great king, cousin of Alexander the Great.
But suddenly they hear the sound of festival instruments at the entrance of the theater.
RUINS AT THE ORACLE OF DODONA, IN EPIRUS BELOW LEFT: EPIRUS'S CAMPAIGNS felt when Pyrrhus got there.
The guys who took credit for brokering this glorious alliance with the warrior king.
This was a man who had defeated enemy generals in hand-to-hand swordfights, while the armies watched.
We underestimate how different life will be when our political system changes.
We underestimate how different we ourselves will need to be to flourish under a different regime.
So, if you want things to change, start by being the sort of person you'll actually need to be if they do.
Let's enjoy what's left of our democracies, and focus on building each other up, while we still have time.
Let's start by not being afraid, says EVELYN RAE ou dont have to flick very far back in our history books to find stories of and unwavering courage in the face of adversary.
Only a century ago, Western civilization was steadily cultivating young men and women who valued the sorts of things that inspired such episodes of bravery namely, freedom, honour, virtue, and personal responsibility.
The prosperity and comfort we know today is largely due to the men and women who valued those things that underpin a well-functioning and free society.
Thinking back on the “good times” of the past, I’m reminded of the young, brave men who fought, bled, and died to secure the freedom-loving nations they were then building for their children to inherit.
Many of them paid for that end with their life; most of those who didnt were, at least, willing to.
Surely, whatever it was, it’s safe to say it’s not prevalent in our culture today.
As a result, were left with grown adults who are incapable of handling decisions relating to their own personal health.
They'll line up for hours on end just to be tested for an illness they have no signs or symptoms of suffering.
And their children, the most vulnerable in society, are being subject to experimental medical procedures to quell the fears of the adults around them.
Unlike our ancestors, we've become a generation of fear and paranoia, so much so, that we are, not only willing, but more than happy to forfeit the freedoms previous generations secured in exchange for a false sense of security.
Its been said that freedom is never more than one generation away from extinction, and were certainly at that crossroads today.
We've forgotten that freedom isnt something that can be left unprotected or unchecked.
Especially now that we have the unrelenting threat of big government whose power rest on the subjugation and control of the people.
Civilizations are shaped by culture, and culture is shaped by ideology.
Today, the Western world has largely abandoned the fundamental beliefs of previous generations.
Subjectivism and relativism now dominate virtually every major institution, and its corrosive effects seep into near-every aspect of our culture, from family to sexuality, religion, politics, entertainment, education, and more.
As a result, there is an expectation that our cultural leaders are subjectivists, afhrming that emotions are the creators of facts and that intention drives morality.
Within this setting, we birthed the regressive and degenerate notion that objectivity and debate represent some sort of threat to social harmony.
Truth has become a casualty of the culture war, and with it, the freedoms necessary for that truth to flourish.
Nature hates a void, and too often the government is ready to fill that void sometimes even if there is no void at all.
And in the absence of objective grounding, the government becomes our only absolute.
Rather than the state protecting our freedoms, the state now views itself as the giver of those freedoms.
Coming back from this point requires a revisiting of the ideas and beliefs that once shaped a freer world.
We must remember once again that human rights are not something we earn from the government and that freedom is not a reward for certain behaviours.
Human rights are given to us by virtue of the fact that we are human, made in the image of our Creator.
And that’s a truth intentionally ignored and suppressed by our would-be overlords and not without reason.
If we dont belong to God, we belong to the state, because when the state is not restrained by a law greater than itself, it becomes a law unto itself.
For as long as there is no throne above our governments, our governments will assume the highest authority over us.
Tyranny 57 reigns when the state claims to be the highest source of law, morality, and justice.
Now, in the Western world, this is a truth we're just beginning to feel the devastating consequences of embracing.
Previous generations understood that the greatest threat to tyranny is a group of people who pledge their allegiance to something greater than the state itself.
And yet almost every aspect of culture today is determined to undermine that fact.
We must consider the fruit of each system and ask ourselves what future we envision for our children.
The last two years have highlighted some major cultural issues, but until we find the underlying ideological cause, our solutions will be nothing more than tissue-patching the gaping hole in the hull.
Unless we go to the root, the system will continue to produce rotten fruit.
When we look out of our windows or at our computer screens and see society falling headlong into unrestrained immorality and decay, we ought to remember to turn around and examine the state of our own homes.
Ultimately, that’s the only real solution to the rot infesting our societies.
So, when we look outside and see injustice, oppression, corruption, the assaults on freedoms, we must do more than complain.
We must remember that the change begins at home, with you and me, breaking free from culturally decaying ideologies.
We must raise the next generation in an environment that previous generations considered worth fighting to preserve.
By focusing on the issue that really matters to ordinary people, says JOSIAH LIPPINCOTT , uild the wall.
They dont >a want Mexican drug gangs, the opioid crisis, and bad schools.
They dont want ever-skyrocketing housing prices and an ever-growing underclass (or overclass) fed from a steady overseas supply. ay That subterranean force in American politics— the sheer instinct for survival—is constantly attacked, rarely defended, but always present.
Yes, the left is going to call any defender of a sensible immigration policy a hardcore racist.
The “matter” out of which a regime is made is far more important than the form.
Democrats openly want to torch it and Republicans are afraid to return to it.
But if the last two years of Covid lockdowns and vaccine mandates have proven anything beyond a shadow of a doubt, it's that there is no institutional support for liberty and national existence.
Unable to win elections with the American population of pre-1965 America, the radical left decided to simply import a new people.
In 2020, Trump lost every non-white voting bloc but won a majority of white voters.
If America had its 1965 demographics, Trump would have been elected in a rout.
But that won't happen unless the left loses its most potent weapon—the sheer numbers at its command.
But there is still time to turn things around.22 will likely be more of the same.
The GOP will grift, new names will make some noise (but accomplish little), and the economic and political situation of the country will get more and more toxic.
The young men that make up the true intellectual vanguard of the Right—the mememakers, pranksters, and brilliant critics on the fringe of the empire—must work to reorient the Right back to the existential politics of who we are as a nation.
The worse things get, the more the nations patriotic core will demand real abiding change.
The politics of 401ks, tax cuts, and debates about how much foreign aid to send to Israel is dead and gone.
Rejecting the yeast life, getting jacked and tanned, slonking raw eggs, reading the classics and holding yourself and your friends accountable will absolutely transtorm your life for the better.
However wrong postmodernism may be and however ill its effects over the last sixty or so years, Derrida, Foucault and their cheese-eating acolytes were right, at least, in one thing; that language holds the power not just to label or categorise reality but also to structure it even create it.
People in California were lounging around in swimming pools, smoking pot and listening to groovy music long before the term “laid back” was coined; but once it was, a whole movement of people came into being, who saw themselves and one another in a new way and started to act accordingly.
Words make things so, and they allow us to orient ourselves in the world in particular ways, opening up certain possibilities and closing off others.
Anyway, I’m saying these things, dear reader, because I’ve been thinking for a while now about what it really means to be a conservative; in particular, whether the word “conservative” itself has any value at this present moment.
As a working definition, I hope we can agree that this neither offends common sense nor the conservative political tradition.
Because I couldnt think of one thing substantial or otherwise — that conservatives have actually conserved.
Now, I could hardly claim to be the first person to have pointed out this dismal scorecard, and I’m sure I wont be the last.
When it comes to conserving the most valuable continuities with the past — to maintaining the “pact between the dead, the living and the yet unborn’, in Edmund Burke's immortal words — the achievements of Western conservatives are a roll call of shame.
Over the past two years, despite the global pandemic and official promises to the contrary, the incumbent big-C Conservative government has allowed the demographic replacement of the native British to continue unchecked and unabated.
Even as its own citizens languished under a national house arrest — unable to go outside for all but “essential purposes, denied access to their loved ones, neighbours and fellow citizens —hundreds of boats carrying so-called “refugees” from around the world crossed the English Channel, often under escort from Royal Navy and RNLI boats, and disgorged their human cargo on these shores.
He was arguably the man most responsible for creating the “gentlemanly conservative” persona that has helped make conservativism, especially campus conservatism, so thoroughly unattractive to anybody youd want to sit opposite at dinner assuming you wanted to maintain your appetite, that is.
This ridiculous, bloviating definition, and the futile gesture it describes, says everything that needs to be said about the man, and the absolute debacle of a movement he and others like him have presided over.
Which isnt to say that there arent things worth conserving in the her and now, because there are — and if they disappeared tomorrow, youd know about it.
Rather, it's that, after so much has already been destroyed or corrupted, other kinds of action are now more essential to make the world fit for humans again.
The models for the future are now very firmly those of the distant past.
Perhaps it’s the early history of the American Republic, before its corruption by the bipartisan system.
Or perhaps it’s the warrior brotherhoods of the Bronze Age and their revolt against the matriarchal world of ancient Europe.
Instead of being a badge of honour and enabler of decisive action, it merely serves as a mark of shame.
Instead of illuminating, it obfuscates the problem, suggesting still, as it did to Buckley, that our job is simply to stand athwart history telling “STOP!’, like some desperate commuter running late for his train; when in fact what we now must do is wrest control of history from our enemies and take it in the direction, and at the speed, of our own choosing.
The film’s denouement features the oft parodied but genuinely touching scene of the boys obstinately disobeying the authority of the headmaster to stand on their desks and pledge fealty to the wronged Mr Keating, quoting Walt Whitman as they do so.
Watch the movie as a youngling and you will be fired up by John Keating’s disregard for procedure, his enthusiasm for his subject and his delight in irking the powers-that-be.
Watch it as a jaded thirty-something who has been teaching British kids over the last decade and you'll see an unrealistic expectation of classroom engagement and a litany of safeguarding concerns.
In the past twenty years, the John Keating character has been slowly sluiced out of the education system, certainly on this side of the Atlantic and I expect on the other side, too.
Robin Williams in Dead Poets Society there were, the idea that a group of students could be so enamoured with a love for learning that they would arrange a midnight rendezvous in a cave to read Housman and Keats is so farfetched as to be absurd.
I was schooled in the late 90s and early part of the millennium and will happily go on record as having enjoyed my time.
The teachers had only recently been robbed of the ability to give a clip round the ear with no consequences and many of them still had the classroom chops and the desire (and backing) to enforce discipline.
My favourite teacher, a qualified pilot with a red face and a battered old BMW used to have a huge Encyclopaedia of physics next to his desk.
The essay would invariably not be done, due to a teenager’s complete incomprehension of Newtons Third Law of Motion and the inability to write 2000 words in the space of an evening in a world before word processors were commonly available.
So the following lunchtime you would be stood outside the staffroom for 40 minutes and then that was the end of the matter.
This man got rowdy, dull-eyed kids from the post-industrial heartlands to engage.
Our school was a 1960s concrete nightmare built around two three-storey towers overlooking the playing fields.
One wet, grey afternoon he decided that we had done enough physics and needed a little sport.
He challenged a boy in the class to go and steal the ball from a Year 11 rugby game that was happening on the PE fields below.
The class and the teacher raced to the window to watch the doomed attempt and the lad getting pummelled.
Another vivid memory of a Van Der Graaf generator being used to demonstrate something about circuits devolving into a manic thirty-person game of statically charged tig.
Sometime after I had left school, in 2007, the government brought in an indoor smoking ban.
I am told from people who were still at the school that our hero wrote “staff smoking area’ on a piece of A4 paper in permanent marker and sat in his car, in full view of the kids.
He used to let the Indian kid in the class off his homework if he gave him a copied CD-ROM of the latest flight simulator game.
THE IRONY, OF COURSE, IS THAT THE PROFESSION IS MORE CLOSED TO THESE TYPES THAN EVER. irrelevance, but the old rogue’s refusal to do things ‘properly stands out in the sharpest clarity.
The British government has repeatedly flagged that white working class boys underperform by every metric, against all other groups even WWC girls.
Well ; the pay is poor, the workload unreasonable and you could have a much more satisfying life as a plumber.
The education system — emblematic of society at large is fundamentally misfiring.
White British boys are mothered to death at primary school, where only 15% of teachers are male.
Many are compressed and deflated by daily drugs so as to be manageable in a classroom environment completely stacked against them, and unlike anything they will experience after they leave school at 16.
Their aspirations are to be Youtubers, their family unit is dysfunctional or defunct and they know nothing of their own history.
Good teachers, risk-takers, rule-breakers, positively masculine male role models are needed more than ever to guide the nation’s boys toward manhood.
The irony, of course, is that the profession is more closed to these types than ever.
It is incredibly sad, but there are other ways to effect change within your community.
MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / MEDITATIONS We WerRe NWeVecrR ASKED MM estar Civilization 1S crisis. More than half a million illegal aliens from around the It's not particularly difficult to differentiate ‘tourists’ from world poured across the southern border.
MUnvetted ‘asylum Seekers’ were fGWn in trom Afghanistan inan open-ended resettlement program.
We have ta Enowwhor ts migration, entering our lands, who is living among us, who are ou | allies — and who aré our enemies.
The stunning scope of scorched-earth migration ‘ facilitated by anti-national entities truly dawned on me . | lLis imperative we are informed on immigration issues. during a journey to the Arctic Circle in 2019.
Look to the work of Dominique Venner, says BLOSSIUS ominque Venner was never a romantic or a depressive.
Dominique Venner, author of A Handbook for Dissidents When Venner looked around, he saw that Europeans had lost control of their institutions, their countries, their destiny.
For Venner, this decadence was brought about, ultimately, by nihilism—a condition stemming not from loss of religious belief, but rather from a more general severing of Europeans from their own peculiar spiritual roots, from that transcendent link to their past that would guide their \ existence and ensure a future for them as * apeople.
For Venner, in short, the bugman is an unnatural and unhappy creature that has been forced to deny his true self. "" , <a a AA | *% _— The antidote to this, Venner concludMAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / MEDITATIONS 68 ed, was naturally to reconnect Europeans with their spiritual heritage.
Not so much by lived experience, as nothing is left of the forms of life that flowed from the primacy of the spirit in European civilization.
The solution, instead, is to go back to “our most authentic sources’, in other words to authors like Homer that speak to something primordial within us.
For Venner, each great civilization (European, Chinese, Arab, etc.) is the expression of a people, each with its own deep psychological inclinations rooted in its peculiar biology.
The manifestation in history of this abiding “spiritual morphology” of a people, he calls Tradition.
Thus, “our most authentic sources are simply sources that present the best mirror to us in which we can recognize, and finally remember, our true self.
Homer is foremost, because he produced “the first and most perfect expression of an ethic and aesthetic heritage which he himself inherited, and raised, in god-like fashion, to sublime heights’, in the Iliad and the Odyssey.
This is an aesthetic-aristocratic ethos that seeks to live life in harmony with the cosmic order and with a sense of proportion, but without the rigid moralistic commandments of the sort we find in the Judaic Tradition.
Virtu is the virtue which Alexander, Caesar, Frederick II and Napoleon SINCE THE GREEKS MET THE PERSIANS ON THE FIELD OF MARATHON, VIRTU AND A SWORD IN HAND ALLOWED THE were supremely possessed of.
Since the Greeks met the Persians on the field of Marathon, virtt and a sword in hand allowed the men of Europe to surmount all the challenges to their existence, and finally become masters of the world.
And so, today’s men of the West must rediscover themselves, to meet the dangers foisted on them by their enemies.
But our cities are crumbling, and our ancient homelands are not what they used to be.
The time has come for the Europeans and their brothers, the Amerikaners, to awaken and free themselves.
We share a rich hidden Tradition, going all the way back to Homer, the repository of all the values we need for our future rebirth.
Faced with the emptiness around us, the insane voracity of the financial oligarchs, the threat of an ethnic war on our soil, this ""Handbook"" sets out to awaken our memory, and allow us to think differently and rebuild our lives, our communities, and eventually our nations, out of fidelity to a higher vision.
This is the spiritual testament of a man who gave his life for the sake of this great awakening before the hour grows too late.
This edition brings the text, suppressed in France and until now unavailable, to the community of all English-speaking lovers of civilization.
A NEW MASCULINE POETRY ATOPTHECLIFFS.COM ‘at printn ' ] en ae —— — rvin “Zabo” Koszewski, also known as “the Baron of Muscle Beach’, was a bodybuilder legendary both for his beautiful body and for his lifespan as a physique competitor.
He was also something of a Renaissance man, a star of television and print commercials and a renowned party-animal on the Golden Age California scene.
According to Zabo, “the easiest way to get into shape is to not get out of shape’, and this was a mantra he followed his entire adult life, remaining in tremendous condition even to the ripe old age of 84.
His first experience of physical training began in his teens, when as a high-school sports hero excelling in track and field, swimming and wrestling — he and a group of friends acquired a barbell.
Before enlisting in the United States army at the outbreak of WWII, he was training at his local YMCA, in Camden.
He took part in three combat landings and then contracted malaria and dengue while serving in New Guinea and the Philippines.
Although his weight plummeted to around 135lbs, he continued to maintain a regimented fitness programme.
Within two years he had won his first competition, the AAU's Mr New Jersey.
Although he failed to win a major competition, like Mr America or Mr Universe, Zabo never failed to turn up in excellent shape for competition.
Like Vince Gironda, he was also clearly penalised for being “too ripped” at a time when a softer, rounder musculature was preferred.
Even so, it was impossible for judges not to recognise his class, and he almost always won “best abs’, with a midsection that even now would rank as outstanding in terms of its development, symmetry and definition.
By 1951, Zabo had moved to Santa Monica, where he briefly shared a home with George Eiferman and the legendary Steve Reeves.
Like many of the best bodybuilders of the Golden Age, Zabo was not somebody who confined himself to the gym, the supermarket aisles and the sofa / bed, but a larger-than-life character who became an inseparable part of the greatest and most glamorous bodybuilding scene in history.
Soon after his arrival, Zabo was recruited into Mae Wests all-male chorus revue, a touring male dance sensation, with his friend George Eiferman and other California bodybuilders.
He also took bit parts on television shows, including Rat Patrol and the Planet of the Apes series, and in films like Cheech and Chong’s Nice Dreams.
Bob Hise tells a story that perfectly sums up his captivating mix of physicality and charisma.
U We of the committee decided that a fair test would be to require all entrants to total three times bodyweight.
Kiddingly, I said, ‘No I would like to see performances on the other lifts’ He bent over the same bar, whipped it to his chest and made a military press and then placed a 25 pound plate on each end of the bar and did a beautiful squat clean and solid deep split jerk.
Zabo, of course, is famous for his rippling abs... and his friend— well... her outstanding bodypart is her neck.
The pretty miss recently competed in the IFBE MISS WESTERN AMERICA contest.
Although the kind of numbers Zabo was hitting would not put him ona podium today, it's worth noting that he performed the lifts “cold”, with no warm up, and barefoot.
Unlike so many competitors today, from whom performance has to be coaxed, and then only under the most favourable conditions, Zabo was always ready to put on a show.
MAN’S WOR / ETERNAL PHYSIQUE We all have so much to thank our mothers for.
His mother made sure to feed him raw milk from an early age, which is why he’s grown up into such a fine young man.
Unlike those other boys whose mothers were scared of “germs and other sissy stuff like that.
What you might not know is that it’s also used to induce tumours and other inflammatory diseases in lab rodents.
Adjective 1. absolutely necessary; essential. ""secrecy is of vital importance"" 2. imbued with energy; dynamic.
Because that would mean you have fallen victim to the trickery of Postmodernism, and you believe “anything can be art’, even the ugly, even the banal.
This pathetic excuse for a philosophy may be holding the dominant position in our culture today, but that doesn't mean we must accept it.
The flaming torch of true Western culture was last seen burning brightly in the early 1900s, the time of the early Modernists.
In this article I will unravel these questions from my perspective, as a sculptor trying to bring powerful art into an era of weakness.
I will reveal why I fell in love with the energy of early Modernism, which sadly took a wrong turn, and how I try to reinvigorate that energy to counter the rot of Postmodernism.
It is my mission to pick up the torch our ancestors left behind and carry it forward.
MEETING THE MASTERS OF MODERNISM he power of Modernism captivated me for the first time when I was in art school.
About 11 years ago, I was trying to find my voice as a young sculptor at the Royal Academy of Fine Arts, Antwerp.
Some of my classes honoured the tradition of sculpture, and I was learning how to sculpt busts and figures from antiquity, while in other classes I was encouraged to dabble with conceptual art.
So even though the rot was well and truly setting in, I have to thank the Academy for still respectMAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / CULTURE ing its rich heritage and briefly pointing my attention to the magnificent artwork of early 20th century Modernism.
As soon as I was exposed to the power of Italian Futurism, Vorticism and Art Deco, I became obsessed.
No other art period could ever compete with the vibrancy, the vitality, the virility I felt radiating out from these movements.
It was so direct and so concentrated from a sculptural standpoint that it touched me on a very deep, primal level.
All things I felt were utterly lacking in the culture that surrounded me.
I realised I was alone with my fascination for powerful and confident forms.
The more early Modernism began to inspire my own work , the more people around me tried to steer me away from it.
Some of my student exhibitions were labelled “too dominant” and “too aesthetic’, so I was asked to soften my works, as it was intimidating the other students and the teachers.
Modernism was so close to us in history that I could still feel the warmth of its smothered flame, yet it was considered totally irrelevant as inspiration for new creations.
At the time I didn't fully understand why the Modernist movements died before they had a chance to prosper, why it was considered taboo to be inspired by their vital expressions, and why my sculpture was rejected by every institution | tried to work with.
But the more I mature as a sculptor, holding my ground in this crazy art world, the more I'm starting to see the bigger picture.
MODERNISM’S SUPERNOVA BURNOUT | eae first set the record straight about what I mean when I use the term Modernism.
Within this short time span many different movements erupted, galvanized by the machine age.
The artists of these movements were energised by their fascination for the machine, which inspired them to dream and imagine things far beyond what was considered possible.
Their lively imaginations were complemented with just the right amount of skill to birth the powerful expressions they became known for.
When you interact with the work of the Modernists, it makes you feel alive.
Sadly, Modernism never got the chance to fulfil its potential to lift culture to higher vibrations and inspire a strong, vital society.
Like a supernova, its extreme intensity led to an abrupt burnout, leaving behind a black hole which sucked in any remaining vitality.
The Modernist man was brutally shaken out of his dream when it became clear that the reality of the World Wars did not at all live up to his romantic expectations.
The chivalric glory and honour he had dreamed of, proved to be nothing more than a nightmare of mechanized killing.
The machine had invaded human space, man had become reduced to its operator.
The ones that didn't lose their lives, lost their confidence and spirit.
A punch-drunk Western world was now ready to have its soul taken away, as it zombie-shuffled into a new cultural chapter, made up of irony, silliness and nihilism.
THE CONTEMPORARY CIRCUS OF POSTMODERNISM his is the point in history where our culture began to disintegrate.
The time period after the Second World War is what I refer to as the aesthetic and spiritual dark age.
It is the cult of ugly art and deconstruction, with Postmodernism as its driving philosophy.
If this movement hadnt been so carefully plotted, it would have died decades ago, but the left-wing elite and its vanguard made their ‘long march through the institutions, and installed the rot at the core of society.
That rot, still spreading today, is what keeps me passionately dreaming of something better.
The first thing you see is some found object on the floor with paint thrown on it.
As youre still trying to figure out what the hell youre looking at, you almost trip over a pile of rubble in the middle of the room.
When you enter the “installation room’, a series of flags and balloons are hanging chaotically off the ceiling, and neon writing is screaming statements against some colonial figure.
You try to escape into the next room, only to find a neck-bearded bugman dancing to a “composition” of noise.
All the while the wheat-bellied exhibition guide ‘artspeaks’ you into a mind prison of indifference.
Artists, like a set of cheap performative clowns, are paraded about on stage to lull you into a nihilistic stupor.
But as the viewer, trapped in your seat, forced to look directly at the awkward spectacle, you dont feel inspired or amused.
You feel uncomfortable, cold and disconnected from your culture, because you cant make any sense of it.
Collectors don't need to feel a connection to artwork to pretend they understand it and throw money at it for bragging rights.
It is witchcraft, and every Postmodern artwork acts as a spell to lower your mental and spiritual vibration.
I believe art has the ability to inspire a society back to a sense of spiritual well-being.
It is our duty as artists to find a powerful aesthetic that can touch people on a deep, primal level, to shake them out of their slumber and open the curtains to a new way.
A NEW AESTHETIC TO REIGNITE THE CULTURAL FLAME o if Modernism is dead and Postmodernism is sapping the spirit of our culture, we are in desperate need of a new vital aesthetic to rejuvenate it.
This is what I am continuously searching for as a sculptor making art today.
Every day I spend in my studio, I work towards finding this aesthetic language, and reinvigorating perennial archetypes that have true relevance to us in today’s context.
I believe we need to look back to a time when there was some real fire and take that forward into the present and future.
It goes without saying that the Renaissance period was an incredibly rich time aesthetically, but let's not forget we are living in 2022, a spiritual and aesthetic dark age.
Tirelessly reproducing works of antiquity, getting lost in nostalgia, is not going to bring us the explosive formulations to shake this culture out of its aloof state.
I dont believe we need to go back to celebrating the machine like the Vorticists, or glorify war like the Futurists.
But I do think there are a series of pertinent and strong elements within these movements that are still relevant to us today.
The Modernists explored timeless archetypes of strength, pure force and energy.
They had a connection to the past and were dreaming of a vigorous future.
These elements are of utmost importance to manifest the new aesthetic mix of our time.
As artists, we need to break through the walls of this creative imprisonment.
My hope is that a vibrant enough cultural movement can act as dynamite to clear a new path forward.
That was the statement I was expressing with my recent exhibition entitled ‘Breakthrough for which I carved three monumental stone sculptures.
In the context of that exhibition I experimented with writing an early manifesto, to state what I think needs to fundamentally change.
Our imagination is meant to take people to a higher vibration and make them feel more alive.
K THROUGH THE WALLS OF CREATIVE A NEW ERA OF AESTHETIC VIGOUR E ART THAT UPLIFTS FORMS MUST BE IRILLING HONOUR HARMONY HOW WE KEEP DWELLING ON ANTI-HEROIC ILL ‘ARTSPEAK’ BREAK THE RULES SCULPTORSCULPTSAPAINTERPAINTS REVOLUTIONARY ACT IS TO ACTUALLY FREE! UNITE TRUE CREATORS ARE K THROUGH! 2021 FEN DE VILLIERS ot.
The process of creating is not a casual aimless act, it is continuous problem solving to find a balanced construction.
Our aim is to find compositions that activate human senses, much like solving a mathematical formula where everything falls into place, and you know its right.
It must tell powerful, heroic stories that make us once again feel proud of who we are.
It is a continuous pursuit, but I definitely feel that the raw energy brewing in early Modernism holds that vital flame.
From here all sorts of vital manifestations can take place, and hopefully a more unique voice of this time can organically form.
It's time for artists to take back responsibility for imagining a more inspiring, uplifting and exciting outlook for culture.
They don't want you to share a common goal, collectivise and fight for a real purpose.
Instead, they want you to remain atomised, disconnected and forever lost in the circus.
As artists, creatives, philosophers, we need to come together and get going, get working, inspire other people with our creations.
MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / CULTURE 90 The flag that our ancestors proudly carried, lays muddied and trodden into the ground of today’s wasteland.
We need to pick it up and carry it through the present and into the future.
Collectivising on the internet and sharing ideas is only the beginning.
People who can play a part in making the work, showing the work or spreading the message.
People who dare to do something different in this time, even if it feels uncomfortable.
Fen de Villiers’ latest exhibition is ""A Language of Form"", which can be seen at the Galerie Verbeeck, Wolstraat 34, Antwerp until 30/1/2022.
JShcrowaceyeemuyomeyems etm ovllu-vetemsovaeursd sl the rain it was a sorry sight.
Rainstorm or no rainstorm, there should have been a little more bustle this time of day.
Mutt walked in a grumpy circle and settled down on the porch out of the rain.
A pitiful fire struggled in the hearth and a serving maid looked up with a start from a table she was scrubbing.
It gave him no small comfort to see that innkeepers were still fat this far from home.
The big man looked at Lad — black-haired with fierce blue eyes, armed, armored, and wild and went pale.
The innkeeper and serving maid settled when they caught the measure of his youth.
Such a large weapon did not suit his rangy build, which was hard and lean and kissed by the sun.
He did not remove his bracer, his buckler, nor the short, curved blade on his belt or the old horn that hung by his hip.
Lad slurping hot rabbit stew from a bowl and Mutt sloughing warm mutton off the bone.
Lad gulped down ale and laughed as Mutt tried to shove his big snout into the mug.
Lad offered the mug and MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / STORY 98 Mutt shoved his face in and lapped away.
Big enough to ride, with soft fur the color of red clay and beautiful green eyes like the Spring wood.
He had the short ears and thick fur of a wolf but with a thick muzzle and broad frame of a shepherd.
Lad did not share that his four-legged companion was in fact a wold a hybrid beast bred for hunting and fighting; companions for the braves of the Shima Clan.
The innkeeper got an eyeful of the bracer that adorned his right forearm and fist.
He recalled in the old stories the men of the South were pugilists as well as hunters and swordsmen.
Lad walked back to the hearth, hefted the big sword, and slung it onto his back.
The leader's sneer withered as the big hound stalked out from behind Lad.
Mutt charged and the leader screamed as the big beast leaped and tackled him to | the floor.
While the other two were distracted Lad threw his smaller blade into one man's chest with incredible speed.
Lad ducked under the blow and swept the man’s legs out from under him, dropping him to the floor.
He brought down the edge of his buckler onto the mans throat, crushing his windpipe.
Even with the weight of the giant sword on his back, the boy was as fleet as a fox.
Lad pulled his curved fighting blade from the dead manss chest as Mutt licked blood from his chops.
It was a ram horn, worked with copper and leather and the runes of the Faith.
He opened the horn and breathed a little life into the golden coals of the Heartsfire that glowed within.
And once more the Heartsfire burned in this village that had forgotten itself.
Lad stood tall in the heat’s embrace, the Fire rising higher than he stood, and he drew courage from Its light.
It loomed over the town like a storm, and hateful light glowed in its windows.
If not, there's a good chance you may not have heard of Richard at all.
It was the first book to expose George Soros and his color revolutions.
I call Richard the OG Regime fighter, because hes been fighting the Cabal most of his life.
On his very first newspaper job, in 1984, Richard wrote an exposé of the Trilateral Commission.
Richard's most recent articles, published on LewRockwell.com, delve into a subject most of us never knew existed—the hidden power of Britains globalist elites.
Richard argues that globalism is a British invention, which was foisted on a reluctant America, over a period of many decades, through Anglophile front groups such as the Council on Foreign Relations.
He believes that British elites still drive the globalist agenda to this day.
Richard, as an avid admirer of your reporting, it is an honor to interview you for Mans World issue 5.
As a friend, I am delighted to be able to offer readers a glimpse of who you are and your extraordinary life's work.
The fictional town of Bedford Falls was partly modeled after Seneca Falls, which is about 40 miles west of Syracuse.
So I grew up in a kind of 1960s suburban version of It’s a Wonderful Life.
In our conversations, you ve often talked about how the upheavals of the Sixties influenced your life.
I was a child during the Sixties, so I experienced that era from a child's perspective, and very much through my parents’ eyes.
As any child does, I watched my parents closely, watched their reactions.
He worked in semiconductors and integrated circuits, and a lot of his work was top-secret, for the military and space program.
Both were brilliant people, doing ground-breaking work in their fields.
They had an innocence and modesty about them, a natural selflessness which one often sees in people of that generation, the World War II generation.
So when the Sixties psyop was unleashed on America, it really MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / INTERVIEW stunned people like my parents.
It was a culture war, a direct hit on the American middle class, the American way of life.
It was like the nightmare sequence in It's a Wonderful Life, when Bedford Falls turns into Pottersville.
This was particularly jarring for people like my parents who had come from immigrant families and grown up poor.
My father’s parents were Russian Jews who escaped from the Russian Civil War in the early ‘20s.
My maternal grandfather fled Korea to escape Japanese occupation after the Russo-Japanese War.
My grandparents wanted what every immigrant wants, a better life for their children, and their children found that dream in the great American suburbs.
It was almost as if someone had torn a hole through the fabric of reality.
When we walked out the front door, we were in suburbia, the land of plenty.
Our world was backyard barbecues, drive-in movies, washing machines, cars, road trips, and split-level homes.
On the other hand, when you turned on the T'V, you were transported to another world.
The TV kept telling us we were living in a failed state, on the brink of collapse.
The media showed us assassinations, race riots, cities in flames, young people blowing their minds with LSD, young people running around naked having sex in public, young people gunned down at Kent State by the National Guard, and, of course, Vietnam.
Always Vietnam in the background, this endless war we were fighting against guys in pajamas, and, for some reason, we were losing.
Back in the Fifties, Joe McCarthy had warned everyone what was coming, and the Sixties proved him right.
The obvious part, the part that everyone could see, was the phenomenon of pressure from above and below.
Pressure from above and below means that the government and the street protesters are working together.
But the conspirators raise such a great clamor that dissenting voices are drowned out.
Normal people—those who arent in on the plot—feel alone, surrounded, outnumbered.
We discussed this in our last podcast, this concept of pressure from above and below.
Back then, you had protesters chanting things like, “Ho, Ho, Ho Chi Minh.
So this was horrifying to ordinary people, whose sons were fighting and dying over there.
Yet you would see politicians on TV praising these protesters, agreeing with them, treating them with deference, and it was like the Twilight Zone.
It was like slipping If the Sixties was a color revolution, it achieved its objective the night Nixon stepped down. into an alternate universe.
In a world where everyone seemed to be going crazy, Nixon came across as normal and sane.
He won every state in the Union except Massachusetts when he ran for reelection in 1972.
So I watched Nixon resign in a crowded lounge in my dorm, filled with hundreds of college students cheering and laughing and carrying on.
Some people say the Sixties ended that night, with Nixon's resignation.
If the Sixties was a color revolution, it achieved its objective the night Nixon stepped down.
But the activists and their government allies applied pressure from above and below, and they overruled the people.
It MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / INTERVIEW 1 i AN poisoned the American spirit for decades.
The biggest fear they managed to instill in our parents was the fear of losing their children to the counterculture, to the mad culture of sex and drugs.
All through the Sixties and into the Seventies, the TV was showing us white middle-class kids on drugs.
White middle-class kids hating their parents, dropping out of school, running away from home, and living on the street.
The counterculture was like a stalking predator, stalking the suburbs, looking for kids to snatch.
Here was a hippie cult breaking into suburban homes and slaughtering people with knives.
It confirmed Middle America’s worst fears that, beneath its seductive veneer, the counterculture was a raging beast thirsting for blood.
The exact quote was, Unless youre prepared to kill your parents, you're not ready to change this country.
I remember the anger and fear in my mother’s eyes, when she heard that.
I wanted to protect my parents from the madness, to reassure them, to comfort them, to tell them everything would be all right.
As the Sixties morphed into the early Seventies, the political crisis died down, but the counterculture just kept getting stronger.
I was only 16, having skipped two grades, so I was very impressionable.
And I was quickly absorbed into the counterculture, pot-smoking and all the rest.
One of the first things I did in college In the end, I did exactly the opposite.
I joined the counterculture myself. was to drop out of pre-med and become a creative writing major instead.
I dropped all my science courses and immersed myself in literature, history, comparative religion, Jungian psychology, and the like.
As I sank ever deeper into a morass of mysticism, I immersed myself in the literature of the counterculture, reading the drug-fueled rants of Ken Kesey, Jack Kerouac, Allen Ginsberg, Hunter S Thompson and others of that sort.
My grandparents had lived with us briefly in the early Sixties, when my grandmother was ill, and the beautiful sound of the Russian language is one of my earliest memories.
All the classes were in Russian and we Americans were supposed to speak only Russian all summer, even with each other, though we often broke that rule.
We had been warned in our orientation briefings to be wary of any young Russians who tried to befriend us, as they would undoubtedly be KGB operatives bent on compromising and recruiting us.
Even so, we had many vodka-fueled conversations with Russian students who complained freely about the oppressive Soviet system, and who told us, with what appeared to be perfect sincerity, how they longed for reform.
All that summer, I met young Russians who loved America with unquestioning abandon.
Even in those days, the allure of Levis and Pink Floyd for Russias youth was a standing joke among Americans.
But I discovered that their passion for American Pop didnt stop with rock bands.
My Russian friends grilled me ceaselessly about the hippie counterculture, the race riots, and the antiwar movement of the Sixties.
Many were deeply shocked to learn that American college students in 1978 considered the Sixties passe.
Some went so far as to suggest that the USSR needed its own Sixties uprising.
With some amazement, I realized that the Sixties psyop which had so horrified my parents made a completely different impression on this side of the Iron Curtain.
On the evening of July 4, 1978, I went with a number of my American dorm mates to Palace Square, the immense courtyard in front of the Winter Palace where so much somber history has unfolded.
Rumor had it that rock impresario Bill Graham had arranged a free, open-air concert that night featuring Santana, Joan Baez, and The Beach Boys.
When 5,000 young Leningraders showed up for the event, the only thing they found was a battalion of gray-uniformed militiamen blocking the square and a monotonous voice intoning on a loudspeaker, “Comrade Leningraders, you are blocking traffic.
For the next six hours, those 5,000 young people absolutely refused to disperse.
They kicked the sides of patrol wagons as they wheeled by on the street.
What amazed me, though, was not the occasional bursts of violence, but the overall restraint of the militsya.
At one point, I caught sight of a pretty, blonde girl, college age, neatly scrubbed and groomed, her hair in two thick braids, standing quietly and gazing across the square at the ranks of militsionyerl.
From all around came screams, shouts, and harsh laughter; the crackle of loudspeakers, the padding of thousands of feet, the angry beeping of car horns.
There was a tiny smile on her lips, and she breathed softly and slowly, like someone waking from a deep, pleasant sleep.
In those eyes, I saw strength, Gone with the Wind is our country’s national epic, in the same way War and Peace is the national epic of Russia. pride and courage. lll never know for sure, but [ have a strange feeling that girl may have been thinking the same thing that I thought the moment I saw her.
I think she realized that evening, maybe in that very instant, that her generation was destined to be free.
And so my summer in the USSR impacted me in an unexpected way, opening my eyes to a dimension of the Sixties counterculture I had not fully understood.
This reminds me of something you've said in our interviews, that you've never liked people telling you, “This is your enemy.
Whenever people tell you that, it makes you want to do the opposite, to learn more about the “enemys point of view.
So when your parents told you to hate the counterculture, maybe that kicked off a similar reaction.
There’s always another side to the story, and there's always something to be learned from the other side.
My favorite novel, as a kid, possibly my favorite novel of all time, was Gone with the Wind.
When I was 10 or 11, I got hold of my parents paperback copy and read it so many times, it literally fell apart.
Gone with the Wind is our country’s national epic, in the same way War and Peace is the national epic of Russia.
What makes Gone with the Wind such a masterpiece is that it takes the most dreadful event in our history, the Civil War, and helps us to understand it, not as history, but as real human experience.
Senator Joseph McCarthy, whose warnings of communist subversion went largely ignored; top right: Richard Nixon's resignation in 1974 marked the real political end of the Sixties counterculture; bottom: Some of Richard Poe's early reporting with the East Village Eye MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / INTERVIEW STRIKE id _A New Kind of Policing \ “a Lost year's bombing of the MOVE house in Philadelphiawasna (°°""""™ | eecident.
But just because we disagree with someone doesn't mean we have to hate them or demonize them.
And that’s why I believe Gone with the Wind is one of the greatest epics ever written, right up there with the Aeneid or the Iliad, because it captures the soul of a nation.
It helps North and South understand each other and maybe even forgive each other, after so much bitterness and bloodshed.
So when you set out to explore the counterculture, you were really defying the teaching of your parents that the counterculture is the enemy.
In a sense, you were deliberately going into the enemy's camp to learn the enemys point of view.
The counterculture is a drug culture, at root, and I got sucked into that, especially psychedelics, which appealed to my mystical bent.
After graduating from SU in 1979, I had no plan, no idea how to build a career as a writer.
Eventually, I enrolled in SU's graduate program for creative writing, but then dropped out after my first year to go study with Allen Ginsberg.
Hed been pushing psychedelic drugs and sexual revolution since the 1950s.
My mother was carrying me in her womb when Ginsberg uttered those words.
In a very real sense, Allens threat was directed not only at Podhoretz, but at my mother and her whole genera112 tion.
Allen and his friends really did “get” me, in the sense that I came under their spell.
I read Jack Kerouac’s On the Road, and became enthralled by his vision of rootless youth hitchhiking aimlessly across America.
A whole movement grew up around Kerouac which ultimately gave rise to the Sixties counterculture.
In the Fifties, Kerouac and his followers were known as the Beat Generation.
Kerouac died in 1969, but the surviving Beat icons—Ginsberg, William Burroughs, and Gregory Corso— all ended up teaching at Naropa Institute in Boulder, Colorado.
When I was accepted into Allen's writing apprenticeship program, it was a dream come true.
Apparently Allen was a frequent guest at Soross Fifth Avenue apartment and his El Mirador estate on Long Island.
According to Soros, it was Allen who got him interested in drug legalization.
Allen was all about drugs, especially psychedelic drugs, and he was extremely evangelistic in encouraging others to use them.
Soros’ biographer Michael Kaufman implies that Allen and Soros met in the early ‘80s and became “life-long” friends, as Kaufman puts it.
Another author provides a little more precision, suggesting that Soros and Ginsberg may have met around 1980.
There’s a little-known portion of Soros’s life that you might call his bohemian period, when he was living in the West Village in Manhattan, trying to write a book on philosophy, which he never finished.
On the other hand, suppose they met earlier, perhaps 20 years earlier, during Soros’s bohemian phase in the West Village.
In that case, they would have met in their 30s, and Kaufman's description of a “life-long” friendship would make more sense.
While working as a stock trader, he struggled to write a book called The Burden of Consciousness, based on the philosophy of Karl Popper, who had been Soross teacher at the London School of Economics.
Only half a block from Soros's apartment was the famous White Horse Tavern, frequented by all the top literary figures of the day, including Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg.
Now I can't prove that Soros met Allen during those years, but it does seem likely.
It's hard to imagine an aspiring young phiI tried to live what I imagined to bea Jack Kerouac sort of life, hitchhiking around the country, working odd jobs, and, of course, writing. losopher such as George Soros missing the chance to rub elbows with the White Horse Tavern crowd, since he only lived half a block away.
My big project was an autobiographical novel, very much in the confessional, tell-all tradition of Jack Kerouac.
I started the novel while living in San Francisco, then finished it in Syracuse.
When it was done, I realized, with an almost sickening sense of horror that I could never publish it.
The novel was intensely personal and autobiographical in the mode of Kerouac’s On the Road.
I realized that I’m not Jack Kerouac or Allen Ginsberg or Henry Miller or any other such person.
I just didn't have the same burning hatred of conventionality that seemed to drive them.
I freelanced at first, then finally got my first newspaper job at the Syracuse New Times, in January, 1984.
That lasted for maybe five minutes, and was succeeded by a fit of the horrors.
The poor staring white face on the floor was more than I could bear, and I managed to get a table-cloth and cover it.
Then I staggered to a cupboard, found the brandy and swallowed several mouthfuls.
I had seen men die violently before; indeed I had killed a few myself in the Matabele War; but this cold-blooded indoor business was different.
There was nobody there, nor any trace of anybody, but I shuttered and bolted all the windows and put the chain on the door.
It took me about an hour to figure the thing out, and I did not hurry, for, unless the murderer came back, I had till about six oclock in the morning for my cogitations.
Any shadow of a doubt I might have had about the truth of Scudder’s tale was now gone.
The men who knew that he knew what he knew had found him, and had taken the best way to make certain of his silence.
Yes; but he had been in my rooms four I sat down in an armchair and felt very sick.
Yes; but he had been in my rooms four days, and his enemies must have reckoned that he had confided in me.
It might be that very night, or next day, or the day after, but my number was up all right.
Supposing I went out now and called in the police, or went to bed and let Paddock find the body and call them in the morning.
I had lied to Paddock about him, and the whole thing looked desperately fishy.
If I made a clean breast of it and told the police everything he had told me, they would simply laugh at me.
The odds were a thousand to one that I would be charged with the murder, and the circumstantial evidence was strong enough to hang me.
Few people knew me in England; I had no real pal who could come forward and swear to my character.
They were clever enough for anything, and an English prison was as good a way of getting rid of me till after June 15th as a knife in my chest.
Besides, if I told the whole story, and by any miracle was believed, I would be playing their game.
Somehow or other the sight of Scudder’s dead face had made me a passionate believer in his scheme.
You may think this ridiculous for a man in danger of his life, but that was the way I looked at it.am an ordinary sort of fellow, not braver than other people, but I hate to see a good man downed, and that long knife would not be the end of Scudder if I could play the game in his place.
It took me an hour or two to think this out, and by that time I had come to a decision.
I must vanish somehow, and keep vanished till the end of the second week in June.
Then I must somehow find a way to get in touch with the Government people and tell them what Scudder had told me.
I wished to Heaven he had told me more, and that I had listened more carefully to the little he had told me.
There was a big risk that, even if I weathered the other dangers, I would not be believed in the end.
I must take my chance of that, and hope that something might happen which would confirm my tale in the eyes of the Government.
It was now the 24th day of May, and that meant twenty days of hiding before I could venture to approach the powers that be.
I reckoned that two sets of people would be looking for me—Scudder'ss enemies to put me out of existence, and the police, who would want me for Scudder'’s murder.
It was going to be a giddy hunt, and it was queer how the prospect comforted me.
I had been slack so long that almost any chance of activity was welcome.
When I had to sit alone with that corpse and wait on Fortune I was no better than a crushed worm, but if my neck’s safety was to hang on my own wits I was prepared to be cheerful about it.
My next thought was whether Scudder had any papers about him to give me a better clue to the business.
I drew back the table-cloth and searched his pockets, for I had no longer any shrinking from the body.
The face was wonderfully calm for a man who had been struck down in a moment.
There was nothing in the breast-pocket, and only a few loose coins and a cigar-holder in the waistcoat.
The trousers held a little penknife and some silver, and the side pocket of his jacket contained an old crocodile-skin cigar-case.
There was no sign of the little black book in which I had seen him making notes.
But as I looked up from my task I saw that some drawers had been pulled out in the writing-table.
Scudder would never have left them in that state, for he was the tidiest of mortals.
Someone must have been searching for something—perhaps for the pocket-book.
Most likely the enemy had found it, but they had not found it on Scudder’s body.
My notion was to get off to some wild district, where my veldcraft would be of some use to me, for I would be like a trapped rat in a city.
I considered that Scotland would be best, for my people were Scotch and I could pass anywhere as an ordinary Scotsman.
I had half an idea at first to be a German tourist, for my father had had German partners, and I had been brought up to speak the tongue pretty fluently, not to mention having put in three years prospecting for copper in German Damaraland.
But I calculated that it would be less conspicuous to be a Scot, and less in a line with what the police might know of my past.
It was the nearest wild part of Scotland, so far as I could figure it out, and from the look of the map was not over thick with population.
A search in Bradshaw informed me that a train left St Pancras at 7.10, which would land me at any Galloway station in the late afternoon.
That was well enough, but a more important matter was how I was to make my way to St Pancras, for I was pretty certain that Scudder’s friends would be watching outside.
This puzzled me for a bit; then I had an inspiration, on which I went to bed and slept for two troubled hours.
My inclination was to let things slide, and trust to the British police taking a reasonable view of my case.
But as I reviewed the situation I could find no arguments to bring against my decision of the previous night, so with a wry mouth I resolved to go on with my plan.
I was not feeling in any particular funk; only disinclined to go looking for trouble, if you understand me.
I hunted out a well-used tweed suit, a pair of strong nailed boots, and a flannel shirt with a collar.
Into my pockets I stuffed a spare shirt, a cloth cap, some handkerchiefs, and a tooth-brush.
I had drawn a good sum in gold from the bank two days before, in case Scudder should want money, and I took fifty pounds of it in sovereigns in a belt which I had brought back from Rhodesia.
Then I had a bath, and cut my moustache, which was long and drooping, into a short stubbly fringe.
Paddock used to arrive punctually at 7.30 and let himself in with a latch-key.
But about twenty minutes to seven, as I knew from bitter experience, the milkman turned up with a great clatter of cans, and deposited my share outside my door.
I had seen that milkman sometimes when I had gone out for an early ride.
Now, Antelope Mill Publishing is vying the chance fora new feneralion lo share what auimates Wien toward certain lardship, The authors contained in this hook have responded to the pronipl ""Why We Fieht"" wilh energy and aeal The witties in this book contain beautiful mages of strueele and leiumpl mixed with the fiery defense of justice and truth.
A handfal af these works of prose and poetry have been selected lor special honors as winners in respective categories.
Antelope Hill Publishing is proud to present the selected works of our first writing contest, entitled Why We Fight, sponsored in part by the White Art Collective.
I went into the darkened smoking-room where the rays of morning light were beginning to creep through the shutters.
There I breakfasted off a whisky-and-soda and some biscuits from the cupboard.
I put a pipe in my pocket and filled my pouch from the tobacco jar on the table by the fireplace.
I lifted the cloth from the body and was amazed at the peace and dignity of the dead face.
That was the worst part of the business, for I was fairly choking to get out of doors.
At one minute after the quarter to seven I heard the rattle of the cans outside.
I opened the front door, and there was my man, singling out my cans from a bunch he carried and whistling through his teeth.
I stuck on his flat blue hat and his white overall, picked up the cans, banged my door, and went whistling downstairs.
The porter at the foot told me to shut my jaw, which sounded as if my make-up was adequate.
Then I caught sight of a policeman a hundred yards down, and a loafer shuffling past on the other side.
As the loafer passed he looked up, and I fancied a signal was exchanged.
I crossed the street, whistling gaily and imitating the jaunty swing of the milkman.
Then I took the first side street, and went up a left-hand turning which led past a bit of vacant ground.
I had only just put on my cloth cap when a postman came round the corner.
At the moment the clock of a neighbouring church struck the hour of seven.
At St Pancras I had no time to take a ticket, let alone that I had not settled upon my destination.
A porter told me the platform, and as | entered it I saw the train already in motion.
Two station officials blocked the way, but I dodged them and clambered into the last carriage.
Three minutes later, as we were roaring through the northern tunnels, an irate guard interviewed me.
He wrote out for me a ticket to Newton-Stewart, a name which had suddenly come back to my memory, and he conducted me from the first-class compartment where I had ensconced myself to a third-class smoker, occupied by a sailor and a stout woman with a child.
He went off grumbling, and as I mopped my brow I observed to my companions in my broadest Scots that it was a sore job catching trains.
The sailor morosely agreed, and I started my new life in an atmosphere of protest against authority.
A porter told me the platform, and as I entered it I saw the train already in motion.
You see, our handsome friend here is a MAN’S WORLD man, and every MAN’S WORLD man knows, whether it’s work or play, he should always look his very best.
That’s why, even when he’s slaying the demons of hell, his OCBD and yachting shorts are just as essential as his chainsaw and shotgun.
And that’s why she’ll be there at his side, cheering every kill, no matter what.
For a husband and wife being each a part of every family, the state may be considered as about equally divided into men and women; and, therefore, in those states in which the condition of the women is bad, half the city may be regarded as having no laws.
And this is what has actually happened at Sparta; the legislator wanted to make the whole state hardy and temperate, and he has carried out his intention in the case of the men, but he has neglected the women, who live in every sort of intemperance and luxury.
The consequence is that in such a state wealth is too highly valued, especially if the citizen fall under the dominion of their wives, after the manner of most warlike races, except the Celts and a few others who openly approve of male loves.
The old mythologer would seem to have been right in uniting Ares and Aphrodite, for all warlike races are prone to the love either of men or of women.
This was exemplified among the Spartans in the days of their greatness; many things were managed by their women.
Even in regard to courage, which is of no use in daily life, and is needed only in war, the influence of the Lacedaemonian women has been most mischievous.
The evil showed itself in the Theban invasion, when, unlike the women other cities, they were utterly useless and caused more confusion than the enemy.
This license of the Lacedaemonian women existed from the earliest times, and was only what might be expected.
For, during the wars of the Lacedaemonians, first against the Argives, and afterwards against the Arcadians and Messenians, the men were long away from home, and, on the return of peace, they gave themselves into the legislator's hand, already prepared by the discipline of a soldier's life (in which there are many elements of virtue), to receive his enactments.
BC (British Museum) the women under his laws, they resisted, and he gave up the attempt.
These then are the causes of what then happened, and this defect in the constitution is clearly to be attributed to them.
We are not, however, considering what is or is not to be excused, but what is right or wrong, and the disorder of the women, as I have already said, not only gives an air of indecorum to the constitution considered in itself, but tends in a measure to foster avarice.
The mention of avarice naturally suggests a criticism on the inequality of property.
While some of the Spartan citizen have quite small properties, others have very large ones; hence the land has passed into the hands of a few.
And this is due also to faulty laws; for, although the legislator rightly holds up to shame the sale or purchase of an inheritance, he allows anybody who likes to give or bequeath it.
And nearly two-fifths of the whole country are held by women; this is owing to the number of heiresses and to the large dowries which are customary.
It would surely have been better to have given no dowries at all, or, if any, but small or moderate ones.
As the law now stands, a man may bestow his heiress on any one whom he pleases, and, if he die intestate, the privilege of giving her away descends to his heir.
Hence, although the country is able to maintain 1500 cavalry and 30,000 hoplites, the whole number of Spartan citizens fell below 1000.
This plant is used as anaphrodisiac today and historically by monks, but it can also act as aphrodisiac for which Greks used it, as they had interest in intensifying, not lowering sexual desire.
This “chasteberry” is also used to treat wounds, it has some wound and ligament-healing ability, Greks used for this also.
I was going to write a supplement guide for frends but I got carried away with this introduction.
Many such remedies are available now if you know where to look and take care attention to supplement quality.
Many pharmaceuticals dont work; I have spoken to many frog doctors who took part in medical trials where common drugs were shown to have no more than a placebo effect.
Furthermore all pharmas are dangerous with long-term use and have serious side-effects including on germline, and I believe combination of modern diet and modern pharma overuse will lead to a massive population degradation or sterility in two to three generations, quite aside from concern now over vaccines.
Since I intended to write a supplement guide, I will give only one suggestion here.
Some frend therefore choose to switch to collagen or to add other amino like lysine when they start to experience these effects.
It is an amazing supplement that has changed my life and that of frends considerably.
Taken on empty stomach first thing in morning it will do much to lower all effects of dread or overstimulation; it will give a strong calm, but not make you sleepy.
Taken with coffee or tea in morning, it gives a calm concentration and focus of power.
A fan of books Dune even start to call this mix rachag after the stimulant drink, it might give you some space powers. gy Join BAP’s telegram group or follow @caribbeanvirtu on Twitter.
There were many things which drew me, a man alienated by modernity, to the sport.
Sumo is relatively unscathed by western progressivism, allowing its viewers to enjoy the sport as such, without having to endure brazen propaganda.
Sumo has a strong history of respecting hierarchy, with the low ranking athletes acting as servants to their more highly ranked superiors.
But perhaps most compellingly, sumo in 2021 features both the most dominant athlete of all time in Hakuho Sho and the athlete who is responsible for the greatest comeback in sports history, Terunofuji Haruo.
When I first started watching sumo, I immediately recognized these two as quite prominent.
Hakuho performs the traditional Yokuzuna entrance Opposite bottom: Terunofuji dispatches an opponent for his ability to alternate between extreme force and masterful, calm technique.
Terunofuji for his unmatched strength, displayed by simply carrying his opponents out of the ring whenever he found himself in a difficult position.
The July 2021 tournament in Nagoya held significant meaning for both men.
Hakuho was on the brink of being forced to retire by the sumo elders for missing previous tournaments with injuries, while Terunofuji was closing in on a promotion to Yokozuna, the highest rank a sumo wrestler can achieve.
Both men needed a strong tournament performance and fate would have it that these two titans met undefeated in the final match of the Nagoya tournament.
HAKUHO akuho—born Monkhbatyn Davaajargal in Mongolia—is the son of a six-time Mongolian wrestling champion and Olympic silver medalist in freestyle wrestling.
Despite being undersized in his adolescence, Hakuho quickly climbed the ranks as he grew.
In May 2007, at the age of 22, he became the 69th Yokozuna—the highest rank that can be achieved in sumo, and the only rank from which one cannot fall due to poor performance.
In January 2015, he set the record for most top division championships with his 33rd.
Had he retired then, he likely would have been considered the greatest sumo wrestler of all-time.
Despite this fact, he was the subject of much criticism from the Yokozuna Deliberation Council and the Japanese media.
From undignified ring moves, such as face slaps and forearm shivers, to post-bout shoves and celebrations, every unseemly move Hakuho makes is under intense scrutiny.
Hakuho’ss foreign-born status only serves to exacerbate the already severe perlustration one would expect from an honor culture such as Japans.
Above the baseline level of criticism, Hakuho received an official warning from the Yokozuna Deliberation Council in November 2020.
These warnings, which are issued to wrestlers whose performance is contrary to what is expected of the rank, are exceedingly rare.
After missing the previous five tournaments to recover from minor injuries associated with aging and a COVID infection, Hakuhos warning remained in place up to the July 2021 tournament in Nagoya.
Hakuho would be forced to retire by the sumo elders unless he could perform up to the high standards of a Yokozuna in the Nagoya tournament.
TERUNOFUJI ike Hakuho, Terunofuji is also Mongolian born and had an exceptional beginning to his career.
He climbed the ranks and won his first top division championship in May 2015 after 25 tournaments, the third-fastest championship in sumo history.
After his first tournament victory, Teru was promoted to Ozeki, the second highest rank one can achieve.
But he would be plagued by knee injuries caused in part by his fighting style.
Teru frequently uses his freakish strength to lift and carry his opponents out of the ring.
The knee injuries took their toll and had Teru perpetually at risk of demotion from his Ozeki rank.
At first it seemed a success, with Terunofuji coming runner-up in consecutive tournaments, March and May 2017.
However, near the end of the May tournament, Teru re-injured his knee which prompted his fall from his Ozeki rank and subsequently the top division altogether.
After the surgery, his weak knee caused him to compensate with his other leg, resulting in double knee surgery on June 25 2018.
Lower-ranked wrestlers act as servants to their higher-ranked colleagues. sumo, Makushita.
No other former top division champion or former Ozeki had fallen out of the salaried divisions.
Others who had come close to falling out of the salaried ranks chose retirement to preserve their honor.
Most wrestlers spend over a decade in the sport without ever achieving what he achieved at a young age.
But now he was in a wheelchair, recovering from surgeries on both knees.
But his coach, still believing in his natural talent and youth, convinced him to take time off to get healthy before attempting a comeback.
While taking time off to recover from a major surgery is common for American athletes, it's essentially unheard of in sumo.
The ranking system is unforgiving and a missed tournament counts the same as a winless tournament.
Terunofuji missed four consecutive tournaments and dropped down to the second lowest division in professional sumo—Jonidan.
Due to his new fighting division, he was now a servant to his former servants and not earning a monthly salary.
Hakuho and Terunofuji sizing each other up before their bout in the July 2021 tournament. division—fighting against teenagers, essentially—the shame from falling from glory would be profoundly magnified.
THE COMEBACK [emo entered the March 2019 tournament with the weight of the world on his shoulders.
He could only preserve his honor by winning and returning to the top division.
Teru won the March 2019 Jonidan division tournament with an undefeated record.
In July 2020 Terunofuji was set to fight in a top division tournament with healthy knees for the first time since May 2017.
But he came out strong, winning his first four matches before a loss to Ozeki Takayasu on day five.
On the final day, Terunofuji, with his 12-2 record, was set to face off against the 11-3 Mitakeumi.
A Romney who actually was capable of acting like his looks, and was worthy of his looks.
Imagine a younger Romney who rouses the nation to a new war, against India, through power of charisma and speech alone.
Also, people awaken one day and find that someone defaced the Holocaust Museum and the Lincoln Memorial... rumors spread that it is Mitt Romney in preparation to overthrow the government.
Instead of returning, Mitt runs to Russia where he becomes a major advisor to Putin.
Soon though, he finally has to leave in a great hurry when it is discovered he's been banging Putin's wife in secret.
He runs to China where, again, he miraculously becomes a major political force and advisor, adopting Chinese customs and language with ease.
After some time he leaves China and ends up living Afghanistan with the tribesmen as one of them, in one of their mud fortresses where he is finally found by American special forces and he goes out fighting, charging them repeatedly with machine gun in his glorious blackand-gold armor and Dune-look headset.
Terunofuji gets his favored grip, with his left hand on Mitakeumi’s belt outside of his arm.
If Teru’s story ended here, it would already be worthy of a Hollywood movie in which his character is played by a person of a much darker hue.
There exist no official criteria as to what makes one worthy of promotion to sumos two highest ranks, Ozeki and Yokozuna.
However, if a wrestler can maintain an average of eleven wins across three consecutive tournaments with ten or more wins in the final tournament, he is virtually guaranteed to receive a promotion to Ozeki.
Terunofuji accomplished this in his first three tournaments back in the top division, winning one tournament and finishing runner-up in another.
In the next tournament, taking place in Tokyo in January 2021, Teru finished runner up, but only won eleven of his fifteen matches, leaving him one short of what he would need for Ozeki promotion.
He went on to win the March tournament with a 12-3 record, easily qualifying him for Ozeki.
The traditional criterion for a Yokozuna promotion is two consecutive tournament victories while at the rank of Ozeki or equivalent.
He did not receive the promotion, as only one tournament was won at the rank of Ozeki, though some argued that he should, with two consecutive victories, three of the last six, and coming runner-up in two others.
Terunofuji did not complain about not getting promoted, insisting that he wanted to earn the promotion.
With the next tournament rolling around in July 2021, Terunofuji knew that it was now or never.
With one tournament victory at the rank of Ozeki in the previous tournament, all he needed to do was perform at the level of Yokozuna.
Terunofujis return to the top division and subsequent dominance coincided with Hakuhos absence.
He had yet to face the greatest sumo wrestler in history and fellow countryman since his resurgence.
Hakuho needed a strong tournament to stave off retirement, while Terunofuji similarly needed one to join Hakuho—the sport's sole Yokozuna—in the highest rank.
Both wrestlers started the tournament strong with wins in their first few bouts.
After each was undefeated after the fifth day, a shift in the strategies of their opponents became visible.
Wrestlers opted to fight the top contenders head-on, rather than deploying cheap-but-legal tactics such as dodging out of the way at the start of the match, face slaps, or forearm shivers.
No wrestler wanted to lose his honor by derailing an undefeated showdown on the final day for a shameful match victory in an unwinnable tournament.
Hakuho and Terunofuji each racked up wins day after day until the final day arrived.
Each fighter was undefeated, leaving the tournament championship to the winner of their clash.
Before their bout, the wrestlers are introduced to the crowd as foreign-born.
In said ritual, wrestlers clap to attract the attention of the gods, lift their hands to show they are unarmed, stomp the ground to scare away demons and throw salt in the ring to purify it.
They repeatedly crouch as if about to start the match and then stand up after a few moments of glaring at each other.
The match starts when all four hands are simultaneously touching the ground.
Hakuho opens with his signature forearm shiver—a move that is strictly legal, but which is frowned upon for a Yokozuna.
Teru counters by reaching for his trademark outside left grip on his opponent's belt.
Hakuho backpedals and slaps Terunofujis head with his left hand, surely aware that giving up the position is certain defeat.
Hakuho attempts a head slap with his right hand and Terunofuji counters with his own, still waiting for the opportunity to seize the all-important belt grip.
He thrusts his right hand to the back of his opponent's belt and gains a firm grip.
MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / SPORT Sensing the danger from relinquishing such a position, Teru starts clawing for Hakuhos belt with his left hand.
Hakuho uses masterful technique—shifting and twisting his hips—to keep his belt just out of reach, forcing Terunofuji to settle for an inside right hand grip.
Teru uses his right hand to pull Hakuho closer so that he can secure the other hand.
Hakuho senses that his opponent is overextended and clamps down Terus right arm.
Using his opponent's momentum, Hakuho attempts to send Terunofuji into the clay.
Hakuho holds on to Terunofuji’s upper arm and uses his right hand to tighten his grip.
Terunofuji is just trying to resist and wait for an opportunity to grab Hakuhos belt.
Hakuho twists Teru by his arm— testing his rehabilitated knees—and goes for another throw.
He sends Terunofuji into the ground, nearly breaking his arm in the process.
Hakuho is the tournament champion, and still the greatest to ever do it.
Promotion to the rank tends to shorten ones career, as poor performance that comes with old age necessitates retirement instead of demotion, in order to maintain the honor of the rank.
He originally stated that he wanted to continue competing at least until the Tokyo 2020 olympics in order to honor Japan as a representative.
Nagging injuries and pressure from the sumo elders made it all the more difficult to wait the extra year from the Olympics getting delayed by the pandemic.
But with the retirement from fellow Yokozuna Kakuryu in March 2021, Hakuho had another reason to continue competing.
As the sole Yokozuna, he needed a young Yokozuna to whom he could pass the torch.
The sumo elders were pleased with his victories, but dissatisfied with the way in which he won, employing dishonorable tactics such as face slaps, elbow bashes, and retreating.
When the September tournament rolled around, Hakuho officially announced his retirement.
He far surpassed his father's record, with 45 top division tournament victories.
He continued wrestling long enough to support Japan in the 2020 Olympics.
His undefeated tournament win and victory over the most dominant wrestler of the next generation was Hakuho’ss defining act of greatness, his final taste of glory.
Terunofuji received his promotion to Yokozuna, making him the 73rd in the nearly one thousand years since it became an official rank, cementing the greatest comeback in history.
Having a single loss against the greatest of all-time constitutes a Yokozuna-worthy performance, the only substitute to a second consecutive tournament victory in his quest for Yokozuna.
With Hakuho out of the field, Terunofuji easily won the September tournament as well, with a record of 13-2.
While I wish that I could have watched these two fight for championships for years to come, I am yet grateful for the opportunity to have witnessed their respective careers.
To see Terunofuji come so close to glory, lose it all, put his honor on the line and regain his former glory and more through sheer tenacity.
To see the apex of their careers result in a legendary, historic showdown.
I am forever indebted to these HERCULEANSTRENGTH.COM men—and to the sport of sumo—for demonstrating such masculine virtues in a world where they are otherwise almost entirely absent.
Dont hesitate to email us for further information and a client questionnaire if youd like dedicated tailor-made personal training on strength training, building muscle, losing fat, and developing athleticism. — 2 “KO-NAoa BE his is my version of the classic Japanese hotpot recipe chankonabe, a favourite of sumo wrestlers in particular.
You can either make the chicken broth yourself (simmer a whole chicken carcass for four to six hours with an onion, carrot and bay leaf, then strain the mixture) or buy some.
Although chankonabe tends not to include beef or lamb, because four-legged animals represent a loss in sumo wrestling , I’ve included ground beef and pork meatballs to go with the chicken thighs, white fish and shrimp.
Of course there are eggs in there, which you wouldn't normally find in a chankonabe.
The stew is usually served , with rice or udon noodles, as shown to the right.
If you choose not to use the sake and mirin, bring the broth on its own up to a simmer.
Make the meatballs by combining the ground meat, garlic clove, herbs and egg and forming the mixture into equally sized balls. fm.
Cut the cod into chunks and do the same for the chicken _ thighs, removing any bones.
Cut the spring onions into two-inch lengths and remove the stems from the shiitake mushrooms and halve them.
Begin cooking the meatballs, cod and chicken thighs first for 5 minutes, then add the shrimp and simmer for another 3 minutes.
Next add the napa cabbage, spring onions and mushrooms and simmer for a few more minutes.
While the vegetables are simmering, soft boil the eggs for 3-5 minutes and then reserve them.
Ladle the stew into bowls, slice the eggs in half and add a whole egg to each bowl.
Fresh and Sustainably-llarvested Alaska Chaga is picked and packed wi small bateles, Our Chara Mushrooms are picked near Fairbanks, Alaska during the winter months, Chaga from these frigid conditions and away frou cur polluted modern world ensure thal vou receive the maxim benefits.
When America came into this territory, it was still pregnant with untapped natural resources and ranged over by people and wild animals that lived according to the cyclical patterns of nature that went on unconcerned with the aims of civilization.
Americas mission was to fill the west with emigrants and stratify it with layers of gridwork, from property lines and excavation tunnels to railways, bridges, fencing, and telegram cables.
In other words, what went on in those years was the building of civilization from the ground up, carving order out of chaos and then establishing the parameters to keep chaos gone for good.
The Kid serves as a vector through which all of this passes, and although he acts, his actions have no major consequences for the circumstances in which he finds himself; rather he is caught up and carried along by the currents of History.
Before the West can be “settled,” however, it must be pacified, and the majority of the book is concerned with this process.
Early in the novel, The Kid takes up first with Captain White and his band of filibusterers, and later the scalp-hunting Glanton Gang, with whom he wanders.
They range over open territory in search of plunder, and when that proves out of their grasp, they continue to wander until their dissolution, and even after that The Kid continues wandering, going wherever he can be useful and doing whatever needs to be done.
The Gang was made up of outlaws, drifters, and military veterans, and The Kid himself was a runaway.
Just as the winds and rains blow wildly across the plains and the open dessert, or herds of animals roam freely, so too does the Glanton Gang range directionless around Northern Mexico.
Like the plains Indians who cyclically follow the buffalo across the steppe, the Glanton Gang wanders in search of natives to scalp, and when they wear out their welcome in Mexico, they retreat north with no goal and no destination, stopping only at the most convenient place from which they can pilfer emigrants heading west in the gold rush.
Their inherent aimlessness is not insignificant, rather it may be the most important detail about them.
MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / LITERATURE These men go wherever their violent impulses take them, where they may be used to earn a living.
Established men of trade or office from back east, a city in New England or Ohio, could never commit or withstand the extreme violence necessary for the lives of these men, nor the relentless exposure to the elements and overall deprivation of housing, food, and any other resource for civilized living.
The settling of civilization, the confrontation with the Frontier, requires a certain type of man, a man who comes from outside the parameters of domesticity, whose survival is predicated not on the taming of his violent impulses, as it would be for an urban family man, but for the unfettered embellishment of these impulses.
In civilization, these impulses would get a man jailed at best, executed at worst, but on the Frontier, repressing them would lead to an even swifter death.
Although these men are required for the pacification of the Frontier, once that is done and the building begins, they become a hindrance.
For example, in the beginning when ‘The Kid meets Toadvine they burn down a hotel for no real reason, and soon after when The Kid is denied whiskey for lack of money, he breaks two bottles over the bartenders head and stabs his eye out.
The only way they know how to get what they want is violence, and it is expressly for this quality that the Kid is invited first into Captain White's band and later the Glanton Gang.
These qualities cause them to run afoul of the Mexican Government, when they massacre a peaceful settlement of natives and try to pass off the scalps as Apache warriors and, later, try to do the same with the scalps of Mexican citizens.
Once they become wanted men they go into villages and their violent impulses are channeled into drinking, whoring, raping, murdering, and thievery; they are repeatedly forced out under a hail of gunfire.
Several members are killed this way, others hanged in Sand Diego, and the Gang is eventually almost wiped out by a group of Indians.
Once the Gang is unemployed and on the run, they retreat north and take up residence at a ferry over the Colorado river near Fort Yuma, Arizona.
The Gang kills the people running the ferry and begins operating it for their own enrichment, charging exorbitant fees, robbing their customers of all their possessions, and excluding Natives from passage at all.
Therefore, it served as a crucial vector for the civilization-building process America was embarking on, and the Glanton Gang were retarding that progress.
In real life, the Gang also sabotaged or outright murdered the operators of two other fords along the river, and this is what provokes the Yuma Indians to attack the ferry, club Glanton to death and murder several others.
As a result of this debacle, the United States military sends a contingent of troops to man the ferry and they allow safe passage of emigrants for the next thirty years.
Here we see played out in stark detail how their violent nature brings them in direct confrontation with developing civilization, in fact it speeds up the progression of that development by bolstering the bulwarks against men such as themselves.
As Nietzsche puts it in Twilight of the idols, these men are required to build liberal institutions; in fact war itself builds liberal institutions, and the type of man needed to make war is the truly free man.
The institutions limit freedom, and they have no room for the man who does not subdue his natural, violent instincts.
The men who KS g make up the Glanton Gang, men like The kid, must themselves be forced out of civilization, once it's up and running.
JUDGEMENT ne of the liberties McCarthy takes with the Yuma Ferry massacre is to depict Judge Holden as fighting his way out by leveling a 12 pound howitzer cannon at the Indians and holding them at bay with it to make his escape.
He wields the howitzer with his bare hands (the ball is twelve pounds, the cannon much heavier) as one of several feats that give him a larger than life, perhaps even inhuman character.
Much speculation surrounds the Judge, even within the story itself, where one character remarks that he’s never presided over any court cases, that no one knows exactly what hes a judge of.
Holden himself waxes philosophical quite a lot about war and the warrior type, some amalgamation of Nietzsche and Heraclitus and maybe some of McCarthys own impressions.
But there's something more to the Judge, something that stirs great curiosity and confusion in the men, and that is his knowledge and study of nature, the way he knows how to make gunpower from bare materials at hand, the way he sketches plants and takes samples of dead things and saves them for study.
Wrapped up in this one character is the generative power of war, and that is what this novel is about.
It is a pre-apocalyptic novel, in which nature is examined, captured, and exploited by men who must make war upon it and its inhabitants in order to make way for the civilization that is to come.
But these men, as we've seen, have no place within that civilization, in fact they threaten its very existence.
War's nobility becomes dishonored once the dance of civilization begins, and the warrior must be subtracted.
And they need a Judge to determine who among them is a threat, and it is his duty to remove them.
Once the West is closing, The Judge hunts down and finds The Kid and must murder him; these walking pockets of wilderness must be tamed.
Death stalks the Crusader in The Seventh Seal, who outlived his time of war and now tries to return to peaceful society; the Judge stalks The Kid as the closing of the west draws near.
Judge Holden cannot allow a warrior to walk among the merchants and the politicians, the farmers and the women.
Holden mocks and taunts The Kid in a paradoxical way, from an angle antithetical to the reason he must kill him.
He tells the kid he wasnt cut out for war, that he suppressed his nature when he showed, or tried to show, mercy to several characters along the way, that he wasn't made of the right stuff for the life they had lived.
The Kid represents an earlier, freer time, an era when a man was allowed required to cultivate his killer instinct and use his violent nature to conquer the wild and carve order out of chaos.
Despite the eminently mis-spellable name, boeuf bourguignon is not a complicated dish to make.
As always, if you look after the little things, the big things will take care of themselves.
My favourite is shin, a bit of tough hard-working muscle that turns to oozing gelatinous chunks after a few hours at the right temperature.
If you choose short rib, make sure to remove as much fat as possible and don't throw away the bones.
Either add them to the stew to enhance the stock or save them for stock-making later.
Heat the oil and butter in a large casserole dish over a medium-high heat, and when the foam has died down, add the bacon.
Fry until the bacon is golden, then remove with a slotted spoon and retain.
Add the bay leaf, carrots and mushrooms to the pan and sauté until lightly golden, then remove and retain them separate from the bacon.
Add the small onions or shallots to the dish, turn down the heat slightly, and fry until just beginning to brown.
At the same time, put the flour on a plate, season, then roll the beef in it.
Remove the onions with the other vegetables and turn the heat up slightly in the pan.
Cover and bake in the oven for two and a half hours, then tip in the small onions, mushrooms and carrots and bake for another half an hour.
Add the remaining parsley and serve with mashed or boiled potatoes, fine green beans, crusty French bread and red wine.
MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / FOOD Please Stop Worrying About Weight Gain—We're4@ Middle I keep seeing posts ab Here's what you shou 4 j) Lisa Valente, M.S., RD To end fatphobia, w we need to Tk, Western civilization, says Philly therapi Rashatwar I’m z “4 — amined That Adele Lost | Weight Yes, |know thisist “Is Joke nan With mii disordered eating for a decade, and her fe fard amid the coronavirus lockdown.
Fatphobia and Racism We need to consider how they're linked when thinking about police violence.
A stunning coffee-table book in its own right, Raw Egg Nationalism is also a political manifesto giving the reader everything he needs to take control of his body and assert his autonomy against the globalists and their anti-human agenda.
Tie the thyme sprigs, bay leaves and parsley stalks together and put in the bowl with the peppercorns.
Heat half the butter in a large casserole pan and, in batches if need be, brown the oxtail.
Don't have the temperature up too high, to prevent the butter from burning.
Add more butter and cook the carrots, onion, celery and garlic until just starting to brown.
Scoop off any froth that appears, then cover and place in the oven for 3 hrs 30 mins.
Remove the oxtail to a bowl and either shred or leave it whole, depending on your preference.
You can either sieve the liquid to remove the vegetables, or leave them in.
Season to taste, then serve the soup in bowls and scatter over some chopped parsley leaves, to garnish.
VISUALIZATION * Having goals and being able actually to see yourself achieving them is one of the royal roads to success.
Soviet weightlifters have been using mental techniques since the 1970s at least, and now theyre a common part of the repertoire of elite athletes.
These athletes will use the power of intense concentration and imagination to run through the routines, from start to finish — and that even includes the moment they step up onto the podium to collect the winner's trophy.
Tiger Woods, for instance, has practised such techniques from his teens, and swears by them.
And now scientific studies have begun to verify just how helpful these techniques can be, and why.
Like Tiger Woods, at a young age Arnold Schwarzenegger discovered the power of visualization.
This began when he first saw Reg Park, in his movie role as Hercules, in a magazine.
I knew that every training is taking me one step closer to turning this beautiful vision into reality.
Of course, Arnold went much further after that, winning the Mr Universe four more times before winning the Mr Olympia, bodybuilding’s contest of contests, seven times — as well as becoming a movie star, politician and global icon.
Your goals may be slightly more humble than Arnold'’s, but there's no doubt that having a vision of what you want to do and being able to see yourself doing it — being able to taste the success you want will carry you a long way towards achieving it.
Heaven knows, weve seen and heard variations of this dichotomy so many times.
In fact, if we were given a dollar for every time somebody told us you have to choose between being muscular and aesthetic on the one hand, or being strong and looking like a sack of potatoes — wed certainly have a lot more spare change in our pockets than we do at present.
While it is obviously true that the strongest men in the world don't have the most aesthetic physiques — the last Mr Olympia winner to take part in a World's Strongest Man competition, if memory serves, was Franco Columbo it’s absolutely not the case that you have to choose between one or the other.
You can be massively strong certainly by comparison with the average man, or even the average trained man — and have a beautiful physique as well, and this is exemplified perfectly by the bodybuilders of the Golden Era.
As well as being bodybuilding’s first real crossover superstar, a man who would play Hercules on the silver screen and fill out the mythical heros loincloth and lion costume admirably, he was also famous for his feats of strength.
Most notably, he was the second man ever to bench press 500lbs, after the Canadian weightlifter Doug Hepburn, with whom Park actually trained briefly on a visit to North America.
For some time, like Reg Park this absolutely shredded Mr America winner was the second strongest bench presser in the world, having pressed 600lbs.
Only the powerlifter Pat Casey, who was considerably larger than Sipes, was a better presser.
Rather than beginning with routines built around an ever-changing repertoire of exotic isolation exercises —what we might dub, in its worst form, the ‘infinity WOD’ method they focused on getting good at the ‘big’ compound lifts (bench press, squat, deadlift, overhead press, clean and jerk); and by ‘getting good’ at them, I mean getting stronger.
Reg Park followed the 5x5 method that had probably been taught to him by Doug Hepburn.
Reg credited this for increasing his strength massively and also for adding a kind of size and density to his physique that he had not otherwise have been able to obtain when he was training just for aesthetics rather than strength.
And it’s this 5x5 method, with some important modifications, that weve made the basis of our Golden Era 5x5 programme.
This is a comprehensive 12-month programme in three phases that will help you gain serious strength while also adding balanced mass to your physique.
The programme contains its own diet plan, with a wealth of Golden Era wisdom on nutrition and muscle gain.
If you're a beginner looking to build a powerful, muscular physique, we recommend the Golden Era 5x5.
Because although strength and aesthetics absolutely can go hand in hand, we believe that the former is the best basis for the latter, and not the other way around.
A man without friends is like a ship without a rudder, a plane with only one wing, a car without a steering wheel.
We don’t mean the kind of people who are just there for the good times, who share in the spoils of victory, drink the champagne then leave you high and dry when you need them most.
A real friend is there through thick and thin, when the chips are down, when the shit hits the fan or when it won't.
TO EVERY THING THERE IS A SEASON To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heavens: A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted; A time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to build up... hese famous verses from the Bible extol something MAU eTerom @sbuoyoler-W eatcanme)(seinva-loceluinm velo bool eleyar-ve ler of specificity.
Many people think that building muscle is just a case of eat chicken and rice + chug protein shakes + lift weights.
In fact, I can think of fewer paths less likely to lead you to success than this bland formula.
I've seen so many people, on the internet and in real life, fail because they think that this formula is foolproof, when in fact, only fools are the ones doing it.
In my home town, for instance, there’s a guy who regularly posts his progress on his Instagram.
To tell the truth, ‘regularly’ doesn't accurately convey the number of times he posts gym-related material each day.
And yet, after two or more years of this nonsense, which is totally unsuited to his purposes and the fact that he is clearly a non-enhanced lifter, he’s still going, despite making no visible progress whatsoever.
In every post, he still looks like he’s stepping into the gym for the first time.
No amount of branded gear, straps, lifting belts and other accessories can disguise the fact that he is neither appreciably bigger nor appreciably stronger than he was when he started.
Vince Gironda knew that there was no single formula for success in the gym.
Maybe, if pushed, he would have said that the right mindset is the one thing everybody needs, but even that doesn't guarantee success.
Vince had bulk diets, cutting diets, mass gain workout programmes, definition workout programmes, cutting programmes, programmes to break through plateaus — a programme and diet to every purpose under the heavens.
Vince knew, and so should you, that there’s no point sticking with a programme that doesnt meet your purposes and needs.
That's why he never advocated any of his diets or programmes to last forever.
No, you shouldnt stay on the 36-eggs-a-day diet once you've gained the mass you need, and sticking to the steakand-eggs diet for too long might see you lose too much weight.
Containing an interactive library, Who Poo explores wild animals and their scat near you.
A filter feature in the library allows users to inpul scat dimensions and animal track features to find matching wildlife.
The library includes photos from President Theodore Roosevel(s North American huntine journals.
Who Poo users can also upload their own photos to complete the m-app encyclopedia.
While the organization was in many ways successful, its aims of renewing Western civilization were not.
Today we find ourselves in another, more extreme, crisis of masculinity.
So many men and boys have turned to the simulated achievement of video games, pornography, and social media, rejecting reality for the digital and refusing to take the risks that are necessary for any kind of genuine achievement.
Boy Scouts of America, in its untainted state, should be a bastion of positive male culture.
To go into the wild is, as Roger Scruton said, to return to a natural condition from which civilized man has detached himself.
In camping, man faces the timeless trials and struggles against the elements that his ancestors have faced since the beginning.
Instead, in the mountains, he is one with it; there is peace, liberty, and serenity.
To experience himself as a part of nature is to ... rediscover that condition that we were in once, before separating ourselves from the natural order.
In fact, there has been a long withering of the BSA’s principles since its inception.
As wilderness is paved over for tract housing, it becomes harder to camp as the wilds are less intimate and immediate to the person.
As an organization ages, there comes the growing bloat of rules, bureaucracy, and liabilities dulling the experience with restrictions, becoming more adult-lead, making it preferable to organize outside of the organization.
Worse still, in a stagnant and decadent culture, camping is commodified with bleeding-edge aerospace technologies and materials, making it more expensive and much less challenging.
Yet, the decline of the BSA also comes as a result of things within its control.
O’Sullivan’s law (that all organizations that aren't actually right wing will over time become left wing) has unfortunately once again proven true.
Standards have been destroyed, and political indoctrination is now par for the course.
Merit badges went from a proof of proficiency in a skill that could be relied upon if needed, to being an ornamental check mark of completing a career sampler.
Young boys’ requirements to earn ranks now cover subjects such as diversity and inclusion (complete with the introduction of political commissars), drug use, cyberbullying, and rape.
With the 8th edition of the Handbook, in 1972, the program was completely overhauled.
The Handbook was dumbed down to a sixth-grade reading level to appeal to ‘inner city youths’ while talking about subjects such as drugs, race consciousness, and eliminating what is core to scouting.
The outdoor requirements, the objective skill-based advancement system, and many skills were all removed.
All the while the Handbook suppressed individual responsibility and initiative.
Within the decade the organization lost over a third of its membership.
The situation was so bad that William Hillcourt, a personal friend of founder Lord Baden-Powell came out of retirement to fix the situation.
Unlike then, today there is no old guard to come out of retirement and save the organization.
In 2013, openly homosexual scouts were allowed in the organization, and, in 2015, homosexual adults were allowed as well.
With a declining membership and tightening financials, a plan was made to quickly double membership, and in 2019 it was enacted.
Anybody with half a brain could have foreseen the problems that would follow, and now, just five years since the first ruling, ‘in 2020, facing numerous lawsuits stemming from allegations of child sexual abuse by some Scout leaders, the BSA declared bankruptcy, as the Britannica states.
We stand at a historic moment; not only is Boy Scouts dying, but there are no true alternative organizations to take its place.
In short, we are making a book for individuals from which a grassroots organization can be derived.
There will be the online group that makes and sells the book as well as distributing PDFs for financially insecure individuals and —if success exceeds all expectations— also sells pins, patches, and uniforms.
But there will be no regional, or council hierarchy, only local self-sufficient local groups.
The book's objectives are to give a common directive for outdoor adventure to members and groups; provide material, structure and guidelines for members to achieve that directive; and lastly ensure quality and standards of the groups and members of the groups, while instilling ideals of honor and fellowship.
There were many proto-scouting groups before BSA and each had a different way of organizing.
Yet no method has had greater success in modern times than the patrol method.
Put a large group of men together and after initial discord, ‘gangs’ would emerge based on various things like similarity of interest, locality, or like-mindedness.
The patrol method is a mere organizational recognition of these naturally occurring ‘gangs formed by instinct.
Gangs consist of about 5 8 people, by no means a clique but not big enough to be unwieldy to lead.
The smaller size of the patrol compared to the troop is logistically easier; it allows its membership to remain local, and thereby have more frequent meetings and outings.
The troop is an organization of several patrols at a local level, whose leadership cadre and senior members fill support positions to help run the troop and plan the itineraries and meetings.
On a troop level, this preparation is in the practical application of skills and knowledge through hikes, outings, games and contests.
Patrols would have classroom-style or infield instruction in preparation for the troop-level events, and on their own practice previously learned skills as a group.
On an individual level, there is book-learning and practice of learned skills.
While book-learning can teach concepts and aid in teaching skills, it has clear limitations, because it cannot teach or improve a new skill.
Instead, whenever possible one must ‘learn by doing’ as done in troop and patrol meetings.
When a Scout has already learned a skill, the book serves as a refresher and allows him to practice a skill alone by rote.
Keeping the organization exclusive in the right way, and detailing principles, skills and standards cannot be done in any conventional way with our book, since people can make their own troops with little to zero oversight from us, the writers.
We would not only have no hands-on interference with these groups, but would have no knowledge about them unless they contacted us.
Putting a childish disclaimer ‘no girls allowed!’ in the text of the book would not dissuade anyone.
First, we will extensively draw upon the kinds of history that were once taught by the scouts but have fallen so far out of favour.
This will help to create a sense of context and identity, so that politically oppositional and antagonistic groups would not use the book as it is.
Such groups would be unable to coopt the material and bowdlerize it, since the historical material is so integral to the philosophy and way that removing it would destroy the whole.
We encourage our writers to talk about history and politics whenever practicable.
The second method of gatekeeping is to have a system of quantifiable merit-based requirements that must be performed under inspection of a local leader or peer who has mastered the skill in order to pass to the next rank.
One can call himself part of the organization if he completes certain initiation rites, challenges, and demonstrations of skill.
Completing the requirements would include having a witness when archiving them as proof of their completion.
This system relies on the honor of both parties, both participant and witness.
These challenges can be something like sleeping in the woods for a night with only the clothes on your back and your knife, to how many pull-ups you can do or demonstrating proficiency in tying a knot or starting a fire by friction.
The requirements and rank system would also apply to local troops and patrols, like a streamer added to the pole or a star stitched on the flag to display the excellency or proficiencies of the unit.
Presently, our focus is on building a group of people who are interested in this concept and can create the material, standards, and standardized operations that will be the bedrock of this organization.
The book is being written in sections by volunteers who are writing on their own specific competencies.
The project is still in its infancy so YOU can have a great effect on shaping the book and the organizations.
The plan is to produce a handbook that teaches core values and skills, how to establish your own local unit, as well as details how to plan and execute, meetings and trips into the wild.
The country farm, even in Roman times, represented an idyll that stood in the starkest contrast to the growing cities, especially Rome, and the life of business that was carried on there.
Even in their sneering condescension, the urbanite and metropolitan have done their bit to fashion this image of the country and village as a place apart, where all that is solid does not melt into thin air.
An initial problem, if we choose to make the village our ideal traditional community, is that the modern-day village is not what it once was, certainly not in England anyway.
And I should know, since I've spent a decent portion of my life in a number of very beautiful English villages none of which could qualify as a real, living place.
Sure, the lovely medieval church may still be there and the picturesque thatched houses are mostly still intact, despite the intrusion of some modern homes and council housing; and sure, there are still people living in the houses, at least for a portion of the year.
Without an independent economic life of their own no trades or small businesses and because the price of properties has become so inflated, and the supply is limited, the young have no real place there and are inevitably pushed out.
The ancient customs, tied to the rhythms of the agricultural seasons, are almost entirely gone, as youd expect; those that do survive are mere curiosities, like the people who maintain them.
Some life remains in the local pub if your village is lucky enough to have one, that is.
So the modern English village is not, like the fictional Cheers, a place where everybody knows your name — but it is somewhere where the locals will at least recognise your car, especially if you drive down for the weekend in your brand new Tesla.
If you want to know more about the English case, Id suggest reading Ronald Blyth’s Akenfield, the story of a semi-fictional Suffolk village, beginning in the late 1800s and ending in the 1960s, when the book was written.
No, you're going to have to go far back if you want a model of village life that isn't a hollow one, stripped of its true purpose and dependent on the wealth of the city for fresh infusions of money and vitality.
Simply moving to villages en masse is not a viable strategy for a traditionalist revival today.
They might be surprised to know that many of the problems they rail against, thinking them to be symptoms of the modern condition, were in fact present way back when, and in just as vicious and unappealing forms as we find today.
The ‘matriarchy’ that does exist, and that exerts enormous influence and power in the social and moral realm, is only the manifestation of this brokenness of the males.
Pretty soon youd discover that the Karen who was watching your every move in the office waiting for something “inappropriate” to report to HR so she could leapfrog you to promotion — had been replaced by a seamstress called Beatrice who watched you at night through a hole in your roof, hoping youd say something heretical to your family so she could go tell the local bishop and have your property confiscated.
The village was principally a farming community , with a small contingent of artisans and a larger number of itinerant shepherds.
What emerges from the wealth of surviving testimony is, among other things, a sense of just how utterly stifling life was for the inhabitants of the village.
In Montaillou, village life revolved around the household, or domus, which encompassed both the house itself and the family within it; the domus assumed a biological, economic, mystical and religious significance, at once.
There is much talk on Twitter of the benefits of the “multi-generational household” well, this what it actually looked like.
The generations dwelling within the domus were considered also to include the dead, who were thought to guard its good future and therefore had to be regularly appeased by the living.
On the day-today, the domus was the principal unit in the agricultural division of labour and the means by which resources were allocated, whether among its members or to the various powers, civil and ecclesiastical, that ruled over the local area.
The chief long-term concern of the head of the household, who was usually male but sometimes female, was the proper descent of the domus and its humble resources.
Marriage customs were such that marriages outside the domus, although inevitable, were considered a kind of tragic threat to its integrity.
The needs of the domus, not the individual, always came first, and it’s hard to doubt that such unions would actually have taken place had they been allowed.
Although a man might try to rule his domus with an iron rod, authority within the household was far from straightforward.
Regardless of their formal power in medieval French society, the women wielded a variety of soft powers that proved no less crushing than a formal matriarchy would have.
It's unsurprising, then, that so much of the official testimony to the bishop consists of men insulting the women around them, the sole exception being their own mothers.
Male servants would often take their masters side when they insulted their wives.
The swiving local priest, having married off his pregnant mistress in order to save his reputation, told the couple that “A man is nothing if he is not his wife’s master” — pointing to the obvious fact that the majority of men were not.
This “total domestication’, as Bronze Age Pervert puts it, was made yet worse through endemic conflict, and not just because the men were emasculated and the presence of multiple generations in a single home is almost always a recipe for bitter resentment and scheming.
The testimony that the villagers gave before the bishop is unequivocal evidence that virtually nothing went unnoticed by someone privacy, whether from one’s own family or from the neighbours, simply did not exist.
Owing to the ramshackle construction of the village houses, it was easy to hear or see what was going on inside at any time.
Internally, the walls were so thin that it was all-but impossible to have a private conversation if others were in the house, as they invariably were, and outsiders could quite literally lift a corner of the roof up to peer inside; this was particularly effective at night, when the inhabitants would be huddled around the light and warm of the hearth, and the observer cloaked in darkness.
Many houses didn't even have front doors, but ill-fitting planks or slats another boon for nosy neighbours.
It’s fashionable to claim, after Foucault, that modern man lives in a panopticon, where his every move and every word is surveilled by unseen forces, but this was hardly less the case in Montaillou, and in the febrile atmosphere of heresy and the Inquisition, the spying and snooping that were part and parcel of village life took on a truly monstrous aspect.
Aloof from this domestic hell, masters of their fate alone, were the shepherds of the village.
It was a common classical trope that the wandering shepherd enjoyed a kind of blessed freedom, unbothered by the cares and customs of the settled world, and nowhere was this more so than in Montaillou.
Although the book's main character is the randy priest Pierre Clergue, it is another Pierre, Pierre Maury, a happy and magnanimous shepherd, who is the real hero of the story.
Like the other shepherds of the region, Maury followed his flocks into the mountains during the season, leaving behind the village and its residents.
Freed from the bonds of place, property and lineage, the shepherds came together in voluntary groupings of friendship as they roamed the mountain passes and pastures.
This vagabond life also resulted in a different mental outlook, more philosophical, more prone to lofty thoughts and much less superstitious than that of the villagers.
Up in their mountain strongholds, the shepherds were untouchable, and many, including Pierre Maury, took advantage of this fact to evade the strong arm of the Church when it reached for them.
And he would not trade that liberty for the plate of gritty lentils often held out to him by friends, employers or parasites, offering to marry him, to help him settle down, to have him adopted into a rich family.
But he saw his destiny as travelling over hill and dale, with friends everywhere and temporary sweethearts.
In this description of Maury’s life, there is a very striking echo of some things the Roman historian Tacitus wrote in the Germania, and they point the way to an alternative model of “trad” life in Europe, one that is barely less ancient than the village but potentially far more promising.
As he runs through the martial customs of the ancient Germans, Tacitus notes how the young men who would form the companions, or comitatus, of the great war chiefs could never settle down to peace, but would instead wander in search of other battles and other chiefs in whose service they could win further glory and distinction.
For the companions demand from the liberality of their chief the horse made for battle, the bloodied and winning spear.
Like Pierre Maury and his fellow shepherds, these men voluntarily forsook the settled life and its regularities — place, property, work, comfort.
They too would wander and find their own fate, rather than waiting for it to find them.
Tacitus describes another similar custom, most prevalent among the Chatti, a particularly ferocious tribe.
When a young man reached maturity, he would not shave his hair or beard until he had killed a man.
These men were a marvel to behold, and lived a life devoted solely to battle.
They would always make up the first line on the battlefield, Tacitus says.
In fact, if we want to look for its origins and impetus, we should look much further back in time, to the very birth of the European peoples.
In light of a number of revolutionary genetic studies in the past six years, the Yamnaya, the principal steppe people in question, have been called “the most murderous people of all time” and “the most violent group of people who ever lived” with good reason.
While the Neolithic farmers who made the earlier journey into Europe brought their families with them, the genetic studies have made it clear that the Yamnaya migration was basically one big mounted warband which either killed or enslaved the Neolithic men of Europe and took their women as wives.
Academics like David Reich, who have been instrumental in advancing this theory, are now doing their best to walk back the full implications of the genetic data they have revealed but — horse, stable door, bolted.
No amount of wishful academic thinking, motivated by the desire not to stir “dark” currents in Europeans thinking about who they really are, can hide what has been revealed.
As much as the establishment of settled farming communities, the origins of the European peoples lie in a wild, bloody ride of young warriors off the steppe.
Perhaps, like among the Germans, it was already an established custom for the young to band together and wander in search of their fortune.
But given the scale on which the migrations must have taken place “massive steppe migration” is the phrase used by the scientists, including David Reich this seems unlikely.
Much more likely is that population pressures on the steppe, and perhaps even political crisis, forced a large number of young, unaccompanied men to move on and create their own opportunities.
It's worth noting that, as dynamic as the pastoralist lifestyle may be, these societies are just as prone to conflict and sclerosis as settled ones.
To wander in pursuit of blood or glory remained an alternative way of life right through the Middle Ages and into the modern era, not just in weakened form as weve seen with the shepherds of the Pyrenees, but also in full-blown, full-blooded, form as well.
This attitude would carry the earliest European colonisers overseas as well, even in the absence of any European tradition of sailing at that time.
The early days of the colonial enterprise, such as when the Spaniards expanded from their island colonies in the Caribbean into Mexico and beyond, were a time of perhaps unparalleled individual initiative and glory, when small groups of determined men could achieve seemingly impossible feats.
Realising he would find no fortune on the island, he and other men who shared his predicament looked elsewhere, taking part in a number of locally raised expeditions before the famous conquest of Mexico in 1520-21, which was achieved without the proper approval of the Crown or its agents in the New World.
People remember that when Cortés arrived on the Yucatan he burnt his ships, to prevent the expedition from turning back and thus focus minds on victory, but they tend to forget that he was pursued as keenly by his rivals on Hispaniola as the Aztecs, and had to head off a number of parties sent to arrest and return him to the isMAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / THOUGHT land to answer for his arrogance.
When the conquest was over, the first thing Cortés did was return to Spain to plead his case retrospectively — before the Crown.
This is just one of a thousand similar stories that could be told, whether of the Spanish, Portuguese, English, French or Dutch in the great Age of Exploration and Conquest. [* done my best to show you that the village is not what many traditionalists think it is or indeed ever was.
Although Montaillou might not have been completely typical, it expressed many of the worst possibilities latent in the form for domesticity to become total, for individual privacy and initiative to be swallowed up whole, and for proper authority to degenerate into a joyless, saggy-breasted matriarchy.
There's no reason to believe that a revival of small communities today assuming that such a thing is even possible, especially at scale would not actually make many of the problems all of us hate, so very much worse.
A new localism could easily become an intimate tyranny far beyond our worst possible nightmares, bolstered by advances in modern technology, and perhaps drawing its justification from Christianity in its wretched present state.
Christianity today, which is no different from the language of “social justice’, has fallen far since the Middle Ages, and seems incapable of doing anything other crushing and twisting life.
Whatever the reason why the Yamnaya left the steppe, there can be no doubt that the decision was a world-historical event.
A settled life has never been the only option for Europes children, and it need not be so now.
As bleeding edge as he may be, our man knows that there are timeless rules of style every MAN’S WORLD man breaks at his peril.
That’s why he’s chosen a sharp charcoal flannel threepiece suit with peaked lapels and matched it with a perfect club tie, white shirt and rosecoloured silk handkerchief.
See, he knows it’s not a false choice between yesterday and today that he must make, but a choice to find the best of both and create something new.
THE FAT NUTRITIONIST “Buster Keaton is illiterate in the same way Homer was.
It's the illiteracy of a warrior, a seer, a poetbard, or a god who doesnt need to read what other people wrote, because hes a god.
Hes already wise.” aybe the best book on movies from the past decade is My Lunches With Orson, by Henry Jaglom.
Jaglom isn't important and there's a good reason you ve never heard of him before.
He's one of these old men who walks around big cities wearing an opera cape and a stupid-looking hat and sits around at outdoor restaurant tables telling rambling stories in a loud voice about all the famous dead people he used to know to cover up for the fact that he’s a failure.
You see these people everywhere desperately trying to prove they used to be somebody and you can never tell just how much they're bullshitting with their anecdotes.
But Henry Jaglom accidentally has one major achievement in his life, because once a week in the 1980s he used to have lunch with Orson Welles and record the conversation on a tape recorder.
The funniest parts of My Lunches With Orson are where Welles trashes Woody Allen for being an ugly yet narcissistic simp who wants people to love him even though there’s nothing to love.
Orson Welles knew all these people and at the end of his life he didn't give a shit about what he said anymore.
The book isn't funny because hes a crank, it's funny because he speaks so much truth you laugh out of pure shock because what he says is obvious but nobody's said that before.
Read chapter 13 of My Lunches With Orson where he trashes Charlie Chaplin.
That's why Buster Keaton is finally giving him the bath, and will, historically, forever.
Welles goes on to show just how self-obsessed Chaplin was, and what a cheap bastard he was too.
But what really makes Chaplin seem like a shitty human being is the way he was completely unwilling to give credit where credit’s due.
Obviously Welles was bitter because Chaplin ripped off one of his screenplays, but Welles isn't the only Hollywood moviemaker who got fucked over by Chaplin.
In 1952, when Chaplin was an old man, he made a cringe-makingly sentimental autobiographical movie called Limelight about an elderly drunk who used to be a big star in vaudeville and is nowa broke, long-winded boring old man who is somehow attractive to a pretty eighteen-year-old girl who wants to be a dancer and wants to marry him--a broke sixty-two-year-old drunk.
Either there’s hope for all of us or this is the dumbest shit ever written.
You should watch Limelight just to see how petty, vain, out of touch and self-obsessed Chaplin was.
After twenty minutes you even start to wonder whether Chaplin was straight because the sheer vanity has to be seen to be believed.
Maybe the worst part of Limelight comes at the end, when the drunk has a comeback performance and then dies after taking a fall onstage.
It's the sort of nauseating “crying clown’ shit that you always thought was just an urban legend.
Orson Welles, Keaton in Cops , Henry Jaglom ond-worst “crying clown’ movie after Jerry Lewis's The Day The Clown Cried, about a clown who entertains children on their way to the gas chamber at Auschwitz and is apparently so bad that Jerry Lewis decided it could never be released in his lifetime.
It’s a serious achievement to come second place in this contest, when you think about it.
You have to be authentically talented to be able to fuck things up this badly.
In some ways the drunk clowns death scene is the funniest part of the whole movie, not only because the “funny” parts are so cringe, but also because youre expected to cry yet want to throw up instead.
But just before that there's finally a good scene in Limelight, because for the drunk’s comeback performance his comedy partner is played by Buster Keaton, the other great slapstick comedy star in 1920s Hollywood.
WELLES: Chaplin showed me the rushes of the original Limelight scene with Keaton, before it was cut.
You would think that the brilliance of Chaplin would give him the generosity of spirit to recognise—— ORSON WELLES CHOSE BUSTER KEATON OVER CHAPLIN WELLES: I don't think brilliance is the word, genius is.
No, not some kind of genius——he was ab201 MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / FILM i ‘a , solutely a genius.
To my great sorrow, I've got to the age now where all my old minority opinions are ceasing to be minority.
I don't know why Keaton to me is more farcical, broader, not as real as Chaplin.
You can see it in his very first movies where he's the only thing worth watching on the screen.
Also, all thirty comedies that he wrote and directed between the beginning of 1915 and the end of 1918, when you take them together, probably add up to the single most innovative series of short films in the history of movies.
Some of his longer movies like The Gold Rush and City Lights and Modern Times are masterpieces by anybodyss standards, and you can admit that even if you dont think hes funny.
A better director, a better writer, a better performer, a better stuntman, a better visual storyteller, a better storyteller all around, and a funnier comedian.
But Buster Keaton had a masculine genius, and the passive-aggressive skinnyfats who have done most of the major writing for the past hundred years cant deal with a masculine genius.
Buster Keaton was born in Piqua, Kansas as Joseph Francis Keaton VI on October 4th 1895.
That was the year of the first real movie projection to an audience, in Paris, at the Grand Café on the Boulevard des Capucines.
His father Joe Keaton came from a long line of Quakers that emigrated to America from Lancashire in the early 1700s.
Joe himself was a drifter from Indiana who joined a travelling medicine show.
Houdini was one of the greatest stuntmen and escape artists in history.
In 1922 a couple of frat boys decided to test him on this and one of them punched him in the stomach, before he had time to prepare himself.
Houdini was important in Buster Keaton’s life because he convinced Joe Keaton to start a vaudeville act with his wife Myra.
He was OK, but he and his wife were never going to draw crowds on their own.
Sure, they could sell cocaine-laced alcohol to yokels in the Midwest and say it was medicine (sometimes it feels like half the American economy is a variation on that sort of scam and always has been) except it doesn't take a lot of talent to convince people who live in the middle of butt-fuck-nowhere and have literally nothing to do except go to work and them come home to drink a semi-poisonous intoxicant that will make them feel giddy and help them forget just how empty and miserable their lives are.
Joe and Myra needed a gimmick to make it in vaudeville so that people would actually pay money to come and see them on stage.
Buster Keaton got his name because when he was eighteen months old he took a “buster” down a full flight of stairs.
A “buster” was the slang term in those days for a serious fall, the kind where you break a couple of bones.
They don’t want you to bond with anybody, and that includes your lovers.
That’s why they push the pill on women, which actually shuts down the release of the ‘love hormone’ oxytocin, and that’s why they want you to wear a piece of dead rubber over your penis.
A condom is a barrier to the closest form of physical intimacy you can achieve with another person and prevents the true union of flesh.
Plus condoms are covered in horrible chemicals like parabens and endocrine disruptors, which mess with your hormones.
Using condoms can actually contribute to making you permanently infertile.
From that day onwards they called him Buster, and the name stuck for the rest of his life.
On October 27th 1900, Buster Keaton made his first appearance on stage, in Wilmington, Delaware.
Buster was billed as “The Little Boy Who Cant Be Damaged’, and luckily for Joe and Myra, audiences were willing to pay a lot of money to watch little Buster get thrown around the stage without ever reacting or losing his cool.
The deadpan, poker-faced Stoicism in the face of violence and MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / FILM chaos began as a gag and ended up becoming the centre of Buster's entire philosophy.
He never had any education, and if you've ever seen his autograph, he has suspiciously neat handwriting.
He could barely read, and his signature was pretty much all he could write.
He's like a figure from the distant ancient past when men had to observe the world and memorise knowledge without using writing.
The summer of 1915 (the summer before his twentieth birthday) was important for Buster.
He caught his first clap, allegedly from a hooker in Muskegon, Michigan.
Hed seen movies before and thought Chaplin was funny, but until The Birth of A Nation he didnt see motion pictures as something hed want to do.
Also, he was tired of getting thrown around a stage by his alcoholic father.
If youve heard of Fatty Arbuckle, it's because you know that he was a silent-film comedian who was accused of raping and killing an actress.
He was innocent, and couldnt possibly have committed the crime, but the media didnt care, and wrecked his career.
If youre six years old, you're already too old for Fatty Arbuckle comedies.
Paramount wanted to offer him a three-year contract for three million dollars because he was so popular.
Problem was, he kept falling behind schedule because he partied too much and had no work ethic.
He and Fatty fell into conversation and hit it off so well that he ended up joining in the scene, and impressed Fatty so much that by the end of the day he was offered a job.
He said hed think about it as long as he was allowed to take a camera home with him.
Buster's main scene lasts less than four minutes total and was improvised in a few hours.
He walks up to the counter with a bucket, sees he only has twenty-five cents to spend, and asks Fatty to fill up the bucket with molasses.
Then he takes off his hat and leaves it on the counter and gets engrossed in a game of checkers that some old men are playing inside the store.
While he’s interfering with the game, Fatty finishes filling up the bucket.
Buster picks it up and tries to leave, but Fatty reminds him he has to pay.
It turns out that the quarter's in the bucket, so Fatty has to fish it out.
To do so he has to pour out some of the molasses into Buster's hat, which is still lying on the counter.
He finds the quarter, pours the molasses back into the bucket and calls Buster over.
Fatty tries to help him pull it off and knocks the bucket of molasses onto the floor.
When they yank the hat off his head, the soles of Buster's shoes are stuck to the floor.
After a struggle, Fatty gets a kettle of boiling water from a stove and pours it over one of the shoes to get it unstuck from the floor.
When it’s loose enough, he plants one of his feet on Buster's chest, kicks him backwards and sends him flying out the door.
Later he goes back to get his hat, walks into the middle of a fight, takes a sack of flour to the face and goes flying.
He tries to take revenge on an employee who laughs in his face by picking up a broom and swinging at him, but the employee ducks out of the way and Buster roundhouse-kicks himself.
Buster is a minor character who is on screen for less than a fifth of The Butcher Boy.
There’s an economy in the way he moves, and you can see how intelligent he is even when you dont compare him to all the other second-rate comedians on the screen.
When Buster takes a fall, you can see that he isn't afraid to take punishment.
And the gymnastic skill it takes to roundhouse-kick yourself like that should have got him into the Olympics.
Fatty Arbuckle knew he had a star on his hands, and it’s a credit to his generosity that he didnt mind when Buster went from novice to apprentice to comedy partner to dominant partner over the course of a couple of months.
Fatty was supposed to be the mentor in this relationship, except Buster was clearly better than him as a gag man, a writer and a director, as well as when it came to performing, both acrobatically and in terms of simple acting.
Buster was only 5’4’, but when you look at his movies it's obvious that he was incredibly lean, strong and agile.
Buster on the other hand could never be a loser or a tramp like Chaplin because he was so self-evidently physically superior to everybody else on screen.
Ultimately Buster was too sophisticated for Fatty, and in 1920 they went their separate ways but stayed best friends.
As a solo comedy star, Buster never forgot how important it was to build a solid team.
He said he hired his staff based on whether or not they were any good at baseball, and he was only partly joking.
All of Fatty’s best men came over to work for him, and he formed a solid, loyal wolf pack that became the finest small production team in Hollywood.
Buster was on contract to make eight short comedies a year, and ended up making nineteen in two and a half years.
But before that Buster spent eight years as the most perfect filmmaker in Hollywood.
If you think that’s a big claim, take out twenty minutes to watch One Week, the first solo comedy Buster released.
It's the story of a pair of newlyweds who get a house as a wedding present.
But Buster's wife's rejected ex-suitor is so jealous of Buster for having married the woman he loved that out of spite he changes the numbers on the crates that contain the building materials so that they dont match the “do it yourself” instructions.
A lot of this has to do with Buster's combination of high IQ, high technical competence, high mechanical ability and low to non-existent ability to read.
Some of the worst silent-movie comedies are unwatchable because they rely too much on subtitles, both to develop the story and to get cheap laughs.
He didn't think he was a poet like Chaplin, and he didnt want you to love him the way Fatty obviously did.
Buster's standard character is curious, inquisitive, serious-minded and has a passion for gadgets.
In one of his most iconic comedies, Cops he plays a young man who is trying to make it in business so he can win the hand of the girl he wants to marry.
What I can say is that the second half of the movie involves the Los Angeles Police Department's annual parade.
He accidentally drives a horse-drawn wagon into the middle of the parade and passes by the main reviewing stand just as an anarchist on a rooftop lights a bomb and throws it down below.
It lands on the wagon right beside Buster just as he’s trying to light a cigarette.
He lights it off the bomb, which he absent-mindedly tosses away as though it were a match.
It's the distracted, dreamy carelessness of the philosopher who has more important things to think about than the everyday world around him.
He was a master of special effects, as you can see in his breathtaking 1924 feature Sherlock Junior, which is so impressive in some parts that youre too impressed to laugh.
When he was making Sherlock Junior, he took a fall and cracked his head on a railroad track.
He didn't stop in the middle of the take, he finished the scene, then took the rest of the day off because he had MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / FILM i a*:. ‘th i. af . a blinding headache.
Twelve years later he found out during a physical that hed fractured his neck, and came within a micromillimetre of getting killed that day.
In his last great feature film, Steamboat Bill, Junior , there is a famous gag where Buster is standing in the middle of a street during a hurricane when the front of a house falls on him.
The only reason he isn't crushed to death is that a window was open on the upper storey.
Some of his crew members threatened to quit if he went through with the stunt.
According to legend, the cameraman couldnt bear to watch, In real life and in the movie, Buster doesnt flinch.
I cant tell you what to watch if you're new to Buster Keaton because I dont really have any favourites.
Not bad for a guy who smoked three packs of Camels a day his entire life.
Buster Keaton at his weakest is still better than pretty much everybody else.
It’s only an hour long, and it's based on a stage play about a man who has to get married by seven oclock on his twenty-seventh birthday in order to inherit seven million dollars from his grandfather.
The premise is stupid, and the miracle of the movie is how Buster takes this idiotic source material and turns it into a genuinely epic comedy.
The climax of the movie features Buster getting chased through the streets of Los Angeles by hundreds, possibly thousands, of unmarried women who dont know whether they want to marry him for money or simply tear him to shreds.
You have to wonder at the imagination that could come up with a sequence like that.
Buster not only dreamed those dreams, he could put together movies that made them real.
If you need a hero, try looking for one who doesnt MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / FILM believe in heroes.
Buster Keaton has the most realistic, hard-headed view of life of any major filmmaker.
They're efficient, functional devices created to serve a specific purpose.
Buster dismissed the idea he was a genius, not out of false modesty, but because it was totally alien to his view of what he did.
He knew he was better than everybody else, and worked hard to make sure that he never had to explain the fact to anybody.
It’s the most convincing, realistic movie ever made about the Civil War, and shows how a little guy who got turned down by the army ended up as a war hero.
No bravado, no showing off, he just gets the job done, without ever realising how spectacular his results are, or caring very much.
IN—1i776 IM—1776 is an online magazine of philosophy, cultural, and sociopolitical analysis.
Our elites have stopped caring about what is good and what is noble and fully embraced sin and weakness clothed as virtue.
Trust in our institutions has almost fully collapsed, and yet, as those in power increasingly expose themselves as frauds and charlatans, in what is probably the last desperate attempt to protect their undeserved privileges, their control over our lives has reached unprecedented levels.
By giving a platform to, and attempting to bring together the most talented writers the anonymous and post-political scene has to offer, we hope to be able to provide the intellectual foundations for those practical solutions capable of forming the resistance our civilization depends on.
The only people who benefit From you eating vegetable oll are the shareholders of the companies who make It and big pharma, which gets to sell you copious “treatments” For the diseases it causes.
JUST SAY “NO” TO VEGETABLE OIL AND SAY “YES” TO A LIFE OF RENEWED HEALTH AND + VITALITY, A\\ ) he manor stunk of corruption.
The rough sound of snorting and clanging echoed from deeper in the manor and Lad stalked toward it.
Two hulking figures stoked the ovens and stirred filthy pots brimming with some heinous gruel.
Lad and Mutt sneaked past the gluttonous pig-men as they barked at each other in their underbitten dialect.
In the shadowy halls they made short work of a stooped and red-eyed gaoler and took his keys.
In the dark corridors under the manor he heard the beating of hammers and the rattle of chains.
Chained, beaten and emaciated, they hammered away in these brutal mines while gray devils pressed them with lash, boot, and threat of blade.
The furious sight of Mutt bounding over crags, crunching bones and rending flesh, scattered the slavers and sent them screaming.
His covered knuckles knocked teeth, wind, and senses from his loathsome foes.
And his short fighting blade slid past leather doublet and iron plate, found the flesh it sought and opened it like a gift.
And when they were free of their chains they took their hammers and picks to the red-eyed cowards who had lorded over them.
They cried out in furious triumph and Lad and Mutt joined them with their own hoots and barks.
But just as the men’s hearts began to swell with courage again, a shadow fell over them.
The brute held a cudgel in one massive fist and a black whip in the other.
He feared not the cudgel, nor the whip, nor the dark hearts of the wicked.
The slave master brought down his cudgel, but Lad rolled out of the way, through the brute’s legs.
Lad ducked and the massive weapon scattered stone and dust as it crashed into the cave wall.
The slaver raised his whip arm but Lad stood on the end of the lash, grinding it into the dirt.
He struck the brute in the back of the elbow with his buckler and the big arm went slack with the sound of crunching bone.
With their hammers, picks, and reserves of strength they broke the giant apart like the rocks of the mine.
One man looked at Lad’s horn and the glow that emanated from within it.
They followed Lad out of the mine and dealt with the pigmen in the kitchens.
They went out the front doors and the men staggered into the gloomy daylight.
Back in the manor they made their way up the sweeping staircase to the top floor.
As they crossed the landing they came to a long corridor and found their path choked with the Mayor's red-eyed ghouls.
They snarled and ran spotted tongues over rotten teeth and blistered lips.
Lad turned their hooks and blades against them, spilling their foul guts.
Mutt sent a panic through them, tearing hamstrings and breaking the necks of those who fell.
Eryk and the men came behind them, their tools doing mighty work in the Mayor's halls.
Lad kicked open the doors at the end of the hall and found a chilling and loathsome sight.
All along the walls of the large chamber were the village women, encased on display behind some crystalline prison.
All of the warmth _ of their love and virtue sup_ planted and mocked by cold crystal.
Blood erupted from the man’s mouth, eyes, and nose, and he fell dead where he stood.
Each man searched his own soul and a shadow of guilt fell upon them all.
We comforted ourselves with pretty lies as she tightened her noose around the village and the Heartsfire burned lower and lower.
She was comely, with long chestnut hair, and freckles that peppered her face.
In the Spring I bring her flowers and she makes them into garlands that she wears.
Lad nodded and together they left the gallery and walked into the Mayors bedchamber.
Lad threw open the wooden doors and parted the gowns and found a stone staircase spiraling down.
Amid the shadow and stench, they could hear children’s cries in the dark.
Above the din of the fight in the dungeon, or perhaps beneath it, he heard a womans voice.
Lad walked deeper into the darkness until all other sounds disappeared.
Her face was framed by long, black hair that fell around her full, naked breasts.
He looked back and saw the Mayor rising above him with the body of a giant serpent.
She screamed and struck at him with fangs the size of whaler’s hooks, her perfect face now a monstrous horror.
Lad threw up his arm just in time, his buckler halting the venomous fangs.
With his free hand he pulled his blade and stabbed her in her amber eye.
He tried to roll away but it caught him in the back, throwing him through the air.
He opened the end, casting valiant light and blinding the creature that was the Mayor.
The tendrils lashed the scales of the demon Mayor and filled her maw and lungs as she drew in air to scream.
From within and without the Heartsfire burned every black corner of her vile being until there was nothing left but smoldering bones and ash.
When the Mayor was destroyed her spell over the women was broken and they were freed from their crystalline cage.
And when the rain broke and the sun returned Lad and Mutt set out to leave.
He danced with all the young girls while the children played with Mutt.
And the Heartsfire burned so bright and strong it could be seen for miles.
I was still under the spell of the Sixties counterculture, still trying to live up to the Sixties “ideal” in some way.
I decided that, if I couldn't be the next Jack Kerouac, I would be an “underground” journalist, in the tradition of the Sixties underground press.
So I was always testing the limits at the New Times, trying to see how radical they would let me be.
And, since the New Times was a left-leaning, “alternative” paper, they let me get away with quite a lot.
The Eye was founded by a guy named Leonard Abrams in 1979, and mainly covered the art and avant-garde scene in downtown Manhattan.
In the 1980s, ‘The Eye was about as close as you could get to the Sixties underground.
At the East Village Eye, you wrote an amazing MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / INTERVIEW NOOR BIN LADIN In conversation with The MAN'S WORLD Latreview: Richard Poe investigative story about the MOVE bombing in Philadelphia.
Not only was the reporting brilliant, your piece was also eerily prescient.
They had done a trial run in 1985, dropping explosive charges onto a house in North Philadelphia, from a helicopter.
The explosives started a fire that destroyed not only the MOVE house, but two city blocks and 61 homes in the surrounding neighborhood.
MOVE members trying to flee the burning house were forced back inside by automatic gunfire.
It turned out the FBI was deeply involved in setting up the MOVE bombing, even providing the explosives.
By designating MOVE a ‘terrorist’ organization, the feds had stripped them of all rights, purportedly making them legitimate targets for counterinsurgency strikes.
That sounds so much like the fake insurgency of January 6, where the government planted pseudo-insurgents among the protesters to commit acts of violence.
The concluding paragraph of your East Village Eye story was prophetic and chilling.
Some say the big event is already on us, that the cabal is preparing the final crackdown, to take our freedom.
I believe all their efforts will fail, as people are finally waking up.
But it’s also possible there may be a false awakening, as there was in the Seventies.
What happened in the Seventies is they created an illusion that a great cleansing was occurring.
We had the Church Committee, the Rockefeller Commission, the Nedzi Committee, the Pike Committee, all these government committees supposedly investigating the alphabet agencies.
Every day brought new revelations about the FBI and the CIA, and their alleged crimes against the American people.
We learned about the MKUltra mind control program, the LSD experiments on unwitting victims, CIA recruitment of journalists and clergymen.
We learned about COINTELPRO, an FBI program which targeted political dissidents, using surveillance, infiltration, disruption, assassination, and black propaganda, that is, smearing people with the use of forged evidence and fake stories planted in the media.
In 1979, the House Select Committee on Assassinations officially determined that Oswald most likely did not act alone.
So all these revelations came pouring out of these government committees and people were just overwhelmed.
But it gave Americans the vague impression that responsible people were on the case, looking into things, that a new age of openness had dawned, and reform was in the air.
Today, the alphabet agencies are far more pervasive and destructive in our lives than they ever were in the past.
I had become a business writer and a senior editor for SUCCESS magazine.
SUCCESS sent me to Russia several times to report on the rise of free enterprise there.
So I had pretty good contacts and knowledge of the business scene in Yeltsin's Russia, and I ended up writing a book for McGraw-Hill called, How to Profit from the Coming Russian Boom, published in 1993.
George Soros had turned down my request for an interview, but he allowed me to interview some of his people who were working in Russia, and I wrote very positively about Soros and all his good work helping the Russians convert to a free-market economy.
What I didn't know at the time is that Soros and others were lining their own pockets, taking ruthless advantage of Russias economic crisis to buy up state properties cheaply, thus corrupting the privatization process for their own gain.
In 2004, I got a call from Chris Ruddy at NewsMax, asking me to do an exposé of Soros for the cover of NewsMax magazine.
And the issue with Soros was that he was making a lot of inflammatory statements to the effect that he was going to doa “regime change” against President Bush, and that he intended to do in America what he had done in other countries.
I ended up writing a cover story for NewsMax called, “George Soross Coup, in which I exposed Soross history with color revolutions, and argued that employing such methods in the United States posed a threat to our democracy.
I believe this may have been the first detailed exposé of Soros’s color revolutions in an American publication.
A UK writer, Neil Clark, had previously written on this subject in a 2003 article in The New Statesman.
Anyway, the article immediately got me on The O'Reilly Factor, and David Brock from Media Matters for America wrote an open letter to Bill O'Reilly and Roger Ailes demanding equal time to defend Soros.
The chairman of NewsMax Media at the time was a guy named Lord William Rees-Mogg.
As a journalist, Lord Rees-Mogg helped create the myth that Soros singlehandedly broke the Bank of England.
In fact, Soros had a lot of help from major financial institutions, and the whole operation appears to have been sanctioned by the British establishment.
Rees-Mogg also went to great lengths to build up Soros’s reputation as a financial guru.
I can't go into all of it here, but suffice it to say that Lord Rees-Mogg was a major promoter of Soros, and he also happened to serve as chairman of MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / INTERVIEW + ‘, KY NewsMax Media, Inc. from 20002006.
So Chris and an associate of his, the late Nick Simunek, had basically gone behind Rees-Mogg’s back to assign me this story.
Rees-Mogg apparently wasn't even aware of the story until after it was published.
Now, at that point, I felt I was onto a pretty big story with Soros, and I didn't want to stop, so I had to find another outlet.
I had previously worked for David Horowitz as editor of his news site FrontPageMag. com in 2000-2002.
Unfortunately, the “Puppetmaster” was partly responsible for getting Glenn kicked off Fox News.
The role of Lord Rees-Mogg in helping to “create” George Soros is something very few people know about.
I highly recommend your article on that subject, “How the British Invented George Soros,’ posted on LewRockwell.com.
You are writing a whole series of articles now on LewRockwell.com, exploring the theme of British influence in US affairs, and unfortunately much of that influence seems to be quite MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / INTERVIEW negative.
So many people think of the UK as an obedient satellite of the United States, but you seem to be saying it’s the other way around.
A lot of our history with Britain has been suppressed, and I think it needs to be restored, for our own good.
If you talk to an educated person from India or Ireland, they can recite by heart a litany of British misdeeds against their country, off the tops of their heads.
It enables them to have good relations with Britain today, because they can negotiate realistically, with an accurate understanding of how the British system works, how the British think, and how to avoid problems with them.
We have forgotten huge portions of our past experience with the British Empire.
The most important thing to know is that globalism is a British invention.
British elites created it, and, to this day, British elites are the world’s leading promoters of it.
Americans, on the other hand, have traditionally disliked globalism, and have periodically rebelled against it quite forcefully, as, for instance, when the United States Senate rejected the League of Nations in 1919, or, more recently, when Pres220 ident Trump put forth his America First policy.
The part we need to understand better is that, when we, as Americans, oppose globalist policies, the British establishment takes that very personally.
They take it as a threat to their vital interests, and they respond accordingly.
Thus, when Trump announced that he was running for president on an America First policy, the British establishment not only opposed him, but took covert action against him.
The British eavesdropping agency GCHQ actually boasts of being the initiator of the so-called Russiagate fiasco, according to an April 13, 2017 article in The Guardian.
The agency claims it discovered “interactions” between the Trump campaign and Russian intelligence in “late 2015, then passed on this “material” to then-CIA chief John Brennan in the summer of 2016.
This is just one example of the kind of influence the British can exert over United States affairs when they believe their vital interests are threatened.
In your latest article, “How the British Caused the American Civil War,’ you reveal that the British continued to exert economic control over the United States even after the Revolution.
Immediately after signing the 1783 peace treaty ending the Revolutionary War, the British started dumping huge quantities of cheap manufactured goods on the United States market, at prices lower than their English ones, and often below cost.
Americas fledgling manufacturers could not meet those prices and went under.
This led to a catastrophic collapse of the United States economy, an armed rebellion in Massachusetts, and threats of secession from many states.
By this means, the British demonstrated that they had both the will and the power to continue enforcing their colonial monopoly on manufacturing in America.
Prior to the Revolution, manufacturing was forbidden in the Thirteen Colonies.
Our Founding Fathers created the Constitution specifically in response to this British trade war.
We needed a new federal government which could retaliate by imposing tariffs.
Under the existing Articles of Confederation, the national government had no such power.
To punctuate the point, George Washington wore a suit of homespun cloth to his inauguration—an item that would have been illegal and subject to seizure under British rule.
In the years ahead, the British continued using various financial and economic maneuvers to bring the rebellious Americans to heel, all of it culminating in the American Civil War.
Over time, the British had managed to re-establish a colonial economy in the South, based on the cotton trade.
The South exported 70 percent of its cotton to England, and purchased British manufactures in return.
The North tried to replace England as the South’s leading trade partner by building its own textile mills and imposing tariffs on foreign trade.
They secretly encouraged the South to secede, promising diplomatic and even military support, if necessary.
While researching that article, I discovered that British strategists actually planned to split the United States into four or more pieces, some of which would be shared with France.
I was also fascinated to discover a January 3, 1860 article from the London Morning Post calling for the reestablishment of British rule over America, in the event that North and South should separate.
The Morning Post was widely known to be a mouthpiece for Lord Palmerston, Britain's Prime Minister at the time.
But I can say there have been many secession movements in America, starting almost immediately after the Revolution, and continuing right up through the Civil War, and the British always seem to be involved, one way or another.
Realistically, it’s in Britain's interest to split up the United States, to make us easier to handle, easier to manipulate.
So I wouldn't be surprised if today's “national divorce’ movement might have some British influence behind it, as well as other sorts of foreign influence perhaps.
But my research indicates that there has never been a serious secession movement in America that did not involve foreign influence, to some extent.
You mentioned that the Seventies brought false hope, the illusion that things were being cleaned up following the exposure of government misdeeds.
I know what my mission is, because life has never allowed me to do anything else.
Everything I’ve experienced, everything I’ve learned has prepared me to do one certain thing, which seems to be solving riddles, solving mysteries, unraveling the Gordian Knot.
And once the knot is unraveled, once the mystery is solved, the solution has to be broken down and explained to people in simple terms.
After 63 years on this earth, this appears to be the one set of skills that I've managed to master.
I just need to focus on my task, to keep writing and researching as long as I can, until someone or something stops me.
And, if the task is worth doing, it doesn't matter if someone stops me.
MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / INTERVIEW ans first companion was the son of the wolf, raised to be such during the Pleistocene and welcomed to his hearth.
In man’s constant war with his surroundings, the dog was first a hunting partner and guardian.
Then, as that war deepened to include war against himself, the dog became a fellow warrior too.
One of the first recorded instances of the use of dogs in war was in a seventh-century BC battle between the Magnesians and the Ephesians.
The Magnesian mounted warriors were accompanied by a dog and a spearman.
In this war the Keres took the life of a Magnesian horseman by the name of Hippaemon, who was buried with his horse, his spearman, and his dog Lethargos, as stated in his epitaph.
Also, in the times of the Greeks, a dog followed his master into the fray at Marathon against the Persians, an act commemorated in the now lost mural of the Stoa Poikile.
While the horse carried us into battle, the Dog stayed at our side if need be until death.
In the age of exploration and conquest that followed the voyages of Columbus, the famed Spanish Conquistadors fought to make a foothold in America against insurmountable odds.
These men came from a Spain freshly united after a centuries-long successful Reconquista — hardened, seasoned warriors unlike any in the world at the time.
These veterans brought with them veteran companions, Alanos and Mastiffs who had fought with them in Spain against the moors.
Born to a line of war dogs, he MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / SHORTS MAN AND DOG by DON VIRREY was whelped in the Americas as a warrior dog for none other than Juan Ponce de Leon.
Ponce de Leon began his career of conquest for Spain in 1508 when he landed on the island of Puerto Rico.
By 1511 Becerrillo appears in the record for the first time, already battle-hardened and sporting scars.
Said to be worth fifty men, he was paid a soldier's wage and awarded comfort befitting his prowess.
He was the pride of his master and caretakers like Sancho de Aragon, and was known to tear through thirty-plus enemies at a time.
Becerillo would meet his end by a poisoned arrow in 1514 during the Spanish-Taino War of 1513-18.
While attempting to rescue his caretaker Aragon from a band of Caribs, who attacked the Spanish by surprise, he swam out from shore behind their canoes, but was wounded by a poison arrow.
Although the men that fought beside him tried to save his life, he died.
The Spaniards buried him in an unmarked grave so his memory could keep haunting the Indians, and it is said that he was mourned by the men more than any other soldier lost that day.
His master Ponce de Leon would meet a similar fate at the hands of the Indians’ poison arrows, not long after.
Becerrillo’s seed would go on to conquer the rest of the Americas alongside the men of Spain.
Known to have inherited his father’s fighting skill and ferocity, he gained the respect of the men with whom he served, was paid as an archer in the ranks, and wore a gold collar given to him by Balboa himself.
Of the same noble blood as Becerillo was Nemo, a war dog who served with the Air Force in Vietnam.
In 1966, at the peak of the ground war, Nemo and his master Robert Thorneburg encountered the Vietcong face first, near Tan Son Nhut Airbase.
Although the Vietcong were usually able to move through the jungle silently and unbeknownst to the America GIs, they could not escape the keen noses of their dogs, whose barks must have saved countless lives.
This is how Thorneburg and Nemo stumbled on a group of hidden Vietcong while on patrol.
Nemo was shot in the face and the bullet took away his right eye, yet he was able to defend his master until help arrived.
Owing to his wounds, Nemo was retired from service at the front but continued to serve until the end of his life, as a recruitment dog at Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas.
They are all based on books, but actually the film versions are the superior ones.
The first two films are magical films at base, dealing with providence, destiny and dreams on the field.
The third tries to make the first two disappear, explaining in cold detail how baseball really works.
Nothing is ever quite the same once it's been explained as a series of causes and effects, least of all magic.
In The Natural, Roy Hobbs is given a second chance at fulfilling his life's dream to play in the big leagues when lightning strikes a tree on his property and he carves the remains down into a baseball bat.
Roy Hobbs is bribed, threatened, blackmailed, and suffers every other attempt to dishonor a man.
Ray Kinsella is called crazy, ostracized from his community, and almost loses his farm and family.
Ray, after winning the pennant and shattering the lights in the stadium with a walkoff homerun, hangs up his jersey when he learns that he is a father.
The film ends as he plays catch with his son, just as it began with young Ray on the same farm playing catch MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / SHORTS with his father.
Having spurned his father’s wishes for him to be a ballplayer as a young man, he is given the chance to play catch with his dad one more time, as a reward for following the voice and believing in something greater than himself.
Manhood and its decline in modernity is a cornerstone of the dissident right.
As a young boy, Royss talent is obvious, but his father, a good man, instills in him that gifts are not enough.
They train for hours and hours and not once does Roy seem bitter or angry that his father spends so much time with him to hone his skill.
His father dies of a heart attack and we see Roy mourn him, the first great loss on his heros journey.
This loss only strengthens his resolve and during a storm, the tree his father died under is split by lightning and Roy carves a baseball bat, Wonderboy -— his very own Excalibur.
He is even on the way to becoming a good father, as he and his girlfriend, Iris, spend a night together before Roy departs for a tryout with the Cubs.
He's dismissed as too old to be a rookie, but gets his shot and turns the team around, performing feats unimaginable for even younger, more athletic men.
The Silver bullet that’s been lodged in his stomach for sixteen years comes loose and sends Roy to the hospital.
The team loses the next few games and the last game of the season is their only shot at the playoffs.
Ina feat of strength, in his last at bat, he sends a homerun through the stadium lights.
Having found his holy grail, he retires from the game and returns to his farm to play catch with his son, continuing the tradition of his father and all those fathers before them.
Ray Kinsella is a product of the 1960s or at least the 1960s that were sold the public.
He was a hippy who read banned books and determined never to be like his father, an old man obsessed with the game.
Hes not a bad father by any stretch, but the first two failures can be said to keep him from being a great father to his young daughter.
Throughout the movie, he keeps referring to his father and the regret he has with how things ended between the two of them.
Ray hears a voice in his cornfield, telling him to build a baseball field for Shoeless Joe Jackson.
Compelled by the mystery and the nagging thought that he has grown up to become just like his father in spite of his best efforts, Ray builds the field, using up his savings and plowing over some of his richest farm land.
Shoeless Joe Jackson then appears one night, walking through a wall of corn at the edge of the outfield and the two bond over their love of the game.
Ray is then told to find a reclusive author whos lost his love of writing and a former ball player who never got his shot in the majors.
Terrence, the writer, is invited to see the other side and because of Ray, feels the creative spark and love for his fellow man that brought out his gifts years before.
Archie, the former right fielder turned doctor, gets his shot to bat against the greats of his time.
But when duty calls, he abandons that dream to save Ray’s daughter's life.
For his efforts, his faith, and the risks he has taken, Ray is rewarded with a gift he swore he never wanted; to be able to play catch with his dad again.
These films bring men to tears because we can no longer play catch with our fathers and because we fear we might not be righteous enough to stay principled in the face of power, corruption, vice, and all other temptations that weaken men.
These films are magical because they inspire belief in a miracles, redemption and an uncynical world.
It is the story of old men sitting in a room, debating ballplayers’ physical appearance, dating habits, and other apparently meaningless intangibles.
Wealth, greed, ignorance, and old white men are the cause of Billy Beane’ problems.
Hes a bitter former ballplayer who was told that he could be the best there ever was.
The pressure of such expectations broke him and eventually he became the general manager of the Oakland Athletics, a plucky team of misfits who rely on good scouting to keep their team competitive.
Only through the power of analytics are the As able to build a roster that can beat the best teams in baseball.
On-base percentage wins games and an obsession with Sabermetrics thrusts the As to the playoffs in a game that they werent supposed to win.
Nerds behind computers calculate percentages and the effort, talent, and skill of the men on the field become ones and zeroes in a simulation.
When a past-his-prime player is traded to the As for nothing, he tries to bring that spark of heroism to the team, only to be told that he’s washed up and if he wants to play, he needs to play their way.
Analytics removed the soul from baseball and yet we expect the victories still to mean something.
Today's game looks like a machine, performing inputs and creating outputs.
The pitching machine throws a ball that the hitting machine can only hit % to 1/3 of the time.
The base stealing machines no longer steal bases because base stealing is analytically irrelevant.
The umpires are monitored by machines and if their call is wrong, their authority is overturned.
The worst part is, this thinking wins, so it will keep being the standard until something else comes along.
Heroism can be explained away with rationality, so heroes cant exist in this world.
Today a man is nothing more than an economic unit, the same as a woman, who can be replaced in the system like a screw or washer in the machine once its worn itself out or become obsolete.
They are taught to be Ray Kinsella, and spurn their fathers, because they are old and have sinned and are obsolete.
Society would see them be a jack of no trade, a master of nothing, because self-sufficiency is inefficient.
Better men than I have written much longer, more profound works on declining birthrates in exchange for extended adolescence.
Everything sucks because the nerds took over and explained away the things they never could accomplish on their own.
I say we call our fathers if we're lucky enough to still have them and I say we play catch with our sons.
We show them Field of Dreams and the Natural and throw Moneyball in the trash.
And when those boys grow up and it’s their time at bat, a hero might knock the cover off the ball.
MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / SHORTS THE FAISAL MARZIPAN rchitecture and interior design matter; just how much they matter, though, very few are likely to appreciate.
Just ask any European urbanite what it’s like to live in a mid-century brutalist building, designed to be a “machine for living in’, as Le Courbusier famously put it.
Architecture is a reflection of a unique place, and, more importantly, the people that inhabit it.
The English built castles of stone and mortar, the peoples of the ancient Near-East erected cities of mudbrick, and certain Native American tribes carved intricate abodes into the sides of cliffs; these are direct representations of the peoples of particular locations and the materials they had available.
Even in the wake of the industrial revolution—when masses of raw materials became available for worldwide megalithic construction—structures did not immediately take on an international aesthetic.
This remained largely true until the arrival of “universal” ideas of governance and habitation.
Universalising architecture and design went hand in hand with these ideas, erecting pillars of glass and steel; identical in Beijing, London, or wherever their foundations lay.
It's no surprise that within and around these obelisks of modernity, culture is equally universal; it’s easier than ever to find a panini in Tokyo or tacos in Copenhagen.
MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / SHORTS BREAK OUT OF THE GLASS CUBE by ANTHONY BAVARIA Most probably see this as a good thing, but something very remarkable is being erased.
Today, nothing is safe, least of all a people's own identity and history.
A few examples are Daniel Libeskind'’s additions to Canadas Royal Ontario Museum and the Museum of Military History in Dresden, Germany; as well as Zaha Hadid's update on St.
Antony's College in the United Kingdom and the Port Authority building in Antwerp, Belgium.
It’s a clash of old-meetsnew, and the high priests of the architectural community are bowing down and praying to these newly constructed golden calves.
However, I’m willing to bet that the average layman might mistake these tasteful additions for an alien invasion.
Some of them appear, quite literally, as if the building is being subsumed or harvested by a galactic entity.
While positive comments and likes for social media postings about this new architectural craze might imply widespread admiration, other cultural trends suggest otherwise.
Regardless of whether or not you keep up with the latest developments in architecture, it’s worth understanding what's happening to our culture — what's being done to it and what that means, and that obviously includes the spaces were supposed to live and work in.
If you can, you should try to avoid being sucked up into this dehumanisation machine.
If youre considering buying a place, make the extra effort to get something older and fix it up yourself.
Besides, newbuild condominiums are usually terribly constructed and have time limits baked into the construction.
As much as we might like to roll our eyes about the explosion of local breweries and the bearded douchebags who've made it happen, these people are at least repurposing long-neglected buildings.
Frequent places like this as well as your local pub in lieu of some edgy, modernistic culture hole.
One good thing is that the architectural oligarchs of modernity are less and less bothered with the environments of where normal people live.
Firstly, they're usually not state-owned, and even if they are, theyre not nationally valuable enough to be targeted for defacement.
Locals and tourists alike can hopefully continue to enjoy normal living situations, unencumbered by the ever-changing tide of modernism.
After all, since the start of this pandemic, you've know something was wrong.
As time has progressed, you've only become more awake to the manipulation of the pieces, moved by hidden actors on the global pandemic chess board.
Either way, you know that the propagandised narrative makes no sense; the why is a matter of secondary importance at this stage.
Unfortunately, as you've probably realised by now, your being awake to it all is not stopping it from happening.
You've saved yourself and if youre lucky, maybe a couple of your close friends and family.
Yes, the same person who creates an level frustration within us, who mocks us as “conspiracy theorists” and would be the first to shop us to the authorities if they were asked to.
This is the person we must win over and have standing alongside us if we are to finally bring Leviathan down.
First, try to understand this situation from the viewpoint of the normie.
You are comfortable among others who feel the same, patting one another on the back.
Now imagine the appearance of someone who wants to strike at the heart of all you hold dear.
You must set up a counter-narrative and leave seeds of truth for them to ‘stumble’ across along the way.
You will need to create an entire world view that they feel comfortable accepting, when the time is right.
As much as we may despise the normie, as much as they may frustrate us, we are playing a numbers game.
Most of all, show them just how fulfilling and rewarding it is living your world view.
The truth is, we can't just interact with these people, by which I mean “just go through the motions”; we must engage with them and, ultimately, win them over.
Because the alternative the success of the global pandemic plan will be terrible for all of us.
BMW released the E39 5 Series in 1995, and production ran until 2003, with a facelift in 2001 smartening up the car’s already pin-sharp looks.
Spend some time with any of these vehicles and you ll know what Agent Smith was talking about.
Dwell on this and you'll start to wonder why such vehicles no longer exist, and if youre like me, you ll start to think about the civilizational implications.
Every line is straight, the flaring around its arches is subtle, and only the slightest beveling takes the edge off its right angles.
Head on, even the top-of-the-range M5 considered by many to be the greatest performance sedan ever built doesnt snarl like its try-hard modern equivalents, and it doesnt sport a — gaping maw of a grille like modern BMWs do.
Switchgear is minimalistic and rugged, an errant knee or elbow wont snap or break anything, and the clunk of its doors makes the equivalent Audi or Mercedes-Benz feel like they were built from Chinese tin.
Only on higher-end models will you find any screens or digital displays, and honestly, these features let the more premium models down.
How these cars drive largely depends on which of the dozen or so engine options you go for.
Smaller 2-litre petrol and diesel units are lacking in power, but still have six cylinders, so glide along with a hum of Germanic superiority.
Straight-line pulls in larger-displacement diesels are endlessly satisfying, and the bigger straightsix petrols sing at high RPMs.
Manuals are geared longer than you may ex239 MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / CARS pect, and dont need to be trashed to extract enough power to have fun.
Not having complete control over shifting is unacceptable to me, and spending some extra time tracking down one of these manuals is highly advised.
Handling across the range is sloppier than on modern premium sedans, but the body roll simply adds another dimension to cornering, one lost two decades later, now that every premium vehicle has had its character hardened and stiffened out.
A few hours behind the wheel and chaining together corners becomes an art form, and the E39 becomes a lithe and supple dancer.
What's radicalizing is that when BMW introduced a new 5 Series in 2004, the Munich manufacturer could have repeated or improved the same winning formula, but chose not to.
Japanese designer Joji Nagashima was given the boot and replaced by the American Chris Bangle, a fan of “deconstructivism” inspired by the relentlessly ugly architecture of Frank Gehry.
Bangle deconstructed the hell out of the 5 Series and BMW vomited out the swollen, curvy, and plasticky E60.
Every 5 Series Sbolecom sr-mexoy ona bole Cor-lmm-veCe mi elaem @)evberweeny BMW's main market, the 5 Series of today is tailored to the crass, bugman tastes of Beijing businessmen.
Interiors became flimsy and cheap, screens replaced dials, and engines became overengineered, unreliable, and prohibitive for users to maintain by themselves.
I bought a dirt cheap E39 525D last year, and coming from owning more modern BMWs, I was blown away.
Everything I needed to do, I could do in my driveway with hand tools and YouTube videos.
When I wanted to remove the pozzed emissions tech, I simply pulled out the relevant pipes, blanked up the holes, and started the car.
The E39 has no longhouse technology to screech and bark at its owner for committing such environmental sins, and wont scold you with alarms and chimes to bring it to a dealer for routine maintenance.
As PLUS ULTRA wrote in this fine magazine, “Big Brother wants to put you into a two-and-a-half-ton RC car, remote-controlled by a government-commissioned call center in Calcutta” The E39 owner rejects this cucked future and chooses timeless aesthetics, precision engineering, and build quality that will endure long after his neighbor's Tesla disintegrates around him.
The E39 represents a high water mark for BMW, and the decline that followed has echoes throughout our civilization.
Roads and bridges are crumbling while our best and brightest minds move imaginary money and design smartphone wanking apps.
We tear down monuments to martial heroes and replace them with sculptures of vaginas.
On January 21, 2015, a handful of dirty, unshaven, and battle-weary Ukrainian soldiers sang the song for the last time as they unloaded their Kalashnikovs at the attacking enemy.
The War in Donbas, sometimes called the Russo-Ukrainian War, began in 2014 following several months of unrest.
The loss of Crimea to the Russian Federation, along with the Euromaidan riots in Kiev that removed President Viktor Yanukovych, created civil war conditions in Ukraine.
On one side stood the supporters of Ukraine's full integration into the European Union.
Here, left-wing and right-wing liberals, centrists, anarchists, social democratic progressives, and hard-right nationalists linked arms and loaded 5.45x39mm rounds into magazines to remove endemic corruption from their country and protect against Russian aggression.
On the other side, supporters of Yanukovych, communists, Cossacks, regionalists, and pro-Russian forces organized themselves to defeat Kievan and EU imperialism.
Both sides called the other “fascist, a term which still has some potency for the grandsons and great-grandsons of the Great Patriotic War.
Before long, private armies owned by billionaires on both sides were trading shots all across the country.
Such archeo-futurism, where Ukrainian oligarchs mimicked the Roman Senators of the Old Republic by raising their own warbands, gave way to fully mobilized and modern battalions.
Patriots, political soldiers, and mercenaries lined up and got MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / REAL LIFE their orders.
Young barbarians like “Woland,’ author of the memoir Valhalla-Express, volunteered for fearsome Ukrainian units like the Azov Battalion and the Ukrainian Volunteer Corps, both of which began as paramilitaries for far-right political parties.
These two men found companions and compatriots from the four corners of the globe.
This is how a civil war became a new crusade pitting competing nationalist visions against one another.
By the autumn of 2014, much of the fighting was concentrated in the far-eastern provinces of Ukraine where the DPR and LPR had been declared.
Here, a plurality if not an outright majority of the population is ethnically Russian and/or speaks Russian as their first language.
Separatism runs deep in the Donbas region, and more importantly, Moscow considers the Don River basin integral to its current mission to reaffirm Russias status as a great power.
While the DPR and LPR militias focused on capturing strategic towns and vital infrastructure like rail hubs and airports, their Ukrainian opponents concentrated on defense and well as expulsion.
Donetsk, a city with almost one million people, awaited as a prize for both.
The crown jewel of the diadem was the Sergei Prokofiev International Airport.
The international airport is located approximately five kilometers from the urban core of Donetsk, while two smaller hamlets, Opytne and Pisky, are situated much nearer at hand.
Here, the “cyborgs” would be born and baptized in blood to the wonderful music of machine gun fire and artillery shells.
The Ukrainians responded to this ultimatum by sending in an airborne task force complete with attack helicopters and planes and troops from crack airmobile regiments.
Overwhelming Ukrainian firepower retook the airport, and while the Vostok men continued to harass and engage in skirmishes, the airport was comfortably in Kiev’s hands by May 27.
It is believed that fifty separatist fighters died in the battle, including Chechen, Russian, and international volunteers.
Flush with victory, the Ukrainians undertook a major offensive in July 2014.
The offensive was spearheaded by Colonel Mykhailo Zabrodski and his 95th Air Assault Brigade.
Before returning to their base at Kramatorsk, the 95th managed not only to win a string of victories, but also to change the entire momentum of the war up to that point.
Kiev looked on the verge of an all-out victory in the summer of 2014, as the DPR and LPR forces were reduced to defending ever-dwindling pockets near the Russian border.
But Moscow couldnt let its client states disappear, so, that summer, between 6,500 and 10,000 Russian troops crossed the border and entered the field of fire.
Moscow still denies this, and one must always be wary of reports coming from the Atlantic Council and other auxiliaries of the American foreign policy Leviathan.
Makiyivka & eanke o Novocherkassk (P41 ~*~ ™ $ A Brief History of the Battles of the Donetsk Airport’ further highlights that the goal of attacking the Donetsk was to both centralize the Ukrainian defenders in one place and to render the airport unusable regardless of the battle’s outcome.
And what a battle it turned out to be—the Second Battle of the Donetsk Airport lasted from September 28, 2014 until January 21, 2015.
The siege earned the sobriquet “Little Stalingrad’ owing to its viciousness, level of destruction, and its mythologizing.
Although they earned their own memorial day and celebrations throughout Ukraine, the “cyborgs’ came into the world as mere men and left it in the same way.
The survivors, men like paratrooper Oleksandr Mashonkin, showed extraordinary courage in extraordinary circumstances, and yet remain ordinary men.
At the start of siege on September 28, 2014, the Donetsk airport was defended by a motley assortment of Ukrainian regulars, volunteers, and militiamen.
The defending units included the 93rd Mechanized Brigade and battalions of the Ukrainian Volunteer Corps.
In case you haven't noticed, there isn’t just a single kind of human life.
Later reinforcements came from the 79th Airborne Brigade, 80th Airborne Brigade, the Dnipro Regiment, and the 95th Airborne Brigade, as well as elements from the 93d Mechanized Brigade and 3d Spetsnaz Regiment.
Some reports claim that the infamous Azov Battalion took part in the battle as well, but these reports cannot be confirmed.
But, if true, then there is something bitterly humorous about the fact that the men of Azov, as well as the men of the Volunteer Corps, whom polite society in both Kiev and the West deem as “Nazi scum,’ displayed more valor and heroism than all the world’s NGOs and Humanities departments combined.
NATO and the EU may refuse to train with Ukraine's “fascist” paramilitaries, but they will gladly let them die in the name of countering Vladimir Putin.
Facing the “cyborgs” were equally tough and dedicated warriors of the Vostok, Somalia, and Sparta battalions.
The Sparta Battalion, a 1,000-man special forces battalion, was at that time led by the legendary commander Arsen Pavlov, aka “Motorola, a Russian-born ethnic Komi who participated in the counter-protests against Euromaidan.
As for the Somalia Battalion, their equally feared commander, Mikhail “Givi” Tolstykh, is now best known for a video featuring him harassing and terrorizing captured Ukrainian soldiers.
These battalions included battle-hardened veterans of the Second Chechen War, as well as former members of the Ukrainian Army.
The battle was equal in terms MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / REAL LIFE Fighting at Donetsk airport.
The DPR/LPR forces also successfully used their control of the city of Donetsk, specifically the city's high-rise apartment buildings, to spot and call for artillery strikes on the airport.
Throughout October and November 2014, DPR/LPR forces conducted daily assaults on the airport to wear down the defenders.
The cold took its toll too, as the average temperature dropped from 45 degrees Fahrenheit in October to 36 and 39 degrees in November and December.
The constant shelling also knocked out the power and water to the airport, thus forcing the defenders to rely on their narrow supply lines back to Pisky.
The DPR force, possibly with the help of Russian special forces, forced the Ukrainian defenders to retreat to the newest terminal in the airport, their last defensible position.
Amazingly, the defenders did not retreat to the new terminal until December 5.
More shelling barrages and penetrating attacks lasted until January 12, when the airports air traffic control tower collapsed.
The DPR hoped to end the siege by issuing an ultimatum on January 13, 2015.
The ultimatum demanded that the Ukrainian defenders leave the airport that evening.
The Ukrainians defied the ultimatum, and, on January 17, a last-ditch counterattack was launched against the DPR soldiers by the airport’s defenders as well as reinforcements from the surrounding villages.
GROUND LEVEL VIEW OF iat ON ll Saas As salads O Nick Pat on Wals sh nicr Inte OwTes ole 1.0a ch —AMANPOUR The counterattack surprised the separatists and allowed the Ukrainians to evacuate many of their dead and wounded.
Eventually, after losing the first floor, the Ukrainians hunkered down on the airport's second floor and resolved to fight to the end.
On January 21, 2015, the last of the Ukrainian defenders either died, fled in small groups to Ukrainian-controlled villages, or were captured by DPR forces.
The Second Battle of the Donetsk Airport was a resounding victory for the anti-Kiev movement.
The War in Donbas is a frozen conflict interspersed with artillery duels and occasional raids across the trench lines.
War fever now seems to have gripped Washington, D.C., with even nominally conservative senators from ruby red states like Mississippi suggesting that America should use its nuclear arsenal to protect the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Hubris has struck again, even despite the recent embarrassment in Afghanistan.
Also, the war showed the expertise of Russian logistics, as most of the supposedly identified Russian units in the conflict came from as far away as Vladivostok.
Most troubling of all, unlike the American military, which has been bogged down in “woke” idiocy and useless COIN strategy games, many soldiers in the Russian military have experience in exactly the type of warfare that would occur if the United States and Russia began a shooting war over Ukraine.
But all the politicking and geostrategy talk should not overshadow why the “cyborgs” of Donetsk airport are so revered in their country.
These men withstood hunger, the cold, and the threat of death for over two hundred days.
The story of Ukraine's “cyborgs” is an ancient epic transferred to the age of smartphones.
Like the heroes of Sparta and Athens, these warriors proved their worth to their ancestors and to those who will come after them.
They and their opponents proved that the bear cult of the berserker can still be found in modern European men.
Sometimes all that is needed is the right moment, the right cause, or the right airport to uncover the glory that can lurk with the hearts of simple men.
And there in the aftermath o} mo || Mo) mm date hme (-t-h a aU lead lola ize lave lina. probable suffering, | first met my wife.
Death, * after all, was the new condition of + our age, and there was no alterwe 44 native but to find contentment in 4 ™ its presence.
The glass was decorated in a mosaic of reds and yellows and blues, but the religious scene it once depicted was unrecognizable, much like the dead around us who were so smashed and bloodied you couldnt tell who was who, only that they had once been something else, perhaps even beautiful.
My wife though, this woman who I dragged from the debris, was still in good condition, considering.
She had been pretty, near gorgeous, you could tell, when she was living, and was still pretty now, once you got used to the idea that her heart and brain had stopped working.
Her only physical fault, if you could call it a fault, was that her ribcage had been crushed by a cinderblock and her whole upper-body was now sunken and flat like a pillow removed of its stuffing.
Perhaps, out of all the bodies before us, the woman I had chosen as my wife, had been this exact mans daughter, but I didn't think so.
He began frantically digging through the stone and metal carcass of the building that had once stood across the street.
He pulled from the wreackage one corpse after another, which he tossed aside because they were not his daughters.
He stacked one on top of the other, whole bodies, discrete limbs, torsos, their shredded clothes which made a kind of grout between their burnt skin.
I felt sorry for him, but this was not a time for pity, and he, too, would be among the dead soon enough.
By now the sun had fallen to the low point of the sky, casting just a faint light across the piles of bodies, their eyes as dull as old coins.
Fires as tall as mountains danced in various parts of the city like drunken demons.
I looked south toward the ocean and saw a small sailboat dangling from a palm tree as though it had been lynched.
To the east, a storm cloud rose out of the MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / STORY desert like a giant, throbbing brain.
As the man went on tossing bodies atop his pile, I finished clearing my woman of the stained glass and the other debris that had done her in.
She lay on her back, her feet stretched out on what must have once been a chair, her arms dangling beside her.
I took her arms and wrapped them around my neck, then grabbed at her waist to lift her.
She came up to me effortlessly, almost tenderly, rather as if she were half-asleep, as though shed crashed out on the sofa with the TV on and was depending on me to bring her to bed.
As I pulled her toward me, it seemed that her arms found purchase around my neck and held me by a strength of their own.
I, too I brought her all the way upright until she was on her her tip-toes, her whole body slack, languorous, her eyes cracked open just enough for me to see my reflection in them, cracked open just enough to receive the enormous love that I was promising her.
Once upright, her skull fell forward, her forehead flopping against mine as if she were coming in for a kiss.
But I wasnt ready yet, not here, not with that old man still desperately in search of his daughter just across the street.
I rolled her down the block until we came to a drugstore where I found shampoo and a bar of soap.
I cleaned her hair and skin, careful to remove the dust and ash that had gathered in her armpits, under her fingernails, and in her crotch.
In another aisle I found deodorant, toothpaste and a toothbrush, and a kit of makeup, which I applied sloppily, but the best I knew how.
I placed a band-aid across a gash on her bicep and cleaned her chest wound with ointment and gauze.
We came to a department store a few blocks down the street where a rack of new dresses, navy-blue with red buttons, stood miraculously untouched, like me, by the war.
She fit neatly into the dress, although it was loose around her crushed ribcage.
I found a pile of jewelry in a shattered glass case and around her neck I clasped a string of costume diamonds.
When we got back to the street where I had found her, the old man, delirious with grief, had pushed through his wall of corpses and now carried his own dead woman across his shoulders.
She was short and blonde, nothing like my wife, missing an entire leg, her face concealed by blood.
He saw me and my wife, so lovely and limp, lying face up in the wheelbarrow.
He leaned over her, the blonde woman still slung across his back, and touched my wifes navy-blue dress.
He fingered the diamonds around her neck, and then, as a final goodbye, pressed his palm against her forehead.
His gestures were delicate, so tender and human, which made me embarrassed for him.
The sun by now had dropped below the horizon and it was night, or should have been, and in the simplest sense, he wanted to know how we could still see each other, and the dead, and our leveled city.
He brought his one-legged, blonde woman down from his shoulders and cradled her like an infant.
Now he was speaking like some kind of mystic, which I despised in him, and I wanted to leave.
He went his own way, muttering to himself, “My daughter,’ not as frantic as hed been when I first saw him in the afternoon, but still with an unresolved longing in his voice that I could remember having once felt myself.
My wife spends her days in bed, dreaming, I like to think, of stillness.
It is an overly simplistic understanding of things that does not allow the dead an inner-life of their own.
I maintain her body as best I can, though she is deteriorating as one would expect.
And sometimes, when I am lying beside her, I think about the old man chanting to himself, “My daughter’ I like to imagine what he means, what he sees, and the memories, false and true, that make up the shadows of his pathetic longing.
I know he must mean something undead, something that cant be had again, no matter how long he searches.
What I can imagine he sees is the girl he once knew to be his daughter, on her bicycle for the first time, her pig-tails flying behind her.
The man, her father, much younger and more sure of himself, watches from the yard, urging her on.
The metallic buttons of her overalls throw rays of sunlight that blind him briefly and then not.
She has a natural sense of how to shift her weight, lean into turns, how to maneuver the handle-bars.
She is graceful, an athlete, and it is coming easier to her with every turn.
He watches, happily, near to tears, as she comes out of one of her turns and continues down the street, a straight, clean line, picking up speed, past one house, then another.
He calls for her but she does not turn back, her pig-tails horizontal behind her, accelerating away from him, into the bright spring sun, everything shrinking, becoming blurred, away from him, until she is too far to see.
Set 1 This will be a heavy set, shooting for 6-8 rep range Set 2 ~70-80% of set 1 weight and shoot for 1015 reps.
Really try to push as much blood into the muscle as possible with this set.
I find that while it does put a little more load on my upper chest, my shoulders are still doing the bulk of the work and I’m able to really push a lot more weight than if the bench was at 90 degrees.
Wrap your elbows or do whatever you have to do to get this one in because you will grow.
I like doing these with a slight incline on the bench, again allowing me to load a bit heavier.
Lately I have been really liking a pretty unique vbar that my gym has I dont know if someone made it or where they got it but it has a very obtuse angle, so it's almost right in the middle of a straight bar and traditional vbar.
Your shoulders should be pretty burnt by now, so utilizing a machine really helps with maintaining accuracy in the execution.
Coriolanus, in the 2011 film ad A 3 ispeare Today, in this modern society which strives to tear down its own high culture and history, Shakespeare and his plays are one of the few still-burning embers by of our theatrical and literary tradition.
For centuries, our ancestors were intimately familiar with and moved by the works of William Shakespeare.
They ve been such a part of the western canon that if you look up one of your favorite historical figures since 1600, chances are they had a favorite Shakespeare play.
After all, many are introduced to Shakespeare through reading his plays in the classroom rather than watching them be performed on stage.
Many arent even aware that he is best known for his war stories, as they've only been introduced to his high-school friendly romances.
For centuries Shakespeare set the standard in the west for heroic masculinity by weaving together tales that demonstrate what these virtues look like when put into action.
Beyond influencing our values, this one man single handedly changed the language we use today.
Words like “critic” “lonely” “swagger-... even “skim milk” were all coined by the bard.
Today, in this modern society which strives to tear down its own high culture and history, Shakespeare and his plays are one of the few still-burning embers of our theatrical and literary tradition.
In Shakespeare's tales, social harmony depends on heroic masculinity as an avatar of divine justice.
What makes his stories different from the films you see today, is that usually you already know how its going to end.
In plays like Romeo and Juliet he tells you from the beginning that this romance between star-crossed lovers will end in tears.
Shakespeare is a master of understanding the human condition and fully embodies the perspective of his characters.
They are deep three-dimensional characters who struggle with the choices they have to make.
The plays reinforce the notion that the line dividing good and evil cuts through the heart of every human being.
But if you really want to know why his plays work, why they have dominated our high culture for so long, you're going to have to watch them for yourself.
How To WATCH FILM ADAPTATIONS Quite simply, the best way to experience Shakespeare isnt to read one of his plays.
While purists would recommend going to a live theatrical performance, unfortunately today many theater directors try to subvert Shakespeare with cringey gimmicks that ruin the experience.
Instead, consider dipping your toes into the water by watching faithful film adaptations made by people who love Shakespeare and arent trying to “deconstruct” his work or repackage it to make it more suitable for the latest modern tastes and fashions.
Through cinematography, music, and using the camera to command the audiences focus, the director has many ways to heighten the drama of scenes.
Shakespeare's antiquated language is wonderful, but it takes a little bit of time to get immersed into it.
Subtitles not only speeds up this process, but also helps you catch all the dialogue if the actors are speaking quickly.
Trading 11th century Scotland for 1960s Eastern Europe, this PBS Television film adaptation of MacBeth is one of the best MacBeth films.
Stewart does an excellent job transforming MacBeth from someone who is torn over the prospect of assassinating his rivals, into a power mad tyrant.
While MacBethss character arc is intriguing, it’s equally exciting watching the other lords of Scotland realizing that MacBeth has become a force of evil who needs to be stopped.
To that end Michael Feast delivers an incredibly moving performance as MacDuff.
P Pn rai rdered his father and married Jabkswaateldstae One of the key dramatic questions in Hamlet is whether Hamlet is crazy or if he is purposely trying to get his others to think he’s gone mad.
This debate has been waged for centuries, and Gibson is perfect for this role in how his performance walks the line between genius and insanity.
Gibson channels Hamlet's mischievous Dionysian energy as he embarks on his revenge mission.
With Mel Gibson’s sheer artistic raw power, Hollywood FEARS this adaptation and has tried to memoryhole it.
Coriolanus is a man of power, and placing the film in a modern setting instead of classical Rome further emphasizes how such an elite man clashes against a degenerate egalitarian society.
With some of the best action scenes in a Shakespeare adaptation, and some powerful monologues, this is an excellent adaptation to watch.
Richard is bathed in a divine light and with a gold and white color palette that separates him from the gray world of the lesser classes.
Rory Kinnear plays a great Henry IV, and does a great job at showing Henry struggling with the morality behind his plot to remove Richard from power.
Starting as far back as 1681, when the ending of King Lear was rewritten for being too harsh, throughout the Puritan, Victorian, and up into the modern era, Shakespeare has well and truly rubbed the censorious up the wrong way.
The National Theater once went as far as to end their performance of the play with an apology for the holocaust.
Ironically, during the holocaust, Nazi Germany actually disliked The Merchant of Venice as it was considered too sympathetic a portrayal and the marriage in the play between Jew and gentile violated the racial purity laws at the time.
Dissidents in history have seen echoes of their struggles in Shakespeare plays.
In the 1964 Soviet Union juUboeM-Cer-lolE-NuCojeMeymer-veelimm Gsalevem CeyAlniaminiae the play to portray Hamlet as a Soviet dissident, and modeled Claudius on Stalin.
In post-Mao China, MacBeth performances became popular as the story of a national hero turned bloodthirsty tyrant resonated among the survivors of the cultural revolution.
Like most things, today’s opposition to Shakespere is of the dumber variety.
Othello, with its black lead, has been a source of casting hilarity due to the ever-changing cultural rules of the past half century.
That was considered offensive, so non-white characters started playing the role.
By the 1980s in England, it was considered racist to have a minority play a flawed character like Othello, so white actors were cast for the part.
Today, however, that’s considered erasure, and we are back to casting non-whites for the role.
It will soon probably be offensive if you dont cast Othello as a woman.
Yet despite all the attempts to ruin the play through modern values, the text remains.
And as long as the text remains, the stories of Shakespeare will endure, far after the dumb ideas of this era are long forgotten.
In a world that wants to destroy our high culture, watching Shakespeare is a revolutionary act.
Shakespeare may have been an Englishman that never left his beloved island, but the spirit he channeled captured the essence of, and belongs to, all men of the west.
And you will be carrying the torch of western high culture onwards to the next generation.
Throttle to the max, heraced towards thetown where this adventure had started.
John lowered the plane and flew underneath the cloud, battling the crazy wind.
Bolts were striking left and right, and thunder roared at the tigerstriped plane.
Cold circled the town, looking for a place where the silver discus could have landed.
Below them, people huddled in their tin sheds, at least the ones that still stood.
MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / STORY + ~y é AY John made another circuit, then another one.
A map flew up, tossed by the wind and momentarily stuck to the windshield, blinding them.
They flew for a second to the south, when in that direction three dots appeared, speedily growing.
They must have quickly repaired whatever damage Cold had done to their craft.
The unlucky guards... and, recognizable from afar by his uniform, Nurlan.
The air was stilled here, as if the effect of the somatoma started a good click below the ancient craft.
The warlord gave a shot at him from his personal firearm, but the distance was too great.
Then with a swift blow, hecut the rope on which Nurlans body was hanging listlessly.
MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / STORY Then, as they finally achieved its altitude, John saw ports in the discus open.
Makan-Khans plane avoided the one aimed at him, going into a deep spiral.
John could not look behind him, but he saw a large flat light appear in front of her face.
He flew under the discus, and at that very moment it seemed to lose its strange buoyancy in the air.
John put his mind to dispatching the Tiger planes now, but this proved unnecessary.
Makan’s plane was nowhere to be seen and the third one had started making his escape.
Sunset was coming fast, and with it, the end of fighting for radar-less planes.
Cold put the floatplane in the muddied road going into Kirshevo from the west.
John ran towards it as fast as he could, knowing that Amara had disabled its defenses as well.
When they were close enough, she opened the trap door and Cold jumped on it even before it touched the ground.
Desist from helping this mudwalker“You voided your rights when you attacked me.
It was installed in one of the flier’s panels, the gruesome beating heart still present.
Pressing the panel in a few places, she made the device emerge and picked it up.
Methinks the welcome at the Rajas court in Surgut will be splendid” John gave no verbal response.
But Makan, instead of pushing Derletass lifeless body off, rolled with it, letting it fall with the somatoma.
John jumped up, avoiding the blow, and landed a mighty kick on his opponent's face.
Once again, the Khan of the Tigers fell back, this time not to stand up again.
He walked over to the place where the somatoma had fallen in mud, poor Bernies heart still beating feebly within it.
He is yours to arrest and send as a trophy to the Neon Tsar, with my regards.
She stood a long while, watching as he disappeared in the distance with the setting sun.
