In my previous blog I noted that by early February 2014 a decision had been made in the Kremlin to dismember parts of Ukraine, even if Yanukovych had put down the Euromaidan and remained in power.
This was revealed in a recently leaked policy note or document which caused a stir in many newspapers and elsewhere several days ago.
Some independent Russian commentators have suggested such a document could have been produced by any one of several important Russian think tanks who were all gradually coming to the same conclusion make a grab for Ukrainian sovereign territory.
He thought that Russia no longer supported him in the Kyiv standoff, that Moscow had sold him out and now had its own plans unrelated to extending his presidential powers.
One of Putin's closest aides, Sergey Glazyev, said at the time, ""Ukrainian authorities make a huge mistake if they think that the Russian reaction will become neutral in a few years from now.
Yanukovych was under constant, massive pressure at that time from the Russian authorities not to sign the Association Agreement deal with the EU, and declined to do so late November 2013.
Update Just read about the terrible assassination of Boris Nemtsov...a most charismatic man and true friend of Ukraine.
Now maybe even more people across the globe will come to their senses and realise the direction in which Putin is leading his country.
The Polish PISM site provides excellent, sober analysis of the sensational leaked Kremlin policy note recently published in 'Novaya Gazeta', and elsewhere.
Kharkiv would be a big problem because although the local strongmen, Mayor Gennady Kernes and Regional State Administration head Mykhaylo Dobkin would be co-operative if such a turn of events were to occur, the local population, in particular, young students could react unpredictably.
Bohoslovska's predictions of what she called a 'war between Russia and Ukraine' are markedly similar to the ideas expressed in the policy note, so confirming the leaked policy note is most likely genuine thus debunking Russia’s claims that the uprisings in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine were a response to a ""coup d’etat"" organised by ""US sponsored fascist/Banderite puppets"" in order to topple a legitimately elected president. p.s.
He must have realised 'the game was up' and that Putin would not be his saviour.
Yanukovych started making plans for evacuation soon after these interviews took place, the policy note written and Russia's aggressive actions toward Ukraine approved.
With recent events in Ukraine and beyond, many policymakers and foreign policy analysts are asking what motivates Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Most importantly, officials in Washington and European capitals are left asking what Putin wants and how far is he willing to go.
The great lesson of the outbreak of World War I in 1914 was the danger of misreading the statements, actions, and intentions of the adversary.
Today, Vladimir Putin has become the greatest challenge to European security and the global world order in decades.
Russia’s 8,000 nuclear weapons underscore the huge risks of not understanding who Putin is and what his aspirations are for himself and the people of Russia.
He has plans of action, but included in them are also alternative contingency plans to deal with problems is things do not work out quite as expected; he is therefore very difficult to predict.
Since coming to power he has created a unique system fusing intelligence with politics and the military and security branches of power.
In the current Russian/Ukrainian hybrid war this system has come into its own.
Also from about 1 hour 00 minutes onward into the podcast ..a brilliant, brutal description of how Putin views the rest of the western world and the relationship between the greater and lesser countries of the western world whether they are truly sovereign or not.
Western politicians and media continue to conveniently delude themselves.
The Ukrainian crisis is not just about some disgruntled separatists in a far corner of the country.
It is a 'spetsoperatsiya' inspired by, organised, funded and controlled by Putin an a handful of his colleagues.
It is replete with 'maskirovka', lies, false trails, misleading declarations...at its core is the absolute need not to reveal its true aims.
Having encouraged Ukraine to join the western club, western nations now have an absolute obligation to prevent Putin accomplish his aims.. p.s.
Other such operations simply do not exist at present, and new ones can not be developed in a month.
It has transferred hundred of heavy weapons, including rocket launchers, heavy artillery, tanks and armoured vehicles, and it maintains hundreds of regular soldiers, including Special Forces, in Ukraine, as well as command and control elements, air defence systems, UAVs, and electronic warfare systems.
The recent escalation in fighting would not be possible without the military support and strategic direction that Russia provides.
There are some claims an ammo dump was hit by Ukrainian artillery...and a significant number of heavy weaponry also destroyed.
Destruction is probably so great that a major attack on Ukrainian-held territory could be halted or at least seriously delayed. p.s If you watch Russian television newsreels and analysis you would certainly receive the impression that chances of any ceasefire soon are very slim.
Tonight's 'earthquake' in Donetsk is perhaps the first bit of luck Ukies have had for quite a while.
