Most of the Communist seats were from the Eastern regions of Ukraine, including Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts in the highly industrialized Donbas area that borders on Russia’s Rostov province, and from the region of the Black Sea port city of Odessa.
The main issue that got the Kiev “Maidan” protests going was that of international economic relations.
Yanukovych had been negotiating for the inclusion of Ukraine in a relationship with the European Union, to lead perhaps to full membership.
However, Ukraine is the poorest country in Europe despite its rich agricultural resources and valuable mining and industrial operations in the Eastern part of the country, with a per capita gross domestic product lower than that of El Salvador.
Therefore when Russian President Vladimir Putin offered Yanukovych what appeared to him to be a better deal, Yanukovych withdrew from the European Union project.
It cannot have escaped Yanukovych’s notice that the European Union and the related Euro currency group was not doing very well for the poorer member countries, such as Greece, Portugal, Italy and Ireland, who were being forced to accept drastic austerity measures in order to stay in the Union.
However, Ukrainian nationalists of various kinds, including neo-Nazi and fascist groups whose bases are in the Galizia region in the far West of the country, also have an extreme anti-Russian ideology, and part of their desire to become “part of Europe” is related to this.
Easterners have both cultural and economic links to Russia, which buys much of what their factories produce.
So when the new post-Maiden government began to put out its program, many in the East began to resist control from Kiev.
Among their fears was that native Russian speakers would be deprived of their language rights.
So in the spring of 2014, there were plebiscites in the Eastern areas in which the idea of either autonomy or outright independence for the East was strongly voiced.
The new government of right-winger Arseny Yatsenyuk decided to crush this movement, which it labeled as separatist, by military force.
So when the Kiev government sent in troops to suppress the autonomist movement in the East, they met with strong resistance and were thrown back in many cases.
Kiev became more and more reliant on the forces of self-organized fighting groups such as the Aidar and Azov battalions, which contain many neo-Nazis, fascists and other extremists.
These elements have launched violent attacks against Ukrainian Communists and others they despise, which have led to many deaths and injuries, including at least two score burned to death in a horrific attack in Odessa last May.
Meanwhile, due to recent defeats of its troops in the East, the Kiev regime is being forced to accept much of the program which the communists promoted a year ago, including a high degree of autonomy for the Donbas region.
The United States has continued to claim that the revolt of ‘Eastern Ukraine is nothing more than “Russian aggression” and is followed in this by our corporate press.
