During its first phase in February–March 2014, the Ukrainian territory of Crimea was invaded and subsequently annexed by Russia following an internationally-criticized referendum.
Concurrently, protests by anti-Maidan and pro-Russian groups took place across other parts of eastern and southern Ukraine.
Local separatists, some directed and financed by the Russian security services, took advantage of the situation and occupied government buildings in Donetsk, Luhansk, and Kharkiv oblasts in early March 2014.
The Ukrainian government was able to quickly quell this unrest, and removed the separatists by 10 March.In the second phase from April 2014, armed Russian-backed groups seized government buildings across Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, together commonly called the Donbas, and launched a separatist insurgency in the region.
To suppress this insurgency, the Ukrainian government began what it called an ""Anti-Terrorist Operation"" , sending in the armed forces to quell the unrest.
Unrest in Kharkiv and Odessa oblasts, on the other hand, did not escalate into armed conflict.
Order was restored in these regions with the co-operation of the local civil authorities, though pro-Russian disturbances, such as bombings, continued throughout the year.
City centre clashes and further events 4 Largest protests by date and attendance 4.
Pro-Ukrainian counter-protests 5 List of proclaimed breakaway states 5.
Historical background of the 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine Further information: Russians in Ukraine, Euromaidan, and Revolution of Dignity Ukraine became gripped by unrest when President Viktor Yanukovych refused to sign an association agreement with the European Union on 21 November 2013.
An organized political movement known as 'Euromaidan' demanded closer ties with the European Union, and the ousting of Yanukovych.
Donetsk oblast governor Serhiy Taruta said that rallies in Donetsk included ex-convicts and others who travelled from Crimea.
Ukraine's police and border guards denied entry to more than 8,200 Russians between 4 and 25 March.
Public opinion in Ukraine A poll conducted by Kyiv International Institute of Sociology from 8–18 February 2014 assessed support for union with Russia throughout Ukraine.
It found that, overall, 12% of those polled favoured union with Russia..0% of those from the four regions surveyed agreed that Ukraine should remain independent, with friendly relations maintained between Russia and Ukraine.
Only 5% of respondents in eastern Ukraine felt that Russian-speakers were 'definitely' under pressure or threat.% of ethnic Russians supported the decision of the Russian Federation to send its military to protect Russian-speaking citizens of Ukraine.
Among all the Ukrainians polled overall, 34% favoured joining the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, while 44% were against joining it.
In eastern Ukraine and southern Ukraine, only 14% and 11% of the respondents respectively favour joining NATO, while 67% in eastern Ukraine and 52% in southern Ukraine oppose joining it.% of people polled in eastern Ukraine thought that the country was going in the wrong direction, compared with only 36% in western Ukraine.A poll conducted by the Institute of Social Research and Policy Analysis analysed the identities of Donetsk inhabitants.
The same poll determined that 66% of Donetsk residents that were polled supported remaining in a unified Ukraine, while 18.2% supported joining Russia, and 4.7% supported independence.
A second poll conducted from 26 to 29 March showed that 77% of residents condemned the takeover of administrative buildings, while 16% supported such actions.
Furthermore, 40.8% of Donetsk citizens supported rallies for Ukraine's unity, while 26.5% supported pro-Russian rallies.In another research poll conducted 8–16 April by KIIS, a vast majority disapproved of the seizure of administrative buildings by protesters.
Over 50% of those polled in southern and eastern Ukraine considered acting President Oleksandr Turchynov to be illegitimate.
Most of those polled said they found nothing attractive about Russia, but those who did, did so for economic, and not cultural reasons.
Those polled in southern and eastern Ukraine were generally split on the legitimacy of the present government and parliament, but a majority in all regions agreed that deposed president Viktor Yanukovych was not the legal president of the country.
In all regions but the Donbas, pro-Euromaidan oligarch Petro Poroshenko dominated preliminary election polls.
Anti-Maidan in Kyiv, 14 December 2013 A comprehensive poll released on 8 May by the Pew Research Centre surveyed opinions in Ukraine and Crimea on the subject of the unrest.
The poll was taken after the annexation of Crimea, but prior to the clashes in Odessa on 2 May.% of westerners and 70% of easterners polled said that they wanted Ukraine to remain united.
Despite international criticism of 16 March referendum on Crimean status, 91% of those Crimeans polled thought that the vote was free and fair, and 88% said that the Ukrainian government should recognize the results.
Anti-Maidan and Titushky During the Euromaidan revolution there were widespread reports that pro-Yanukovych and pro-Russian 'anti-Maidan' protesters were paid for their support.
Media portrayal of the Ukrainian Crisis Russian and Ukrainian sources differed greatly in the way they portrayed the demonstrators.
In the Ukrainian media, ""Colorado beetle"" was used as a derogatory word for the pro-Russian demonstrators and militants, in reference to the Ribbon of St George they wore.
Starting in the Russian media, the wave of unrest came to be referred to as the ""Russian Spring"", a reference to both the Prague Spring of 1968 and the Arab Spring of 2010–2011.
Timeline of the 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine Unrest by region Crimea Main article: Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation Pro-Ukrainian demonstration by Crimean Tatars in Crimea, February 2014 15 March anti-war protests, named the March of Peace, took place in Moscow a day before the Crimean referendum.
Following the removal of Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych on 22 February 2014, various protests and counter-protests were held in Crimea, including by anti-Maidan Russian nationalists who sought the peninsula's annexation by Russia and by Crimean Tatars who supported Ukrainian unity, leading to a crisis in the region.
Beginning on 26 February, unidentified militants, subsequently confirmed to be Russian troops by Vladimir Putin, began to gradually take control of the Crimean Peninsula.
During this time, the question of joining the Russian Federation was put to a referendum, which had an official turnout of 83 per cent and resulted in a 96% affirmative vote but has been condemned by European Union, American, Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar officials as a violation of the Ukrainian constitution and international law.
On 17 March, the Crimean Parliament declared independence from Ukraine and asked to join the Russian Federation.
On 18 March, Russia and Crimea signed a treaty of accession of the Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol into the Russian Federation.
On 21 March, the accession treaty was ratified and the establishment of two new constituent entities in the Russian Federation was marked by a 30 gun salute under an executive order of the Russian President.
The United Nations General Assembly passed a non-binding resolution that declared that the referendum was invalid, and the incorporation of Crimea into Russia was illegal.Around 3,000 people had fled Crimea by April 1, and 80% of them were Crimean Tatars.
Teams from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe in Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast and Chernivtsi Oblast assisted internally displaced persons who have resettled in western Ukraine from Crimea.
Numbers of refugees, primarily Crimean Tatars, continued to rise, and by 20 May the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said that about 10,000 people had been displaced.
Donetsk People's Republic and War in Donbas Pro-Russian protesters occupied the Donetsk regional state administration building from 1 to 6 March, before being removed by the Security Service of Ukraine.
Pro-Russian protesters in Donetsk, 8 March 2014 13 March was marked by violent clashes between pro-Maidan and anti-Maidan protesters in Donetsk.
A large group of anti-Maidan protesters broke through a police cordon and began to attack a smaller pro-Maidan demonstration.
On Sunday, 6 April, pro-Russian protesters held a rally in Donetsk pushing for a referendum on independence.
A group of 1,000 protestors broke away from the crowd and stormed the RSA building, with the police offering little resistance.
The people who voted within the RSA were not elected to the positions they assumed.
According to the Information Telegraph Agency of Russia, the declaration was voted on by some regional legislators, however other reports say that neither the Donetsk city administration nor local district councils in city neighbourhoods delegated any representatives to the session.
Additionally, the group's leaders have appealed to Russian President Vladimir Putin to send Russian peacekeeping forces to the region.
The group's leader, Andrei Purgin, had been arrested weeks prior on charges of separatism.
Later that day, the SBU office in Donetsk was retaken by SBU Alpha Group.
The Ukrainian special forces unit led by the Ukrainian vice prime minister for law enforcement, Vitaliy Yarema, that was supposed to restore control over the Donetsk RSA building, however, refused to storm it and remove the separatists.
Turchynov offered amnesty to the separatists if they laid down their arms and surrendered, and also offered concessions that included devolution of power to regions, and the protection of the Russian language in law.
Many in Donetsk expressed disapproval toward the actions of the separatists.
Siege of Sloviansk and Battle of Kramatorsk Sloviansk city council under control of masked men armed with Kalashnikov assault rifles and RPG-26 rocket launchers On 12 April, a group of masked militants, formed in Crimea and led by former officer of Russian security services Igor Girkin, captured the executive committee building, the police department and SBU office in Sloviansk, a city in the northern part of the Donetsk Oblast.
Ukrainian Internal Affairs Minister Arsen Avakov labelled the gunmen ""terrorists"", and swore to use the Ukrainian special forces to retake the building.Seizures of police stations and other government buildings by armed separatist groups also occurred in other cities in Donetsk Oblast, including Donetsk City proper, Kramatorsk, Druzhkivka, Horlivka, Mariupol and Yenakiieve.
Ukrainian transitional president Oleksandr Turchynov launched a full-scale 'anti-terror' military operation to reclaim the buildings.Vitaly Yarema said that Russian Special Forces units, including the 45th Parachute Guards Regiment usually stationed near Moscow, were operating on Ukrainian territory in the cities of Kramatorsk and Sloviansk.
On 16 April, the number of Russian special forces troops was said to be 450.
Civilians block Ukrainian military near Sloviansk, April 2014 By 16 April, the 'anti-terror' operation being conducted by the Ukrainian government in Donetsk Oblast had hit some stumbling blocks.
Protesters seized Ukrainian armoured vehicles in Kramatorsk, and sent soldiers away in Sloviansk.
Internal Affairs Minister Arsen Avakov said that troops were forced to open fire, resulting in the killing of three of the attackers.The Geneva Statement of 17 April did not result in the end of the government building occupations in Donetsk Oblast.
Two pro-Russian groups in Mariupol said that they 'felt betrayed' by the action taken in Geneva.
A truce declared for Easter Sunday was broken by an attack upon a separatist checkpoint in Sloviansk, further inflaming tensions.The situation remained tense on 23 April, with occupation of government buildings ongoing throughout the region.
OSCE monitors observed that the city administration building, SBU building, and police station in Sloviansk remained heavily fortified by armed groups of men with masks and automatic weapons.
However, the monitors believed that the city remained under heavy surveillance, both by people in uniforms and masks, but also by many persons in civilian clothing.
One resident said that people in Sloviansk were afraid to discuss their opinions of the occupiers.
Barricade in Sloviansk, 23 April 2014 On 24 April, Ukrainian forces made a series of 'probing attacks' into Sloviansk against the insurgents.
The Ukrainian government then stated on 25 April that it would 'fully blockade the city of Sloviansk', and continue with the 'anti-terror' operation.
Amid the increasing tensions, separatists in Sloviansk detained seven international monitors on an OSCE military verification mission in Ukraine, who had been travelling into the city on a bus, along with the bus driver and five accompanying Ukrainian soldiers.
Access to the city remained unrestricted despite the supposed Ukrainian army blockade, with separatist barricades manned by fewer people then on previous days.
Local residents said that the separatist administration in Sloviansk provided no administrative services to citizens.Leaflets released by the Donetsk People's Republic were distributed on 26 April, notifying citizens of a referendum on the question of whether or not they supported the proclamation of ""state sovereignty"" by the Republic to be held on 11 May.
In the morning on the next day, two members of the OSCE special monitoring mission were held by a group of unarmed men from the Donbas People's Militia in Yenakiieve.
They were taken to the occupied city hall, questioned, and then released after a letter sent by the mission's office in Kyiv confirmed the credentials of the monitors.
A large pro-government rally in Donetsk city marched in protest against the violence in Donetsk Oblast, and the attempted assassination of Kharkiv mayor Hennadiy Kernes on 28 April.
The rally was swiftly and violently broken up by separatists armed with baseball bats, iron rods, firecrackers and shields.
First Battle of Mariupol The barricade outside Donetsk RSA featuring anti-western slogans.
A new counter-offensive by government forces on Sloviansk during the early morning of 2 May resulted in the downing of two government helicopters, and casualties on both sides.
As a result, Ukrainian forces gained control of all separatist checkpoints, and of half the city.
Serious fighting resulted in the recapture of the occupied buildings in Kramatorsk by government forces, and at least ten separatists were said to have been killed in Andriivka.All of the international military monitors who had been held in Sloviansk were released by Vyacheslav Ponomaryov on 3 May.
On the same day, protesters in the city of Donetsk stormed and occupied the chairman of the regional government's private business office and the SBU building, smashing windows and ransacking files as an act of revenge for the clashes in Odessa.Kramatorsk was reoccupied by militants on 4 May, and Sloviansk saw renewed fighting on 5 May, resulting in the deaths of four Ukrainian soldiers.
As part of the counter-offensive, government forces recaptured the building on 7 May, but then left it, allowing the separatists to quickly re-occupy it.Occupied buildings in Donetsk had been heavily fortified by 6 May, and Donetsk International Airport was closed to all traffic.
The regional television broadcasting centre remained occupied by about thirty camouflaged insurgents with AK-47s.
A BTR-70 was parked outside building, along with barricades made of sandbags and tyres.
A similar presence was observed at the RSA building.On 7 May, Russian president Vladimir Putin asked the separatists to delay the planned 11 May referendum on the status of Donetsk.Denis Pushilin, the leader of the Donetsk People's Republic, refused.
In response, Ukrainian transitional prime minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk referred to Putin's words ""hot air"", and vowed that the counter-offensive in Donetsk would continue.A large skirmish erupted in Mariupol on 9 May, when government troops launched an attack on a police station in the city, resulting in the killing of at least twenty people.
These were described by the Ukrainian government as ""militants"" and ""terrorists"", though some local residents said that they were unarmed protestors.
According to representatives of the Donetsk People's Republic, 89% voted in favour of self-rule, and 10% voted against.
OSCE monitors did not observe the referendum, as the situation in Donetsk after the skirmish in Mariupol was said to be ""volatile"", forcing them to restrict their operations in the region.
In response to the perceived weakness of the Ukrainian army, some Ukrainians who opposed the insurgents formed the ""Donbas Volunteer Battalion"", modeled on the Ukrainian partisan groups that fought against both the German Reich and the Soviet Union during the Second World War.
Steelworkers and security guards from Metinvest, along with local police, began joint patrols in the city of Mariupol on 15 May.
These groups forced the insurgents out of the buildings that they had been occupying.
Steelworkers could be seen removing barricades from the city centre, and also cleaning up the burnt city administration building.
By the morning of 16 May, Associated Press journalists could find no trace of the insurgents in Mariupol city centre.
On 16 May, however, it seemed that separatists were not banished from the city, as reporters from The Washington Post said that about a hundred pro-Russian activists gathered on the steps of the city administration building, and that the separatist flag continued to fly over it.Rinat Akhmetov, oligarch and owner of Metinvest, called for non-violent protests against the separatists in Donbas on 19 May.
In response to this call, cars gathered in front of the Donetsk RSA building and continually honked their horns.
The confederal state of Novorossiya was proclaimed by Pavel Gubarev on 22 May, incorporating both the Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People's Republic.
A few days later, on 26 May, a heated battle broke out between separatist insurgents that had been in control of Donetsk International Airport, and Ukrainian government forces.
Around fifty insurgents were killed in the fighting, which resulted in their losing control of the airport.Chechen paramilitaries, along with others from Russia, fought Ukrainian forces during the battle.
According to Artur Gasparian, a member of the insurgent unit that had been holding the airport, the majority of the separatists' losses were due to friendly fire.Members of the Vostok battalion, the pro-Russian insurgent group that fought Ukrainian forces at the airport, took control over the Donetsk RSA building on 28 May, and removed the leaders of the Donetsk People's Republic.
They were seen clearing barricades and rubbish left by those previously in control of the building.
War in Donbas Vostok Battalion members dismantling the barricade at Donetsk RSA on 3 June.
As part of Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko's fifteen-point peace plan, a frequently broken ceasefire spanned from 20 June until the 30th.
A renewed government offensive after the ceasefire broke down resulted in heavy losses for the separatists, forcing them to withdraw from northern Donetsk Oblast, including many cities that had been under their control since April, such as Sloviansk, Druzhkivka, Kostyantynivka, and Kramatorsk.
Heavy fighting continued in the following months, until the signing of the Minsk Protocol in early September, which established a ceasefire.
Attacks on journalists There were a number of attacks on members of the press by members of the separatists in Donetsk.
On 10 April, protesters outside the Donetsk RSA attacked Belarusian journalists for speaking the Belarusian language, and not Russian; Ukrainian journalists were forced to speak Russian to avoid angering pro-Russian protesters.
According to Kyiv Post, they also attacked reporters from Russia Today, but RT did not carry the story.
An unknown man set the car of the editor-in-chief of the News of Donbas on fire.
Stepan Chirich, a Belarusian reporter with the Russian NTV channel disappeared in Dnipropetrovsk Oblast.
Another journalist, Evgenii Gapich, a photographer for the Reporter newspaper from Ivano-Frankivsk disappeared in Horlivka.
His whereabouts are unknown, but allegedly he has been held in detention by separatist forces in Sloviansk.
Furthermore, Simon Ostrovsky, a journalist with Vice News, was captured by unidentified people in uniform in Sloviansk, and released after four days.
Luhansk Oblast Protesters around a statue of Taras Shevchenko on Heroes Square in Luhansk, waving both Russian and Ukrainian flags, 1 March 2014 In protest against the proposed cancelling of the regional language law, the regional administration of Luhansk Oblast voted to demand that the Russian language be given official language status.
A peaceful pro-Maidan demonstration on Heroes Square, outside the Luhansk city administration building, was attacked by anti-Maidan counter-demonstrators on 9 March.
The attackers then stormed the building, and occupied it, but were swiftly removed by government forces.
Pro-Russian activists discussed plans for a ""Luhansk Parliamentary Republic"" on 8 April 2014. 1,500 were involved in the building's occupation.
According to The Guardian, the personnel include former members of the Berkut special police.The mood remained tense in Luhansk on 14 April.
There has been no indication that pro-Russian demonstrators in Luhansk would enact the terms of the Geneva Statement on Ukraine, and demonstrations have continued.
Those occupying the SBU building told OSCE monitors on 20 April that they would demobilize once occupied buildings in Kyiv were vacated by Euromaidan supporters.
The monitors also encountered a roadblock near the village of Rayhorodka, in Novoaidar Raion.
It was manned by about ten people in civilian clothes, including the local Orthodox priest.
They stated that they set up the roadblock on 14 April to protect their village from any separatist incursions.
A commander of the Ukrainian army indicated that no incidents had occurred at the roadblock so far, but that unknown armed individuals had been seen approaching it in the night.A rally outside the SBU building to elect a 'people's government' in Luhansk occurred on 21 April.
Luhansk People's Republic and War in Donbas Destroyed house in Donbas, 22 July 2014 Several hundred protesters that had gathered outside the occupied SBU building proclaimed the ""Luhansk People's Republic"" on 27 April.
They demanded that Ukrainian government provide amnesty for all protesters, enshrine Russian as an official language, and hold a referendum on the status of the region.
They issued an ultimatum that stated that if Kyiv did not meet their demands by 14:00 on 29 April, they would launch an insurgency in tandem with that of the Donetsk People's Republic.As these demands were not met, 2,000 to 3,000 protestors stormed the Luhansk RSA building on 29 April.
The building was unprotected on the exterior, but a group of riot police confronted the protesters in an inner courtyard of the building.
A brief standoff resulted, but the police did nothing to stop the protesters.
Several other buildings, including a police station and the local prosecutor's office were later seized.
Twenty separatist gunmen fired machine guns at the police station to force the officers within to surrender.
President Oleksander Turchynov responded to the loss of the buildings by demanding the immediate resignation of police chiefs in Donetsk and Luhansk.
By 2 May, however, pro-Russian protesters occupying the city council and the television centre had left, and the prosecutors office was freed following negotiations between authorities and separatists.The next day, however, separatist leader and self-proclaimed mayor of Luhansk Valeriy Bolotov announced the formation of a ""South-Eastern Army"" to march on Kyiv.
Bolotov also declared a state of emergency, introduced a curfew, a ban on political parties, and a mandate that local law enforcement officials must take an oath of allegiance to him.
Members of the OSCE special monitoring mission were later stopped at an 'illegal' checkpoint near the village of Shchastya, and held for three hours before being released.
According to RIA Novosti, 96.2% voted in favour of self-rule.Valeriy Bolotov, leader of the Republic, declared ""martial law"" on 22 May.
OSCE monitors said that around 70% of ""shops, cafés and banks"" were closed in Luhansk city centre.
Those shops that were still open were said to be sold out of some necessities, and fuel was not available.
Police were entirely absent.The confederal state of Novorossiya was proclaimed by Pavel Gubarev on 22 May, incorporating both the Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People's Republic.
Explosions struck the RSA building in Luhansk on 2 June, killing eight people, and wounding twenty-eight.
Russian media reported that the explosions were caused by an airstrike by Ukrainian government forces.
Ukrainian government officials denied this, and said that the insurgents had fired an anti-aircraft missile at themselves.
A CNN investigation found clear evidence that the detonations came from the air and the pattern of the craters suggested use of standard equipment on the Su-25, a ground-attack fighter, and the Su-27—both combat aircraft operated by Ukraine.
Heavy fighting in the region continued over the following months, until the signing of the Minsk Protocol in early September, which established a ceasefire.
Kharkiv Oblast Protests were also held in Kharkiv Oblast, and the regional state administration building there was occupied multiple times.
Pro-Ukrainian protesters in Kharkiv, February 2014 Unrest first gripped Kharkiv city on 22 February 2014, when Euromaidan protesters occupied the Kharkiv regional state administration building.
Later that day, several thousand protesters tried to topple a statue of Vladimir Lenin that stood opposite to the RSA building in Freedom Square.
Several taxi drivers defended the monument, injuring several of the protesters.
By the next day, several thousand pro-Russian protesters had gathered in the square to protect the statue.
Local police kept Euromaidan and Anti-Maidan protesters apart until 1 March.
On that day, pro-Russian activists stormed the RSA building, assaulted the Euromaidan activists who had been occupying it, and raised the Russian flag over the building.
Some of the protesters were Russian citizens who had travelled to Kharkiv from Russia.
According to the local media, 2,000 Russians were brought by buses with Russian number plates to Kharkiv to take part in the storming of the RSA building.
Russian activist organizations confirmed that they sent Russians to ""peacefully protest"" in Kharkiv.
Police regained control of the building by evening on the same day, and replaced the Russian flag with that of Ukraine.Demonstrations by pro-Russian and pro-Ukrainian activists in Kharkiv continued throughout the month of March.
Despite this, the city remained relatively calm until 15 March, when two people were killed in a shootout between Ukrainian nationalists and pro-Russian activists.
On the next day, pro-Russian activists broke into a Ukrainian cultural centre in Kharkiv, removed books written in the Ukrainian language, and burned them on the street outside.
Pro-Russian protesters in Kharkiv, 8 April 2014 Pro-Russian protesters stormed and occupied the RSA building on 6 April.
Doubts arose about the local origin of the protesters after they initially stormed an opera and ballet theatre believing it was the city hall.
By 8 April, the RSA building had been retaken by Ukrainian special forces, and seventy protesters had been arrested.,000 pro-Russian protesters returned to the RSA building on 13 April, and rallied around it, with some entering.
These protesters then holed up inside the building with Kharkiv mayor Hennadiy Kernes.
Later in the day, Kernes declared his support for an autonomy referendum and amnesty for the arrested Kharkiv separatists.
At least fifty pro-government protesters, who had been holding concurrent demonstrations, were severely beaten in attacks by pro-Russian protesters.
According to a report by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe monitoring mission on 19 April, no protesters had been seen in front of the RSA building since 13 April.
The Kharkiv City Appeals Court ruled on 17 April that 43 of the 65 protesters arrested by authorities following the takeover of the RSA building on 8 and 9 April would remain in custody.
They called for the resignation of the city mayor and prosecutor as well as the return of Viktor Yanukovych.
More peaceful rallies were held in the morning on 23 April, with both anti-government and pro-government demonstrations held in Kharkiv city centre.
Later that day, over 7,000 residents held a rally in the same spot to support the unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
The situation overall in Kharkiv remained calm, though police remained on high alert.
A small group of riot police were seen guarding the RSA building on 25 April, though the police presence as a whole in the city appeared to be much reduced.Rival demonstrations by supporters and opponents of a unitary Ukrainian state occurred on 27 April in Kharkiv city.
Shooting of Hennadiy Kernes The mayor of Kharkiv, Hennadiy Kernes, was shot in the back while cycling on 28 April 2014.
He was said to be in ""grave, but stable"" condition, but later recovered, according to Televiziyna Sluzhba Novyn on 10 May 2014.
However, he had also stated that he did not support the pro-Russian insurgency, and backed a united Ukraine.Mykhailo Dobkin, a former governor of Kharkiv Oblast and potential Ukrainian presidential candidate, said ""You want to know my opinion, they were shooting not at Kernes, but at Kharkiv"", and said that the shooting was an attempt to destabilize what was otherwise a relatively calm region.
Further protests Ukrainian military roadblocks in Donetsk oblast, 8 May Kharkiv returned to relative calm by 30 April, no rallies having been observed there by OSCE monitors.
A minor demonstration by about four-hundred separatists was held in Freedom Square on 4 May.
A notably increased police presence remained in and around Freedom Square.
On the same day, a planned rally by pro-Ukrainian unity groups was cancelled due to concerns about potential clashes in the wake of the Odessa disaster.Demonstrations by ""opponents of Ukrainian unity"" with Russian and Soviet flags were held in front of the Russian and Polish consulates in Kharkiv city on 26 May.
These demonstrators initiated petitions that they said were signed by 1,500 people from Kharkiv, which called on the EU and Russia not to recognise the results of the 25 May Ukrainian presidential election.
They also voiced opposition to the Ukrainian government's military operations in Donetsk Oblast.
Mayor Hennadiy Kernes returned to Kharkiv city on 16 June, after receiving medical treatment in Israel.
The city administration provided buses for around 1,000 people who came to greet him upon his return.
Demonstrations similar to the one that took place on 26 May continued throughout the month of June.
The demonstrators voiced the same concerns about the Ukrainian government's military operations to combat separatist insurgents in Donetsk Oblast.
Some of the people participating in this rally approached the location of the aforementioned pro-Russian demonstration.
Police officers that had been escorting the pro-Ukrainian demonstrators dispersed the crowd.
Thirty activists from both groups were temporarily detained as a result.
They gathered outside the RSA building with European Union, NATO, and Ukrainian flags, and said that they wanted to prevent the war in the Donbas region from spreading to Kharkiv Oblast.
They demanded that gatherings of separatists and communists within Kharkiv city be prohibited.
An attempt was made to destroy an important bridge in the village of Hrushuvakha on 29 July.
The bridge was not damaged in the attempt, but Kharkiv RSA said that there were other plots to carry out ""terrorist attacks"" in Kharkiv Oblast.
The mayor of Kharkiv, Hennadiy Kernes, granted freedom of the city to two Russian citizens at a session of the city council on 6 August.
This concerned some people in the city, causing about one-hundred people to protest outside city administration building.
Police restrained the protesters, who attempted to force their way into the building.
Protesters and the police negotiated, and eventually five protestors were allowed into the city administration to voice their grievances.
About one-hundred anti-Maidan-affiliated demonstrators gathered on Freedom Square to protest against corruption in Ukraine on 17 August.
The pro-Euromaidan demonstrators also collected money for the Armed Forces of Ukraine, and for refugees fleeing the War in Donbas.
A peaceful gathering of Ukrainian unity activists was held outside the Russian consulate in Kharkiv on 28 August.
The demonstration was later dispersed by the police after stun grenades were thrown at the consulate.One of the largest gatherings of supporters of Ukrainian unity in many months took place in Kharkiv on 28 September.
At about 14:30, a diverse crowd of 2,000 people met in front of the Opera House.
The crowd then marched to Freedom Square, where there was a statue of Vladimir Lenin.
The statue been a rallying point for pro-Russian protesters earlier in the year.
The statue of Lenin was pulled down by the demonstrators at 22:40, shortly after oblast governor Ihor Baluta signed an order to dismantle the statue.
From early November until mid-December, Kharkiv was struck by seven non-lethal bomb blasts.
Targets of these attacks included a rock pub known for raising money for Ukrainian forces, a hospital for Ukrainian forces, a military recruiting centre, and a National Guard base.
According to SBU investigator Vasyliy Vovk, Russian covert forces were behind the attacks, and had intended to destabilize the otherwise calm city of Kharkiv.
They demanded that a referendum on the establishment of an ""Odessa Autonomous Republic"" be held.An 'Odessa People's Republic' was allegedly proclaimed by an internet group in Odessa Oblast on 16 April.
Members of the Odessa anti-Maidan protest group later swore that they made no such declaration, and the leaders of the group said they had only heard about it through the media.
The OSCE monitoring mission in Ukraine later confirmed that the situation in Odessa remained calm.Local anti-Maidan and pro-Euromaidan leaders in Odessa Oblast voiced scepticism about the Geneva Statement on Ukraine on 20 April.
The anti-Maidan leaders insisted that they aimed not at secession, but at the establishment of a wider federated state called 'Novorossiya' within Ukraine.A hand grenade was thrown from a passing car at a joint police-Maidan self-defence checkpoint outside Odessa on 25 April, injuring seven people, and causing heightened tensions in the region.
City centre clashes and further events Pro-Russian encampment outside the Trade Unions House A week later, on 2 May, a rally by about 1,500 pro-government demonstrators, including football ultras, was attacked by visibly smaller group of alleged pro-Russian militants with batons and helmets.
Both sides clashed in the streets of central Odessa, building barricades, throwing petrol bombs, and firing automatic weapons at each other.The anti-Maidan protesters were later overwhelmed by the much larger group of Ukrainian unity protesters, forcing them to retreat to and occupy the Trade Unions House.
Whilst defending the building, militants on the roof tossed rocks and petrol bombs at the protesters below, who responded in kind with petrol bombs of their own.
Police said at least three people were shot dead.In the aftermath of the clashes, on 4 May, the main Internal Affairs Ministry office in Odessa was attacked by pro-Russian protesters.
They demanded the release of their ""comrades"" who had participated in the clashes.
By 5 May, the situation in Odessa had calmed, though the atmosphere remained extremely tense.About sixty people gathered on Kulikovo Field to commemorate the 2 May fire on 13 July.
They chanted ""Donbas, we are with you"", in reference to the ongoing War in Donbas.
Internal Affairs Ministry advisor Zorian Shkiryak said on 25 December that Odessa and Kharkiv had become ""cities which are being used to escalate tensions"" in Ukraine.
According to the security service the separatist network behind it also wanted to set up a ""Odesa People's Republic"", ""Porto-Franko"" and other breakaway entities.
Largest protests by date and attendance The charts below show the locations, dates, and attendance rate of pro-Russian protests in Ukraine, and also of pro-Ukrainian counter-protests.
Rally of supporters of the Donetsk People's Republic on occasion of Victory Day held in Donetsk, 9 May 2014 Referendum in Donetsk, 11 May 2014 Extant Donetsk People's Republic – This was proclaimed on 7 April.
It controls large swathes of territory in Donetsk Oblast, and is supported by the insurgent Donbas People's Militia.
Luhansk People's Republic – This is the successor to the failed Luhansk Parliamentary Republic, proclaimed on 27 April.
Activists occupied the SBU building in Luhansk from 8 April, and gained control of the city council, prosecutor's office, and police station by 27 April.
The regional administration announced its support for a referendum, and granted the governorship to separatist leader Valeriy Bolotov.
Like Donetsk, a referendum on the status of the region took place on 11 May.
Republic of Crimea – This was proclaimed on 17 March by the parliament of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol.
These two entities, which together comprise the whole of the geographic Crimea, functioned as separate administrative units within Ukraine.
After a disputed referendum on the political status of Crimea held on 16 March 2014, the Russian Federation annexed the Republic and split it back into the federal city of Sevastopol and the federal subject of the Republic of Crimea.Failed proposals Kharkiv People's Republic – The Kharkiv People's Republic was a short-lived republic proclaimed on 7 April by protesters occupying the RSA building.
However, later that day, Ukrainian special forces retook the building, thereby ending the control the protesters had had over the building.
On 21 April, during a rally, demonstrators elected a ""people's governor"", though it is unknown if this is connected to the former Republic.
Odessa People's Republic – This republic was declared by an internet group on 16 April, but local Antimaidan protesters said they had not made such a declaration.
Unlike in Kharkiv, Donetsk, and Luhansk, pro-Russian protesters in Odessa said they wanted Odessa to be an autonomous region within Ukraine, rather than to join Russia.
On 28 October, the SBU said they had foiled a plot to create a People's Republic in the region.
They found a munitions cache, and arrested members of an alleged separatist group.
They also said that Russian intelligence and security services were behind the plot.
Novorossiya – This confederation was established on 24 May 2014 with an agreement between the Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic to form a confederal union of people's republics.
However, the Parliament of Novorossiya, chaired by Oleg Tsarov, continued to function as an office for political advancement, and was involved in the coordination of humanitarian assistance on 2 February 2015.
The armed forces of the two People's Republics are combined in the United Armed Forces of Novorossiya, and the war flag of Novorossiya remained in widespread usage.
International response For reactions specific to the secession crisis in Crimea, see International reactions to the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation.
For reactions specific to the war in Donbas region, see International reactions to the war in Donbas.
Various international entities warned all sides to reduce tensions in Eastern and Southern Ukraine.
Armenia – In late March, Armenian president Serj Sargsyan and Russian president Vladimir Putin held a phone conversation where both men stated that the Crimean referendum constituted a case of people exercising their right to self-determination via the free expression of will.
At the same time, the presidents highlighted the importance of commitment to the norms and principles of international law, especially the UN Charter.
The Prime Minister told the Australian House of Representatives on 3 March that ""Russia should back off, it should withdraw its forces from Ukraine and people of Ukraine ought to be able to determine their future themselves"" with the Australian Government cancelling a planned visit to Russia by the Trade Minister Andrew Robb.
Harper condemned Russia's military intervention in Ukraine; he announced that Canada had both recalled its ambassador to Russia and withdrawn from the 40th G8 summit, which was to be chaired by Russia.
On March 3, the House of Commons passed a unanimous motion condemning Russia's intervention in Crimea.
Harper called Russia's actions an ""invasion and occupation"" and Baird compared them to Nazi Germany's occupation of the Sudetenland in 1938.
Canada suspended all military co-operation with Russia, and asked Russian military servicemen to leave its territory in 24 hours.
A spokesman restated China's belief of non-interference in the internal affairs of other states and urged dialogue.
India – National Security Advisor Shivshankar Menon of India stated that Russia has legitimate interests in Crimea and called for ""sustained diplomatic efforts"" and ""constructive dialogue"" to resolve the crisis.
However, the National Security Advisor is not a part of the Cabinet of India and, as such, Menon's statement was not an official statement issued by the government of India.
India subsequently made it clear that it will not support any ""unilateral measures"" against Russian government.
On 19 March, during a speech in the Chamber of Deputies, Renzi stated that the Crimean status referendum was illegal and that the G8 countries must start co-operating to solve the crisis and prevent a return to the Cold War.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization – On 2 March, Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen convened the North Atlantic Council due to what it called Russia's military action and President Vladimir Putin's alleged threats against Ukraine.
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe – OSCE chairman-in-Office Didier Burkhalter condemned the detention of military inspectors from OSCE participating states in Sloviansk, and requested that they be released.
Apakan said ""There is a need for de-escalation...the Special Monitoring Mission is here to promote this objective.
Romania – A harsh exchange of words between officials in Moscow and Bucharest erupted in the context of Ukrainian crisis.
Rogozin's statements have irritated the authorities in Bucharest that catalogued them as a threat.
The ministry alleged that what it called ""American experts from the private military organization Greystone"" disguised as soldiers, as well as militants from the Ukrainian far-right group Right Sector, had joined Ukrainian forces preparing for the crackdown in eastern Ukraine.
Russian president Vladimir Putin did not send his regards to Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko for the Independence Day of Ukraine celebration on 24 August, despite the fact that Poroshenko had sent his regards to Putin for Russia Day on 12 June.
On 7 April an ""anti-terrorist"" operation against militants was started in Luhansk and Donetsk self-proclaimed republics.
United States – United States Secretary of State John Kerry stated that he thought the conflict in Kharkiv, Donetsk, Luhansk, and Mariupol was a carefully orchestrated campaign with Russian support.
Assistant United States Secretary of State Victoria Nuland said that the United States had no doubt that Russians were behind the takeovers of government buildings in eastern Ukraine.Geoffrey R Pyatt, United States Ambassador to Ukraine, characterized the militants as terrorists.
On 30 April, John Kerry stated that phone tap evidence proved that the Kremlin was directing pro-Russian protests in the region.
International sanctions during the Russo-Ukrainian War During the course of the unrest, the United States, followed by the European Union, Canada, Norway, Switzerland, and Japan, began to sanction Russian individuals and companies that they said were related to the crisis.
The Russian government responded in kind with sanctions against some American and Canadian individuals.
With the unrest continuing to escalate, the European Union and Canada imposed further sanctions in mid-May.
Geneva Statement on Ukraine On 10 April, Ukraine, the United States, Russia and the European Union agreed to hold a 17 April quadrilateral meeting in Geneva to try to negotiate an end to the crisis in Ukraine.
The meeting produced a document, called the Geneva Statement on Ukraine, which stated that all sides agreed that steps should be taken to ""de-escalate"" the crisis.
All four parties agreed that all ""illegal military formations in Ukraine"" must be dissolved, and that everyone occupying buildings must be disarmed and leave but that there would be an amnesty for all anti-government protesters under the agreement.
The agreement put on hold additional economic sanctions against Russia by the United States and the European Union.
National unity talks As part of an OSCE initiative to solving the crisis in Ukraine, national unity talks were held in Kyiv, starting from 14 May.
The OSCE said that Russian president Vladimir Putin supported its initiative.
Concurrently, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said that the separatists should be included in the talks.
Separatists from Kharkiv were indeed invited to attend, but they refused to participate.
Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko announced a fifteen-point plan for peace on 20 June.
The plan called for a week-long ceasefire, starting on 20 June, for the separatists to vacate the buildings they've occupied, for decentralization of power from the central government in Kyiv, and for the protection of Russian-language rights.
Amnesty for those who laid down weapons and didn't commit serious crimes.
Establishment of a .mw-parser-output .frac{white-space:nowrap}.mw-parser-output .frac .num,.mw-parser-output .frac .den{font-size:80%;line-height:0;vertical-align:super}.mw-parser-output .frac .den{vertical-align:sub}.mw-parser-output .sr-only{border:0;clip:rect;height:1px;margin:-1px;overflow:hidden;padding:0;position:absolute;width:1px}10-kilometre long buffer zone on the Ukrainian-Russian border.
Liberation of illegally seized administrative premises in Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
Restoration of central television and radio broadcasting in Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
Coordination of governors with representatives of the Donbas before the elections Early local and parliamentary elections.
Restoration of industrial objects and objects of social infrastructure.Russian president Vladimir Putin offered some support for the plan, but called for Poroshenko to bring the separatists into negotiations.
Poroshenko previously refused to enter into negotiations with armed separatists.OSCE monitors with the Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine met with a representative of the Donetsk People's Republic on 21 June to discuss the peace plan.
The representative said that the Republic would reject the ceasefire, and said that the primary demands of the government of the Donetsk People's Republic were ""withdrawal of Ukrainian forces from Donbas"", and recognition of the Republic.
However, after initial peace talks between the separatists, Ukrainian and Russian officials, and the OSCE in Donetsk on 23 June, Alexander Borodai, prime minister of the Donetsk People's Republic, said that his forces would hold to the ceasefire.
Soon after this statement, separatists in Sloviansk shot down a Ukrainian Armed Forces Mi-8 helicopter, killing all those on board.
The next day, the Office of the President of Ukraine issued a statement that said that the ceasefire had been violated by the insurgents at least thirty-five times.
Despite this, Poroshenko extended the ceasefire by three days from its planned ending on 27 June.
In response to this action, protesters in Kyiv took the streets in large numbers to demand that the ceasefire be cancelled.
The ceasefire had little actual impact on clashes between government and separatist forces, with at least five government soldiers killed during the ceasefire.
By July, the peace plan had fallen by the wayside and Poroshenko ended ceasefire after both sides accused each other of repeated violations.
The Ukrainian Security Service put out a wanted poster for Strielkov, accusing him of a series of charges, included premeditated murder and organizing mass riots.
CNN presented a video from a large separatist rally held in a central Donetsk city square around lunchtime on 26 May.
Two told a CNN team they were from the Chechen capital, Grozny, and one indicated that he was formerly a policeman in Chechnya and was in Donetsk to serve the Russian Federation.
Russian and Ukraininan media published numerous reports on bodies of separatists being transported secretly back to Russia, usually through Uspenka.
The bodies were transported to a Russian military base in Rostov-on-Don.
Some of the families were able to get the bodies secretly returned to them.
Russian citizens Alexander Dugin On 29 March, Russian political scientist Aleksandr Dugin appeared in a leaked Skype video conference with Kateryna Gubareva, the wife of Donetsk-based separatist Pavel Gubarev.
In the call, he reassured her of Moscow's support and further actions that should be taken by the movement.
He also stated all presidential nominees should be considered 'traitors' with only Yanukovych considered legitimate.
Following the video's release, a member of Dugin's Eurasian Youth Union was arrested on 31 March for planning terrorist acts in Ukraine.
Pro-government figures Valentyn Nalyvaichenko , the head of the Security Service of Ukraine , and Andriy Parubiy , 23 March 2014 Nadiya Savchenko is a Ukrainian ex-paratrooper, and a helicopter navigator, who was captured by the separatists as a member of Aydar battalion near Luhansk.
After being captured in June, the separatists published a video of her interrogation, and held her hostage.
Savchenko was the subject of a number of articles in Komsomolskaya Pravda by Nikolai Varsegov, who accused her of being a sniper and mass killer.
In July, the Russian government officials said that Savchenko had ""illegally crossed Russian border as refugee"", was stopped by Russian police, and is faced with a trial for alleged assistance in the murder of two Russian journalists.
Being finally allowed to see the Ukrainian consul, Savchenko said that she was transported to Russia against her will.
Ukraine's National Security and Defence Council chief Andriy Parubiy oversaw the government military operation against pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine.
As part of the Budapest memorandum participant, Parubiy appealed for assistance from the United States as one of the signatories.
Parubiy resigned as National Security and Defence Council chief on 7 August 2014.
Andriy Biletsky, the head of Social-National Assembly and Patriots of Ukraine , is commander of the Azov Battalion.Other foreign participants Chechen, Abkhaz, Ossetian, and Cossack paramilitaries have been active participants in the insurgency in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
Some Chechen opponents of Russian government were fighting pro-Russian separatists in Ukraine for the Ukrainian government.
In a meeting held on 7 July in Donetsk city, Russian politician Sergey Kurginyan held a press conference with representatives of Donbas People's Militia, including Pavel Gubarev, and said that Russia did provide significant military support for the separatists.
During a discussion among the participants, Gubarev complained that the arms that had been sent were old, and not fully functional.
In response, Kurginyan listed specific items, including 12,000 automatic rifles, grenade launchers, 2S9 Nona self-propelled mortars, two BMPs, and three tanks, that he knew had been supplied to the separatists by Russia.
Kurginyan admitted that Russia had initially sent ""4th category weapons"", but since 3 June had supplied equipment that was fully functional.
He also said one of his goals whilst in Donetsk was to ensure that military support from Russia was increased.
He repeated the claims of constant flow of military support provided by ""Russian community"" into the conflict zone on 13 July.OSCE monitors Monitors from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe were sent to Ukraine after a request by the Ukrainian government, and an agreement between all member states of the OSCE, including Russia.
The SMM lost contact with four monitors in Donetsk Oblast on 26 May, and another four in Luhansk Oblast on 29 May.
Both groups were held in captivity by separatists for a month, until being freed on 27 June and 28 June respectively.
Defectors Ukrainian defectors to Russia Throughout the conflict, there were reports of both police and military either deserting their posts or defecting to the separatists.
Oleksandr Turchynov stated that numerous Ukrainian military and security personnel joined the separatists, alongside Ukrainian military equipment.
A report by the Internal Affairs Ministry said that over 17,000 policemen had defected to insurgents in eastern Ukraine by 23 May.
Russian defectors to Ukraine On 19 July, Ilya Bogdanov, a former Russian FSB lieutenant in Vladivostok, defected to Ukraine claiming that he couldn't longer stand the lies used by Russia to stimulate the situation in Eastern Ukraine and Dagestan, where he served earlier.
On 24 July, Russian army serviceman Andrej Balabanov asked for political asylum in Ukraine stating ""I finally took a decision not to take part in this war and sided with Ukraine.
Balabanov claimed his unit had sent ""military intelligence, GRU, experts and Chechens"" into Ukraine to help the separatists.
On 7 April, he escaped house arrest after cutting off his monitoring bracelet, and later gave interviews to the Russian channel state LifeNews about 'guerrilla struggle' and using firearms to capture buildings.
Topaz was re-arrested as he set up another interview with Russia's Life News channel.
He received an eight-years prison sentence in January 2018, but was released in September with credit for time served.On 12 April a saboteur known as ""K"" was arrested by the SBU in Kharkiv.
He had been tasked with organizing riots and capturing administrative buildings.
The men were travelling on a bus and found in possession of explosives, petrol bombs, bats, shields, helmets, knives, and other weapons.On 25 April, the SBU announced it had arrested two Ukrainian military members recruited by Russian intelligence.On 29 April the SBU arrested Spartak Holovachov and Yuri Apukhtin, leader of the Great Rus' organization in Kharkiv.
Makarov, an alleged spy from the GRU was arrested in Chernihiv on 20 March 2014.
Anton Rayevsky was arrested in Odessa and then deported for inciting ethnic hatred and violence.
Roman Bannykh, allegedly an agent of the Russian GRU, was detained on 5 April 2014.
Negrienko was arrested earlier in March 2014 for attempting to recruit Ukrainian police officers.
Oleg Bakhtiyarov, for allegedly planning to storm Ukraine's parliament and Cabinet of Ministers buildings in Kyiv by force.
Bakhtiyarov allegedly also arranged, with some Russian TV channels, to film the incident, which would then have been blamed on Ukrainian radicals.
Two Russian citizens were arrested in Lviv oblast on 2 April 2014, suspected of plotting to take several Ukrainians hostage, including a presidential candidate.
Also allegedly found was a notebook with details of cars used by the presidential candidate and a timetable of his movements, a tablet with images of the targeted politician, as well as members of Lviv Regional Council, one former MP, photos of houses belonging to them, and plans for gaining access to them.
Pro-separatist supporter detained by Ukrainian soldiers, 30 July 2014 Mariya Koleda was arrested on 9 April 2014, and allegedly performed Russian intelligence agency tasks to destabilize the situation in the southern regions of Ukraine.
On 7 April, she allegedly took part in fights at the Mykolaiv Oblast Regional State Administration building using a firearm, and confessed to shooting and wounding three people.
On 22 April, Ukraine's director of Ukraine's national security service announced that they had arrested three alleged Russian GRU agents.
On 1 May, border guards arrested a Russian citizen for planning separatist provocations in Luhansk.
The man was allegedly a member of the neo-Nazi skinhead group 'Slavs' and had several swastika tattoos as well as a Nazi-branded knife.
On 23 October, Ukraine arrested a man that they claimed was a high-level Russian intelligence agent who had been co-ordinating separatist activity and had organized the protest of several hundred National Guard troops outside the Ukrainian presidential administration building in Kyiv on 13 October.Bounty In April 2014 international billionaire and governor of Dnipropetrovsk Igor Kolomoisky issued a $10,000 bounty for the apprehension of Russian agents.
On 19 April he issued his first $10,000 payout for the capture of a Russian saboteur.
Protesters burn literature from far right groups in Kharkiv, 1 March 2014.
Demonstration in support of Ukrainian unity in Donetsk, 17 April 2014 Protest rally in Odessa against Russian President Vladimir ""Putin's occupation actions in Ukraine"", 2 March 2014.
George's Ribbon, used by pro-Russian civilians as a patriotic symbol, 9 May 2014.
Church of Holy Epiphany in Karlivka, Donestk Oblast, on 23 May 2014, shells on road from fighting between Ukrainian forces and pro-Russian separatists.
Regions inhabited by significant Russian populations in Ukraine in 2001.
Donetsk and Luhansk separatists driven by people of Akhmetov and Yefremov.
Retrieved 28 February 2014. ^ a b Crimea Applies to Join Russia Archived 21 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
Retrieved 18 November 2020. ^ a b ""How 'eastern Ukraine' was lost"". openDemocracy.
In Donetsk Gubarov was known as a neo-Nazi and as a member of the fascist organization Russian National Unity.
Pavel Gubarev, a former member of the neo-Nazi, Russian chauvinist Russian National Unity movement ^ ""Pro-Russian Group in Donetsk declare independence from Ukraine"". news.biharprabha.com.
Pro-Russian protesters storm buildings in cities close to Russia border"". euronews.
March 2014. ^ a b В Кривом Роге, Сумах и Полтаве также проходят многотысячные митинги против российской агрессии – Новости / ФРАЗА Archived 7 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
Protesters declare Donetsk 'republic', BBC News ^ Daily Press Briefing: 7 April 2014 Archived 8 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
Ukraine Crisis Escalates as War Fears Grow Archived 8 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
All illegal armed groups must be disarmed; all illegally seized buildings must be returned to legitimate owners; all illegally occupied streets, squares and other public places in Ukrainian cities and towns must be vacated.
Amnesty will be granted to protesters and to those who have left buildings and other public places and surrendered weapons, with the exception of those found guilty of capital crimes.
It was agreed that the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission should play a leading role in assisting Ukrainian authorities and local communities in the immediate implementation of these de-escalation measures wherever they are needed most, beginning in the coming days.
The U.S., EU and Russia commit to support this mission, including by providing monitors.
The announced constitutional process will be inclusive, transparent and accountable.
It will include the immediate establishment of a broad national dialogue, with outreach to all of Ukraine's regions and political constituencies, and allow for the consideration of public comments and proposed amendments.
The Crazy Ideologue of the New Russian Empire, The Daily Beast ^ Known Russian Fascist Aleksandr Dugin Instructs Ukrainian Separatists | Voices of Ukraine.
March 2014 ^ З України видворено російського неонациста-""чорносотенця"", який готував диверсію в Одесі – Новини України на 1+1 – ТСН.ua.
Retrieved 1 May 2014. ^ a b SBU detained Russian agent who coordinated separatists in Ukraine.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0; additional terms may apply.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
