It contains the research findings on the EU’s interventions in conflict prevention and peacebuilding in Ukraine.
Further, it focuses on possible areas for improvement and recommendations regarding the EU capabilities.
This case study report is based on both a desk research and field research, consisted of in-depth Interviews with the representatives of local and international actors.
This project is funded by the EU’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme Grant agreement no.3866 This document only reflects the views of author, and the EU is not responsible for how the information may be used.
On the one hand, the EU as a security actor has relied on its soft power, promoting democratic transformations in the neighbourhood through positive conditionality.
Ukraine, in turn, has, for the most part, regarded the North Atlantic Treaty Organiszation as its primary security partner and model.
Some aspects of civilian security were touched upon (e.g. border management, judiciary reform) but never constituted a core dimension of the bilateral relations.
However, during the Revolution of Dignity and after the Russian meddling in Ukraine, the EU could not help but become a security actor, albeit reluctantly.
In the first place, the EU was the player who recognized the legitimacy of the presidential elections held after the Revolution of Dignity on 25 May 2014 and hence made the entire world, including Russia, recognize them too.
The EU has been active in setting up the Geneva format for negotiating a peaceful settlement of the conflict and the stabilization of Ukraine.
Although the Geneva format was replaced by the Normandy format, which no longer included the EU but a representation by Germany and France, Brussels remained active in helping Berlin and Paris put together a settlement plan.
Moreover, several waves of sanctions imposed by the EU against Ukrainian and Russian persons and companies , including top Russian companies and officials close to Putin, seem to have thus far been effective in deterring Russia from seizing more territory.
The EU also made an attempt at contributing to the conflict settlement by dispatching an EU Advisory Mission to Ukraine.
Although the mandate of the mission did not match the request of Ukraine, EUAM remains a significant tool in Ukraine’s institution building at the time when viable and functional institutions are paramount for the state’s survival and sovereignty.
Importantly, the role played by the EU and the form that the EU interventions have taken is subject to debate in Ukraine.
As mentioned, this was not only the case with the EUAM mandate, but also with the EU’s choice to consider decentralization as an additional element for conflict settlement.
The latter is particularly sensitive and hotly contested in the Ukrainian context.
The reason to include this case in this study is that the EU considers decentralization a means to contribute to conflict resolution.
Nevertheless, including this case does not imply that the authors of this report agree with the suggestion that the root cause of the conflict in Ukraine is the status of the regions in the East, or that more autonomy in these regions will necessarily lead to a solution.
The paper concludes with a reflection on how the EU civilian capabilities in peace building and conflict prevention could be made more inclusive and sustainable.
National context The presence of the EU in the eastern neighbourhood has irritated Russia over the last decade.
In order not to lose its capacity to project power in the region in the post-Soviet era, Moscow has created alternative integrationist projects that fuelled tensions in the region.
The final choice of President Yanukovych, announced on 21 November 2013 by then Prime Minister Azarov, of suspending the signing of the Association Agreement generated deep dissatisfaction in the form of mass protests.
After repeated violent crackdowns by law-enforcement agencies, the protests led to a regime change after the incumbent president left the country.
This chapter provides some relevant background information about the Ukrainian national context, both before and after the Revolution of Dignity took place.
It explains the conditions in which Ukraine found itself between two integrationist projects and how it managed to revive the relations with the EU and pursue a reform agenda.
For Yanukovych’s Ukraine , the choice between association with the EU and the membership in the Customs Union was an uncomfortable position.
Choosing the Customs Union was dangerous due to the potential to provoke protests within Ukraine and loose the relative comfort of managing an independent policy for the benefit of Russia.
During Viktor Yanukovych’s rule, Ukraine made significant efforts to balance the two centres of gravity, which was also the case during the presidency of Kuchma , but this permanent balancing act led to a loss of credibility and worsening conditions to join one or the other.
The decision of Yanukovych was not well received in Moscow, which put significant efforts into convincing Ukraine to join the Customs Union.
After four months of pressures from the Russian side in combination with discreet negotiations between Moscow and Kyiv, Yanukovych accepted to shelve talks with the EU over the Association Agreement on 21 November 2013.
Many Ukrainians viewed the AA as a tool to fight corruption and revive the economy.
Almost half of the population was willing to join the EU in 2013 while about 30% supported the idea of joining the Russian-led Customs Union.
In addition, the attempted violent crackdown of peaceful protests on Maidan generated more protests demanding the resignation of the cabinet, and later of the president.
This was criticized by a part of the Ukrainian public and appreciated by another part.
The pressure from the EU states increased in January and February 2014 after the lawenforcement bodies carried out violent attacks on the protesters.
With the rising protests in February 2014, the foreign ministers of Germany, France and Poland became the mediators between president Yanukovych and the opposition.
The mediation of the Weimar Triangle, also attended by a Russian representative, consisted of an attempt to find a compromise between the parties.
The EU, however, did not manage to predict the seriousness of the crisis in Ukraine and the aggression of Russia.
The new Ukrainian leadership now favoured signing the AA and the continuation of the European integration path.
The annexation of Crimea and the subsequent Russian meddling in the East of Ukraine revealed the dire situation of the Ukrainian army and shortcomings in the functioning of state institutions in Kyiv.
The Russian annexation of Crimea and the meddling in the East was evidence of the weakness and unpreparedness of the Ukrainian state to deal with domestic and external challenges.
In this context, Ukraine needed the support of the EU, the United States and other developing partners in restoring the state institutions.
The relations with these developing partners focused partly on security related institutions, but the economy was also a priority.
Moreover, the Russian president Vladimir Putin have explained the annexation of Crimea as a preventive intervention aimed at defending the rights of the Russian speakers and denied the illegality of Russian actions, saying that over 90% of people living in Crimea voted in favour of reuniting with Russia , although, not mentioning the conditions under which the referendum took place.
The main process, which Ukraine had been preparing since 2007 – the Association Agreement – was re-launched and the first political part of the AA was signed despite Russian protest.
The signing of the AA was supported by the majority of Ukrainian society.
Despite the high overall support of Ukraine’s EU membership, there were considerable differences at the regional level.
The AA between EU and Ukraine provisionally entered into force on 1 November 2014.
The DCFTA between EU and Ukraine allows Kyiv to access the EU market in specific sectors and to have the same regulatory environment in those sectors.
Despite the previously firm position of the EU of not accepting interference from Russia in EU-Ukraine relations, after several rounds of trilateral consultations the then Trade Commissioner, Karel de Gucht, announced that an agreement to delay DCFTA had been reached by the EU, Russia and Ukraine.
Ukrainian leadership was not willing to join the Customs Union, but even if it was, this would have been impossible due to the fact that DCFTA and the Customs 6 Union exclude each other as each of these provides a different regulatory framework.
The entry into force, even provisionally, of the Association Agreement changed the optics of how European integration is perceived in Ukraine.
Decision makers in Ukraine now need to implement the AA and avoid “empty” words about EU-Ukraine relations.
The reforms target urgent issues like fighting corruption, independence of justice, reform of law-enforcement agencies, but also various reforms in social and economic areas.
Of enormous importance in EU-Ukraine relations since the pro-European government in Kyiv took office was the contribution of Brussels to avoid an economic collapse of Ukraine.
However important the financial support of EU to Ukraine would be, the political support was paramount for Ukraine.
First of all, one should consider the EU support for presidential elections on 25 May 2014, which basically closed down the debate about the questioned legitimacy of the acting president.
The fact that presidential elections were 1 The Support Group was established by the European Commission and consists of staff working for the Commission.
The several waves of sanctions against Ukrainian and Russian persons and companies , including top Russian companies and officials close to Putin, seem to have thus far been effective in deterring Russia from seizing more territory , but was insufficient in preventing the ongoing support of Moscow for the separatists in the East of Ukraine.
The Russian Federation has attempted to play “divide and rule” over the European continent, finding situational allies in order to make the decision-making process more sluggish.
Also, countries like Austria, Finland, Hungary, Cyprus, Slovakia, Greece and the Czech Republic have echoed unwillingness to increase sanctions or expressed readiness to cancel sanctions.
One has to note the strong role of Germany in pushing the EU to speak with a common voice towards Russia.
Following the sanctions imposed by European Union, the Russian government imposed retaliation sanctions on a series of goods produced in EU, United States of America, Australia, Canada and Norway.
The statement of Russian leadership was surprising for many given the contraction of Russian economy.
International interventions The European Union is an important player in Ukraine.
In 2008 the negotiations on the new enhanced agreement – the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement – started and were concluded in 2013.
The Association Agreement was signed in 2014 and, as of now, serves as one of the key reform roadmaps for Ukraine.
In 2014 the EU announced the allocation of another 11 billion EUR to Ukraine.
Therefore, EU money, as well as specific policy tools (e.g. the Association Agreement, the Visa Liberalization Action Plan) and reputational costs to Ukraine if it fails to deliver on its promises, provide the EU with a “carrot and stick” tool which has proven effective for reforms.
Inter alia, the VLAP contains the “Public Order and Security” block, which in turn contains requirements for fighting corruption and law enforcement.
Apart from the official representative body of the EU – the EU Delegation to Ukraine – there are a number of EU mechanisms which provide support to Ukraine.
On a regional level, the EU Border Administration Mission to Moldova and Ukraine, with headquarters in Odessa, has been a permanent “representation” of the EU in Ukraine since 2005.
Various aspects of reforms in good governance, democracy, rule of law, human rights, justice and migration, as well as the cooperation within the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union, have been part of the EU-Ukraine Action Plan and EU-Ukraine Association Agenda.
The EU involvement in multi-track diplomacy became evident in the attempts of the EU to contribute to the settlement of the political crisis in Ukraine.
Aside from the separate tracks initiated by the EU member states, the EU has been active in setting up the Geneva format for negotiating a peaceful settlement of the conflict and the stabilization of Ukraine.
Although the EU, as such, was no longer included in the Normandy format, its member states Germany and France were, and Brussels remained active in helping Berlin and Paris put together a settlement plan.
The EU also coordinated its activities on Ukraine with the United States of America and other countries, especially those represented in the G7.
Despite the fact that the EU was not always present at the table, the role of the EU alongside such countries as Germany was instrumental in shaping a joint response to the conflict in Ukraine.
In this context, it is noteworthy to mention the EU sanctions on Russia for illegal annexation of Crimea and for fuelling conflict in the East of Ukraine.
Other efforts were concentrated on such international organizations as the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the Council of Europe, NATO and mainly the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe E, which became the key organization tasked with observing the cease-fire and report on the implementation of the Minsk Agreements.
EU involvement in conflict prevention and security measures in Ukraine until 2014 Out of all EU instruments in Ukraine only one – EUAM – was dispatched as a direct result of the Russia-Ukraine conflict and thus can be assessed as a conflict prevention and/or peacebuilding effort.
The aim is to produce a coherent and complete strategy for the constitutionally independent players in the justice sector.
The objectives include enhancing the police skills on management and operations against cross border crime.
Also, a large number of EU member states have been engaged in Ukraine’s SSR, in addition to numerous other international actors.
Since no donor coordination mechanism was established in Ukraine, the EU tasked EUAM to coordinate donor support to SSR in Ukraine to avoid duplication.
The document offers a solid overview of the donors’ presence and priorities in Ukraine.
The key donors in SSR vary depending on the institution in question, but the key partners include NATO, the Council of Europe, IMF, the World Bank, the USA operating through the United States Embassy, Japan, OSCE, as well as a whole range of individual states.
Looking at graph 1, it is obvious that NATO is the only international organization dealing with the military aspect of SSR in Ukraine.
In turn, the civilian aspect of SSR is supported by the EU, OSCE, the Council of Europe and others.
While the EU is present in all of the above mentioned spheres, law enforcement is the sphere where the EU has the strongest involvement given the EUAM’s coordinating role.
Regarding decentralization , EU members such as Poland, Sweden and Germany, as well as the EU as a whole, have been consistently supporting 12 the decentralization reform through technical advice and financial assistance.
With EU support, a concept document on the reform of local self-government was approved by Ukraine in July 2009.
EU’s financial assistance was preceded by the political decision derived from the EU-Ukraine Association Agenda to prepare and facilitate the implementation of the Association Agreement.
The utilization of two different mechanisms by the EU is primarily driven by the peculiarities of decentralization reform in Ukraine.
Thus, IcSP funded programmes would be focused on the eastern regions of Ukraine, Donetsk and Luhansk, and specifically on the areas under government control.
Despite the signing of a ceasefire in winter 2015, hostilities continue to this day, which requires a different approach to decentralization and local governance reform.
Thus, the IcSP is aimed not only at assisting with reforms, but also toward reconciliation efforts.
U-LEAD, on the other hand, focuses on other areas of Ukraine that also require capacity building programmes and technical assistance to enable administrative and fiscal decentralization.
Overall, in view of the EU’s unique transformative power and leverage in Ukraine, any of its efforts in peacebuilding and conflict prevention could yield significant result, provided the EU is willing to fully engage and provide the necessary resources.
The EU efforts within the multi-track diplomacy, security sector reform and decentralization are reviewed in detail below.
European Union Diplomatic Intervention in Ukraine – “Normandy Format” 3.1.
Contextualization of EU intervention in Ukraine Diplomacy was unable to prevent the domestic crisis in Ukraine or the Russian intervention in the East of Ukraine and its subsequent annexation of Crimea.
The international community, including the EU, found itself unable to swiftly respond to the unfolding events in Ukraine, which included “hybrid” warfare.
The term hybrid warfare is used for a combination of traditional and unconventional elements that are employed by an aggressor, Russia in this case.
Russell Glenn defined hybrid warfare as ‘an adversary that simultaneously and adaptively employs some combination of political, military, economic, social, and information means, and conventional, irregular, catastrophic, terrorism, and disruptive / criminal warfare methods.
This type of warfare, which was applied on a large scale in Ukraine, proves to be an enormous challenge for the government of Ukraine and the EU, as it requires skills and resources that were not implemented before.
With reference to the Crimean annexation, Ukraine, EU, United States and most of the UN countries refer to it as the illegal annexation of Crimea, unlike Russia which claims the annexation was carried out according to international laws.
In relation to the war in the East of Ukraine, the Ukraine, EU and United States have used the term Russian aggression, while Russia denies involvement and calls it a domestic conflict and civil war.
All parties unofficially acknowledge that hybrid war tactics were applied initially.
Moreover, the Chief of General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces, general Gherasimov, laid out his theory on new type of war before the conflict in Ukraine took place.
In 2013 general Gherasimov was saying that ‘in the XXI century there is a tendency of erasing distinctions between a state of war and peace.
That is to a great extent the policy that Russian applied in regard to Ukraine once the aggression took place.
The short history of the independent Ukraine provided the tools to avoid conflicts and guarantee territorial integrity and security.
Despite the existence of the memorandum, Ukraine was not protected against external aggression.
Moreover, Russia, as one of the guarantors was the one who actually annexed Crimea and crafted the conflict in the East, instead of protecting Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
In terms of diplomatic efforts of the EU, the EU reaction was often one step behind the events in Ukraine, while sometimes Brussels delegated its job to the member states.
The first mention of the political crisis in Ukraine is contained in the EU Council conclusions of 20 14 December 2013, which highlight the readiness of the EU to sign the Association Agreement and ’emphasizes the right of all sovereign States to make their own foreign policy decisions without undue external pressure’ referring to Russia.
On 20 February 2014, at the pinnacle of the Revolution of Dignity3, the EU gathered for an extraordinary session of the Foreign Affairs Council in which the EU dropped its neutral position towards the ongoing events in Ukraine and agreed on necessary steps that would lead to de-escalation.
Evidence of that is the meeting between Yanukovych and HR Catherine Ashton on 10 December 2014, in which the president of Ukraine promised not to resort to violence.
The situation in Ukraine after the presidency of Yanukovych was extremely chaotic.
On the one hand the level of polarisation between Maidan supporters and Yanukovych supporters was extremely high, on the other hand, the state institutions were weak and it took them a few days to weeks to be back in control.
The shuttle diplomacy of various officials from the United States, European Union and EU member states culminated in the Agreement on the Settlement of the Crisis in Ukraine, which was signed on 21 February 2014 by President Yanukovych and the three opposition leaders.
The agreement was mediated by the foreign ministers of Germany, Poland and France at the invitation of the former EU HR and Vice-President Catherine Ashton.
However, the intervention of this so-called ‘Weimar Triangle’ was too late since the protesters rejected the deal, and on 22 February 2014 President Yanukovych fled the country.
Despite early calls to the EU in January 2014 from experts like Judy Dempsey to delegate mediation to Germany and Poland, given the inability of Brussels to handle the crisis, the EU has been slow in its response, at least slower than the expectations of Ukraine.
All the calls of the international community to restore control of the Ukrainian authorities were ignored.
Despite the restoration of power, the Ukrainian army was in a very poor condition.
It is fair to say that Ukraine has been able to withstand the expansion of Russian-backed separatist territories mainly due to the mobilization of many volunteer battalions alongside the regular troops.
Even in the Donbas region, there has been significant opposition to the Russian inspired separatism.
The lack of support from local population and the “import” of Russian mercenaries was confirmed by Igor Strelkov, who use to serve minister of defence of the self-proclaimed Donetsk Peoples’ Republic and led the Russian-backed separatists in Crimea and in Eastern Ukraine.
The direct intervention of Russia, as well as other factors, such as the downing of MH17, caused EU member states to become more involved in settling the conflict.
Since the failure of the Weimar Triangle was a recognized fact after president Yanukovych’s exile, the Geneva format emerged in April 2014.
It 16 was agreed that the protesters in Ukraine were to leave the buildings they occupied, while the illegal groups in Eastern Ukraine would be offered amnesty.
The Geneva agreement was cautiously welcomed, though there were no guarantees that the commitments on the side of Russia and Ukraine would be fulfilled.
Policy design The EU model aimed to aid conflict settlement in Ukraine broadly corresponds to the one that was suggested by German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
Under the first pillar, the “Normandy” format for the conflict in Ukraine was created on 6 June 2014, when the leaders of Ukraine, Germany, France and Russia met close to the 70th anniversary of the D-Day allied landings in Normandy.
A cease-fire agreement was much needed in order to stop the violence and the rising number of causalities, but also for Ukraine’s stabilization.
After a fourteen hour negotiation, a package of measures for conflict settlement was agreed upon on 12 February 2015.
The package of measures agreed by the Normandy Four in Minsk was not a process that started from scratch.
They prepared a joint declaration, which was a political umbrella for a signature of the Trilateral Contact Group and the two leaders of the separatist territories.
To summarize, the Normandy Four upgraded and reinforced the Minsk protocol to create the conditions for the signing of Minsk II package of measures.
It was clear that if Russia wants to stop the war, then it stops , because after the Kremlin accepted the Minsk package, de-escalation and a sharp decrease in cease-fire violations took place.
A few days later, on 17 February 2015, the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 2202 which also endorsed the Minsk Agreements, including the package of measures of 12 February 2015.4 During the negotiations and the creation of the Normandy Format, Brussels was not involved to the extent that Germany and France were.
This was evidenced by less involvement by the head of the European Commission and president of the Council, as well as that of the new HRVP for foreign and security policy, Frederica Mogherini.
The EU Council meetings served to build consensus, while some arrangements took place prior to the Council.
For many it was not surprising to see that German Chancellor Angela Merkel took the initiative and also brought Paris into the format.
The absence of the EU was regretted by certain EU countries and EU institutions, however, the most disturbing question for certain EU countries was why Germany and France went to the negotiations and signed an open-ended deal, which was later accepted by the EU through its Council endorsement.
The same question was raised to Frederica Mogherini, who said that, even though the EU was not directly involved, she has been coordinating with the leaders of France and Germany and she was on the phone with them during the negotiations.
Moreover, diplomats added that, in the Council, the member states had agreed on the red lines of the future agreements.
Therefore, the risk of reaching an agreement unacceptable to a member state was minimal.
However, despite the explanations given by EU, it is still necessary to find out why the EU lost the initiative in the process.
The involvement of the EU in the negotiations is a much more disputed issue that it seems in the public discourse.
The lack of direct involvement in the conflict settlement has several explanations.
Many experienced and knowledgeable public figures and EU officials share the idea that it would have been logical for the EU to sit at the table alongside the US, Russia and Ukraine.
They point out, however, that the need for deeper EU involvement emerged when the EU was weak because of the elections in the European Parliament and the change of the European Commission.
It is worthwhile to consider the mandates of HRVP Ashton and HRVP Mogherini, and how these mandates impacted member states’ behaviour, from a comparative perspective.
However, when comparing her mandate to that of HRVP Mogherini, it is possible to observe more diplomatic leadership during Ashton’s mandate, with clear roles the EU played in the negotiations with Iran and Serbia – Kosovo negotiations.
Additionally, the EU has played a leading role in the settlement of the Cyprus conflict.
In the mandate of HRVP Mogherini there seems to be a greater focus on strategic planning and cooperation with the European Commission and less involvement with political processes backed by member states.
Under Mogherini, the EU revised the EU strategy in global affairs, the EU neighbourhood policy, and improved the inter-institutional coordination.
Nevertheless, the challenge remains to increase the HRVP’s contribution to the most pressing international issues in foreign policy, especially to those involving EU member states.
In summary, it is not only the EU institutional void that caused a timid involvement of Brussels in diplomatic efforts to solve the conflict in the East of Ukraine.
Frederica Mogherini assumed office at a crucial moment in the conflict.
At that time, a series of questions were raised by EU officials in EU parliament, EEAS and member states regarding Mogherini’s ability to negotiate on behalf of the EU and were questioning her preparedness to withstand a negotiation round with president Putin, given her allegedly insufficient experience.
Also, leaders of several member states have suspected Mogherini of having a too soft and conciliatory position towards Russia.
Concluding, the EU policy design regarding its intervention in Ukraine at the level of multi-track diplomacy was rather process driven and has arguably weakened its influence in the process.
This mainly happened due to the overlap of the need to intervene in the conflict with the leadership change in the EU institutions.
The steps of the EU, especially at the level of the HRVP, were seen by certain EU member states as not entirely coherent and often inconsistent towards Russia , and questions regarding to what extent the new HRVP was well positioned and ready enough for negotiations in such a complex situation and format were raised.
Policy implementation Very few observers consider it possible that another format would have been able to achieve what the Normandy did not achieve the settlement of the conflict.
The negotiation format was limited by the true intentions of the participants.
In Ukraine and in a considerable part of 8 Author’s interview with an EEAS official, Brussels, 2016.
The Kremlin, on the contrary, highlights its readiness to contribute and denies any direct involvement in the conflict.
This also implies that Russia positions itself as a mediator and not as a party in the conflict.
Minsk II, signed as a result of the Normandy format efforts, shifted the centre of gravity in the conflict from military operations to diplomacy.
Nonetheless, military means are still used and the Russian military build-up on the Ukraine’s border continues to take place.
The question that is frequently asked by critics of the Minsk agreement is whether Minsk was created to hold the ceasefire and solve the conflict or to reform Ukraine.
In Kyiv, many accused president Poroshenko that within Minsk II he committed to things he cannot deliver, such as the amendment of the constitution, which can only be done by the parliament.
In Ukraine, many parties did not receive the insistence to adopt constitutional changes well.
The question that many Ukrainians ask is why a constitutional change has to be imposed from the outside instead of emanating from the population.
The Minsk conditions are seen by many parties as a direct pressure on the country’s leadership to accept changes that are not needed and do not contribute to the settlement process because these are not directed to solve the conflict, but to give Russia guarantees that Ukraine is not going to have a sovereign foreign policy.
The pressure on Ukraine also relates to the issue of elections in the occupied regions.
Among other aspects, Minsk II does not provide for a concrete sequencing of the process.
This has become a big issue as each side interprets the interconnections of the agreement in its own way.
That is why Germany has focused on negotiating a strict action plan with clear dates and benchmarks lately in order to move on with the implementation.
In Ukraine, many parties see this as an attempt to transform the conflict from an interstate conflict into a domestic conflict.
But as Kyiv is pressured by the Kremlin, it is also pressured by the Ukrainian public opinion and various groups to withstand occupation and confront the separatists.
The EU sanctions – a key component in the de-escalation, accompanied by US, Canada, Australia, Japan, Norway and other countries increased each time when the Kremlin crossed another “red line”, be it the illegal annexation of Crimea or the escalation in the East of Ukraine.
First, they were an important signal to everybody that the West was united in its rejection of Russian aggression.
At the same time, some EU member states advocated for lifting sanctions against Russia as these were affected by the Russian counter-sanctions.
While EU based companies may have been affected by the Russian counter-sanctions, according to research carried out by CEPS (Gros & Mustilli 2016) and the report of the European Parliament , the EU economies were not really affected or the impact was limited.
There was a discussion in 2014-2015 about the provision of lethal arms from the Western countries to Ukraine.
However, president Obama and European leaders did not support this approach as the common policy is that the conflict could only be solved by peaceful means.
Also, among officials and experts there were discussions that the West might embark on a trade-off with Russia, having the West more conciliatory over Ukraine, and Russia helping more in Syria.
From the perspective of EU officials, the intervention of Russia in Syria, aside from the supposed intention to show the ability to act as global power and reaching places outside the so-called near abroad, was intended to weaken the EU’s position in the negotiations, including on Ukraine.
Although the EU managed to keep separate tracks for Syria and Ukraine, it is true that the issue of Syria does effect the position of certain member states with regard to Russia.
The future of the “Normandy Format” Various EU members and officials of certain member states are concerned with the fact that the two most significant players in the EU are handling the crisis by themselves and demand changes in the format.
Especially the EU eastern member states are concerned about the vision of Berlin and Paris over the conflict and in particular that the Russian responsibility for the conflict may not be sufficiently reflected by Germany and France.
The member states that have had negative experiences with Russia in the past are the most vocal.
These states have a significant level of distrust for the Kremlin’s real intentions in the conflict, which is also the case for Berlin and Paris, although to a lesser degree.
Ukraine has quite a feeble ownership over the process of negotiations in the Normandy format because Kyiv is often pressured by the Kremlin, Berlin and Paris, and its choices are quite limited.
Even if HR Mogherini is not at the negotiation table, she has an important role in shaping the EU position on Ukraine within the European institutions.
Chancellor Merkel and President Hollande made it very clear that they do not consider themselves neutral brokers by constantly highlighting that Russia is responsible for the war in eastern Ukraine and the destabilization of Ukraine, and also by imposing sanctions.
As of August 2016, it seems that there is an agreement at the level of the EU of who did what in the conflict and who is to be held accountable.
However, there are different ideas within the EU on how to deal with Russia in the future.
France, Italy, Austria and other countries would like to restore the dialogue, ease the sanctions and then deal with the issues.
Other countries, such as Poland, Romania and Lithuania favour strong preconditions to re-launch the dialogue and cooperation with Moscow.
Nonetheless, it seems that there is a consensus that bringing Russia and Ukraine into a diplomatic process has played an important role in de-escalating the conflict.
Number of ceasefire violations The involvement of the United States was demanded several times, above all by Kyiv.
Also certain EU member states made this demand; the most vocal of them was Poland.
Despite the huge disappointment of many officials and the expert community in Kyiv over Obama’s disinterest in Ukraine, there were also reported offers on behalf of the White House to enter the negotiation format.
The United States presence might lead to a discussion of Russian-US bilateral grievances in a format that was not created to discuss these, and, thus, deviate from the main purpose.
The United States unofficially joined the negotiation format by having a separate track of consultations over Minsk implementation led by V Surkov and V Nuland.
Additionally, the United States mentioned they could join Normandy ’if the four countries agree that Washington could play a role during the consultations or at the negotiating table’ 16.
But in general, the Russian position is that the participation of such countries as the US, Poland, UK, etc., would have blocked the results that the Normandy format achieved so far.
Thus, according to Russia, having the EU at the table would be a nice exercise, but would not provide the results which the Kremlin would like.
For the EU, the inclusion of the United States in the Normandy format might make sense since the direct negotiations between the United States and Russia at this moment are non-transparent.
This leaves the possibility for Washington and Moscow to accept compromises in the absence of EU and Ukraine.
If this occurs, Ukraine and the EU will lose ownership over the process.
Comparative advantages and disadvantages on EU direct / indirect involvement in negotiations regarding conflict 19 settlement in Ukraine.
This issue became a central element of the EU-Ukraine summit in April 2015.
However, the mission is only observing how the ceasefire is violated, broadly speaking.
In practice, contrary to the Minsk provisions, it has no free access to the occupied territories, as the separatist leaders condition the access.
Nonetheless, Kyiv has been unhappy with it, because the Ukrainian leadership would like a mission with the capacity to enforce peace.
Nonetheless, Ukrainian disappointment over the EU’s lack of response to this demand has been deepened by the fact that, in the case of Libya, the EU HRVP, backed by Italy and France, proposed an EU mission to maintain the ceasefire (the mission was not supported by member states) , while in the case of Ukraine, Brussels did not even propose such a mission.
Kyiv, Ukraine 19 Author’s compilation based on the carried out interviews.
The Normandy format was able to reach an unstable ceasefire, but it is quite unlikely that it will solve the conflict in Ukraine.
The inability of the West to solve the conflict was not because the diplomatic efforts of Germany and France were insufficient, but rather because of the diverging objectives of Ukraine and Russia.
The Kremlin states it would like to hand back control of the separatist territories to Ukraine, but on its own conditions.
In the Russian understanding, the separatist territories will de jure be part of Ukraine, but only to block inconvenient decisions of the central government in Kyiv, as Russia wants the institutionalization of its meddling in local and national politics, especially when it comes to strategic issues such as NATO membership or joining the EU.20 Therefore, Ukraine now has two choices and both of them are bad.
The first is to accept the status of the separatist territories on Russian conditions and risk paralysing the Ukrainian government for an indefinite period.
The second is to keep the status quo with the separatist territories and move towards freezing the conflict.
Theoretically, there is a third option – ensuring security in the East of Ukraine, creating conditions for elections in separatist regions and take back control of the territory and the border, as the Minsk agreements prescribed.
Nonetheless, for Russia to further sponsor the separatist regions brings significant economic and reputational costs, for example through the funding demands of the occupied regions and the economic and political impact of sanctions against Russia.
In order to speed up the process, Russia raised the issue of the Minsk implementation in discussion with the EU and US in August 2016.
The pretext for this was allegedly a planned diversion of Ukrainian intelligence in the occupied Crimea, something denied by the government in Kyiv.
Thus, Moscow seems increasingly disappointed in the Normandy format and its European brokers.
The main Russian disappointment came as a result of the inability of Germany and France to make President Poroshenko implement Minsk II, especially the part on constitutional reform.
Therefore, the Kremlin does not seem to have any other choice than to continue the discussion with the US, as the Kremlin sees Washington as the one who could really influence Ukraine.
Conclusion The EU has been slow in responding to the crisis in Ukraine and the following conflict between the Kremlin and Kyiv.
Embassy in Ukraine, Kyiv, 2016. 26 weakened EU intervention in the conflict settlement.
The EU difficulties in having a clear role in conflict settlement in Ukraine were also generated by the institutional void and change of EU leadership when the conflict emerged.
The inability of the EU to respond to the crisis in Ukraine revealed insufficient experience in conflict intervention and slow reaction mechanisms, but also different visions inside the EU on how to deal with Ukraine and how to build a dialogue with Russia.
However, the EU and its member states, with a leading role for Germany and France, have managed to move a considerable part of the fight to the diplomatic arena by creating the Normandy format.
Apart from the diplomatic attempts to resolve the conflict, the EU strengthened its positions by imposing a series of sanctions against Russia and mobilized a wide support for Ukraine to resist the pressure.
Security Sector Reform in Ukraine – the role of EUBAM and EUAM This chapter focuses on the role of two EU missions present in Ukraine – EUBAM and EUAM – in Ukraine’s security sector reform.
EUBAM is the EU’s only “hybrid” mission, administered by the European Commission but supervised by the Council, while EUAM is a civilian CSDP mission.
EUBAM started its work in 2005, while EUAM has only been in operation since 2014.
EUBAM is a local mission based in Odessa oblast, while EUAM is Kyiv-based and covers all of Ukraine with its mandate.
Also, EUBAM is widely regarded as an EU success story, while the record of EUAM is still to be evaluated.
The chapter first gives an overview of the dynamics of Ukraine’s security sector reforms from independence until the present.
It then moves on to provide an assessment of the two missions on focus, tracing the processes of policy design, implementation and change.
It ends with conclusions and reflections about how the EU capabilities and conflict prevention can be enhanced, based on the case study.
In the first years of Ukraine’s independence, the new state apparatus focused on establishing autonomous and capable security structures, one of the key characteristics of a state, reforming those which Ukraine inherited from the Soviet Union.
Together with Ukraine-NATO Action Plans, this has been by far the most important key strategic document which shaped Ukraine’s “security identity” until 2010, when the “Law on Domestic and Foreign Policy” of Ukraine declared Ukraine’s neutral status.
While different analysts have suggested different periods in Ukraine’s security sector reform , in this chapter special attention will be paid to the state of the security sector in Ukraine in the period 2010-2013.
This reflects the state in which Ukraine’s security institutions were at the time the conflict in the East of 21 With its missions EUAM and EUBAM the European Union deals with the civilian security sector reform in Ukraine only.
However, this section provides an overview of the security sector reform as a whole, since, in the current geopolitical environment, analyzing civilian and military security sector reform in Ukraine separately from each other would prevent the reader from an overarching comprehension of Ukraine’s security problematics.
By the years 2011-2012 the Ukrainian security institutions, especially those belonging to the civilian sector, still reflected the centralized Soviet model of governance.
It is symptomatic that the Internal Forces of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the special militia troops “Berkut” were mainly used for the crackdowns on the protesters and not the Ukrainian Army.
While in-depth research on the role of Ukraine’s security sector in the events of the Revolution of Dignity remains an unfilled niche in the academic and policy literature, it could be assumed that one of the reasons why the Army was not engaged in the crackdowns could be the loyalty of the armed forces to citizens rather than to the governing authorities.
As outlined by the EU Crisis Management Concept, which lays the basis for the EU Advisory Mission to Ukraine, ‘ith little resistance, pro-Russian militant groups have seized control over local police, intelligence services and municipal buildings in the Eastern regions of Luhansk and Donetsk, have declared the birth of self-proclaimed independent republics and have engaged in increasingly violent actions against Ukrainian security forces.
Hence, the unpreparedness of Ukraine’s civilian and military structures to defend Ukraine’s citizens from the Russian attack was undeniable.
After the Presidential and Parliamentary elections in 2014, the newly established authorities embarked on a series of reforms in the security sector.
The rights and freedoms of an individual and a citizen are for the first time defined as one of the key objectives of Ukraine’s National Security Strategy (National Security Strategy of Ukraine 2015); 3) European and Euro-Atlantic integration as a guiding vector of reform (National Security Strategy of Ukraine 2015); 4) Reforming in a state of the ongoing conflict; 5) Increased cooperation between military and volunteers.
It should be noted that the volunteer movement was instrumental to the support of the Ukrainian army in 2014-2016.
As a result, the Concept for the Development of the Security and Defence Sector assigns numerous roles to the civil society ’for the realization of tasks in the interest of the national security and defence of the state’, g. ’providing services in the implementation of what the Concept calls ”peacekeeping tasks” by the Armed Forces of Ukraine; functioning of a network of non-state research institutions which would professionally deal with the security and defence issues, etc.’; ’ensuring development of ICT used for the security and defence sector;’, etc.
In practice, the Concept’s provisions reflect the changes which have started and been ongoing since 2014.
However, it is fair to say that emphasis has been placed on military reform and that the reform of the civilian security sector has generally been less straightforward.
As outlined by the Concept, the Ministry of Interior is now the key internal security structure, to which the National Police, the State Migration Service, the National Guard, the State Border Service and the State Emergency Service will belong.
The police patrol reform was part of the Ministry of Interior reform, which kicked off in 2015.
Eka Zguladze also supervised the establishment of the National Police as a body subordinate to the Ministry of Interior.
The police patrol was a new structure which was created from scratch and in a very short period of time , within which the officers were employed and trained.
Notably, the early stages of the current governments’ reform relied on the Georgian model; hence numerous former Georgian officials from Saakashvili government, including Saakashvili himself, occupied various state positions, including those in the security sector.
This approach is different to OECD-DAC approach to the definition of the security sector, on which the EU relies.
The consequences of this discrepancy for the operation of the EU missions in Ukraine, in particular EUAM, will be analysed in further detail below.
While the “police patrol” reform was relatively easy, quick and affordable to realize, other reform spheres,g. criminal investigation, are much harder to reform, both costand human resource-wise; 2) The financial factor.
Ukraine’s defence needs have grown exponentially, which has led to a fivefold increase in its security and defence budget in comparison to 2013.
Moreover, abuse of funds is likely to stay in the short to middle term.
With national defence being a top priority in Ukraine this leads to underfinancing of the civilian security sector; 3) Potential duplication of functions.
Over the last year numerous institutions have been created whose functions overlap, especially in the anti-corruption sphere.
It remains to be seen whether all these institutions find their niche and can coexist efficiently; 4) “Turf wars” between the security sector institutions which are loathed to curb their own competences and authority ; 5) Last but not least, the war, which requires the institutions to reform while responding to the challenges of war time.
EUAM and EUBAM Out of the EU actors present in Ukraine, two – EUAM and EUBAM – deal with SSR in Ukraine.
Both missions, however, represent the EU efforts in the civilian security sector reform in Ukraine.
EUAM Policy design A CSDP mission to Ukraine was requested by Ukraine in the wake of a Russian organized referendum in Crimea.
Ukraine’s idea was to request a monitoring CSDP mission to be dispatched to the administrative line of occupation between Ukraine and the Crimea.
However, while the request was reviewed in the EU, the Russian intervention in the East started.
Since some EU Member States were strongly against sending an EU mission to the East for political motivations, Sweden, Poland and Great Britain suggested a compromise in the form of an SSR CSDP mission, with headquarters in Kyiv.
As mentioned above, the CMC stressed the role of weak security institutions in the Ukraine during the unfolding and development of the conflict.
As a result, a CSDP mission was dispatched to Ukraine , but its “security and defence” component was watered down as much as possible.
It is important to stress that while the key interlocutor with Brussels was the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, apparently none of the mission’s beneficiaries were consulted when EUAM’s mandate was elaborated.
The potential beneficiaries did not even know that they would be the mission’s partners and target institutions until the mission set up in Kyiv.
In addition, an official of the EU Delegation in Ukraine reported that the EU Delegation in Kyiv was not consulted at the stage of the mission’s inception.
While the Delegation welcomed the mission as a reinforcement to the EU reform effort in Ukraine, its focus on SSR was treated with some degree of surprise, since the “SuperTWINNING” project, run by the Delegation, had already covered practically all institutions foreseen as EUAM beneficiaries.
As a result, the EU Delegation had to withdraw the Twinning advisors from the Ministry of Interior to give way to EUAM advisors.
Sent as a political signal of support to a partner country at war, the mission was mandated with providing strategic advice to the civilian security sector reform only.
Its “security and defence” component largely disappeared from the mandate.
Some member states even opposed the mission’s assistance to the National Guard, perceiving it as a military structure, despite its subordination to the Ministry of Interior.
As a result, the National Guard was not included in the list of EUAM beneficiaries.
The EU reluctance to send military missions to the Eastern neighbourhood region for fear of irritating Russia has been addressed in the literature and Ukraine’s case provides more evidence of this reluctance.
It should be stressed, however, that, distanced as the EUAM mandate is from any relation to the Russian-Ukrainian war, the Ukrainian case is still a precedent for the EU by sending a mission to the Eastern neighbourhood while armed conflict is ongoing.
In contrast, the EU Monitoring mission to Georgia was dispatched after the hostilities were over.
Policy implementation and change The initial mandate of the EUAM was to provide strategic consultation and coordinate donor support to civilian security sector reform in Ukraine.
In particular, the key complaint was that strategic advice was not enough for the local institutions and they needed projects and training as well.
While this could be justified by several objective reasons, the mission’s mandate itself required it to support ’rapid preparation and implementation of the reform measures’ and the expectations of the local stakeholders for the mission’s rapid involvement in the reform process were high but not met.
The local frustration with EUAM was felt in Brussels, which is why a Political and Security Committee delegation arrived in Kyiv in September 2015 in order to make an assessment of the mission’s activities.
So, the strategic review of EUAM’s mandate was carried out after less than a year of its operation.
Kęstutis Lančinskas, chief of the Vilnius County Police took over the position after Kalman Mizsei left at the end of 2015.
The review of the mission’s mandate after one year was an exception to the regular procedures, since a typical timeframe for a CSDP mission mandate review is 2 years.
In fact, the National Police was established with support of EUAM and now is among the mission’s beneficiaries ; 29 Author’s interview with an EEAS official, Brussels, 2016.
This was an important concession, since the launch of the regional offices was considered from the start of the mission but only took place in May 2015, because the member states were sceptical about establishing regional offices for reasons of safety and a wish to avoid a duplication of functions with the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in the East.
However, the EUAM regional offices were approved in Brussels on condition that they would perform a representative rather than a policy-making function.
The issue was so sensitive for some member states that they even opposed the regional representations of the EUAM to bear the names of “offices”, preferring the term “presences” instead.
Strategic advice on civilian security sector reform, in particular the need to develop civilian security strategies Support for the implementation of reforms, through the delivery of hands-on advice, training and other projects Cooperation and coordination, to ensure that reform efforts are coordinated with Ukrainian and international actors The mission itself drew up a list of its achievements.
EUAM’s key achievements Target partner Assistance to drafting strategic documents and legislation, projects and trainings institution in Ukraine Civilian Security Strategic advice on a range of concept papers and strategies, such as the Sector at large ‘Strategy of the reform of the internal affairs agencies’, amendment to the Criminal Procedure Code on delineation of investigative powers, the draft law on freedom of assembly, and on the National Human Rights Strategy and Action 32 Author’s interview with a Ukrainian diplomat, Kyiv, 2015.
The majority expressed their satisfaction with the cooperation with the mission.
EUAM is active in a variety 35 According to six interviews of the author held in June – July 2016 in Kyiv. 37 of spheres, including collocation of experts to the beneficiary institutions and providing strategic advice on strategies and legislations, material and technical support (trainings, study trips, equipment ), donor coordination and even fundraising.
EUAM coordinates donor support for the reform of the law enforcement sector, and organizes monthly meetings with donors and beneficiaries.
Various beneficiaries assured that the donor assistance was coordinated effectively and avoided overlap.
Also, EUAM coordinates its activities with the EU Delegation to Ukraine and the EU Support Group to Ukraine.
During autumn 2015 EUAM and the EU Delegation have started to work on a “comprehensive approach” of support for anticorruption reform, community policing and the rule of law.
Under this mechanism, EUAM drafts a project proposal, the European Commission provides funds and a third party (e.g. a relevant member state institution) implements it in consultation with the EU Delegation.
This could also be related to the fact that the mission finally reached its full operational capability and was ready to engage fully starting in autumn 2015, which coincided with the mandate review36;  The role of the mission as the channel of communication between Brussels and the beneficiary institution37;  The high level of EUAM professionalism and expertise of the mission’s advisors.
The EUAM operates among a wide variety of donors and partners , and the beneficiaries seem to perceive the mission as one of the Western projects present in Ukraine, rather than a politically significant security and defence mission.
It is fair to say that the mandate review of EUAM led to positive evaluations of beneficiaries, who were of the opinion that the mission was much more focused and responsive to the needs of the partner institutions.
On the other hand, a number of different but interconnected factors challenged EUAM’s activities.
Lack of domestic strategic reform vision and civil-military dilemma One of the key challenges to EUAM’s work is lack of consensus on the vision and broader purpose of civilian security sector reform in Ukraine.
EUAM has drafted a proposal for a “Civilian Security Strategy” of Ukraine.
The idea is to develop a mind-set of security as a civilian concept, stressing security of citizens and not the security of a state, which EUAM attributes to a more militarised approach.
This, however, contradicts Ukraine’s own approach, according to which it is impossible to draw a clear distinction between civilian and military security in times of war.
For example, border guard and security service institutions function as both civilian and military bodies –g. regarding to intelligence, anti-terrorist activities, etc.
While Ukraine proclaims European and Euro-Atlantic standards as guidelines for its SSR, it often complains that the advice received from the EU, and EUAM in particular, would suit a peaceful security environment but not the one of a country facing military aggression.
Last but not least, the EUAM distances itself as much as possible from any connection whatsoever to the conflict in the East.
Not only does it not carry out any activities which could be described as a contribution to conflict prevention and peacebuilding, but it also rejects indirect involvement,g. assisting in the establishment of regional antiterrorist centres operated by the Security Service of Ukraine.
While it is understandable that such attitude is the result of caution on behalf of the member states, it is important to underline that the mission was invited by Ukraine as assistance in the conflict resolution and in the aftermath of the Russian aggression and not as an adviser to SSR in peaceful times.
The restraint of EUAM towards recognizing the realities of the ongoing war in Eastern Ukraine can well corrode the receptivity of Ukrainian counterparts towards its advice.
Some Ukrainian senior officials see significant potential if EUAM could assist in SSR in the East, where the security institutions can be built from scratch.
Some EU officials in Brussels confirm the possibility of this option, but strictly conditional on the launch of the reintegration of the occupied territories.
Domestic resistance to reform There is resistance of certain actors from the Ukrainian civilian security sector against reform.
Another factor is the “personnel resistance” the “old apparatus” which remains employed in much of the security sector.
Another cause of domestic resistance is that Ukrainian partner institutions are not used to receiving advice as a type of external assistance.
They are used to perceive assistance as donor supported projects, technical and material support, trainings, professional development, trips, etc.
Lack of trust between the mission and local partners It is also true, however, that some partner institutions have more constructive cooperation with EUAM than others.
It is worth pointing out that from the outset of EUAM GPO was one of the organizations which did not attribute itself to the security sector and hence did not perceive the EUAM’s mandate as relevant for itself.
For example, while for EUAM the National Police is one of the key local partners , for the National Police EUAM comes fourth in terms of priority partners.
At the same time, the cooperation between the Security Service of Ukraine and EUAM was very constructive and fruitful according to both sides.
The creation of the International Advisory Group to SSU, which EUAM suggested and to which it belongs, was explained, inter alia, by receptivity of the institution.
EUAM’s low profile Whether the EU likes it or not, EUAM, as the only EU representation in the capital alongside the EU Delegation, bears the reputational costs for the EU in Ukraine.
In this respect, the low profile the EUAM keeps in the media, lack of public statements and participation in public discussions are not only detrimental to the EU image in Ukraine but may also decrease the probability of reform success.
It might be the case that the reforms advocated by EUAM would be supported by Ukraine’s civil society which might create synergy with EUAM in exerting pressure, advocacy and monitoring.
However, with much of EUAM’s work taking place behind the scenes, it is impossible for Ukraine’s civil society to appreciate the EU efforts, or to take part in the public discussion.
As it was explained to the author by an EEAS official, low levels of the mission’s publicity can be attributed to the fact that EUAM does the “technical” part of the work while the “political” statements are part of the EU Delegation or High Representative portfolio.
This appears as a certain paradox since CSDP was never meant to be a ‘technical’ instrument.
Publicity is also important in order to inform the civil society about the mission’s “logic” of reform.
It should be noted that EUAM is mandated with a very broad and far-reaching task of assisting the civilian sector reform in Ukraine.
In addition, EUAM rather offers a “fishing rod”, than a “fish” – its focus is on assisting to choose the most suitable reform vector and reallocation of domestic resources to implement it rather than bringing the resources from the outside.
Justified as this approach is to ensure local ownership, it is time-consuming and unlikely to provide immediate results.
While Ukrainians expect a quick pace of reforms , EUAM risks 45 Author’s interview at the National Police of Ukraine, Kyiv, 2016.
As mentioned above, human rights and gender belong to one of three cross-cutting issues which EUAM focuses on in supporting reform of the civilian security sector in Ukraine.
EUAM aims to mainstream a human rights and gender perspective into all advice and support provided to agencies in the civilian security sector.
EUAM realized a number of initiatives promoting gender equality in Ukraine’s SSR,g. in the National Policy, the Ministry of Interior and the State Fiscal Service.
EUAM also emphasized the European standards in human rights and gender while advising on the Law of Ukraine on Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and on the implementation of the Human Rights Strategy and Action Plan.
Overall, the author observed that the interlocutors typically were taken aback by the questions of their cooperation with the mission on gender issues, clearly missing the link between the latter and conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
With regard to multi-stakeholder coherence, the EU-US “rivalry” was also observed by some commentators in 2015, when the United States prevented the EU from “co-owning” the police patrol reform.
In 2016 several interlocutors representing the EU institutions in Ukraine shared their frustration over the American approach, which according to them, focused on quick and bright but unsustainable results, whereas the EU approach focused on sustainability but lacked visibility and PR.49 Some interlocutors in the beneficiary institutions also confirmed that EUAM is not the priority partner for them but the US, Canada and Japan.
Reanimation Package of Reforms, Razumkov Centre, Amnesty International, etc.
It also created the “Parliament – Civil Society Platform” as a framework of cooperation between the Parliament and the Verkhovna Rada on issues related to civilian SSR.50 Regarding civil-military synergy, as explained above, EUAM avoids any cooperation with the military.
Hence, no examples of civil-military synergy in connection to EUAM were observed.
One such example is e-case management .51 48 Interviews of the authors with officials of EEAS and EUAM, Brussels, Kyiv, 2016.
EUBAM The EU Border Assistance Mission to Moldova and Ukraine has been operating since 2005.
It also has a EUBAM Office in Moldova and five field offices – two on the Moldovan side of the joint border and three on the Ukrainian side.
EUBAM's primary counterparts in Ukraine and Moldova are the local Border and Customs Services.
Technically EUBAM is not a proper CSDP mission but a hybrid one, since it is administered by the European Commission rather than by the European Council.
The Russia-instigated conflict in Transnistria remains frozen since 1992, and both Moldovans and Ukrainians were distrustful towards each other over the alleged smuggling over the Transnistrian segment of the Moldovan-Ukrainian state border, which the Moldovans did not control.
However, the institutional affiliation of the mission was debated between the European Commission and European Council prior to its establishment.
Still, scholars and policy analysts, as well as the European External Action Service itself tend to group EUBAM together with other CSDP missions.
Policy Implementation The daily activities of EUBAM experts, as described by Isachenko , consist of two main duties.
First is the on-the-job training of Moldovan and Ukrainian customs and border guard personnel.
At the management level EUBAM experts provide advice on how to set up night patrols, how to deal with subordinate personnel, as well as how and why to conduct briefings and meetings.
The key similarity with EUAM is that the bulk of EUBAM activities is aimed at capacity building of the local partners but, unlike EUAM, EUBAM’s work is focused on field work and real time “on the job” training.
While EUAM is based in Kyiv and attempts to influence the strategic level of decision-making, EUBAM efforts are local and constrained to specific branches of the Customs and Border Services of the partner countries.
One of EUBAM’s key achievements is considered to be the introduction of a new customs regime between Moldova and Ukraine.
However, EUBAM did detect the large smuggling route of chicken meat which was smuggled through Transnistria to avoid custom duties.
The first is to introduce automated exchange of travelers’ data between Ukraine and Moldova, including on travellers entering Moldova through the Transnistrian segment of the border.
The second is the establishment of a jointly operated border crossing point at Kuchurhan-Pervomaisk, which is located at the Transnistrian segment of the border.
This is an extraordinary achievement, since for the first time since the start of the Transnistrian conflict, Moldovan customs and, later, border police, will be able to have access and check all travellers and vehicles entering or exiting Moldova at the Transnistrian segment.
In a whole range of interviews which the author has carried out on EUBAM, not a single beneficiary complained or criticized the mission.
The fact that almost 100% of EUBAM personnel were seconded from the EU member states border and customs services and had practical rather than theoretical expertise was much appreciated.
The presence of an EU mission in Odessa makes the Ukrainian population feel more secure against the threat of Russia’s continued aggression, including from the Transnistrian side.
Since Russian troops are stationed in Transnistria, there are fears in Ukraine that they could be used for an attack on Ukraine.
It is worth noting that EUBAM is known among its stakeholders as an ever self-developing mission, responding to the needs of local stakeholders and the evolving geopolitical situation.
However, the Addendum only put to paper what was 54 Author’s interviews at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine and State Fiscal Service of Ukraine, Kyiv, 2016.
Speaking about EUBAM’s contribution to conflict prevention and peace-building in Moldova is one issue.
The Ukrainian interlocutors see this as a sign that EUBAM is getting more focused on Transnistria and Moldova, rather than Ukraine.
The Russian intervention in the East and the annexation of the Crimea added an extra impetus to the work of the mission.
Monitoring of the Transnistrian segment of the UkraineMoldova border became more important, firstly as an early warning mechanism of any threats which might emanate from that territory, and secondly to ensure that the increased security measures taken by Ukraine and Moldova still allowed for the flow of goods and people across the border.
More specifically, EUBAM has deployed 12 additional experts to the Transnistrian segment of the border since 2014.
It also opened a sub-office in Pischanka, at the northern end of the Transnistrian segment of the border to increase its geographical reach.
The additional staff have been used to advise the Ukrainian State Border Guard Service and State Fiscal Service on second line checks to detect the smuggling of weapons and contraband, as well as to ensure traveller rights are protected through the additional second line checks.
It is debated whether the mission will close down altogether, will continue with some changes to its functions or assume a different form.
The reason for the EUBAM exit is that the mission has fulfilled its mandate.
The mission itself considers that intensive capacity building has been provided and large scale training is no longer needed by local beneficiaries.
It can also be assumed that EUBAM wants to distance itself from the Russian-Ukrainian conflict and so refocuses its attention to Moldova and Transnistria, where it already has expertise and significant progress.
Ukraine is especially interested in prevention of smuggling on the occupation lines in the same way it was done on the Transnistrian segment, and for this, EUBAM experience is crucial.
An idea harboured by the Ukrainian officials is that EUAM takes up EUBAM’s functions and expertise (e.g. personnel) in establishing Integrated Border Management in Ukraine.
Rather than providing direct monitoring on the occupation line in the East, transfer of practices to the Ukrainian institutions is what is expected by Ukraine’s authorities.
Cross-cutting themes With regard to ownership, the above discussion shows that the Ukrainian government and counterparts have embraced the EUBAM mission and would like it to stay and expand to border crossing points with Slovakia, Poland and Hungary.
In 2015 EUBAM introduced an international Gender Advisor position within its staff.
The Advisor’s job is to firstly look at how EUBAM’s own support to the partners can be made more gender sensitive.
Secondly, the Advisor is also working directly with the partners to identify how to mainstream gender considerations into their policies and daily work.
Although EUBAM does not provide technical equipment, it recognizes that some of the improvements it supports, such as cross-border data exchange and closer connections to EUROPOL, FRONTEX and INTERPOL, require ICT equipment.
In these cases, EUBAM has supported the partner services in both countries to submit proposals for the EU’s Integrated Border Management Flagship Initiative projects, which provides funding for such equipment 66.
Also, since EUBAM activity in Ukraine decreases, it ensures that other EU tools step in.
For example, one EUBAM expert used to work on good governance and human resource management in the State Fiscal Service of Ukraine.
A specially focused Twinning project was launched in February 2016, deploying ampler and more targeted resources on this issue.
Conclusion This chapter discussed the EUAM and EUBAM mission in Ukraine.
While EUAM deployed only recently, the EUBAM mission started in 2005 and it is not clear whether its mandate will be extended.
The key similarity with EUAM is that a bulk of EUBAM activities is aimed at capacity building of the local partners but, unlike EUAM, EUBAM’s work is focused on field work and real time on-the-job training.
Overall, none of the missions contribute directly to conflict prevention and peacebuilding, instead concentrating on institution-building on a strategic, as well as, local level.
The different institutional nature of EUBAM and EUAM and larger flexibility of EUBAM suggest that maybe in sensitive geopolitical environments , EUBAM’s “hybrid” nature could be used as a blueprint for further missions, rather than a unique exception.
EU governance interventions in Ukraine – the case of decentralization 5.
Introduction In Ukraine, governance reform is an ongoing process that started after the proclamation of independence in 1991.
Throughout the past twenty-five years, the speed and depth of reforms have varied depending on the political situation in the country.
After the Revolution of Dignity of 2014 which was inspired in part by the intrinsic governance problems such as corruption and lack of rule of law, a new impetus was given for the acceleration of much needed reforms.
Decentralization and local self-governance reform was among the top priorities in the Strategy for Sustainable Development ‘Ukraine-2020’ , a framework document announced by President Poroshenko after the Revolution of Dignity to address the structural shortcomings that haunted the Ukrainian state for decades.
Following the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation and its involvement in the conflict in the east of Ukraine, decentralization reform and authority of the regions became highly politicized issues in Ukrainian society.
The majority of the provisions in the Minsk II agreement are not observed to this day, including the critical aspects of peace processes such as a full ceasefire, withdrawal of heavy weapons, access for OSCE observers to the conflict zone, as well as the withdrawal of all foreign troops.
Thus, according to the survey from October 2015 on decentralization, prepared upon the request of the Council of Europe, 59% of the respondents believe that Ukraine has to implement the decentralization and local governance reform.
The EU efforts in addressing governance reform in Ukraine, and particularly the decentralization dimension, have significantly increased in the past two years.
Although European Union grants and programmes have been present in Ukraine for quite some time, the political and security situation in the country after 2014 has accelerated the pace and scope of support.
This case study evaluates the process of the creation, implementation and adjustment of EU policies in support of the decentralization reform in the conflict-affected areas of Ukraine.
It assesses the state-of-affairs of the governance reform in Ukraine, and analyses the relevant EU programmes and instruments, while accounting for local ownership, gender dimension, communication technologies and multi-stakeholder coherence.
Ultimately, it stresses the significance of decentralization reform for mitigating the grievances and shaping the conflict dynamics, not only in the war-ravaged regions, but throughout the whole country.
Decentralization in Ukraine Scholarly inquiries into the ability of decentralization to mitigate conflict or prevent a relapse, point at both the possibilities to do so and possible backlashes.
Decentralised Governance for Development” links the failure of the decentralization reform to conflict occurrence by pointing at the highly politicized nature of the process that can be hijacked by corruption, abuse of power by elites, lack of inclusive practices and respect for local traditions.
In the analysis of the ethnic conflict and secessionism, Dawn Brancati argues that implementing political decentralization reforms in democracies have produced mixed results for the reduction of conflict.
Statistical analysis of the patterns between decentralization and intrastate conflict by Joseph Siegle and Patrick O’Mahony also underlines the complex nature of the relationship.
Empirical evidence from the case study analysis further suggests that there is no onesize-fits-all relationship between decentralization and conflict.
Thus, inclusive practices, local ownership, and multi-stakeholder approaches will be explored as the possible elements of a successful decentralization reform outlined by Kyiv.
Alongside the structure, it also acquired the intrinsic problems such as the overreliance on central authority, ineffective composition of lowest administrative units, and lack of resources available to them.
Although the legislative foundation for the decentralization was already devised in the mid-nineties, the continued dominance of the centralized decisions from Kyiv, lack of real financial resources at the local level, and pervasive corruption have hampered the transition to a more decentralized model.
The decentralization reform during the presidency of Viktor Yuschenko was not realized, in part due to the political infighting.
The current efforts of President Poroshenko are largely supported at the political and societal levels, yet the annexation of Crimea and the conflict in Donbas have been detrimental for the decentralization process.
European Union members such as Poland, Sweden, and Germany, and the organization as a whole have been consistently supporting the decentralization reform, both through technical advice and financial assistance.
Thus, IcSP-funded programmes would focus on the eastern regions of Ukraine, Donetsk and Luhansk, and specifically on the areas under government control.
Despite the signing of a ceasefire in winter of 2015, hostilities continue to this day, which requires a different approach to decentralization and local governance reform.
Thus, the IcSP is aimed not only at assisting with reforms, but also geared toward reconciliation efforts.
U-LEAD would focus on the rest of Ukraine, which also requires capacity building programmes and technical assistance to conduct administrative and fiscal decentralization.
EU Intervention in Ukraine – The Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace The Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace is a mechanism of EU external assistance aimed at preventing and addressing conflict situations across the globe.
The successor of the Instrument for Peace , IcSP focuses on conflict prevention in addition to the crisis response and preparedness components.
Since the second part of 2014, IcSP-related programmes in Ukraine were funded for 55 million EUR, with an additional 20 million planned for 2016.
Conceptually, IcSP interventions can be divided into hard interventions, such as the support for the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine , and soft interventions, such as the assistance to local populations, demining, and governance reform in Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
Alongside the OSCE, the IcSP aimed at assisting the efforts of the International Organization of Migration and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Ukraine.
Activities, such as increasing the capacity of regional media to report in a sensitive way on the conflict, social assistance, and demining, were implemented directly through NGOs.
Currently, the IcSP in Ukraine continues to support IDPs, activities of the OHCHR, demining, and is expected to expand its focus to police reform.
In 2016, a new action has been developed to address one of the most contentious aspects of the governance reform in Ukraine.
Decentralization and local governance reform has sparked heated debates in the Ukrainian society following the occupation of Crimea and war in the eastern regions.
With the constitutional reform regarding decentralization in Ukraine underway, the future of the territories under separatists’ control remains uncertain.
In this regard, the new programme “Restoration of Governance and Reconciliation in Crisis Affected Communities of Ukraine”, funded under the IcSP, was both a timely and necessary step to address the discrepancies that may arise from the uneven progress of the governance reform in Ukraine given the deterioration of capacity and infrastructure that resulted from the conflict.
In fact, the EU’s instrument, which will run for 18 months, will contribute to the existing framework and also enhance the scope of the current efforts.
According to a representative of the UNDP in Ukraine, the IcSP was designed to accomplish in the conflict-affected areas what U-LEAD would in the rest of Ukraine.
Thus, IcSP will fund a range of projects and efforts that would be implemented by UNDP and UN Women in Ukraine, as well as by local and international NGOs.
The primary focus of the funded projects is strengthening the capacity of local government in light of the ongoing decentralization reform.
Other aspects that the instrument covers are the support of community security, enhancing social cohesion and promote gender equality.
Restoration of Governance and Reconciliation in Crisis-Affected Communities of Ukraine USD 3 mln Restoration of Governance and Reconciliation in Crisis-Affected Communities of Ukraine USD 10 mln Rule of Law and Community Justice for Conflict-Affected Areas in Ukraine 2015 2016 2017 2018 Graph 1.
By and large, the activities envisioned by the instrument are demand-driven, as they reflect the needs of the local state administrations and local communities outlined in regional development and recovery plans.
As of June 2016, the IcSP programme, aimed at assisting decentralization reform in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, has moved from the policy design to implementation stage.
The IcSP funded programme “Restoration of Governance and Reconciliation in Crisis Affected Communities of Ukraine” was jointly designed by the EU delegation in Ukraine and the UN Development Programme in Ukraine.
While the IcSP provides funds for the initiatives to strengthen the capacity of local communities for decentralization reform, the EU officers also participated in designing these projects.
At the same time, the programme was devised within the framework of the overall programmes and agreements between the principal donors of the decentralization in Ukraine the EU and US.71 Although in its current form the EU-funded IcSP programme is similar to the approach designed for the rest of Ukraine (capacity building for local governance reform), there are nuances for the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
The EU representatives regularly visited the affected regions and interacted with the local government officials that designed regional development plans.
Based on these recovery strategies and development plans, the EU delegation to Ukraine devised the IcSP funded programme.
Although there was no direct input for the programme from the local level, the UNDP and EU’s prior experience with supporting governance reforms 71 Author’s interview with a EU Delegation official, Kyiv, 2016.
Another unique feature of the EU intervention through the IcSP in the conflict-affected areas of Ukraine, is that it not only enhanced the existing framework supported by other donors, but also encompassed a dualistic approach of development and recovery, which was not the case for the rest of Ukraine.
Thus, the U-LEAD and similar actions that are aimed at assisting with administrative reform and enhancing service delivery, were not directly linked to the regional development that was funded under separate EU mechanisms.
In contrast to U-LEAD, which focused primarily on development interventions, the IcSP in Ukraine, which supported projects in the conflict-affected regions, has also incorporated the recovery component.
Although the Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace was created in 2014, this process was not related to the events in Ukraine, but rather coincided with the changing security environment.
Thus, the programme of the European Neighbourhood Instrument is known in advance; IcSP, however, is designed for a short period, in which the European Union identifies relevant areas and then searches for the stakeholders that could offer proposals and implement them.
Policy design and implementation The formal start of the design stage of the IcSP was September 2015, a period that directly followed the protests around the first voting for the Amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine regarding the decentralization reform.
Yet, he mentioned that it might be a risk during the implementation stage.
Kramatorsk has directly suffered from conflict when it was first occupied by separatists in 2014, but later liberated by Ukrainian armed forces.
Although the IcSP in its current format is not aimed to cover the territory of Donetsk and Luhansk that is not controlled by Ukraine, at the design stage the EU specifically looked for the partners that would be accepted in the NGCA if the situation changes.
Given the existing timeline of the Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace in the conflict-affected areas of Ukraine, it is rather premature to assess the policy implementation and subsequent policy changes.
However, it is possible to explore the expected role of four cross-cutting themes, as well as the interactions between the primary stakeholders and the unique context in which the implementation stage is set to develop.
The issue of gender and women involvement in the local governance reform was actively considered during this stage.
An active role in proposing strategies and sharing practices in gender-based approaches was taken by the UN Women in Ukraine.
The UN Women involvement in the IcSP in cooperation with UNDP was directly encouraged by the EU delegation in Ukraine.
The significance of women’s involvement in local ownership for the local governance reform and reconciliation efforts is further highlighted by the fact that women are disproportionately affected by the conflict and also represent the majority of the IDPs.
At the same time, their representation in the higher management and leadership positions in communities or local civil society groups remains low.
Gender The emphasis on gender in the recovery and development efforts in Donbas during the implementation stage of the IcSP is highlighted in the tentative action plan that is focused on empowering local women-leaders, female IDPs and women groups to enhance the capacity of gender advocates to oversee the accountability and transparency for decision-making at the local level.
Toward these goals, the IcSP will involve the services of not only UN Women, who also participated in the design of the instrument, but also local and regional NGOs and contractual service-companies.
The peculiarity of the conflict in the east of Ukraine, which has been widely considered a case of hybrid warfare, gave rise to the importance of the media and various information technologies in shaping the discourse of conflict.
The focus on empowering regional and local media representatives to promote a balanced view on the conflict through interaction between EU and Ukrainian 73 Author’s interview with a EU Delegation official, Kyiv, 2016. 55 journalists has been executed through the creation of the Regional Voices programme.
Support for the local media would also be considered under the IcSP activities focused on Donbas in 2016-2017.
Furthermore, the ICT and gender themes are highly interlinked in the case of Ukraine, since almost 95% of journalists participating in the IcSP Regional Voices programme are women.
According to the representative of EU delegation to Ukraine, this trend is shaped by the fact that regional journalism is considered less prestigious and not well paid, therefore men are not willing to hold positions in this sphere.
Information and Communication Technologies Introduction of innovative technologies such as e-governance is one of the primary activities planned under the goal of enhancing community capacities for an effective decentralization.
Alongside hromadas and contractual companies, local CSOs and NGOs, as well as the UNDP, will be the primary stakeholders in the process of introducing the innovative information and communication technologies.
Moreover, the current instrument would continue to support the local media in order to develop a conflict-sensitive approach toward such issues as decentralization and peacebuilding.
Local ownership In Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, which have been directly affected by the conflict, the issue of local ownership regarding local governance reform has been vividly demonstrated by the actions of local communities.
Although these two regions require greater support with strengthening the capacity to conduct the reforms in comparison to other regions of Ukraine, they are also more willing to take the matter into their own hands to accelerate the pace of these reforms.
EU and UNDP representatives have emphasized that conflict-affected communities have demonstrated the willingness to not only receive assistance from international institutions, but also to participate in shaping the vision and strategies for change.
In the case of decentralization reform, local stakeholders have actively taken part in devising regional development strategies.
Since the IcSP funded action was building upon the existing efforts of the international community, the established connections with regional government administrations proved to be useful for revising and expanding regional development programmes that now incorporate issues that previously were not included, such as community security, issues of IDPs, and administrative reform.
This is actually designed to be read by an interesting public and should be considered as owned by the communities.
And this was very useful because, for instance, the emphasis on community security, and administrative reform, and IDPs and social cohesion are also the themes that we integrated into the proposal and, therefore, now the action.
So what we now have is that we have a government-owned product of a participatory process, which is this regional development strategy, and we have the resources from the EU to actually conduct the targeted programmes in those areas’.77 Although there is the common vision for the recovery and development strategies which is supported by stakeholders at the local, state and donor level, it is worth noting the unequal geographic distribution of attitudes of Ukrainians toward local governance reform.
This discrepancy can be partly explained by the timing of the report that was presented on October 2015.
Given the sensitivity of these reforms in the conflict-affected regions, there might be a lag between the activities of the international donors and the Ukrainian government to educate the population about decentralization reform and the shift in the population’s perceptions.
Another critical dimension to the progress of decentralization in Ukraine, and concurrently the efforts of international donors, is the possible discrepancy between the formal legislative process of local governance reform and real tangible changes that should take place at the community level.
Although progressive legislation on local governance is the foundation for successful reforms, measuring the capacity of local communities to actually benefit from administrative and fiscal decentralization is equally important.
Although local ownership for the recovery and development efforts is not explicitly referenced in the official IcSP documents, it is nevertheless reflected in the character of activities planned for implementation by this instrument.
Since the current EU action is not a standalone project, but rather expands on the existing framework, there is an already established dynamic of a bottom-up approach not only while designing the action, but also when implementing it.
The CBA initiatives strengthened the capacity for local governance through microfinancing local development projects in Ukraine.
These initiatives have a wide geographic representation and have operated for several decades.
In the Donbas region, the CBA projects have also been implemented providing a certain foundation for the current governance interventions by UN, EU and other international actors.
In that sense, the current IcSP has the capacity to develop proposals along the duration of the action that stem either from the assessment of the IcSP interlocutors or, on occasion, can come from the local level.
The latter proposals that identify a gap or a need in the framework supported by the IcSP will be assessed and implemented if possible.
The EU delegation has not only directly cooperated with the UNDP and UN Women to devise the range of activities that would enhance the capacity of Donetsk and Luhansk for decentralization reform, but also interacted with central government authorities at the Ministry of Regional Development, Building and Housing of Ukraine, as well as at the level of local administrations and communities.
The importance of an effective multi-stakeholder coherence is further emphasized by the fact that the IcSP was not designed as a standalone intervention, but rather as an expansion on the existing development and recovery framework that was supported by various donors.
Thus, effective integration and cooperation with the projects funded by SIDA/SDC and the Netherlands, as well as coordination of efforts with other donors such as USAID, was an important precondition for the complementarity and continuity of the recovery and reconciliation efforts in Donbas.
In the implementation phase the EU relies on the UNDP, UN Women, local CSOs and contractual service companies for implementation of the activities planned.
Whether it is improving local communities’ capacity for governance reform, enhancing community justice and security, restoring social cohesion or empowering women-leaders and groups, the EU IcSP highlights the unique role that Ukrainian state institutions, especially at the oblast level, play in directly affecting and benefitting from the planned activities.
Moreover, the smaller area to support for reforms (in comparison the rest of Ukraine that is funded under U-LEAD), the unique role of civil-military administrations of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts that were reorganized following the conflict, as well as Kyiv-appointed governors who have a lot to prove to the local population in GCAs , solidify the expectations that the planned scope of activities will be implemented.
Given the conflict dynamics in Donbas and especially the NGCA that is affected by the humanitarian crisis , it was imperative to coordinate the IcSP efforts with other stakeholders.
Policy change Since at the time of the assessment of the IcSP in Donbas, it was at a very early stage of implementation, it is rather premature to speak about the crucial changes that this action went through and how EU has adapted to them.
In this regard, the analytical component of the IcSP includes the monitoring of the most vulnerable groups in the Donetsk and Luhansk region who could be disproportionately affected by the decentralization reform.
While at the time of the preparation of the report no data on such groups was available, one can safely assume that communities that are close to ceasefire borderlines would be the most affected.
The vulnerability assessment will be conducted at the initial stages of the programme to adapt planned activities to include the potential inequalities that women and men IDPs face in the conflict-affected areas.
The results of this analysis will feed into the Social Cohesion and Reconciliation Index that is used to measure the impact of the IcSP and inform programme design through focusing on social cohesion and reconciliation.
While a vulnerability assessment represents the intrinsic mechanisms that can change the activities of the IcSP, there are also external factors that could affect the change in policy.
The decentralization reform is a lengthy process and in Ukraine, where the security and political situation is still unstable, the risks of slowing and stalling remain high.
In this regard, it is imperative to think beyond the timeframe of the IcSP for mechanisms that can support EU efforts in the mid-to-long term; 4) There is a risk that the wide variety and number of activities leads to dissipation of focus.
Given the 10 million EUR budget of the IcSP, it is imperative not to lose focus of what the primary needs are in terms of local governance reform.
Although, here the EU appears to have the role of funder through the IcSP and UNDP as an implementer, a synergetic relation between the two organizations is important for implementing the project; 5) The lack of acceptance of decentralization efforts from local communities.
The perceptions about what is decentralization and how it can improve the well-being of the 59 communities are gradually improving.
Yet, in the east of Ukraine much is contingent upon the security situation, as well the success of the state and international efforts in the areas of infrastructure improvement and reconciliation.
In this regard, the acceptance from local communities is depending on the success of reforms that are tangible at the local level.
The agreement that was signed in the Belarus capital, first in September 2014 and then again in February 2015, as the fight continued became the generally accepted road map for solving the war in the East of Ukraine.
Under the agreement that is colloquially known as Minsk II, warring sides agreed to a ceasefire and withdrawal of foreign combatants.
Moreover, there were provisions on the reintegration of the non-government controlled areas of Donetsk and Luhansk and decentralization reform in Ukraine.
However, a year and a half later none of the articles except for consultations have been implemented, thus creating a dual risk for international efforts to support decentralization reform in the conflict-affected areas of Donbas.
On one hand, the possibility of a resurgence of conflict and deterioration of security environment would hinder local governance reform.
On the other, if the situation will not change as the low level violence continues and NGCAs are not reintegrated, the grievances will only grow stronger.
It is worth noting that according to Minsk II, parts of Luhansk and Donetsk not under government control should receive a special status as a part of decentralization reform.
This provision has created tensions as Ukrainian parliament vote on the corresponding legislation in August 2015 has led to violent outbreaks.
Although the EU and UNDP representatives who work on the implementation of the IcSP agree that there has to be a credible plan for expansion of the action scope if the Minsk II agreement is fully implemented, stakeholders appeared sceptical of that possibility in the near future.
A representative of the UNDP in Ukraine, however, suggested that the UNDP activities in the GCA should be considered as a “forward deployment” when and if the reintegration happens.
Given the extensive work and connections that this organization established throughout the past twenty years, UNDP has the capacity to conduct such operations.
Toward this goal, the IcSP, which focuses on capacity building in the short run, could have a real impact on reintegrating Donbas, but only if it triggers the processes for the long run.
In a sense, creating participatory inclusive governance practices, getting rid of corruption, and capacity building for decentralization reform, could show the local population in both GCA and NGCA areas the progressive and effective changes that are conducted by Ukrainian government.
Conclusion The EU Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace in Ukraine that was launched in spring of 2016 will aim at assisting the conflict-affected communities in Donetsk and Luhansk.
In order to effectively address not only the lack of capacity in the Donbas region for decentralization, but also to coordinate the actions with other international and local stakeholders, the IcSP was designed to complement the existing development and recovery framework.
It is imperative to outline strong and weak aspects of the IcSP in Ukraine that focus on conflictaffected areas of Donbas to anticipate the challenges the EU could face during the implementation stage.
Following the interviews with main stakeholders, the table below (table 5) summarizes their central arguments.
At all levels, the EU policies were evaluated against the background of Ukraine, in order to understand to what extent Brussels is able to influence the process of conflict settlement.
The European Union has been less involved in the conflict settlement in Ukraine than Kyiv would have liked.
However, for the EU it is not important whether Brussels participated directly in the negotiations or not.
It is much more important to achieve a stable ceasefire and positive steps in conflict settlement and if the EU could do this with the help of others, then it will proceed precisely in such a way.
Therefore, the model developed by the Normandy format could be replicated for other conflicts as well, if there are member states that have a greater ability to reach the EU’s objectives.
The model of Normandy has also been accepted by the EU in the case of Ukraine, and Brussels was happy that Germany and France took the leadership, however, the EU is willing to join the table shall there be another conflict.
The case of the Russian-Ukrainian conflict also highlighted that the personality of High Representative is very important not only in order to reflect the consensus or trade-off of the member states, but also to be able to face crisis situations and negotiations with such experienced leaders as President Putin.
The EU has been slow in responding to the crisis in Ukraine and the following conflict between the Kremlin and Kyiv.
The EU’s policy towards the conflict was rather process driven and therefore the decisions of the EU were subordinate to the situation on the ground in Ukraine, which weakened the EU intervention in the conflict settlement.
At the same time, the EU has the capacity to adapt and create new mechanisms to deal with new challenges.
That was the case for diplomatic efforts made within the Normandy format with the active involvement of Germany and France, but most importantly by putting in place a series of sanctions and a support package for Ukraine involving financial means and expertise.
Also, the conflict in Ukraine revealed that the EU is very vulnerable in times of transfer of power.
To a great extent, aside from the questions regarding the preparedness of Frederica Mogherini to withstand a round of negotiations with President Putin, the reason why the EU excluded itself from the negotiations process, is the fact that all the heads of EU institutions were changing.
Therefore, an EU mechanism that would ensure a smooth transfer of power and not affect its capacity to act on the international arena was largely missing.
The case of Ukraine shows that the EU is rather perceived as a source of funds and an extremely important player for a country’s economic stability, and as a consequence political stability, and less as an actor that could take on the challenge of the negotiation process.
This demonstrates the fact that the EU preferred to delegate some tasks to OSCE (probably also at the insistence of Russia) and opted for political and economic sanctions that were a powerful non-direct tool to deter Russia from taking additional destructive steps.
It is quite often that the EU preferred to be less involved in the political crisis, despite calls from Ukraine, but at the same time playing a heavy technical role, especially through its financial support.
While EUBAM and EUAM have a different nature, their objectives have become so intertwined against the backdrop of the Russian conflict in Ukraine that it would be sensible to advise on a common policy towards these two missions rather than provide separate conclusions.
In the first place, in the times of conflict the EU presence matters, even more so than in peaceful times.
For geopolitical and security reasons it is advisable to continue the EU presence in the Odessa region after EUBAM exits.
While the EU approach towards the exit strategy and local ownership for reforms is understandable and justified, the Russian aggression, ongoing since 2014, does not allow for a traditional phase-out.
As explained above, the EU presence in Odessa is perceived as a security and stabilizing factor and leaving the region would send a wrong signal to both Ukraine and Russia.
A flexible approach to the mandate and responsiveness to the needs of the local beneficiaries is what is appreciated by the local partners.
EUAM and, most importantly, the Political and Security Committee and Member States, should be ready to adopt a flexible approach to the mission’s mandate, being ready to respond to the needs of the local beneficiaries and the changing geopolitical context.
As the EU did not negotiate the mission’s mandate with the local stakeholders before the mission arrived, it caused certain issues.
When the mandate is not negotiated, as in EUAM’s case, this decreases the probability and inclusivity of local ownership, since the local partners are excluded from owning the process from the start.
It is quite puzzling that a mission, which was sent as a result of the Russian aggression in Ukraine, distances itself from the realities of war.
Ignoring these realities and specific tasks of the security sector to counter them, both civilian and military, will ultimately increase the gap between EUAM and partner institutions and discredit the mission.
The different institutional nature of EUBAM and EUAM and the larger flexibility of EUBAM suggest that, maybe, in sensitive geopolitical environments (as is that of the Eastern partnership for the EU), EUBAM’s “hybrid” nature could be used as a blueprint for further missions, rather than a unique exception.
For now it seems that a CSDP status for EUAM would offer more limitations and bureaucracy rather than opportunities and flexibility.
In turn, EUBAM, administered by the European Commission, is more flexible and responsive, both activity and budget-wise.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that none of the missions in question were sent to prevent a crisis/conflict.
Hence, as valid as the institution-building argument as a conflict prevention tool is, it looks like the EU has failed to act pre-emptively in the case of Ukraine.
For further EU interventions it would be advisable to dispatch an institution-building mission simply on the grounds of the existing institutional weakness, and not after the institutions fail to prevent a conflict.
Thus, according to the Minsk II agreement the areas of Luhansk and Donetsk that are not controlled by the Ukrainian government should receive a special status, which de facto means that the scale and the quality of the decentralization reform would be unequal not only in the conflict-affected areas, but also for the whole of Ukraine.
To address the low level of capacity for local governance reform among the state authorities and local communities in Donbas, the European Union, in collaboration with the UN agencies in Ukraine and civil society organizations, has developed a new action that combines both a reform and recovery agenda.
The Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace in Ukraine became a crucial form of EU intervention that will enhance the capacity of the conflictaffected communities for fiscal and administrative decentralization, empower women leaders and groups among IDPs and host communities, promote community security, and generate social cohesion.
Although, at the time of the assessment, the IcSP was in the early stages of the implementation, it has already contributed to the consistency of the international donors’ efforts to provide support to the most vulnerable communities.
Since the IcSP is not a standalone action, but rather an expansion on the existing programmes aimed at capacity building, community justice, and recovery, it provides a unique opportunity to consolidate the recovery efforts and connect them to the reform agenda.
The focus on the decentralization reform in Ukraine will serve not only as the conflict resolution and peacebuilding element with regard to the war in Donbas, but would also be an indispensable conflict prevention tool, given the existing grievances toward inefficient governance structure expressed in many regions of Ukraine.
In a way, the decentralization reform strengthened by the comprehensive support from international donors could improve the well-being of the conflict-affected communities.
If successful, the reform would improve the attitude of the local communities in Donbas toward the central government and thus eliminate several of the causes for grievances, such as lack of authority at the local level and economic deprivation.
At the same time, there is a need for more analytical coherence at the level of the EU delegation when it comes to the cross-cutting effect of various projects and programmes.
Thus, there are specific offices in the EU delegation in Ukraine that are responsible for anticorruption, decentralization, open budget etc., but the strategic discussion regarding how all these topics intersect is concentrated at the level of head of cooperation.
While it is important to have a strategic level discussion, it does not have to be concentrated only at the top level.
Overall, the EU decision to offer a separate mechanism for supporting local governance reform in conflict-affected areas of Ukraine could prove beneficial not only because it would affect both the reform and reconciliation agendas in the region, but also because a working framework of international donors coordinated by the UNDP exists in Ukraine that has worked with local communities since the start of hostilities and accumulated considerable knowledge about their needs.
Although the IcSP is at the early stages of implementation, it is important to take into account the risks associated with local governance reform in Ukraine and also particular weaknesses of the instrument that were outlined in this 64 report.
The crucial focus, however, is to think strategically beyond the 18-month timeframe of the IcSP and consider the spill-over effect that the success of the project could have beyond the targeted communities and, specifically, on the population in the non-government controlled areas.
EU Policy Briefing on Whole of Society Conflict Prevention and Peacebuilding.
Putin Has Two Options – to Retreat Gradually or to Launch an Offensive on Ukraine.
Ukraine’s Yanukovych missing as protesters take control of presidential residence in Kiev.
Council Joint Action 2005/776/CFSP of 7 November 2005 amending the mandate of the European Union Special Representative for Moldova.
Revised Crisis Management Concept for a civilian CSDP mission in support of Security Sector Reform in Ukraine.
National Opinion Poll on decentralization and local self-government reform.
Commission staff working document accompanying the Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on strengthening the European neighbourhood policy.
Commission implementing decision on the Special Measure 2015 for Decentralization Reform in favor of Ukraine to be financed from the general budget of the European Union.
EU announces more than €100 million for Ukraine to support decentralization reform and re-enforcement of local governance.
Sixth Progress Report on the Implementation by Ukraine of the Action Plan on Visa Liberalisation.
Remarks by High Representative/Vice-President Federica Mogherini following the Foreign Affairs Council.
Restoration of Governance and Reconciliation in Crisis-Affected Communities of Ukraine.
EU-Ukraine Association Agenda to prepare and facilitate the implementation of the Association Agreement.
Joint Statement on Ukraine of the Weimar Triangle Foreign Ministers Frank-Walter Steinmeier , Laurent Fabius , and Radoslaw Sikorski in Weimar.
The Effects of Sanctions and Counter-Sanctions on EU-Russian Trade Flows.
Vystuplenie na vstrece glav gosudarstv Tamozennogo sojuza s Prezidentom Ukrainy i predstaviteljami Evropejskogo sojuza.
Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov’s remarks and answers to questions at the Terra Scientia Youth Educational Forum on Klyazma River, Vladimir Region, July 22, 2016.
Urgent Problems of Reformation of the Internal Affairs Entities in Ukraine’s Security Sector Reform.
Security Sector in the Context of General Socio-Political Situation in Ukraine.
Responding to Foreign Affairs and Security Challenges in the EU’s Neighbourhood.
Opublikovano infohrafiku pro vytratu Ukrainy na oboronu za ostanni 20 rokiv.
Russia’s Hybrid War in Ukraine, Breaking the enemy’s ability to resist.
Putin zajavil o pol’ze prodovol’stvennogo embargo dlja ekonomiki Rossii.
European Union’s engagement with nonstate actors in Common Security and Defence Policy.
Assessing the Merits of Decentralization as a Conflict Mitigation Strategy.
Treba pruznachaty Molodukh Energiynukh Ludei na Kluchovi Pozytsii v Prokuraturi.
An Analysis of Institutional Conflicts in Malawi’s Decentralized System.
Polish President Plans to Suggest Changing Format of Ukraine Negotiations.
A Combined Practice Note on Decentralisation, Local Governance and Urban/Rural Development.
Letter dated 7 December 1994 from the Permanent Representatives of the Russian Federation, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, A/49/765.
Gender in EU Conflict prevention and Peacebuilding Policy and Practice.
