Putin, Ukraine, And 'Phantom Pain'{""articleSection"":""Steve Gutterman\u0026#39;s Week In Russia"",""headline"":""The Week In Russia: Putin, Ukraine, And \u0027Phantom Pain\u0027"",""inLanguage"":""en-US"",""keywords"":""Features \u0026 Blogs, Russia, Picks, Steve Gutterman\u0027s Week In Russia"",""author"":{""@type"":""Person"",""url"":"""",""description"":""Steve Gutterman is the editor of the Russia/Ukraine/Belarus Desk in RFE/RL\u0027s Central Newsroom in Prague.
He lived and worked in Russia and the former Soviet Union for nearly 20 years between 1989 and 2014, including postings in Moscow with the AP and Reuters.
Putin, Ukraine, And 'Phantom Pain' July 16, 2021 10:14 GMT By Steve Gutterman Several times in recent weeks, Vladimir Putin has sought clearly to cast doubt on the legitimacy of the Ukrainian state and the nation itself.
Putin, Ukraine, And 'Phantom Pain' share Print With a deadly COVID wave setting grim new records almost daily, President Vladimir Putin continued to devote a great deal of attention to the past and future of Russia’s ties with Ukraine, self-publishing a startling article that drew a mixture of derision and deep concern about Moscow’s intentions.
Meanwhile, the Kremlin crackdown on opposition, dissent, and independent media persisted ahead of elections to the State Duma, the lower house of parliament, in September.
Destabilizing Fixation' The pen may or may not be mightier than the sword, but both can be wielded in a threatening way.
Back in March, Moscow began a buildup of military units in Crimea and along the border with Ukraine, raising the specter of a new offensive within or beyond areas of the neighboring country that have been controlled by Russia or forces it backs since 2014.
There were flare-ups of fighting but no major escalation as of yet, and the military moves were seen by many observers as a show of force -a warning about what might happen if Moscow saw fit and a way of adding to the pressure the seven-year war in the Donbas has exerted on Kyiv and the West.
Since then, Putin has repeatedly used another instrument -words -to keep up the pressure.
Several times in recent weeks, he has sought clearly to cast doubt on the legitimacy of the Ukrainian state and the nation itself, asserting that Ukraine and Russians are ""one people,"" dismissing the country of 44 million as a ""spawn of the Soviet period,"" falsely claiming that it is now run by the West, and suggesting that its borders should be subject to negotiation.
A number of observers took aim at what they indicated were Putin's failings as a historian -Radchenko and others ​bored holes in his comparisons of the Russia-Ukraine relationship with those between Germany and Austria and the United States and Canada.
Others, meanwhile, pointed to the high word count and noted that the article could have used a good editor.
Mustafa Nayyem Putin's words were ""not an article,"" Nayyem wrote, ""but the phantom pain of an obsessed failure who, out of his own stupidity and greed, has lost a loved one"" -a reference to the Russian aggression that has deeply alienated millions of Ukrainians and severely damaged ties for what analysts say may be decades or more.
But he and Culture Minister Oleksandr Tkachenko, who suggested that Russian leaders have been ""rewriting history"" since tsarist times, also signaled that Moscow's actions helped reveal far more sinister messages beneath the friendly title and assertions of brotherhood.
Zelenskiy Trolls Putin After Russian President Publishes Article On Ukraine Zelenskiy’s remarks suggested that while Putin’s article may be risible, it could potentially provoke both laughter and concern.
The big question, of course, is whether Putin’s ramble through the past gives any indication of Russia's future actions.
Some said it could be a sign of imminent aggressive action, a notion that others dismissed.
Or at all,"" Sam Greene, director of the Russia Institute at King’s College London, wrote on Twitter.
In 2014, Russia seized control of Crimea by sending troops with unmarked uniforms to the Ukrainian region, securing key facilities, and staging a referendum deemed illegitimate by the UN General Assembly.No Advance Notice It was some time before Putin acknowledged that the occupying soldiers dubbed ""little green men"" were Russian, and Moscow continues to deny direct involvement by its military in the war in the Donbas despite overwhelming evidence.
Observers also pointed out that, while Putin said a lot, he had said most of it before.
He had already claimed that the Ukrainian state was a creation of the Soviet Union, and had already suggested that when the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, Ukraine should have reverted to the borders that defined it in 1922.
Armed Russian military without identification take up position at an airport in Simferopol during the occupation of Crimea in 2014.
But that assertion may seem astounding enough regardless of how many times it is uttered.
It appears aimed to delegitimize the international borders thrust up by the Soviet collapse and, in turn, to cast doubt on the legitimacy of Russia's neighbors from the Baltics and Belarus to the Caucasus and Central Asia.
But the suggestion that Ukraine has no right to statehood in its current borders goes beyond that, and beyond the war in the Donbas, according to Aleksei Venediktov, the prominent editor in chief of the Moscow radio station Ekho Moskvy.
Both in Russia and abroad, some read Putin's article as a signal that words will be followed by actions -perhaps very assertive or aggressive ones.
Putin's article will now be ""the basis of future and current policy of the Russian Federation on Ukraine,"" Venediktov said in a July 13 interview on the Internet channel Dozhd.
Instead, he said, he may be seeking to justify his position and his past actions -which, as Nayyem pointed out, have driven Kyiv and the Ukrainian people further away from Russia, not brought them closer.
The article ""feels as if it's driven by frustration, by isolation, by impotence, even,"" Galeotti said on the podcast.
Regardless of what happens in the coming weeks or months, the sheer repetition of Putin’s claims about Ukraine – now brought together in a manifesto-like document -may have ramifications in the long run, seeping into the consciousness of officials, at least, and becoming a narrative set in stone.
Since 1991, though, the 15 countries that gained independence have been at peace with one another -with exceptions including Russia's brief war with Georgia in 2008 and the conflict between Kyiv and Russia-backed separatists in the Donbas, which has killed more than 13,000 people since 2014 and still simmers.
Arguably, with his drumbeat of remarks on Ukraine, Putin is planting a new time bomb.
Steve Gutterman Steve Gutterman is the editor of the Russia/Ukraine/Belarus Desk in RFE/RL's Central Newsroom in Prague.
He has also reported from Afghanistan and Pakistan as well as other parts of Asia, Europe, and the United States.
GuttermanS@rferl.org FOLLOW Subscribe via RSS About This Newsletter Some of the key developments in Russia over the past week, and some of the takeaways going forward, by the editor of RFE/RL's Russia Desk, Steve Gutterman.
It's posted here every Monday or you can subscribe on iTunes or on Google Podcasts.
The editor of RFE/RL's Russia Desk dissects some of the key developments over the previous week and offers some of the takeaways going forward.
I hereby give consent to RFE/RL to use my e-mail address for the purpose of sending me the selected newsletter.
