Next round of Minsk talks on Donbas conflict settlement fails again; US, EU, Canada and Switzerland introduce new sanctions against Russia, Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk “people’s republics”; S&P cuts Ukraine’s rating to pre-default level.
Talks between contact group, pro-Russian separatists fail to take in Minsk; Ukrainian parliament adopts new government's programme; United States Congress passes draft law on military support for Ukrain; Ukraine needs another 15bn dollars to avoid default.
Another Minsk meeting scheduled for 9 December; Parliament approves new cabinet, appoints deputy speakers and heads of parliamentary committees; Protesters in Vinnytsya storm regional council’s building; Ukraine to run out of coal reserves in few days – experts.
NATO concerned over military capabilities of Russian troops along Ukrainian border; Ukraine to drop its non-bloc status; Ukrainian parliament of eighth convocation convenes for first session.
Russian army, pro-Russian fighters readying to intensify hostilities; Ukraine announces official parliamentary elections results; Supplier of South African coal rejects new deals with Ukraine.
Russia strengthens military positions along Ukrainian border; Top Ukrainian election body announces preliminary parliamentary vote results; Ukrainian currency crashes to 15. hryvnyas per dollar.
Poroshenko meets Putin at Milan summit; Ukrainian parliament passes anti-corruption laws and the law on prosecutor’s office; Ukrainian authorities blamed the Russian special services for organizing the rallies in Kiev.
Separatists and the Russian military have shelled Ukrainian troops more than 1,000 times since the beginning of a cease-fire; A Red Cross employee was killed during shelling by the pro-Russian separatists; The Council of the European Union adopted an official decision to postpone theprovisional application of the EU-Ukraine association agreement's title on a deep and comprehensive free trade area until 2016.
The separatists and Russian military continue offensive actions in the area of the antiterrorist operation in Donbasthe.
They continue shelling Donetsk, the checkpoint at the entrance to Mariupol, Debaltseve city, Trudivske village, Pisky city; Ukraine turned over the ratification of the Association Agreement to the General Secretariat of the EU Council.
Poroshenko announced the end to a ceasefire and the resumption of an antiterrorist operation in the east of the country; antiterrorist operation forces freed from separatists Slovyansk and Kramatorsk; Donetsk has become militants main base.
Poroshenko wins early presidential election; 3,000 to 4,500 Chechen and Russian mercenaries involved in armed conflict in Donbas; Naftohaz sends Gazprom 786m dollars for gas imported in Q1 2014.
Snap presidential election held in Ukraine; Medvedev says Russia had not guaranteed territorial integrity of Ukraine; Terrorists in Donbas kill more Ukrainian military, peaceful citizens.
Separatists in two Ukraine's eastern regions declare “independence”; Russia officially warns Ukraine about advance gas payments; Tatars demand national autonomy for Crimea on 70th anniversary of deportation.
Ukrainian authorities resume counterterrorism operation in eastern regions.
Separatists kidnap journalists, OSCE military inspectors, representatives of armed forces.
The Horlivka city councillor from the Fatherland party and a Kiev student found dead in Slovyansk.
Armed separatists seize administrative buildings in eastern regions; Russian president complains to European leaders about Ukraine's gas debt; Ukraine's economic performance deteriorates.
EU Foreign Affairs Council issues conclusions on Ukraine; protesters, opposition demand immediate reinstatement of 2004 constitution; protesters have freed the occupied administrative buildings.
