By Cheryl LaBash Havana, Cuba Three days of solidarity will mark May Day 2022 in Havana.
In Cuba, for the first time since the COVID-19 pandemic forced cancellation in 2020 and 2021, the awesome May Day march will joyously take place Sunday, May 1.
The events are dedicated to Cuba’s historical leader, Fidel Castro Ruz.
On the eve of May Day, April 30, the Central de Trabajadores de Cuba [Cuban Workers Central Union] is welcoming workers from around the world to learn from Cuban workers and their neighborhoods the pain caused to Cuban families by the unilateral United States economic, commercial, and financial blockade — essentially an illegal economic war.
After meetings with the hotel and tourism union, delegations will visit communities under reconstruction and partake in the community soup called caldosa with Committees for Defense of the Revolution.
Hundreds — most under 30 years of age — arecoming from the United States in various brigades, delegations and just coming as individuals to demonstrate their solidarity with revolutionary Cuba — real aid to the Cuban people.
Their experiences will inform their work when they return to the US., be it in work places, mutual-aid projects, communities fighting for affordable housing and against evictions, to abolish the police abuse and murders and to stop the Continued on page 2 Z| Solidarity activists will join the Cuban peopleiin the Plaza of the Revolution.
BILL HACKWELL U.S.-NATO war and attacks on trans rights: Two fronts in the class war By Greg Butterfield In Texas and Alabama, transgender youth are facing forcible detransition.
Greg Abbott in February, not only ban gender-affirming care for children, but subject their parents and health-care providers to prosecution.
This means that even kids who have been transitioning for years, who have lived as and always been known asa girl or boy to their peers, would be forcibly “outed” and denied the care they need to grow up happy and healthy — even banned from using the restroom they choose at school.
These measures directly contradict the recommendations of medical experts, including the American Medical Association, the American Academy of Pediatrics and the American Psychological Association.
Tennessee and Arkansas already have laws banning gender-affirming care.
Nearly half of United States states currently have similar legislation pending.
Safe Haven vandalized 3 Over 1,000 students at West High School in Salt Lake City walked out of classes April 6 to protest pending anti-trans legislation in Utah.
Adventist Healthcare on several occasions has come to the bargaining table claiming that they had not seen any proposals.
The union officials assert that all proposals were properly forwarded to the hospital administration.
Just one day before the one-day strike was held, the hospital chief negotiator claimed at the start of the session that the union was attempting to back-date proposals for back pay that was owed to the nursing staff.
He proclaimed the proposal was invalid and that the hospital couldn’t afford it.
He told them that there was nothing to talk @truecie « LA LUCHA about and left the room.
Many issues have been raised by the union in this round of contract negotiations.
Among them are patient ratios that make sure Ff that nurses are not assigned x more than a reasonable number of patients for care.
Additionally, management has eliminated the differential pay for evening and weekend shifts which results in a cut in pay of several thousand dollars.
Chants demanding safe staffing levels were heard continuously throughout the day along with chants demanding fair negotiations.
The nurses on the picket line & received tremendous support from the public as many drivers honked their horns in support.
Just about every bus driver that drove by honked loudly to show support.
Many people walking by stopped to listen and discuss the issues with the nurses.
By Stephen Millies Millions of people around the world rally for environmental justice every year on April 22, which is Earth Day.
This struggle is more important than ever as capitalist climate change continues to cook the earth.
A big step forward in the environmental movement has been targeting toxic racism.
It’s not accidental that children in the Black-majority city of Flint, Michigan, were poisoned by their lead-contaminated drinking water.
Water protectors from Indigenous nations fight Big Oil and its dangerous pipelines.
Hundreds of people who stopped the Dakota Access Pipeline were arrested.
Ninety percent of pesticides used in the US. are applied in agriculture.
Twelve of the 14 markers for harmful pesticides were found in the blood and urine of Black and Latinx people at levels five times that of whites.
Chemical plants throughout the southern United States are often located in Black communities.
While in the North, Black and Latinx people living in the South Bronx have the highest number of asthma cases in the country.
Cancer clusters exist alongside petrochemical plants from Philadelphia to West Virginia to Louisiana and Texas.
Auto companies didn’t want to use catalytic converters that have reduced smog.
VV LE-Nin ao x frets eS Se 2624 Vietnamese Siamp eaehialing 150th Lenin’ s birthday: until the polluters were fought off.
Capitalist politicians have learned to speak differently than when Ronald Reagan was elected California governor in 1966.
At the time people wanted to save the redwood forests from the clear-cutting lumber companies.
Socialist countries accounted for nearly a third of the world’s population.
The Vietnamese and Laotian people were fighting 500,000 United States troops as well as napalm bombs and agent orange pesticides.
Lenin — the leader of the Bolshevik Revolution — indicated how strong the movement of workers and oppressed people was.
By 1970, Lenin’s writings had been translated into more languages than the New Testament worldwide.
Meetings and events were planned around the world to commemorate Lenin’s life.
The United States ruling class wanted to divert attention from this important anniversary.
They sought to keep an environmental movement within the bounds of capitalist politics.
Capitalists also wanted to put the socialist countries on trial as polluters.
Many of the socialist countries — including China, Cuba, North Korea, and Vietnam — had been open or disguised colonies of the big capitalist countries.
These countries that liberated themselves from colonial underdevelopment were always trying to catch up.
Capitalist media used the slogan “people cause pollution,” as if it didn’t have anything to do with making profits, the profits-before-people system.
The TV networks almost never mention that the Pentagon is the world’s biggest polluter.
Today the banks, utilities and other corporations claim to be “green” as the earth continues to heat up.
Sharon Black May Day 2022 Continued from page 1 climate catastrophe and looming nuclear war that threatens human existence as the fight to end the intensified United States blockade continues.
May Day — International Workers’ Day — began in the United States in Chicago in 1886 where workers fought for the 8hour work day, but until 2005/2006 it was most celebrated outside the United States and especially in countries that have freed themselves from imperialist domination, like Cuba.
The three day solidarity gathering culminates on May 2, with a solidarity conference featuring CTC General Secretary Ulises Guilarte de Nacimiento that will conclude with the approval of a Declaration of Solidarity with Cuba and the proposal to fight against imperialism and for the advancement of leftist organizations for a progressive change in the world.
Founded in 2018, Baltimore Safe Haven is a local, trans-led nonprofit that provides the city’s at-risk TLGBQIA community — particularly Black trans women — with food, housing, health care and more.
Key members of Safe Haven’s staff have expressed their outrage and frustration in the wake of this attack and the online harassment that has accompanied it.
I’m afraid for my own safety and the safety of my staff at this moment,” remarked founder and executive director Iya Dammons.
Case manager Nicole Wells was the first to notice the graffiti and shared a similar U.5.-INAA Continued from page 1 ers” or pedophiles for supporting gender-affirming care for youth.
This slander campaign has gone hand-in-glove with the Florida “Don’t Say Gay” law championed by Gov.
Ron DeSantis, which bans any mention of queer and trans issues from schools, and the British government’s decision to exclude trans people from the ban on so-called “conversion therapy” that forcibly seeks to change people’s sexual and gender identities.
The grotesque anti-trans campaign echoes the rhetoric of other anti-LGBTQ2S witch-hunts, like the one targeting gay men during the AIDS crisis.
It is having dangerous consequences for the trans community, which already faces a high rate of murders and violence.
Trans people have been harassed and threatened on trains and in the street.
State and local protest actions and lawsuits are attempting to hold back the tide.
But it’s clear that the ultra-right plans to continue riding their hate campaign into the mid-term Congressional elections this November.
In fact, Democratic politicians are rapidly moving to the right on every issue from police brutality to COVID prevention — all while leading the charge for war against Russia.
Big Lies, at home and abroad On the other side of the planet, antifascists from the Donetsk and Lugansk People’s Republics, the Ukrainian antifascist underground, and troops from the Russian Federation are fighting to stem the tide of a U.S.-NATO takeover of Eastern Europe.
The location chosen by the West for this showdown is the former Soviet republic of Ukraine, ruled by a right-wing coup regime installed by Washington in 2014.
The backbone of this regime is neo-Nazi groups that have terrorized leftists, trade unionists, journalists and minority nationalities and immigrants.
The reality of the situation has been turned on its head by the propagandists of United States Big Business and the Pentagon.
Russia’s government also saw that a complete NATO takeover of Ukraine would endanger its own sovereignty, and felt no option but to act.
It’s the exact same strategy of divide-and-conquer being used to demonize trans people here at home.
Families of trans children are being forced to flee states that have adopted laws banning gender-affirming care and persecuting supportive parents.
In the same way, millions of people in Donbass and Ukraine have been forced to flee their homes beSLL PHOTO support the organization’s valiant struggle to uplift the most vulnerable members of our community.
Regarding the upcoming festivities Dammons said, “This is the first time we have ever thrown a major, big Pride like this for the trans community.
I would like to see people come out on June 4 and let them know that this will not happen in Baltimore City at all.” classes April 6 cause of the war crisis methodically set up by Washington and its allies.
Trans people and their supporters are slandered and dehumanized every day in print, broadcast and social media and by elected officials.
In the same way, social-media monopolies, corporate media and Washington officials promote neoNazi-spawned claims of “Russian war crimes,” suppress and deplatform alternative sources of news and analysis, and support measures that dehumanize and belittle people who live in the Donbass region and people of Russian nationality.
It might seem that geographical distance, lack of mutual understanding and the intensity of the attacks make it impossible for these struggles to unite.
It is the job of communists to prove them wrong, by building bridges between diverse sections of the working class at home and abroad to fight back.
Board has recently voted to ped | % public Schools, despite overwhelming opposition from the A community, School closures disproportionately harm | communities of color.
Teachers and longshore workers in the Schools and Labor Against Privitization coalition are leading the unified labor action.
The billionaires are after our public resources here in the City of Oakland.
The Oakland School Board has recently voted to close 11 public schools, despite overwhelming opposition from the community.
They are part of a long-term plan by corporations to destroy public education — selling them off to real estate developers or converting them into charter schools.
Meanwhile, the City of Oakland is planning to spend $855 million in taxpayer money to construct a new A’s stadium and condo complex at Howard Terminal, which is crucial to the port of Oakland.
These privatization schemes are part of the gentrification of Oakland — attacking working-class communities, destroying union jobs, and displacing low-income residents of the Bay Area.
This year May Day falls on a Sunday, so our action will be two days earlier, on April 29.
As a collective we understand that Oakland is not the only American city under attack from billionaires attempting to privatize/gentrify for personal monetary gain.
We understand that Black and Brown communities across the country continue to be disproportionately affected by the resulting wealth gap epidemic.
We also understand the continued effect privatization and gentrification have on the working class as a whole.
The wealth disparity between the very rich few and the majority working class is larger than it has ever been in this country’s history.
The main reason for this phenomena is that our elected representatives continue to give the rich and corporate America access to public resources and wealth at an alarming rate — resources and wealth created by the poor and working class.
We say NO to the closing of public schools in Oakland, which provide education and jobs to disadvantaged communities, to pave for the Fisher family and other privatizers to take them over as private charter schools.
We say NO to the Fisher family’s attempt to benefit financially by acquiring industrial public land that creates good union-paying jobs and tax revenue for our communities to build private multi-million dollar condos and a baseball park.
We shall organize to forge a social, economic and political movement for all working people — employed and unemployed — in our own name.
We shall spread awareness, influence elections to once and for all provide a voice for the working class, independent of influence by either of the corporate-dominated political parties.
We shall work in conjunction with any organization in which the purpose is to put an end to the oppression and exploitation of the poor and working class.
We shall hold any elected official (labor or governmental) accountable for catering to the interest of the rich few instead of the majority working class that elected them.
We will achieve this by using class-struggle methods to expose and eradicate all efforts to privatize/gentrify any and all public resources for the financial benefit of billionaires, oligarchs or those who in any way represent corporate greed.
We shall oppose all tactics used to divide the working class, both outside and inside the labor movement.
And finally we shall create a voice and space for all people regardless of race, sex, age, gender, sexual orientation, ability, nationality, religion or work status.
Mobilizing | inOUR OWN This anthology is a call to working people organized and unorganized to unite and mobilize around our own agenda.
On May Days in the years that followed, the ILWU shut down the ports to demand justice for victims of police violence; to demand universal health care, and to demand workers rights for all.
The ILWU shut down West Coast ports to oppose wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and in solidarity with Palestine.
CARLOS LATUFE Looking behind the headlines Why Russia recognized the Donbass republics In order to have a clear anti-war, antiimperialist position today, class-conscious workers need to understand the significance of the Russian Federation’s Feb. decision to recognize the Donbass republics of Donetsk and Lugansk as independent, sovereign countries, nearly eight years after they first declared independence from Ukraine.
Ukraine and its Western sponsors spent the last seven years sabotaging the 2015 Minsk II agreements meant to end Kiev’s attacks on the people of the Donbass region.
Washington and Kiev spent the last three months preparing an invasion of the Donetsk and Lugansk People’s Republics as a means to draw Russia into a wart.
It is therefore not a question of seizing Ukraine, nor even, in all likelihood, of occupying it and certainly not of destroying it.
It asserts complete United States world domination in both political and military terms.
In other words, the United States is to be the sole and exclusive superpower on the face of the planet.
It is to exercise its power not only in Europe, Asia, the Middle East and Latin America, but also on the territory of the former Soviet Union.
This was a unique opportunity for the United States anti-war movement to hear directly from people in the Donetsk and Lugansk People’s Republics , whose voices are silenced by the Western mass media’s pro-Ukraine war propaganda.
Imperialist propaganda and Ukrainian Jews The history of Ukrainian nationalist collaboration with Nazi Germany and the present alliance between the Kiev government and neo-Nazis.
Ukrainian security services arrest young communist leaders The March 6 arrest of Aleksandr Kononovich and Mikhail Kononovich, leaders of the Leninist Communist Youth Union of Ukraine, has been condemned by the World Federation of Democratic Youth and other progressive organizations.
Ukrainian authorities unleash witch hunt The Ukrainian authorities, being in a state of shock and fearing for their fate, organized a widespread witch hunt.
Every day in the territories controlled by Kiev, there are detentions, abductions and torture of political activists and civilians who disagree with the policies of the central government.
Matyushenko is an anti-fascist and a member of Livitsya , an alliance founded by activists from various social movements in Dnipro two years ago.
United States is using Ukraine as ‘cannon fodder’ Yuliy Dubovyk: Iam a Ukrainian-American.
I grew up and spent over half of my life in Ukraine, although now] live in the United States.
I wanted to explain my thoughts on the ongoing crisis with Russia, because mainstream corporate media outlets don’t ever share perspectives like mine.
The Ukrainians that aren’t mentioned The corporate media claim that all Ukrainians support President Zelensky, who has banned most political parties except his own and the far-right.
These news outlets also whitewash the fascist gangs — integrated into the Ukrainian army —that engage in torture.
This was in addition to the 175,000 NATO troops already on Russia’s border.
NATO expansion technically means that the member-nation’s armed forces are “integrated” into the NATO military command.
The smoldering wreckage of a passenger train after being hit by two missiles launched from a NATO F-15, April 12, 1999.
How to oppose an unjust war The Leninist view of how to fight against imperialist war remains one of the most controversial and defining characteristics of the communist movement, because it means standing up to the capitalist class at the moment its fangs are bared.
Czarist Russia’s conquering of Siberia meant killing and exploiting Indigenous peoples like what was done in the United States and Canada.
Unlike Poland, which had been a powerful state for centuries before its partition, Ukraine was a nation in formation.
Revolutionaries fought against the oppression of dozens of nationalities in Czarist Russia.
Before the Bolshevik Revolution, 76% of Ukrainians didn’t know how to read or write.
The treatment of the Ukrainian poet, writer and artist Taras Shevchenko was particularly outrageous.
Born into serfdom, a form of feudal enslavement, he became the most famous figure of the Ukrainian national renaissance.
Czar Alexander II had Shevchenko imprisoned for writing a satirical poem, an action that helped shorten his life.
Besides criticizing serfdom and the czarist dictatorship, Taras Shevchenko also opposed the grotesque discrimination suffered by Jewish people.
But unlike enslaved Africans in the United States, their families couldn’t be broken up.
Poverty and pogroms Ukraine was rich but Ukrainians were desperately poor.
The czarist empire was the greatest exporter of wheat during most of the 1800s with Ukraine producing the greatest share.
It was only after 1870 that the United States, Argentina and Canada became major wheat exporters.
Yet the Ukrainian peasants who harvested wheat and other crops were often hungry themselves.
Farm laborers would suffer night-blindness because of a lack of vitamins.
The Czar sought to turn this anger into racist violence directed at minorities.
These spasms of terror in which hundreds of people were lynched were called pogroms.
The Bolsheviks fought pogroms @teruecuie « LA LUCHA Ukraine and the Bolshevik Revolution A y \ BLACK SEA Ora > bs S CHS ea LF ie 5 Legh Konotep Verpuenye\ Sieeropol one Formation of the borders sigue of Soviet Ukraine hese in 1917-1928 Ee 7 GD vorsopersae £ Ect. ey Nad | Soy¥> \ CRIMEAN with guns.
The revolutionary movement had been centered in the cities and minefields where the working class was concentrated.
The greatest center of pogroms was Ukraine and Moldova where the working class was smaller.
None of this prevented the centuries-old czarist police state from being overthrown in March 1917.
Eight months later, workers organized into councils known as soviets took power.
Their slogan of “bread, peace and land” appealed to millions of people.
Two million soldiers from the former Czarist Empire had died in World War I Peasants — the vast majority of society — wanted to take the land that they had plowed for generations.
The Bolsheviks told them to kick out their landlords and seize the land.
In contrast, capitalists betrayed Black people after the United States Civil War.
Instead of the former slave masters being forced to give up their plantations, most Black people became landless sharecroppers.
Lenin and Ukraine When the peasants and workers took power on Nov., 1917, the Russian landlords and capitalists were demoralized.
The support given by capitalists in other countries sparked a civil war.
The counterrevolutionaries were called White Guards, who were a Russian terrorist army much like the Ku Klux Klan.
The United States and other countries sent troops to support the White Guards and attempted to drown the socialist revolution in blood.
The Red Army of workers and peasants defeated the White Guards and foreign troops.
Dock workers in Seattle and Britain refused to load weapons for the White Guards.
In the Russian Civil War of 191820, most of Ukraine had been overridden by White Guards.
A well-to-do minority of Ukrainians supported the White Guards and joined the pogroms.
Their political descendents supported the Nazis in World War II and today they comprise the fascist Azov Battalion and Right Sector thugs.
After hundreds of years of Czarist oppression, Ukrainians and other nationalities wanted freedom.
Famines and industrialization The Ukrainian Soviet Republic was established.
In 1922 Ukraine joined with the other soviet republics to form the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Whereas printing in Ukrainian had been forbidden by the Czar, in 1980 there were around 1,500 newspapers and magazines printed in that language.
Besides millions of Ukrainian and Russian speakers, there are Greek, Hungarian, Jewish, Roma and other peoples.
Some have asked why the Bolsheviks included predominantly Russian speaking areas, like the Donbass, within Ukraine’s boundaries.
The reason was that in 1917, the vast majority of Ukrainians were peasants who lived in the countryside.
After the civil war came the famine in 1921-1922 in which millions died.
The loss of millions of agricultural workers because of World War I, the civil war and the 1918 influenza pandemic further reduced the harvest.
Many Ukrainians, who are not communists, claim this famine was deliberate genocide against the Ukrainian people.
Yet the famine affected millions of Kazakhs and Russians outside Ukraine.
This famine took place during the first five-year plan which was rapidly industrializing the Soviet Union.
But these plots were too small to employ modern agricultural machinery.
Peasants were encouraged to join cooperatives and form collective farms.
This was an intense class struggle which amounted to a second revolution.
Sometimes the worst exploiters are the small property owners like small slumlords or other small-time cockroach capitalists.
Kulaks helped sabotage the harvest by concealing grain stocks and slaughtering livestock.
The forming of collective farms went hand-in-hand with constructing factories making tractors and harvesters.
Defeating Hitler and NATO Looking back, some argue that collectivization should have started sooner and/or more slowly.
Soviet leader Joseph Stalin in his article “Dizzy with Success” urged activists to be more careful.
Often overlooked in this famine, as historian Mark B Tauger points out, is the devastating role of the wheat rust fungus.
This plant disease would have been disastrous whether there had been a collective farm movement or not.
In 1921, before he became president, Hoover led a relief campaign that aided starving people in the Soviet Union.
But in the early 1930s Hoover did nothing, even while many United States farmers couldn’t sell their crops during the Great Depression.
Also questioned is that the Soviet Union exported crops while people were starving.
Professor Tauger estimates that as many as two million people might have lived if these exports ceased.
But as Tauger mentions, both Germany and Britain threatened to stop lending credit to the Soviet Union unless Continued on page 7 & China, says top official J By Gary Wilson As the United States and its NATO satellites flood weapons into Ukraine, NATO is being “transformed” into a fighting force capable of direct wars on Russia and China, says NATO General-Secretary Jens Stoltenberg.
NATO formally launched a 4,0,000-strong rapid response force targeting Russia in February.
Also to be noted is President Joe Biden’s shift away from the “no first use” of nuclear weapons, with the Pentagon announcing March 29 that the United States would consider first use of nuclear weapons.
In an interview with the Telegraph, Stoltenberg said NATO is in the process of making a “fundamental” shift from engaging in what he called “tripwire deterrence” to “be transformed into a major force capable of” direct warfare.
What the Soviet Union had to sell at the time was largely oil, lumber and wheat — all at the low Depression prices.
Imports of machinery were absolutely necessary to industrialize the Soviet Union.
And the industrialization carried out by the five-year plans enabled the Soviet peoples to defeat the Nazi invasion, which killed over 5 million Ukrainians.
By 1940, over a half-million Ukrainian workers had high school or college educations.
This was despite an overwhelming majority of Soviet citizens — including 78% of Ukrainians — voting to retain the Soviet Union ina March 17, 1991 referendum.
This tragedy was a greater defeat than the victory of Hitler over the bones of the German working class.
World capital and its media have been able to poison the minds of too many Ukrainians, Russians and other peoples living in the former Soviet Union.
We look forward to NATO’s defeat and a revival of a revolutionary movement in Ukraine.
Following the overturn of the Soviet Union, NATO has expanded from 16 countries to 30.
NATO expansion into Eastern Europe For the last two decades, NATO has been expanding into Eastern Europe.
In 2004, Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia were incorporated.
Meanwhile, the United States is expanding its proxy war in Ukraine, as Leon Panetta, who was CIA director and then secretary of defense in the Barack Obama administration, so clearly put it.
The United States and its NATO military operation is in a proxy war against Russia, with Ukraine as the battlefield.
The US. role, Panetta said, is to provide more and more weapons faster and faster with Ukraine doing the fighting, bolstered by foreign mercenaries.
It’s amatter of military fact that in the Ukrainian proxy war, more military-technical assistance has been dispatched by the United States and its NATO satellites, in a larger amount and in a shorter time, than in any previous military conflict in history.
Stop arming Ukraine “Russia warns United States to stop arming Ukraine,” the Washington Post reported April 14.
The diplomatic note, titled “On Russia’s concerns in the context of massive supplies of weapons and military equipment to the Kiev regime,” was forwarded to the State Department by the Russian Embassy in Washington.
The United States has sent more than $2. billion worth of arms and other military aid to Ukraine since Russia launched its military action in February.
NATO’s military budget accounts for the majority of military spending worldwide.
JL by i NUL > wp Ge NEV il WA OF NATO COUNTRIES $120 Estim ated NATO United States commands NATO As noted by the Pentagon, NATO is the primary force for United States dominance and control in Europe.
All NATO countries are under the effective military domination of the United States.
While the governments of the imperialist countries in NATO are not puppet governments, they are unable to take major decisions involving peace and war without the approval of the government of the United States.
The civilian governments of the NATO countries lack full control over their own armed forces.
NATO was founded as a U.S.-led military alliance against the Soviet Union and the socialist countries in Eastern Europe.
After World War II, the United States was determined to bring all the imperialist countries under its military control — first the defeated Axis powers of Germany, Japan and Italy and then increasingly its “victorious allies,” Britain and France, through the NATO alliance.
At the end of the Cold War, the newly capitalist oppressed countries of Eastern Europe were signed up as formal NATO members.
NATO has been in the process of unofficially taking in Ukraine — minus Crimea and the Donetsk and Lugansk People’s Republics.
Following the breakup of the Soviet Union, socialist industry was dismantled in Ukraine.
Once the second-largest economy in the USSR, “independent” Ukraine is now the poorest country in Europe.
In 2013, the European Union demanded that Kiev impose WashNorth Atlantic Treaty Organization rr Here is what every NATO country will spend on defense in the year 2021.
Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych rejected this for a more favorable offer from Russia.
The Euromaidan coup quickly followed in 2014, openly supported and financed by NATO, to put in a government that bowed to the IMF demands and made NATO membership a policy mandate.
The resistance to the Euromaidan coup and to NATO in Ukraine has been bigger and more widespread than reported in the United States corporate-controlled media.
The resistance has been strongest in the eastern part of Ukraine, particularly the Donbass region.
The autonomous Donetsk People’s Republic and Lugansk People’s Republic were created when the people there voted overwhelmingly against a NATO-controlled regime and to secede from the Kiev regime.
The result was a 97% vote in favor of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea seceding, with an 83% voter turnout.
Los archivos de los cinco cubanos regresan a Casa re Por Bill Hackwell Hace una semana Cheryl LaBash y yo iniciamos el viaje para llevar a casa los Archivos de la larga lucha por la liberacion de los 5 cubanos que con Alicia Jrapko acumulamos durante un periodo de 13 afios, cuidadosa y metddicamente guardados en nuestro sdtano; desde la primera carta que Gerardo Hernandez le envio a Alicia a fines de 2001 desde una prision federal en Miami hasta la ultima que nos envio desde el Hueco en la prision de transferencia de Oklahoma City el 12 de diciembre de 2014.
Junto con las cartas hay material de las muchas campafias y proyectos que tuvieron lugar durante ese tiempo.
Si bien es una cantidad significativa del registro histdrico, no representa toda la informacion acumulada durante ese tiempo por el movimiento internacional que apoyo a los Cinco.
La singularidad de la lucha por la libertad de los Cinco Cubanos fue que, a diferencia de la mayoria de las luchas, estuvo claramente enmarcadaen el tiempo desde el momento en que fueron arrestados en Miami el 12 de septiembre de 1998, por defender su patria de los ataques terroristas organizados en esa misma ciudad hasta su liberacion el 17 de diciembre de 2014, a través de esa estrecha ventana que se abriO por un breve momento bajo Obama.
Cuando llegamos a Kramer Junction, nuestra ruta era continuar hacia el este hasta Arizona, pero no pude evitar tomar un desvio hacia el sur con el automovil leno de la historia de los 5 Cubanos hasta las puertas de la penitenciaria que encarcel6 a Gerardo durante tanto tiempo, una vuelta de victoria modesta pero significativa para una lucha librada por todo el pueblo cubano y apoyada por millones en el mundo.
Fue aqui donde Gerardo termino en el Hueco durante una semana antes de ser enviado a Butner Prison Carolina del Norte donde se reencontré con sus hermanos Ramon Labajfiino y Antonio Guerrero antes de su regreso triunfal a casa.
Fue desde esta prision de Oklahoma donde pudo sacar su Ultima carta de prision para Alicia diciendo que no sabia a donde lo llevarian pero sabia que su tiempo en California habia terminado y le agradecia todo lo que habia hecho.
Las 3100 millas recorridas con esta carga historica fueron para mi, en lo personal, un momento de reflexion y un avance desde el fallecimiento de Alicia en enero pasado.
Devolver todo esto a sus legitimos duefios, el pueblo cubano, era algo que ella y yo habiamos discutido muchas veces, ahora se habia convertido en el cumplimiento de una promesa, en mi percepcion de urgencia.
La entrega de los Archivos a la Embajada de Cuba fue un momento de solidaridad y un paso importante hacia su destino final.
El cierre del viaje tuvo lugar anoche cuando activistas solidarios con Cuba del area de D.C. y diplomaticos de la Embajada de Cuba se reunieron para compartir recuerdos de Alicia y su vida bien vivida.
Resumen Cuban 5 archives begin their journey home By Bill Hackwell April 11 — A week ago Cheryl LaBash and I started the journey to take home the archives of the long struggle to free the Cuban 5 that Alicia Jrapko and I accumulated over a period of 13 years, carefully and methodically stored in our basement; from the first letter Gerardo Hernandez mailed to Alicia in late 2001 from a federal prison in Miami to the last one he sent us from the hole in the Oklahoma City transfer prison on December 12, 2014.
Along with the letters are material from the many campaigns and projects that took place over that time.
While this material is a significant amount of the historical record, it does not represent all of the information accumulated during that time by the international movement that supported the Five.
The uniqueness of the struggle to free the Cuban 5 was that, unlike most struggles, it was clearly framed in time from the moment they were arrested in Miami on September 12, 1998, for defending their homeland from terrorist attacks organized in that very city to their release on December 17, 2014, through that narrow window that opened for a brief moment under Obama.
What was most inspiring was that it took place as the internet was becoming an increasingly prominent organizing tool that connected the movement like never before enabling international events to take place in London; Holguin, Cuba; Toronto; Puerto Allegre, Brazil; Tijuana, Mexico, to name a few, and in Washington D.C., where for several years supporters of Cuba gathered from all over the globe to protest for the freedom of the five in front of the White House and lobbied on Capitol Hill against the legislation that entrenches the blockade of the island.
Cuban 5 Banner Tehachapi Pass dropping down into the wonders of the desolate Mojave Desert with its twisted but majestic Joshua Trees.
When we arrived at Kramer Junction our route was to continue east to Arizona but I could not help myself but take a detour south with the utility vehicle full of the story of the Cuban 5 to the gates of the penitentiary that imprisoned Gerardo for so long taking a modest but significant victory lap for a struggle waged by the Cuban people and supported by millions around the world.
It also seemed right to get off Interyears of the victorious Gerardo Hernandez. state 40 in Oklahoma City to repeat it at the Federal Transfer Center where prisoners are shuffled to and from federal prisons around the United States It was here where Gerardo ended up in the hole for a week before he was sent to Butner Prison, North Carolina, where he reconnected with his brothers Ramon Labanino and Antonio Guerrero before their triumphant return home.
It was from this Oklahoma prison where he was able to get out his final prison letter to Alicia saying he didn’t know where they were taking him but he knew his time in California was over and he thanked her for everything she had done.
The 3,100 miles driven with this historic cargo was personal for me, a time of reflection, and a moving forward since Alicia’s passing this past January.
Getting this all back to its rightful owners, the Cuban people, was something she and I had discussed many times and now it had become a fulfillment of a promise in my perceived urgency.
The delivery of the archives to the Cuban Embassy was a moment of solidarity and an important step to its ultimate destination.
The finality of the trip took place last night when D.C.-area Cuba solidarity activists and the diplomats of the Cuban Embassy gathered to share remembrances of Alicia and her life well-lived.
