After his arrest he claimed that he was not bound by any oath because he gave it to the Soviet union, not Russia.
The explanation offered on Russian television on Thursday by the men known as Ruslan Boshirov and Alexander Petrov for their trip to London and Salisbury throws up as many questions as answers.
The men – leading suspects in the poisoning of former Russian spy Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia – say they were so keen to visit Salisbury cathedral that they travelled to the city on two consecutive days.
On Saturday, March 3rd – which the British authorities claim was the date of a reconnaissance mission – they got to Salisbury train station but say they were driven back by snow, even though local newspaper pictures show people going about their business with little difficulty.
They were less than a mile from the cathedral – perhaps a 12-minute walk – but say they could not get there that day.
The next day they accept they may have been close to the house of Sergei Skripal at the time his home was sabotaged with nerve agent, although his address is about 3km from the cathedral – their supposed destination in Salisbury and nowhere near other attractions they say they were interested in, including Old Sarum and Stonehenge.
They arrived on Friday, March 2nd, and say the UK was gripped by transport chaos.
That is true – Storm Emma had met the so-called Beast from the East, causing a blast of heavy snow.
More than 1,900 flights to or from UK and Irish airports were cancelled.
Petrov said their friends had been suggesting for a while that they visit the “wonderful” city of Salisbury.
The British authorities have said the pair left their hotel in east London and arrived at Waterloo station in the capital at 11.45am, where they caught a train to Salisbury and arrived at about 2.25pm.
They were in Salisbury for just under two hours, leaving at about 4.10pm.
Petrov said the pair had planned to visit not only the cathedral but Stonehenge and the ancient settlement of Old Sarum, which is north of the city centre.
Petrov said they returned to the station and spent about 40 minutes there drinking coffee in the station cafe.
The cathedral is only 1.2km from the train station – a walk of about 15 minutes.
They could easily have strolled there in the half hour they said they spent there.
There was snow on the ground but people were going about their business.
The Salisbury Journal’s live blog showed that by the time the pair were there, the snow on city centre pavements was sparse.
British counter terrorism police have said they believe the March 3rd visit was a reconnaissance mission.
But the police have only released one image from Salisbury on the Saturday – the men at 4.11pm at the railway station, about to return to London.
No images or timeline have been issued of the men’s movements around Salisbury that day.
The British police have not said if they were seen near the Skripal house.
The phrase is a little clunky and is not commonly used in modern-day Salisbury.
But Wikipedia does use the phrase and gives details about the spire and clock.
They imply that this time they did reach the cathedral and possibly Old Sarum.
The pair said they took pictures at the cathedral – and would have been spotted by CCTV cameras there.
No images have been released by the counter-terrorism police of them at or near the cathedral.
Mention of a park will prick up the ears of security officials – and Salisbury citizens.
A city centre park, Queen Elizabeth Gardens, was cordoned off and searched after Charlie Rowley and Dawn Sturgess were poisoned with Novichok.
Police have said they do not know where the pair dumped the Novichok used in the attack on Sergei Skripal’s home.
According to the UK authorities, after arriving in Salisbury at 11.48am on March 4th, the men did not go straight to the city centre or the cathedral.
They should have turned right into the city if they were on the tourist trail.
Instead they turned left and walked directly to the residential area northwest of the city where Skripal lived.
They were caught at 11.58am by a CCTV camera at a Shell petrol station on Wilton Road.
On the opposite side of the road is a tree-lined path that leads up to the Skripal house on Christie Miller Road.
If they went straight to the house and carried out the attack, they would have been at the Skripal front door shortly after noon.
There is no reason for them to be anywhere near it – it is 3km northwest of the cathedral.
About an hour after the attack, at 1.05pm, they were in the city centre on Fisherton Street, according to the British authorities.
There is a gap of about 40 minutes in the timeline the police have provided between when the pair were seen in Fisherton Street and when CCTV footage picked them up at the station at 1.50pm on their way back to London.
On 4 March 2018, Skripal and his 33-year-old daughter Yulia, who was visiting from Moscow, were found “slipping in and out of consciousness on a public bench” near a shopping centre in Salisburyby a doctor and nurse who were passing by.
Paramedics took them to Salisbury District Hospitalwhere medical staff determined that the pair had been poisoned with a nerve agent.The police declared a major incident as multiple agencies were involved.
Following the incident, health authorities checked 21 members of the emergency services and the public for symptoms;two police officers were treated for possible minor symptoms, said to be itchy eyes and wheezing, while a third, Detective Sergeant Nick Bailey, who had been sent to Sergei Skripal’s house, was in a serious condition.
By 22 March 2018, he had recovered enough to be discharged from the hospital.
Former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych has called for “direct peace talks” between Kyiv and Russia-backed separatists in Ukraine’s east to end a conflict that has killed more than 10,300 people since April 2014.
At a press conference in Moscow on March 2, Yanukovych vowed to ask the European Union, the United States, and Russia to assist in organizing the talks to reintegrate the territories controlled by the separatists into Ukraine.
Russia-friendly Yanukovych fled Ukraine in February 2014 following months of mass street protests in Ukraine and has been residing in Russia since.
Russia’s subsequent seizure of Crimea and its backing of the separatists in eastern Ukraine have triggered waves of United States and EU sanctions targeting Russian officials, companies, and economic sectors.
Yanukovych also said at the press conference that in the note he wrote to Russian President Vladimir Putin in February 2014, he never asked Putin to send troops to Ukraine.
Answering a question about the investigation of the killings of Euromaidan activists in February 2014 by snipers in downtown Kyiv, Yanukovych placed the blame on the protesters themselves, saying the buildings that the snipers shot the protesters from were under the activists’ control.
Yanukovych has been charged in absentia with high treason, violation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity, and other crimes.
His trial is under way in Kyiv. mikenova shared this story from National Post.
His case has nothing to do with the Trump campaign or allegations that it colluded with Russia in 2016.
Special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation has painstakingly documented evidence of Manafort’s role in a 10-year scheme involving money laundering, tax evasion and illicit lobbying — crimes that could lead to decades in a prison cell.
Given Manafort’s extensive ties to Russian and Ukrainian oligarchs, Russian President Vladimir Putin would almost certainly have had detailed knowledge of Manafort’s transgressions.
And that means that, when Manafort was promoted to chairman of Trump’s campaign in May 2016, the Kremlin probably had vast amounts of material it could use to blackmail him.
When it was revealed in August 2016 that Manafort had received at least $12. million in secret payments from the pro-Kremlin party of Viktor Yanukovych, Ukraine’s ousted president, that alone was enough to end his nascent return to United States politics.
Rarely is there a long-term strategy behind it; it often functions as a kind of insurance in business or political dealings.
Accordingly, to say that the Russian government would have access to kompromat on Manafort is not necessarily to argue that its procurement was part of a sustained, centrally orchestrated campaign.
Instead, it could have been casually generated through Manafort’s dealings with Kremlin-connected oligarchs and politicians, as well as Konstantin Kilimnik, his right-hand man, who Mueller has alleged had active “ties to Russian intelligence” through 2016.
Kilimnik was integral to Manafort’s decadelong scheme to defraud the United States.
In Kiev, Kilimnik was known as “Manafort’s Manafort,” and he probably helped the American lobbyist to use stolen or false Ukrainian identities to set up offshore shell companies that were used to launder some $30 million.
Kilimnik ran Manafort’s office in Ukraine, where investigators found forged invoices, including one that billed a Manafort front company $750,000 for hundreds of nonexistent computers.
The intimate relationship between Manafort and Kilimnik is perhaps best captured by Kilimnik’s frustrated attempts to contact witnesses in Europe to ensure they would not disclose Manafort’s secret lobbying in the United States, which violated the Foreign Agents Registration Act.
If Kilimnik and Deripaska knew of Manafort’s crimes and crippling financial distress, so did the Kremlin.
We can safely assume that Manafort was a compromised man when, on June 9, 2016, he met with a Russian government attorney to, in an ironic twist, receive illicit “dirt” on Hillary Clinton.
But Manafort was not the only person on the Trump campaign vulnerable to potential kompromat possessed by the Kremlin.
Like his campaign chairman, Trump has been plagued by self-engineered financial distress.
He has grown reliant on money from the former Soviet Union, including Russia.
He worked closely with politically connected oligarchs and corrupt business partners.
His financial empire is shrouded in the secrecy of hundreds of shell companies.
The parallels between Trump and Manafort are many, but they do not end there.
Manafort’s cooperation with Mueller could soon reveal how the Kremlin employed kompromat to attack United States democracy, because if Putin had compromising information on the campaign chairman of a major party candidate in a United States general election, he would probably put it to use.
The same applies to the candidate himself. mikenova shared this story from Skripal – Yanukovych – – Oligarchs – Manafort – Trump – Google News.
Mr Manafort’s former client President Viktor F Yanukovych was … role in a reported effort by Mr Manafort to contact a Russian oligarch, Oleg V … chairman of the Trump campaign, Mr Manafort emailed Mr Kilimnik … In a court filing last year, Mr Mueller asserted that Mr Kilimnik was now based in Russia.
Jul 3, 2018 – Robert Mueller believes Kilimnik is currently in Russia and has ties to Russian … Among Manafort’s clients were Russian oligarch Oleg Deripaska and other … Viktor Yanukovych, who became the president of Ukraine in 2010.
Jul 3, 2018 – Konstantin Kilimnik, who is now indicted alongside Paul Manafort on witness … election toward Trump, Manafort and Kilimnik pondered the risks to Russia if the … Among Manafort’s clients were Russian oligarch Oleg Deripaska and other … any proposal for new Manafort business during the campaign.
Apr 21, 2018 – Prosecutors say they have long suspected former Trump campaign chairman Paul Manafort of being a back channel to Russia during the election.
