One year since Crimea was annexed by Russia, polling reveals that the new order enjoys legitimacy among the population.
Russia’s annexation of Crimea was an illegal act under international law.
It is also an act that enjoys the widespread support of the peninsula’s inhabitants, with the important exception of its Crimean Tatar population.
It is now a year since the Russian seizure of the peninsula and installation of a pro-Russia local government.
The hasty organisation of a referendum held on 16 March, produced a 96.77% vote in favour of joining Russia.
To grasp the conundrum that Crimea presents to the international community, we need to appreciate the disjuncture between scale and legitimacy it represents.
For Kyiv, it was an illegal vote by an undemocratic regime installed by an occupying force.
Nevertheless, on the ground in Crimea, prevailing opinion at the inter-state and state level does not matter.
It is also considered legitimate within Russia itself, where, in 2014, polls revealed rising levels of support for the annexation from 64% in March to 73% in September.
Our highlighting of the conundrum is based on the results of a public opinion survey we organised on the Crimean peninsula in December 2014.
We have worked with the Levada Center for over a decade on public opinion polling, within the Russian Federation in 2002, in the North Caucasus in 2005, and in the breakaway Georgian region of Abkhazia in 2010.
In April 2014, the Political Science division of the United States National Science Foundation awarded us a RAPID research grant to examine public opinion in response to the EuroMaidan protests, the toppling of President Yanukovych, and the subsequent annexation of Crimea.
Initially, we did not propose to sample in Crimea because we did not consider a reliable survey possible.
In these discussions, we learned of the long record of cooperation between KIIS and Levada, one that stretched back to Soviet-era personal networks within the discipline of sociology.
This cooperation became significant when Russia annexed Crimea; it meant that KIIS’s interviewers could no longer work for a Kyiv-based firm.
We thus decided to conduct an equivalent survey in both southeast Ukraine and Crimea.
The survey took on average about 45 minutes to complete and was conducted in Russian between 12 and 25 December 2014.
The field report indicated no interference by Crimean authorities with the survey.
But since the last Ukrainian census was 14 years ago, and we have no reliable estimates of how many have left Crimea since March, there are innate difficulties with survey research there, before we even consider the political climate.
Of the sample, 63% declared their nationality as Russian, 21% as Ukrainian and 8.5% as Tatar.
This last figure almost certainly under-samples this important but difficult-to-survey group, which was 12% of the population in the 2001 Ukrainian census; and possibly larger today.% of respondents are pensioners, an important demographic in a peninsula with many veterans and other retirees.% work in services and most of the rest in a broad range of professions.
We discuss here four key features of the survey, the full results of which we hope to publish later.
Polling by the International Republican Institute found only 6% of Crimeans believed the country was heading in the right direction in November 2009, 11% in October 2011, and 24% in May 2013.
We have found that this generic question about the direction of a region is a powerful predictor of political preferences, and it also encapsulates a variety of beliefs about recent economic performance and future expectations of prosperity.
A remarkable difference is seen in the response of the Crimean Tatars to this key question, with only 28% agreeing that life was improving.
The disaffection of Tatars since the annexation is well documented and their political and human rights situation is increasingly precarious.
Likewise, Crimeans have different perceptions about Russia moving in the right direction, with over 90% of ethnic Russians and Ukrainians believing it to be so, but only 33% of Tatars feeling that way.
These results were recorded at a time when the rouble was dropping precipitously in value against Western currencies, and economic sanctions against the Putin administration were being ramped up.
Compared to the opinions of Russians residents of Crimea are much more optimistic and demonstrate the highest positive scores on this ‘right-wrong direction’ question that we have seen in multiple surveys across territories of the former Soviet Union.
The responses to the right-wrong direction question are strongly correlated with the respondent’s own personal outlook.
Only 12% of Ukrainians and Russians say that their mood could be described as either ‘stressed’, ‘angry’ or ‘anxious’, with Tatars indicating a rate that is double that of other Crimeans.
These ratios, again, are very low compared to others in zones of political tension of the former Soviet Union.
The responses are not motivated by material wealth, which is low and quite similar to other post-Soviet regions.
In a complementary manner, over three-quarters of the non-Tatars expect to be better off in two years compared to half of the Tatars.
The dramatic switch of the peninsula from Ukraine to Russia has even increased levels of optimism about future personal wealth.
Consistent with and motivating positivity about Crimea’s direction, the annexation of the peninsula by Russia has the support of a strong majority of the Russian and Ukrainian ethnic groups.
When asked if the annexation was a ‘wrong decision,’ ‘generally a right decision’ or ‘absolutely the right decision’, 84% of this combined group picked the third option.
The Tatar response on this question is almost split evenly, with about one-third picking each of the first options and only 20% the 'absolutely correct' option.
These responses indicate that had a legal referendum that met international standards been permitted in Crimea , there would likely have been a majority in favour of leaving Ukraine and joining Russia.
As it was, the referendum was characterised by all manner of illegal practices and conducted in a coercive environment.
The Tatars' decision to boycott, further underscored legitimacy questions.
Russians in Crimea have a very negative opinion of the EuroMaidan movement.
After the success of the revolution in Kyiv, the ratio of those who wanted to secede and join Russia undoubtedly jumped due to television-fed perceptions that ethnic Russians would become second-class citizens in Ukraine.
Russians in Crimea have a very negative opinion of the EuroMaidan movement, with only 2.5% of our sample, thinking it improved conditions in Ukraine, and over 90% believing it made things worse.
Judging that the rights of Russians in the country were under threat, a pessimistic mood reinforced by Russian television , the ratios presented here reflect a profound sense of alienation from Kyiv and its pro-Western leadership, and a preference for Russia as a guarantor of ethnic Russians’ status, power and future.
Unlike residents of western and central Ukraine who tend to readily self-identify in these terms, the strong majority of the population of Crimea do not perceive themselves as European.
Respondents in the six regions in southeast Ukraine were evenly split on this question, with 45% identifying definitely or probably yes while 45% identified as definitely or probably no.
Again, Tatars show some differences on this question from other Crimeans, though it is not as dramatic as others; less than half of this Muslim minority see themselves as European.
Our survey and previous surveys show considerable divisions over a European, and especially a Euro-Atlantic, orientation in southeast Ukraine.
The extent to which it has become a marker of a ‘civilisational divide’ in Ukraine, in opposition to a notion like the ‘Russkiy Mir’ , is an important question.
Certainly, the Kremlin has invested strongly in this notion, and more recently in the concept of separate civilisations.
In Crimea, at least, the evidence suggests this is working – 89% of respondents agreed that Crimea belonged to Russkiy Mir, the mirror opposite of European feeling.
In southeast Ukraine, the equivalent figure underscores the divide, with 51% strongly or mostly agreeing that their region belongs to the Russkiy Mir.
Furthermore, and most importantly, we should not assume that those holding that their region belongs to Russkiy Mir are supporters of Vladimir Putin.
In the six southeastern regions we surveyed, only 2.8% of respondents said they definitely trust the Russian president.
Finally, our survey shows that despite the enormous support for the annexation, and the high level of optimism for the future, only one-third of respondents in Crimea believe that the annexation has been problem-free in the nine months leading up to the interviews.
Tatars overwhelmingly stress the problems brought about by the change of government, with only a derisory 2% agreeing that it has been problem-free.
Recent journalistic accounts have indicated the significant annexation difficulties, including ready access to the peninsula, which is now blocked on the Ukrainian side.
Moreover, the expected boon in Russian tourism has not materialised; partly due to the significant financial pressures that Russian holiday-goers now face due to declining incomes.
Future polling will reveal whether current frustrations wane, and whether the high support and expectations associated with annexation will remain, as recession bites within Russia.
Recent journalistic accounts have indicated the significant annexation difficulties.
Understandably painful as it is for Ukraine, the question warrants debate.
The Kosovo case has important lessons for the international community about the importance of ‘remedial secession’ in cases of active physical oppression of a minority population.
Kosovo is also held to have ‘earned sovereignty’ through accepting a period of international administration.
By these criteria, the Kosovo case is clearly different from the Crimean case.
Furthermore, Kosovo became an independent state whereas Crimea aspired to join another.
Yet, at the same time, we need to recognise that while the circumstances under which Crimea became a self-determinating region, and by which its inhabitants expressed its opinion, were manifestly illegal, the majority of the current population in Crimea appears to approve of its unification with Russia.
The circumstances of each are distinct but they do share familial origins and resemblance.
Today, debate about these regions is in danger of being overwhelmed by homogenising legalism and geopolitical polemic.
We need a geopolitics that is about more than just ‘Putin and the West’, one that acknowledges past histories of sponsored settlement, forced displacement, war crimes, inept state building, and economic marginalisation in these contested spaces.
We need, in short, to respect the complexity of places and the local voices of those – in situ and displaced – caught up in struggles over them.
