The plebiscite was a trap for taking the masses out of the revolutionary struggles in the streets and preparing worse attacks over their gains.
In his new proposal after the plebiscite Tsipras offered immediately that the cuts be for 13 billion euros.
It was a very bad joke, because the Greek ship-owners and their bankers en the HSBC collect their money outside Greece and keep their assets abroad As we can read in the last news, this plan makes sense if Greece, as a debtor, puts all the state enterprises as collaterals, that is, if it makes a huge mortgage of the whole country.
Speaking clearly, the plebiscite was an antidemocratic fraud and an ultimatum at the same time.
Greeks were obliged to vote either for “YES” or “NO”, that is, for MerkeTs plan or for Syriza’s proposal.
The illusions of the masses about defeating the Troika and Merkel with the “NO” without defeating the pro imperialist bourgeois government of Syriza was a trap armed by Tsipras and the entire world reformist left.
A plebiscite in the bourgeois regime is totally dictatorial and Bonapartist.
It has not even a slight piece of formal bourgeois democracy that could be used to its favor by the workers.
The plebiscite, as we insisted in our declaration on July 3, was obliging the workers to opt between the hot embers and the boiling oil.
Or, as is the case of the freedom of expression, for organizing unions, etc.; but the Bonapartist institutions for domination of the bourgeoisie, as is the justice, the police forces, and in this case, the referenda or plebiscites, cannot be utilized by the workers, because they are antidemocratic, Bonapartist measures or tools (that is, in2 International Workers' Organizer trinsically repressive to the service of the bourgeoisie, NT) even from the point of view of bourgeois formal democracy.
The plebiscite was intimation to the masses, blackmail for them to commit self-murdering.
Tsipras always made clear that the belonging of Greece to the UE was not into question.
All those that collaborated with this trap by Syriza against the masses ought to explain the fraud that they supported.
The Greek Parliament is just beginning to meet, the fraud of the YES and the NO will soon be exposed.
If there are too much abstentions or votes against, there will be a new election, a new Parliamentary distraction to channel the indignation of the masses.
If not, the officers’ caste of the Greek Army, a member of the NATO, will be coming to put order, if the working class does not prevent them from.
The plebiscite, with the false choice between YES and NO was a trap for preventing THE REVOLUTIONARY UPRISING OF THE MASSES WHEN GREECE WAS ENTERING DEFAULT AND THE POWERS WERE NEGOTIATING THE RESCUE OF THE NATIONAL DEBT We must start saying that Syriza called for a plebiscite for strengthening and legitimizing all the institutions of dominion of the exploiting class in Greece, whatever the results between the YES and the NO vote.
The government of Tsipras -coming from repaying 7,5 billion euros of the debt in a common memorandum with Merkeldid not call a plebiscite against itself.
Syriza did not call for a plebiscite to be defeated and make its own government fall down.
If that had been the result the politics applied would have been exactly the same to that Tsipras is now applying, which shows that the negotiations in the back room among the capitalist gangs in Europe have never stopped.
With both options, both YES or NO, the bourgeois institutions of domination would be equally legitimized, and this is what they needed amidst the tremendous political crisis that exists in Greece.
Moreover, the Parliament is just going to meet to give the deal a final blessing in the form of a law, which will show the fraud committed by the bourgeoisie.
Maybe the “leff’ and “nationalist” wings break with Syriza, voting against it, but there will be an absolute majority of the YES and the NO, imposing the worst sufferings to the masses.
Whoever does not start by saying this is a vulgar charlatan that long ago has stopped to confront the bourgeois state and its institutions.
The plebiscite was called at the last moment by Syriza for preventing a colossal political crisis and a new revolutionary uprising of the masses in the midst of a possible economic burst.
In this situation the way was open for the Greek masses for stopping the attack and irrupting again with their battles by confronting directly the Greek big bankers and parasites.
This would have amounted to go to an inevitable clash with the government of Syriza, which comes applying the same plans of attacking the masses that were applied yesterday by Karamanlis and Papandreou.
Some people want to paint the Greek bourgeoisie as opposite to the vassal treaties proposed by Maastricht’s Europe.
Though as it has been demonstrated all these 8 years, all the bourgeois fractions and all their governments closed ranks with the Troika -of which they are partagainst the workers.
The plebiscite was for distracting through a vile lie and a deception, the perspective of fighting of the exploited against their executioners, the Greek capitalists and their government that submit with treble chains the Greek working class and the ruined petty bourgeoisie to imperialist Maastricht.
The world reformist left tried to use this plebiscite against the Troika, Though, to be sure, the only one that used the plebiscite was the Troika itself for gaining time, with Syriza, and be able to attack violently the masses, as it is happening now.
The members of the Troika defended their businesses and the social imperialist left was kind enough not to defend the interests of the working class.
GREECE 3 The plans of Germany and USA in the backroom, in front of Greece, WHICH HAS LONG DEFAULTED Greece is a small imperialist country in bankruptcy and decadency.
This petty imperialist country, when East Europe fell, took the Balkans together with the United States imperialists.
Long ago, from early Twentieth Century, the bourgeois states, their nations have turned into an absolute obstacle for the development of the productive forces.
That is what the emergence of imperialism, phase of decay of capitalism is about.
The bourgeoisie does not defend the fatherland, but the markets, the foreign concessions, the sources of raw materials and its spheres of influence.
The bourgeoisie never defends the fatherland for the sale of the fatherland in itself.
When its profits and its businesses are threatened, it is even defeatist against its own nation.
This is what has just happened in Greece with Syriza and the government of its bankers and big ship-owners.
They have defended their businesses with the EU and Wall Street... and not Greece.
World leftists, in all their shades, only devoted themselves to embellish the attitudes of a class that is in decay and bankruptcy, which is the bourgeoisie, and the rotten capitalist system.
The bourgeois sectors that “defend Greece” are up to now marginal sectors that long for getting out of the euro, but not to go to the Drachma; they want to go TO THE DOLLAR instead, as golden Down or the partners of Syriza in the government.
This amounts to a true civil war headed by Merkel and the imperialist Greek bourgeoisie not “against Greece” but against the Greek working class and exploited.
In both cases, it would be done through an awful trimming against the masses.
The plan of the IME, which acts as a true usurer, is imposing a vassal imperialist country as is Greece, the plant they imposed to a semicolony, as is Argentina, in 2005 with the Kirchners.
In those years they turned an un-collectable debt in a collectable one, with juicy interests, which have been already collected and put into their pockets.
That was a variant being discussed at the board of secret negotiations among the imperialist gang.
Ultimately that would have been a “sweeter” plan for Greece than the present one.
That is the politics of USA, which through the Morgan Bank and Goldman Sachs has secured the collection of its credits in Greece on the basis of a percentage of the export and import taxes and the games-tax.
USA seeks that Germany does the “dirty work” against Greece, so that, by means of future crises, the United States government may attract the beaten country under its “protective” wings.
Though, the plan imposed and the actual negotiation that came out was that proposed openly by the EU, with Germany at its head.
This is what the proposal of Europe -main lender to Greeceand Germany in particular, is about.
As we have said, the Bundesbank is full of Greek junk bonds for a total value of 50 billion euros.
It has to revalue those papers; if not, the German state will be obliged to put fresh euros in the coffers of its bank, something it does not want to do.
That’s the reason why the proposal by Syriza after the plebiscite of making trimmings for 13 billion euros, increasing the age threshold for retirement, the percentage for VAT, reducing the amount for pensions, etc.
This does not suffice 4 International Workers' Organizer Germany to give new value to the junk bonds.
Germany demands the suspension of the stability for all the state employees so that they can be laid off if the interests cannot be paid, and that all the Greek state enterprises are put as collateral of the debt; Germany also wants to get a hig portion of all the funds put hy the EU to rescue the debt.
Any one that follows today in the media the impositions of Merkel and the servility of Tsipras will see that the German impositions are thought to re value the papers of the Greek external debt and its Junk bonds that are in the Bundesbank coffers.
Though, the Greek bankers want also a little of the cake as a prize for getting Greece to kneel beneath the UE impositions.
Another 25% should go for the “productive investment” of the European transnationals that will make business in Greece and all across Europe.
So the Greek bankers also take a bit of the rescue packet, after having broken with their crisis the finances of the state.
The whole crisis will be paid for by the masses The masses will pay for the crisis all the way through.
Germany behaves to Greece, on a large scale with the essence of the mechanics of relationships that capitalists set when their competition goes bankrupt or melts.
When a company goes bust, employers do not pay for the crisis; neither the creditors nor the debtors.
Those who pay for the crisis are the workers suffering dismissals, hunger, factory closures... or with the loss of all their conquests.
The Government of Syriza is as the directory of a lesser company that is broken.
This directory has a President something everybody is trying to hide which is New Democracy, a Greek ""right-wing"" party.
This President was voted by all the representatives in the House, starting with Syriza.
In this broken Greece, and with its workers uprising for years, the directory put as ""Executive Manager"" of the company a ""Manager of left"" to mislead the workers so that they do not expropriate the factory, as the Greek working class threatened to do with its revolutionary struggle.
To make the workers believe that their company directory is their ally against the creditor.
Alternatively, if the workers are mobilized, they may be convinced that their ""friend"", the leftist CEO, can thus press best the creditor not to liquidate the conquests of the workers.
It is what the ""new left"" want the working class to believe in Greece and around the world.
GREECE 5 The biggest enemy of a directory is always the workers, either that the company is in bankruptcy or in expansion.
Whoever does not say this clearly lies to the masses, as it has been doing all the left worldwide with Syriza, the left leg of the Greek bourgeois Government.
The broken company will only come out of its crisis by attacking all the conquests of the working class, either shutting its doors, paying the creditors, or by having the State to pay them; while they keep their money in their pockets.
In short, the Greek Government, as any directory on a broken company, does not mean about the workers.
It intervenes to defend the bosses’ profits and their future at the expense of workers.
His ally is the creditor, although this may have taken up the rope to his neck.
His enemy is the workers, who must pay for the company’s crisis or be dismissed when the capitalist auctions his property, not just because it is in crisis, but to go to a quiet place to rest.
The role of the reformist left, which promotes a policy of class collaboration, is to blur the boundaries of class and pass the enemies of the Greek workers as Syriza as allies.
Tsipras is acting for what it is, a bourgeois Government filled with parasitic bankers and ship-owners who are partners to Goldman Sachs, but with its business rooted in Europe under the industrial and commercial control of Germany.
Tsipras isn't a madman, or a pancake that has turned upside down, or a man out of control.
He is acting as a broken company director discussing with creditors how best wrench his workers and collect himself and his bosses and creditors all that remains of the value of the broken capital.
He defends their business, their market, their place in the division of labor in which Greece is located today in the Europe of the Maastricht Treaty.
Those who cannot defend their interests due to the leadership they have at their head, are the workers.
The plan imposed to Greece by Germany and the rest of imperialist Europe IS THE PLAN so THAT ALL EUROPEAN AND GERMAN WORKING-CLASS PAID IN PARTICULAR, THE FINANCIAL CRISIS Germany knows and understands the conditions of the economy and world politics perfectly and why keep uncompromising against Greece, as it did.
It seeks to punish, but not ""Greece"" but the Greek, European and German labor movement in particular.
Eeftists’ patriotic zealotry and pro bourgeois policy cover, ultimately, the real imperialist policy against European workers.
Bankrupt Europe needs, so that the immense heaps of junk bonds and capital that banks go again to the production process, a labor movement in the imperialist countries under the same conditions that Merkel and Tsipras want to impose to the Greek working class.
If Germany and Tsipras manage to impose this plan, all the European capitalists and their imperialist powers will stand up and cheer.
A Greek labor movement without retirement, hospitals or public schools, with unemployed starving to death on the streets as a cheap industrial army of reserve, without social security, with depressed wages, with hundreds of thousands of laid-off State workers, is their golden dream.
Eor the German working-class it is a question of life and death to stop this attack on its class brothers and sisters in Greece.
The plan imposed to Greece by Germany and imperialist Europe is the plan for all European workers 6 I International Workers' Organizer to pay for the crisis of the financial capital.
What's here is a plan of attack to the Greek working class, to impose those conditions throughout the European -and particularly Germanworking class.
Germany needs to defeat its own working class because the European crisis and crash are already here to stay, and also the huge competition with America, which fights to enter Eastern Europe and challenge Germany for the control of the sources of raw materials and the Russian military apparatus.
The one who capitulated was the reformist left calling to rely ON THE FRAUD OF THE PLEBISCITE “Syriza betrayed"", ""it capitulated"", ""it has disappointed the people"", the left now says tearing their garments, such as a deceived person.
These would be mortgaged and untouchable if the creditor, in this case Germany and the EU do not authorize to sell or rent them.
This is what a creditor would do with a broken company that is its debtor.
If it makes the latter a loan for it to continue working, the creditor would require it to put machines, titles and property as pledge or mortgage in the name of the creditor for the money received.
But also the directory of the company in bankruptcy wants to collect what they put into the company.
In this case, under imperialist powers, the PIGS in the South of Europe lost hundreds of millions of dollars with their bankers on Wall Street crisis.
Syriza has not ""betrayed "" the class it represents, which governs and manages the interests of all the Greek bourgeois and the European imperialism.
He was loyal to the bourgeoisie and the EU, of which the Greek capital is a part.
Among them they of course have disputes; they fight for business... sometimes they have to shoot shots.
Stronger imperialist gangs whack the smallest ones, put them on their knees, and submit them.
Precisely that Treaty of Versailles was what opened the way to fascism in the 1930s to lift the great Germany that had been cruelly humiliated.
With the Greek working class crushed, Greek bankers, partners of Goldman Sachs, will be ready for any counterrevolutionary adventure in the semi-colonial world and Eastern European countries where their bosses in NATO and Wall Street send them.
Eor this serious crisis and attack of the capitalists, neither Syriza nor the treacherous trade union bureaucracy of the PC, the deserters of Trotskyism and their ""new left"" in the world have prepared the working class.
The ""new left"", a reformism without reforms Despite what reformism without reforms thinks, there is no possible harmony among the imperialist powers in this agonizing period of capital.
In this case, USA, Germany and to a lesser extent France are doing well at the expense of the crisis and the meltdown of the others.
There is no place for everyone in the looting of the world, when the market has narrowed and the crack is here.
The United States has thrown its entire crisis to the world and with its hurst.
We insist, there is no harmonic development of the capitalist system in the imperialist epoch, as everybody in the reformist left paints it.
The working class can much less improve their standard of living within this system by pressing the bourgeois parliaments or putting on the political standing of class collaboration with ""progressive"" and ""democratic"" bosses.
And that 1% of the planet has grabbed the 50% of the assets of human civilization.
The Greek crisis this time is connected with the outbreak of the Chinese stock market, which preannounces that the stagnation of its economy is the product of a new relocation of transnationals to parts of the world where labor is cheaper.
It is the indication that the capital is coming out of the production process, where the rate of profit has dropped.
Uncontrolled banks parallel to the official banking have given credits to 90 million savers to invest on the stock exchange in a housing bubble, which already does not find buyers.
The banks have had to put more assets as collaterals as the stock of the transnational companies are devalued.
Thus the hanks borrow and the Chinese State has begun to squander its reserves.
The apologists of capitalism already took it for overcome the crisis of 2008.
However it was an illusion; the leaderships of the proletariat had given Capital a short respite strangling the wave of revolutionary offensives of the masses.
Only the strongest were able to absorb the world capitals, as did United States to cover its huge deficit, or hold itself, as well as the powerful German economy.
They pulled their entire crisis to the masses and to the world, or else were filled with junk bonds, which they “re valuated” as in Greece, transforming the country into vassal or by multiplying the looting of the semi-colonial world.
Greek bankruptcy and subsequent default and the outbreak of the Chinese stock market announce a new slump in the world economy, which will make the dominant imperialism show the claws not to allow this crisis to touch them.
Her plan is to finish getting all conquests off the Greek working class, to turn Greece into a maquila, where investing would be a great temptation and big business.
But here the issue is that the Greek capitalists and bankers are not broken.
By breaking the Greek State, they 8 International Workers' Organizer have already recovered all their 2008 losses, and have become associated although to a thousand times smaller extent with German and American financial capital.
Without proletarian revolution there is no breakthrough for the Greek working class and people.
Their bosses, the imperialist bankers, will make them play its role by quickly clashing with the world working class.
The global capitalist system into bankruptcy will not give reformism peace or tranquility.
What the reformist ""new left"" does not say is that Greece has no solution for WORKERS IF THEY DO NOT TAKE POWER About all this discussion on the Greek question there are already written rivers of ink.
But what reformism never says is that Greece has no solution for workers if they do not take power.
That is the immediate task posed since 8 years now, before the crack and bankruptcy.
The political struggle of the masses for defeating the infamous regime of the Troika which governs Greece already has shown that is the only possible way of combat of the exploited.
The economic struggle has no immediate solution if it not rises to political struggle and the masses don’t defeat and pull down the regime and the Government of the ruling classes.
Conditions for socialist revolution in Greece are much more than mature, they are rotting and decomposing openly.
There are high heaps of stupidity of the left following the bourgeois charlatan politicians and journalists.
In Argentina revolution had started and President De la Rua had to go by helicopter off the Government House before the harsh fighting in the streets and the embryonic emergence of bodies of self-determination of masses, which threw down five Presidents in one week.
These huge fights were thousand and one times betrayed by the bureaucracy of trade unions led by the Greek CP, and by the ""new left"" of Syriza, sustained by the debris of Trotskyism.
It has been extremely clear that the only way to put a limit to this brutal attack is with a revolutionary uprising of the masses and by defeating in the streets the Government and Parliament of the parasitic bankers and ship-owners of Greece.
That was the plebiscite about; once again the politicians raised that illusion to prevent a crisis in the heights that would have allowed an independent decisive action of the Greek masses leaving no stone of this infamous regime of the Troika and its anti-labor Government.
After so many years, some ""leftists"" giggle when we speak of Councils of workers and soldiers in Greece.
That’s because if these councils develop, and extend, their days as Greek working class leaderships will be counted.
They want us to believe that the struggle began with the ""NO"" in the plebiscite of Syriza.
The masses clashed with this trade union bureaucracy and their armed hands when the latter were defending the Parliament of Papandreou, which voted the worst attacks against the masses.
With the rebel youth and its self-defense committee immigrants were defended from the beating of the fascist gangs.
The ruined middle classes of the countryside went to directly sell their products to the city, to break the chain of middlemen that affected the price of their goods, so that the people could eat.
The workers and people alliance was within reach of the hand and still is, faced with the ""corralito"" expropriating the ruined middle-class savings.
The youth put their martyrs, as Alexis Grigoropulos shot by Karamanlis murderous police and Pavlos Fyssas, murdered by the fascist gangs of Golden Dawn.
Then, here which capitulated are those who submitted to the plebiscite and embellished Syriza from the left,e., those who closed again a revolutionary path to the Greek working class.
They capitulated who have poisoned the consciousness of millions of workers worldwide awakening illusions in Syriza, saying it would confront the EU and that it could be imposed with 60% of 'NO' votes in the polls.
Their attack can only be stopped by the working class with its revolutionary struggle.
They capitulated who made the Greek and world working class believe that with “the victory in the polls”, Germany, the head of the European imperialist powers, with its Bundesbank filled with junk bonds of Greek debt, would feel frightened and declare their hanks’ default.
It is about stopping the EU, imperialist Maastricht, the IME and the cynical Greek bourgeoisie, by putting the foot on their chest and making them kneel down.
That is not made through votes, but with the revolutionary stmggle of the masses.
Only a provisional revolutionary Government of workers and soldiers can deflne the fate of the masses in their favor over the ruin of the bourgeois state.
A country that invaded Europe twice and unleashed two world wars seeking for a sphere of influence of its own in the old Continent.
More than a lie this is a tragedy, with which the Greek working class is having very quickly its experience.
To stop the Troika you should defeat first the Greek Government because the enemy is at home.
Stopping the unprecedented suffering of the Greek masses, confronting the Troika and parasites of Greek imperialism cannot be achieved with votes but with the revolutionary struggle of the masses of Greece and the whole Europe.
So, the first step to get the masses off the morass to which Syriza took them is deploying a definite fight for the rupture of the exploited with the imperialist bourgeois Government.
Combat cannot be other than the fight for rallying decidedly to the streets for seizing the power and putting instead on its foot that of the working class, the unions, the factory committees, the unemployed committees, the committees of the rebellious youth and the ruined petty bourgeois.
We must put up the self-defense committees and worker militias, starting by fighting for the liberation of the rebel youth in Greece who was so brave as to confront the fascist gangs; and we also must be prepared, because those gangs will now be multiplied by a thousand.
Either with Syriza disciplining all bourgeois fractions in the Parliament to vote as law the agreements with Germany and the EU; or going to new elections with a worn out Syriza, with the masses demobilized and reconstituting a reactionary power, settled in counter-revolutionary forces to discipline the exploited.
Reformism cannot regulate any reform, except to be the guarantor of the business of the capitalists openly.
The bourgeoisie seeks to define this clash in their favor with counter-revolutionary blows and fascism.
It will attempt to pull from the Greek working class until the last drop of blood and 10 International Workers' Organizer sweat, and for this purpose the exploiters are preparing a hard defeat.
The Government of Syriza and its plebiscite were a ""siren song"" so that the masses crash against the coup of the Greek bankers and Merkel, the ""Iron Lady"", the head of the EU, together with the United States Capital.
In fact there was a common action of the imperialist forces of Maastricht and its Government in Greece against the masses, against the working class.
Actually Syriza, the bourgeois Government, is trying to deliver a severe blow to the Greek working class.
What's next is a mass dismissal of civil servants, plus pension, wage and job loss... even more unprecedented sacrifices for those masses who are already suffering.
Capital disciplined its agent Syriza / Tsipras, and sent him to attack the Greek working class openly.
The bourgeois only delivers some concession when it is on the verge of losing everything, and this wasn't the situation created by the plebiscite, but the opposite.
When we are publishing this statement the Greek Parliament is about to meet, which will devote to make law Merkel and Tsipras Pact against the workers and the people.
The skyrocketing of the public service fees, the VAT increase, the attack on pensions, the job instability of public employees and the labor flexibility that they want to impose on Greece, if it is not stopped there, will deepen and go against all the European working class.
There are the same claws of Germany, GREECE 11 US imperialism, the Great Britain and France, among others, which are crushing the Ukrainian working class and massacring the Donhass miners.
These resist heroically, along with the working class in Kiev, an attack of the same magnitude that Greek workers are suffering, an attack that will deepen in all European countries.
It is not just Greece that is bankrupt, hut the whole imperialist Europe.
The world crack began in the imperialist gang heads’ home, USA, which is littering the world -and Europe in particularwith its crisis and thousands of tons of junk bonds.
They have thus forced the working class in Europe to choose a location in any of two ""blocks"", either in the ""progressive bloc"" of Greece or against it in the regressive ""block"" of Germany.
Every working class has thus been submitted by them to its own imperialist bourgeoisie, particularly the German and Greek ones.
They have presented the current struggle not as a fight of the working class in Greece and throughout Europe against imperialist Maastricht, Merkel and the Greek Government.
In fact we have a true class war between the exploited in Europe and the imperialist Governments and regimes.
The ""new left"" has said contrariwise, and thus it has isolated the Greek working class from their class sisters and brothers of Germany, when it is precisely there where the attack on the Greek and European working class can be stopped.
The policy of the social imperialist reformist left has been wetting the gunpowder so that the spark is already not even turning in Greece.
This is the only way to conquer the unity of the European working class in one single fist.
Eor Merkel, imbibing the Greek imperialist bourgeoisie, in the defeat to the Greek proletariat the conditions to defeat the German proletariat are implicit.
The latter, gripped by Social Democracy, Stalinism, and the threat of the crack, has not yet intervened in a decisive form.
German imperialism has been regulating the crisis inside Germany; but if the attack in Greece passes, Merkel will return with all her strength to crush the German working class, such as Erance, England and all imperialist powers will also do.
And in Germany and the rest of imperialist Europe, the first task in order to free the workers and common people from the yoke of the capitalists, is to stop and defeat the attack of Merkel and imperialist Maastricht against the Greek working class.
Preventing this is the task of the “nationalist” notion of the imperialist powers distilled by labor autocracies and bureaucracies of the old continent.
It is about breaking the unity of the working class and developing the worst chauvinism in the labor movement.
We insist, that is the role of a powerful aristocracy and labor bureaucracy, such as the social imperialist parties and Union bureaucracies, which are responsible for submitting the working class to their executioners.
The true policy of the German bourgeoisie is making their working class believe that the cause of their misfortunes is the “completely indolent” Greek working class... and vice versa, to convince the Greek working class that those responsible for its miseries are the German workers.
The German working class has long ago lost its 36 working hours per week and 25% of its salary.
The conditions have been created long ago for the German workers to meet the suffering Greek and European working classes.
This amounts to putting the Greek working class in the hanging rope of its executioner and away from 12 International Workers' Organizer their class brothers and sisters of Germany, France, England and throughout Europe; because it is impossible to start in defeating Maastricht and the Troika without the victory of the socialist revolution in Greece.
They have subjected the working class to ""democratic” or “unfortunate” imperialism saying that, in a second stage, they would make ""the revolution""... hut they are always hung to the coattails of any imperialist gang.
The fight for the disavowal of the external debt of Greece is the struggle for the expropriation of the Greek bankers and the transnationals, because as members of the European and American financial capital they are which created it and cheated the people.
This is the only program which, breaking with chauvinism, opens the conditions to conquer the unity of the Greek working class with their brethren in Europe.
That opens the way to the defeat of imperialist Maastricht and to the start of a European socialist revolution.
Plebiscites, the submission to Syriza’s siren song and all their deceptions are not more than a diversion to hold the stick of Germany and Greek imperialist bankers and knock the workers.
Eeftist parties won’t save their faces after such capitulation to Syriza and the Greek imperialist bourgeoisie.
The first step to show if they are truly for the workers is that whoever speaks on behalf of working-class organizations must break openly with the class collaboration Government of Syriza, Independent Greeks... and the President of New Democracy.
Here the theory-program has collapsed of ""Eet's all of us go with Syriza in the first stage, then celebrate the plebiscite as they did, on account of what they had not yet conquered and afterwards, in the second stage we can settle scores with the Greek imperialist bankers in misfortune"", as the new left claimed.
The left voted to celebrate the world day of the plebiscite and not tell the truth to the masses.
Merkel becomes a bit tough, but agrees to everything... and the left celebrates.
This is the ""new left""... a concoction of old recipes of Stalinism and social democracy.
Merkel and Tsipras’ attack must be stopped in Berlin, Madrid, Paris, and by making the oppressed peoples in Eastern Europe rebel, since the working class of the imperialist Europe would look at itself in the ""mirror"" of those working classes and their squalid living conditions.
Only fighting to unite Greek workers with the European working class and collaborating to make these to rise to set up combat organizations, it may advance to put up a revolutionary leadership.
That is what the fight is about for the Councils of workers and soldiers and workers militias, with representatives of all the oppressed classes of society.
There, in the bodies of dual power of the masses, it will be the order of the day the setting of a revolutionary leadership, which will only emerge as an expression of the international combat of the revolutionary forces of the fourth international against the liquidators of the Socialist Revolution.
First they contained the first wave of struggles of 2009-2011, year when the huge revolutionary processes were beginning in Maghreb and the Middle East, in the spheres of influence of the imperialist powers.
And once those have been smashed, the imperialists go for Greece, and tomorrow they will go definitely for the entire European working class.
In Greece, as in Ukraine, two great battles of the world working class are being held.
Imperialism as a whole is concentrating its forces to smash these two revolutionary focuses.
If it cannot crush them, they could expand and put all Europe on fire, to either side of the Rhine, both in the imperialist West as in the oppressed Eastern Europe.
There lies the future of Greece and also the future of the European revolution.
The Greek proletariat only has common interests with the European and World working class.
Without this as a precondition, no decisive struggle could be taken ahead.
The first battles of the struggle against the deal MerkelTsipras have begun.
When this declaration was in the press, the first clashes have started in the streets against the Parliament of the Troika and the pirates of the Greek bourgeoisie.
Transport and state workers are already striking and calling to surround the Parliament today.
The KKE and the unions it dominates had an opportunity for calling to defeat the plebiscite, opposing to it, not the ridiculous call to vote NULL, but a courageous struggle of the unions and the whole working class against Syriza, which has come for a time applying a starving plan of the Troika.
The Stalinist bureaucracy in the unions also prevented the masses from giving a reply in the streets to the trap of the plebiscite.
A call for a national congress of the unions and worker organizations, to put up committees of enterprises, of unemployed, of supplies, etc., would open a new perspective for Greek exploited and also put on the order of the day a call to all workers in Europe for coordinating a common struggle against the imperialist Europe of Maastricht.
Today they are the great obstacle for opening a revolutionary perspective.
Theses union bureaucracies have imposed on the unions the worst humiliations and separated the unionized workers from the millions of unemployed and immigrant workers.
The leash of Capital is uniting ever more all the sections of the working class, including the ruined layers of the middle-classes.
The masses are trying to break the contention dams of their leaderships.
This is one of the last opportunities that the Greek masses have to find a breakthrough, and a poignant warning to all the workers in the imperialist powers.
No demands in any sector or trade inside the working class can now be achieved without defeating the government and the deal Tsipras-Merkel.
Golden Down and the whole fascist movement, before the development of the crisis and supported by the ruined desperate petty-bourgeoisie, will turn to recruit fresh forces -encouraged in the backroom by Big Capitalin order to attack labor and the fighting masses.
Building up a worker militia in Greece is a question of life and death for the exploited.
It is necessary to set up the committees of selfdefense of the fighting workers alongside the immigrant workers, facing any attempt from the part of the bureaucracy of the Unions to break from inside the struggle of the Greek exploited, as we saw already in 2012 when the masses were fighting to throw down Papandreou.
Bourgeoisie with its class-collaboration governments -of the likes of Syrizacomes putting to sleep and anaesthetizing the masses, so to be able to repress violently and unmolested their left wing.
In Greece, the latter has been long grinding the workers’ backs with sticks and guns.
There are exploiting and exploited classes, in this case capitalists and workers.
For reformers and opportunists, even since the 19th century, and after that for social democracy, the Stalinists and all that came after them in the 20th century to the present day, this Marxist law, which boils down to ""the history of mankind is the history of class struggle"", ""is suspended"" during some historical periods.
For example, they say that in semi-colonial countries the native bourgeoisie clashes with the abuses of imperialism, or that in the imperialist countries democratic imperialists collide against the ""more fascist” ones.
For them there's a bourgeois block that the proletariat can use for their purposes making political deals with it, thus helping to strengthen the proletarian forces.
Which more developed this “two fields” theory was Stalinism in its ""popular fronts"" policy.
These old recipes about “progressive bourgeois fields"" led the working class to the worst defeats by supporting ""democratic"" imperialism in the inter-imperialist wars or seconding bourgeois governments, lackeys of imperialism, which were disguised in ""democratic"" clothes to strangle the proletarian revolution.
We will not enumerate here the huge list of revolutions betrayed by this poison of the reformist left ""two fields"" theory.
That theory was that choked the 1968/74 revolutionary upsurge and all the fights for national independence in the aftermath of the Second World War; and so on.
Life has showed that not even formal bourgeois democracy is defended; imperialism can’t be defeated in semicolonial countries nor will inter-imperialist wars be prevented, if the working class does not join forces with the other oppressed classes of society against the bourgeoisie.
Where there is a bourgeois and thousand workmen, it is the bourgeois who has the upper hand, since if there is no agreement the latter goes away with his wallet, as Trotsky says.
The most serious flaw of this “two fields” theory is that it poisons the consciousness of the working class and creates in it illusions in its executioners.
As Trotsky would say, on a political front with the bourgeoisie is not the law of mathematics which rules, that is, in which one plus one is two, but the law of the parallelogram of forces,e. the product of two forces with opposite direction is zero.
Who gives even the tip of the little finger to the bourgeoisie, or creates political illusions about bourgeois parties and Governments is giving his/her soul to the devil.
Moreover, the sin is much more serious, because he/she becomes responsible for the atrocities and the exploitation of a bourgeois Government against the working class.
But what is more serious still, giving the slightest support to a bourgeois Government is to waive in advance the fight to overthrow it.
In itself, it is a complete program 16 International Workers' Organizer through which the left refuses to prepare the conditions for a revolutionary overthrow of that Government -a bourgeois class collaboration Government-, because it awakens illusions of the masses in it.
And it is not enough to then say ""Syriza has betrayed us"" while they called to a political front with Tsipras by means of voting NO in the plebiscite.
For us, revolutionaires, any tactica that does not express the strategy and principles is a betrayal.
There are tactics and tactics, some are treasonous and other are revolutionary.
But if these do not pursue the objective of the seizure of power, they turn against the working class.
There have been ""geniuses"" of sophistry who have come to say, paraphrasing Clausewitz, ""tactics are the actions of scattered patrols"" and strategy is “the conjunction of those actions with a goal”... but this is quackery.
The war techniques are based on a principle, which is to concentrate all forces and means available to overcome the will of the enemy.
So the crucial point is separating the forces of the working class from their torturers, to liberate them from the latter and its institutions of domination in a way that allow the exploited to take power.
Therefore it is not tactical to make a political bloc with the bourgeoisie, unless you want to betray.
Any tactical intervention in bourgeois electoral processes must serve to organize the fighting of the masses, denouncing the bourgeois institutions of domination, fighting for the power of the working class and to develop the forces of the revolutionary movement.
For example, we make a military action unity with anyone who faces imperialism if the latter attacks an oppressed country.
We do not deny the unity of action for a point in the struggle against imperialism if the native bourgeoisie are seeking to press it by mobilizing the masses.
In the elections for parliamentary seats any political working class intervention is based on maintaining the class independence.
In a plebiscite, no different class blocks hide in the 'Yes' or 'NO' alternative.
That’s why now the bourgeois have very easily agreed and voted together Merkel package.
That is why, either in the elections you respect the political independence of the working class or you seal a political bloc with the bourgeoisie and betray the proletariat.
Plebiscites as of Greece are the most undemocratic form of wrapping the bourgeois dictatorship and a policy of class collaboration, for in a referendum you always opt between two bourgeois policies; tbe working class cannot introduce its program and put it to tbe vote.
Some other ""new left"" parties and currents also said that if the 'NO' won, the best conditions were being created to fight.
As we see today, the trap of the 'NO' created the worst conditions to fight, not the best ones.
As we see, this last variant did not nor could be with Syriza in the Government, because every confrontation with the EU must begin with defeating Tsipras, not with him coming as a winner with the 'NO' vote, as he did.
If we of the revolutionary parties can develop our positions, we intervene in them to develop the extra-parliamentary struggle of masses.
We reaffirm, however, that the ""No"" or ""Yes"" alternative in a referendum does not allow to express a class independence policy.
In the ""NO"" you could find any kind of bourgeois parties, including the fascists of Golden Dawn and bourgeois partners of Tsipras at the Ministry of Defense -the Independent Greeks.
The division was established around which bourgeois program was to be applied in Greece, whether that of Tsipras, that is of negotiating a more gradual attack or that of Merkel, ""operating without anesthesia""... or the exit from the euro.
The extreme pressure from Merkel legitimized the ""setting in increasingly fewer installments"" by Tsipras.
The more Merkel pressed, the more and more Tsipras 'gave in', as his sycophants say.
Let's say the truth, both of them, Merkel and Tsipras played for the same team.
Tsipras was always who worked to impose an ultimatum on the Greek working class.
The problem is no one within it denounced that in this plebiscite, both the ""Yes"" and the ""NO"", or the hybrid positions about them, were part of a great anti-democratic trap against the working class... a fraud of various bourgeois gangs.
No current, even the more ""reddish"" ones denounced the referendum trap nor called to defeat it.
But the plebiscite did not elect any members, even of the reformist parties.
It was the Government of Syriza that had ""NO"" in its pocket, as Merkel had the ""Yes"" vote.
Calling to vote 'NO', “though changing its content”, and make the masses believe and develop delusions about that serving to defeat the attack, was collaborating with the deception against the same masses.
We have here a position that vindicates the theory of ""two fields"", that is, an openly class collaborationist position.
For now PO, Antarsya, French NPA and all new European social-imperialist left have long broken with any policy of class independence.
The more the bourgeoisie lies to and deceives the working class the more this deception and this lie should be denounced.
Syriza and the bourgeoisie of the 'NO' used it to impose the plan of the Troika.
And it is not about many NO votes coming from working-class neighborhoods.
Also many workers voted Peron and his party in Argentina to Chavez in Venezuela to Obama in the USA and that does not mean that they were class votes.
Because the masses -and not themare who pay the consequences of such treachery and fraud.
They could not express their yearning for Justice and stopping the terrible attack on them.
The 'NO' could not nor can ever be used against the Troika because it was a tool of Syriza, its Government and the negotiating table with Merkel.
So then PTS is saying that the plebiscite was a great trap; that the 'NO' was a fraud.
The PTS was with one foot in a correct position facing the plebiscite, and with the other foot together with its friends Antarsya and French NPA which openly supported it.
There was no other chance of expressing a policy of class independence and clashing with the Troika save that of facing both Yes and NO in the plebiscite; because unless workers break with both 'Yes' and 'NO', that is, with Syriza’s fraud and its plebiscite, they will not advance to the Socialist Revolution.
Telling the working class that it ""can use the NO vote to fight"" is a lie.
Because what you need to say is that you have to break with this Government that has cheated us with the referendum, because it is pro-EU, because it is pro-IMF, because it is the ""left Manager"" of the Morgan banking, so much -or more an enemy of the Greek workers as is Merkel.
It's that freed with its judges the fascists of Golden Dawn, which kill immigrant workers with their sticks.
The PTS announced the mother of all battles against the referendum, but stayed on the ""NO side-walk"", giving Syriza ideology from the left.
The PTS says that this level, which is not yet perceptible, ""is the seifperception of the masses of their own strength.
The PTS threatened to leave the ""NO field"", but came to the edge of the palisade and returned to the 'field' of Syriza again.
If you develops much your ""self-perception"" you will notice quickly from this.
Here nobody invents any position that these people do not have, though they pretend to speak in a highbrow way.
The 'NO' and the referendum are a defeat for the working class, and they have been used by Syriza to attack it violently.
This defeat now the masses must overturn once their struggles were diverted by this Government of class collaboration of Syriza and its infamous plebiscite, which turned out to be nothing more than a detour to let Merkel, the EU and the Greek bankers put the sacrifice of the working class in their pockets.
All this left believes that the class nature of the institutions of the bourgeoisie can be changed.
This is the old social democratic theory of Bernstein that the ""State is neutral"", an ""empty bag"" that each class may impose their own content to.
Bernstein’s followers today say for example, that you can press the bosses’ justice to get ""good sentences"" in favor of the workers.
The left with 'NO' applies this same theory to the plebiscite, saying that you may give it content in favor of the masses or against them if Syriza uses it.
We will not tire of affirming that the 'NO' in the referendum was one of the policies of the Greek bourgeoisie and bankers to fool the masses and impose a brutal attack, in partnership with the Merkel who if the YES had won would have imposed the same attack with few degrees more.
These are the trickeries and drawings this people had to do to follow in the NO’S ""bourgeois field"", covering it with a “red” mantle and saying that the referendum as an institution has ""progressive features"" that can be used in favor of the workers.
The FIT of Argentina is making progress in the school of this ""new left"", as now it has openly entered into it.
But this position of the KKE is far from having confronted the trap of the plebiscite.
The Greek PC leads the absolute majority of trade unions and whole labor confederations, and has not called a single action of the Greek working class to struggle for defeating the referendum fraud.
It was commissioned to unravel the fabric of the working class, demobilize it and guarantee social peace to Syriza so this rearm the Government of imperialist bankers and, buttressed by the Pact with Merkel, attack as it is doing now the Greek labor movement.
KKE, with its abstention policy facing the plebiscite, washed the dirty laundry of the fight which it did not prepare or organized, in a treacherously deliberate way.
Now, it will be in the ""opposition"", and the “left” dam for containing the revolutionary masses when they win the streets again, as it is happening at this moment, when we are finishing this article, when the Parliament is assembled.
I.e., the KKE located itself outside of the ""two fields""... but to save them both from the fire of the proletarian revolution.
Syriza is a Government of popular front, of class collaboration, the bourgeoisie being inside; many shades of the bourgeoisie: from the Ministers of finance and defense, up to New Democracy’s Pavlopoulos, chosen by the majority of Syriza in the Parliament, as the new President of Greece that is above Tsipras.
Papandreou and PASOK which was destroyed in the revolutionary processes of these years in Greece gave the post to Syriza so that it implements their plan.
For this reason, Syriza is not the expression of the revolutionary process that the Greek masses and its rebellious youth began in 2008 but its diversion and abortion.
The role of Syriza is coming to anesthetize the masses, violently repress its left wing as it has done-, protect the most reactionary bourgeois state institutions, as the caste of Greek officers who occupied the Balkans, the judges who have jailed rebel youth and even sheltered the fascist bands, which tomorrow will be called by big capital to crush the masses numbed by Syriza today.
They, with the City of London and Wall Street have stolen the money of the Greek masses.
The working class cannot move forward to defeat the EU without taking power in Greece.
This revolution would be a link, an episode of a single and unique European revolution.
This amounts to asking the Greek imperialist bands to break with its partners of the imperialist gangs in Europe, in favor of the working class.
It is impossible to fight against oppression and the dire situation of Greek masses unless you expropriate the Greek capitalists and bankers and call on the German and European working class to confront Merkel, the Bourbons and all imperialist gang from Europe and the IMF together with the Greek masses.
PTS addresses Podemos of Madrid and Barcelona recognizing that this party is in government with coalitions where the bourgeoisie is in.
PODEMOS is a force that has been got hegemonic by the rich middle class going down and a faction of the “democratic” bourgeoisie.
PODEMOS is in itself a “republican front” with the shadow of the bourgeoisie inside, but the difference is that this current “republican front” has put on his shoulders the monarchy and defend tooth and nail it against the masses.
It is unlikely to demand on supposed democrats -that they aren’t even such a thingto carry out tasks that the militant masses of the Spanish State tried to do by a true “outrage” rebellion with their vanguard the heroic Asturias miners today chased and imprisoned, etc.
Podemos himself says that what they are doing in Spain is a “democratic revolution” and the central thing of such revolution is the “democratic” reform the monarchy has made itself by taking out all the corrupts who stole the money and putting the only prince that for now, has not been charged in any case.
They are telling masses that PODEMOS is the expression of the “outrage” working class struggle in the Spanish State.
Thus, PTS created the illusion that such a bourgeois front could support the Greek working class.
PODEMOS sustains the monarchy that has in jail the Basque fighters like Tsipras and his bastard left of Goldman Sachs keep in prison the Greek youth for the “crime” of confronting fascism.
The bourgeoisie of Spain leamt from the year ’31 when the “republican front” won the elections and after that the mass upsurge overthrew the monarchy by fighting in the street and boycott against the fake Berenguer Cortes.
Podemos comes to prevent the mass revolutionary upheaval using petty-bourgeois phrases, changing the names of the Madrid streets that had old fascists’ names but he rules for the bourgeoisie against the worker movement and sustaining the Spanish Bourbon monarchy, the biggest representative of Maastricht.
PODEMOS pretends not to notice the trade unions and worker organizations using in his favour the huge discredit of the trade unions.
They are getting ready to be like Syriza that doesn't have any pressure on the part of the worker movement, thus, allowing that the trade unions keep inside a social pactthe Moncloa Pactfor the bureaucracy can continue strangling the working class' struggle.
PODEMOS sweetened by the world reformist left is the twin star of Syriza.
Both are the new stars in the “New Eeft”'s world that only irradiate new catastrophe and sufferings for the worldwide working class.
They wanted to show Tsipras as a new ""European Chavez"" T he reformist left wants to convince that Greece is a colony or a plundered semi colony, and its bourgeoisie as if it were half oppressed by imperialism and half oppressor of its own working class.
They want to bring about a ""Bolivarian movement"" in the imperialist Greece.
Sometimes in semi colonial countries, and under specific historical circumstances, the native bourgeoisie haggles their share of national income and supervalue taken out of the labor movement with imperialism, which controls most of the economy of these countries.
The bourgeoisie blackmails the imperialism mobilizing the masses, up to the point that they can control them because if not they may attack not only the interests of imperialism but also the native bourgeoisie.
Their imperialist gangs are junior partners of imperialist domain of the world.
Greece is the weakest link of imperialist domain in bankruptcy of Europe.
Imperialist gangs even the smallest ones and minor partners, share out world market and the big or tiny areas of influence, where they are associated.
Most of European powers have remained vassals after the 2008 crack The relationship between them and the imperialist powers that won the commercial battle like the US, Germany and Japan is vassalage.
The imperialist pirates’ winners will keep the losers' business and even their areas of influence.
Here what is being defined in the Chinese crisis, European bankruptcy and Greek crisis it is how the imperialist powers defeated in the trade war pay the crisis and which of the victorious imperialist powers will have to pay the next crisis, that It is already here.
And if the working class does not take the power, the war will come, which is the last path that the world capitalist system has to solve its chronic crisis.
This is the only way to raise the current situation of Greece from a strategic point of view.
Greece has the second MILITARY BUDGET OF ALL European countries, and ITS REACTIONARY OFFICERS, IS AN ADVANCED DETACHMENT OF THE IMPERIALIST NATO TROOPS Gentlemen, we must speak clear.
Under these conditions, to prtend the masses believe the emergence of a ""Bolivarian phenomenon"" in the imperialist Europe is stupid.
In Eastern Europe, in the new colonies and ON GOING DEBATE 23 republics of the former workers states that possibility is open.
But here we are talking about the bourgeois government of Syriza, the Greek shipowners, one of the largest shareholders of HSBC, of those who had put their assets as partners of Banking Morgan and Goldman Sachs on Wall Street.
You are talking about a small bankrupt imperialist nation, but which has the second military budget in Europe, even bigger than Germany.
Greece and Turkey dispute the southern Mediterranean, the routes of the Black Sea and the Balkans.
You are talking about transnational companies of the largest ship owners in the world.
Greece and its genrerals officers, used to make coups and kill workers, is the outpost of NATO troops to the Balkans, Eastern Europe and the southern Mediterranean.
These Greek pirates will never call to support the working class and its organizations of struggle.
Instead, the world reformist left, indeed, called to support Syriza, the left cover of these imperialist gangs, some of them run down.
Then, to pretend that Greece is a plundered semi-colony is a fraud 24 International Workers' Organizer because what they are proposing to Syriza, a direct agent of Greek and European imperialism is a ""antiimperialist front"" to face Maastricht.
They have already gone too far when they proposed Hollande and imperialist social democracy to make an ""anti-austerity"" front.
These are the doodles the left of Maastricht has to draw to deceive the masses and left support Syriza.
The pseudo-theory of a ""Bolivarian government"" the in imperialist Europe of Maastricht is a huge revisionist cruelty and deception for the masses.
What lies ahead are governments of class collaboration, popular fronts, to rebuild the battered states and regimes of imperialist Europe.
If they fail in their attempts, the next it will be the fist of fascism.
This is the only way to conquer the unity of the European working class.
The nationalism of imperialist powers is to break the unity of the working class and develop a worstchauvinism in its labor movement.
Plebiscites, are submission to the siren call of Syriza and all its deceptions are merely a round-up to support the big stick of Germany and the Greek imperialist bankers against workers.
If you do not face and defeat the bankers and capitalists parasites of Greece, there is no solution for the working class of this country.
We are facing a policy of class collaboration, of subordination of the working class to bourgeoisie political fronts.
That was the support to the NO together with Syriza ""against the Troika"", as if the fate of the Greek masses could be tied to the fate of NO of Syriza.
With the plebiscite, they beautified the good boss, who is ready to hit the working class.
The Greek government is popular front government, as Stalinism imposed for decades.
That is, a government of workers' parties with the imperialist bourgeoisie.
In ' 89, imperialist demagoguery promised workers from Eastern Europe they would earn the same wages as the West German workers, however today they have worse wages than those earned by the workers of Congo, Bolivia, China, Middle East, etc.
Only thus they would be able to also regroup their forces to stop the attack of the bankers and their Governments that takes from them all their conquests.
The business of Putin and Merkel around Gazprom is based on the looting of Russia, The Russian Federation and all the nations that constituted the former Warsaw Pact, in complicity with their Governments.
The workers of the Donbosss^ despite suffering enormous casualties and the massacre against the civilian population^ stopped the advance of the counterrevolutionary offensive of the Kievan military forces under the orders of NATO Their great ally is the working class of Western Ukraine, which refused to fight against their class brothers and sisters in the East A revolution is in the works in Ukraine.
Imperialism has concentrated its forces and makes play to all of its agents to defeat it.
The Western Ukrainian exploited in Kiev, also face the IMF imposed plans of Poroshenko puppet government.
Heroically, the workers of the Donbass have slowed the counter-revolutionary offensive of Kiev’s military forces under the command of NATO, suffering huge casualties and massacre of civilians.
They were not Russian troops, under the command of Putin the butcher, the protagonists of this battle.
They have been the heroic working class of the Donbasss and its miners, and the working class of Kiev.
In this battle, which prevented the occupation of the Donbass, the other main protagonist was the heroic resistance of the workers in the West who refused to fight against their class brothers and sisters in the Donbasss and have disintegrated the army UKRAINE 27 of Kiev.
In January the Government of Poroshenko launched a levy to recruit 50,000 soldiers, but failed miserably.
More than 7500 Ukrainians face criminai charges for evading miiitary service.
Working-class women of Donetsk and Lugansk are in charge of denouncing the murderous colonels and generals of Kiev, insulting them and wanting to do justice for their dead sons and husbands, for the destruction of their land.
The only forces that the Government in Kiev in Ukraine can rely on are the fascist militias as Aidar or gangs of outsiders and mercenaries against which the masses have already revolted in cities like Konstantinovka.
This shows that the fight of the masses from East and West Ukraine is one and a single one, for the same demands and against the same enemy.
That is why -and despite the leadership it has at its head which is trying to split it at every stepthe Ukrainian workingclass again and again struggles to unite its ranks.
Nothing prevents the unity of the exploited from all over Ukraine except this huge conspiracy of the bourgeoisie and the betrayal of the leaderships of the world proletariat.
These have left the leadership of the most heroic of the Ukrainian resistance, the miners in the Donbass, in the hands of Putin and the bourgeoisie of the East who are trying to depict the Eastern workers’ true allies,e., the workers in the West of Ukraine, as their enemies.
In the Minsk negotiations^ Putin has handed over the heroic resistance of the masses of the Donbass The exploited in the Donbass stopped temporarily the offensive, but the bourgeoisie of East Ukraine and Putin handed that victory over to Poroshenko and imperialism in the Minsk negotiations.
The major point of this agreement was to divide the ranks of the Ukrainian exploited to impose the disarmament of the Donbasss and implement the plans of the IMF in Kiev.
Thus they opened a ""demilitarized zone"", splitting and tearing Ukraine, to prevent the imminent unity of the masses from East and West, which would have meant the beginning of the revolution in the entire nation, the only way to conquer bread, jobs, and wages.
The ""demilitarized"" zones of the Minsk agreement are nothing but boundaries drawn by a counterrevolutionary plan by which Putin and the Great-Russian bourgeoisie are given the central work of disorganizing from the inside the revolutionary process of the Donbasss.
No doubt if they are able to impose it, the way to the colonization of Ukraine and the privatization of the mines and all the State companies will be at the order of the day.
Putin is junior partner of Merkel in the gas business, both the Gazprom and the gas trade in Europe.
Yesterday he supported Yanukovich and today manipulates the resistance of the working class to continue staying, somehow, in business.
Imperialism snatched from its hit man Putin the control of Ukraine, but in return for these services in the region, it left in Putin’s hands the peninsula and the pipeline of Crimea.
The Great-Russian bourgeoisie and their peers and allies of the Donbass did not fight against the Kievan counter-revolutionary forces which are under the command of NATO and ""democratic"" Obama.
Thus, he proved to be a simple lackey and junior partner of the imperialist bankers.
With the Pact of Minsk the Donbass is again encircied and the bourgeoisie in Kiev is given time so it can reset its counterrevoiutionary forces, and the Great-Russian bourgeoisie disarm the miners’ movement.
There is no way to victory without the unity of the entire Ukrainian working class, which supports the same pro-IMF attack throughout its territory.
This counter-revolutionary pact aims to prevent the unified exploited in Ukraine sweep away Poroshenko puppet government and defeat the plans of hunger of the IMF with the victory of the proletarian revolution.
Thus, they seek to submit the masses of the Donbasss to the pro-Russian bourgeoisie, disarming them, to implement the plans of the IMF in the West.
This Pact seeks to ""integrate the militias to the new regular army” and the forefront of this plan is the pro-Russian bourgeoisie of the East, launching an ultimatum and threatening to declare ""illegal"" any militia who do not want to submit.
Thus, with a divided Ukraine, with a false ""autonomy"" to the rebel areas, they seek to stabilize the region and ensure the re-colonization of the country.
Putin and the bourgeoisie of the East, which used the mobilization of the masses as small exchange for their business, today command this plan of disarmament agreed in Minsk and no doubt they will impose it with iron and fire.
Putin and the pro-Russian bourgeoisie have handed over the military victory of the Donbass’ masses in the Minsk Pact.
The bourgeois fractions of Kyiv linked to EU and the bourgeoisie of the Donbasss seeking in a race against the clock to disassemble the revolutionary masses are the same Ukrainian Moguls and oligarchs who yesterday supported the Government of PutinYanukovych.
They are now trying to come as partners of the complete colonization of Ukraine by U.S., NATO and the EU, or as partners of the Putin butcher.
They are nothing more than the old hierarchy of Stalinism, the Gorbachev and Yeltsin’s cronies; the same who stole all the riches and key sectors of the Ukrainian economy in '89.
Nothing fills the Ukrainian and Great-Russian bourgeoisie of dread more than the armed workers, because the latter call into question the business and property of imperialism and the bourgeoisie not only in the West but in the entire Ukraine.
Putin and his allies see that their heads may roll, if councils of workers and soldiers of the Don come together with their starved and dismissed Russian brothers and sisters who are in same or worse conditions than their brethren in Ukraine.
Conditions to forge the unity of the masses of Ukraine are not oniy at the order of the day, but they are an absoiute necessity.
Only the working class and its vanguard the Ukrainian mineworkers, putting themselves at the head of the masses, can find a breakthrough to Ukraine, strangled by an unpayable debt with the IMF, and achieve true unity and national independence.
Revolutionary Trotskyists know that so that those links do not become chains, the USSR that must return is not the USSR of the Stalinist bureaucracy -jailer of Nations turned into a Russian bourgeoisie-, the vendors of the worker States to imperialism and Citibank.
Putin is responsible for dividing at each step the struggle of the exploited of the Donbasss from that of the exploited of Kiev and uses the blood of the martyrs as currency for the business of Gazprom and the Citibank in Russia.
The bourgeoisie of Great Russia was the first to sign the payment of the Ukrainian frauduient debt with the tMF in a deai with imperiaiism, and at the hands of Yanukovich, downioad the entire weight of this agreement on the backs of the masses.
A Ukraine independent from the EU, Maastricht and the NATO as well as from the oppression of Great Russia can only arise as a by-product of a great worker and socialist revolution.
It would wake up all the Nations of Eurasia oppressed by the boot of Great Russia and the US, French, and English imperialists military bases, which have settled in all the former Soviet republics to plunder their riches and super exploit their working class.
It would shake from Russia from its foundations, as the absolute majority of the Russian working class survives in conditions of absolute inequality and loss of their historical conquests, under Putin’s fierce dictatorship and the infamous regime of the new Russian oligarchy, junior partner of imperialism.
Putin and the great Russian oiigarchy do fear more the unity of the Ukrainian working ciass of the East and the West, and with the expioited in Russia, than they fear imperiaiism piaced with NATO aiong Russian borders, encirciing it.
The revolution of the Councils of workers and soldiers of the Donbasss must succeed in Kiev, with the working class taking the political leadership of the war in the first place, expropriating the expropriators and breaking with imperialism to have bread, jobs, and decent wages.
The restoration of the dictatorship of the proletariat under revolutionary forms in Ukraine would be a big step forward for making come again the revolutionary Soviet Union of Lenin and Trotsky.
This is what all the left of Obama has convened to hide and that’s why they have set up a ring of silence and shame against the heroic fight of the East Ukrainian exploited.
The Kiev Parliament prepares to vote a law by which it is prohibited to use symbols from the former Soviet Union in the whole Ukrainian territory.
It is clear that many of these symbols were used or left run by Putin in Ukraine to handle Eastern workers that do not accept to be submitted by the European imperialist banks.
And we say only in Ukraine, since on May Day there was a mobilization of the Russian unions -that do not represent more than one 5% of the working class of that countrysponsored by Putin, which took very well care not to carry any red flag or claims of the working class.
Despite this, the demands of salary increases, against the high cost of life and the dismissals, were expressed in that mobilization, even when there were trade unions representing only the privileged layers and labour aristocracy of Great Russia.
The Soviet consciousness of the Ukrainian masses is based in that a submission to the EU and the iMF wouid mean a massive ciosure of mines and mass iay-offs... not oniy on the Ukrainian side but aiso on the Russian side.
For USA -the owner of the pianetstepping on Ukraine with NATO and so reaching the border with Russia is a key to be which makes high technoiogy business to Russia's miiitary industry, and not as happens untii now, that France and Germany manage this business through their companies, in Ukraine, in the heat of the events of revoiution and counterrevoiution, the dispute is deveioped for who controis the process of semi-coionization the internationai financiai capitai need to make, inciuding over Great Russia. in their fights, the miiitias of the Donbasss parade fist high.
This identification of the mining workers miiitias is because they assert themseives as Soviet Patriots.
And today they have been taken to iiving conditions worse than those they had when aii the conquests of the USSR were vanishing at the hands of the Staiinist scourge restoring capitaiism at acceierated pace.
Even today the working ciass of the West aiready cannot consume, since Maastricht bankers have expropriated their wages, jobs, retirement savings and aii their conquests.
For this reason there have emerged the contradictions driving to this huge civii ciass war and no iesser inter-imperiaiist ciashes for the controi of Ukraine in their race for the controi the Great Russia, it is a hinge revoiution because it puts at the order of the day the unity of the European working ciass against imperiaiist Maastricht and the struggie for the restoration of the dictatorship of the proietariat under revoiutionary forms in the former Soviet Union and Eastern European countries.
Then, the enactment by the Pariiament in Kiev of the iaw that forbids the use of symbois from the former Soviet Union is aiready an indication that the masses take it seriousiy, and that the miners of Ukraine do not accept the iay-offs pianned by the iMF, or that the production is disassembied as weii as the division of iabour that exists with the Russian industriai apparatus.
In their demand 'That the USSR comes again"", the masses of the Donbasss express the opposite of what Putin and the cynical great Russian bourgeoisie do, which in '89 handed over the October revolution to Citibank and imperialism, with the Stalinist bureaucrats becoming in new native oligarchies, so much in the great Russia as in all nations that it oppresses.
Pro-imperialist butcher Putin has nothing to do with the conquests of the October revolution in the former Soviet Union, as he is seeking only to keep his business with Merkel and Obama, staying with Crimea and the gas supplies to Europe.
Neither has it to do with the former Soviet Union and the conquests of the' 17 this coward great Russian bourgeoisie, genocidal towards the masses in the Caucasus and Chechnya, which gave all the technology of the Russian military industrial apparatus to German, French and American imperialism, and key sectors of the economy to the Citibank and the Krupp and BASF Groups of Germany; and whose funds are in the accounts of the imperialists banks.
For more efforts that Stalinism waste does in Europe, it will not be able to return to deceive the world working class.
And the pulse of those remains of Stalinism will not tremble in crushing and killing from inside the Donbass masses so that they disarm.
Ukraine threatens to be the spark -as also Greece for the imperialist Europethat restarts the historic Soviet Revolution of the party of Lenin and Trotsky and the III International, which left unfinished the task of defeating the imperialist powers in Europe; that allowed Stalinism to isolate the USSR, and then -once defeated the world revolutionsurrender it to imperialism.
In the former worker States there had been achieved huge gains that were delivered by Stalinism to the world capitalist system, becoming this doing in a new proprietor class, a new bourgeoisie plunging those achievements of the Socialist Revolution.
It was not the working class of the former USSR which benefited in the handing over to imperialism but this coward new Great-Russian bourgeoisie, which established relations with the world economy, becoming in junior partner of Citibank and the German BASF in the sacking of Russian gas.
Actually the Stalinist clique had already UKRAINE 31 long been keeping those trade relations with imperialism.
Seeing the working class of the Block and Eurasia in a condition of plundering and destitution as the rest of the semi-colonial countries, and the Russian working class martyred and over-exploited by the counter-revolutionary boot of the Pro-imperialist Government of Putin amounts to definitely understanding the enormous historical importance which the developments in Ukraine have for the European and world revolution.
The working class of that country and its fierce vanguard, the miners in the Donbasss, craves to put the USSR again on foot.
The way for this is the unity with the working class in Kiev and Europe, and Russia in particular.
It has been the unprecedented suffering of a torn and martyred working-class as the Ukrainian one; it has been the scourge of Capital which has pushed the masses to revolution and to defending their jobs that the EU and the IMF want to destroy.
The working class clings to its mines and steelworks, as outside them lays slavery, migration, and the precipice.
The historic task proposed by the revolutionary Trotskyist who are continuity of the Fourth International, of fighting for the restoration of the dictatorship of the proletariat in the former worker States is, nothing more and nothing less than giving an immediate objective to any immediate uprising of the working class in countries where it had already expropriated imperialism historically.
The catastrophe of the world capitalist system and the Wall Street explosion of 2008 pushes the former launch huge offensives against all the world working class and even to lesser imperialist powers -such as Spain, Greece, Portugal and all of southern Europe, to which it has imposed true "" Versailles treaties"" and surrendering.
These offensives of looting and enslavement against the world's masses have pushed and will continue pushing increasingly the working class of the former worker States to fight for regaining its old conquests.
To do this it must settle accounts with the Stalinist rubbish that expropriated the socialist revolutions handing them over to the bourgeoisie and world imperialism.
In the fighting in Ukraine, like yesterday in the Caucasus, we see the first steps of a counter-offensive of masses by workers who, in the 20th century, conquered the first victories by expropriating the bourgeoisie.
Neither Putin, nor the Ukrainian oligarchy, or traitors of the WSF, the Stranglers of the Socialist Revolution of the 21st century do not have, nor will have anything to do with it.
Putin and the Great Russian bourgeoisie do not want to lose their business.
The workers in Germany, France, Spain, Greece, Great Britain and all imperialist powers have been snatched enormous conquests together with the loss of wages and millions of jobs, and plans for permanent retrenchment.
Maastricht and Wall Street will not stop until they turn all of Europe, from Portugal to the Russian steppes, into a large maquila of slave workers, and Nations becoming in colonies and protectorates, under the command of NATO and the imperialist powers that emerge victors in the trade war.
In imperialist Europe only it is saved from the attack on the working class a minority of worker aristocrats and bureaucrats, paid and corrupted with coins falling from the despoliation of the colonial and semi-colonial world.
Their social imperialist parties and Union bureaucracies have betrayed all decisive struggles which, from Portugal to Russia, since 2008, the European working class has starred.
They have led to covenants and agreements with the exploiters the massive general strikes that shook Portugal and Belgium.
They are saving the bankers and managing openly the bad business of its financial capital, deepening the attack on the workers, as does Syriza in Greece and PODEMOS is preparing to do so under the orders of the corrupt Spanish monarchy.
The World Social Forum concealed the worst counter-revolutionary offensive of their imperialist regimes, which together with Obama, have massacred and martyred all the revolutionary processes of the Maghreb and the Middle East.
They want to disguise Putin as an ally of the workers and the oppressed peoples of the world, though he is the largest agent and partner of Merkel, the Citibank and the IMF, and the largest exploiter of the Russian working class and of the peoples that Great Russia oppresses.
We have already seen Putin supporting Yanukovich, the largest agent of imperialism in Ukraine, as well as providing Bashar dog with weapons to make genocide in Syria and support the counter-revolutionary Zionist-fascist State of Israel which occupies the Palestinian nation, among other outrages.
In Ukraine a decisive match of all the European working class is played.
Ukraine is a link that has dislocated itself from the imperialist US/ Maastricht domination, as the masses started a revolutionary offensive.
A ""Floly Alliance"" has grouped at the Minsk Conference to prevent the unity of the Ukrainian working class and the standing up of the revolution of the councils of workers and soldiers.
The battle of Ukraine is a decisive battle for the global working class and for Greece and across Europe in particular.
There fights the advance of the resistance against the plans of hunger and misery of the IMF and the Europe of the Maastricht Treaty.
The division imposed by the treacherous ieadership has prevented by now the Ukrainian revoiution from being a ram for the European revoiution, and that has resuited very onerous to the working ciass. in Greece, Spain, itaiy, and even in Germany and Western Europe, the imperiaiist pirates are deepening their fierce attacks against the expioited.
The German working class has already lost its 36-hours-a-week and has received as a ""prize"" a reduction of more than 25% of its salary.
To the reactionary Union of Maastricht of the imperialist Pirates -that punishes the European exploited and plunders the semi-colonial world-, it is necessary to oppose the Revolutionary Unity of the working class, the only way to conquer the independence of the oppressed countries of Eastern Europe, to retrieve all the achievements that they are snatching from us in Western Europe like bread, jobs, decent wages, health and education that are the demands of all the exploited from Portugal to the Russian steppes.
A Ukraine sacked under the boot of NATO, the EU and the IMF would be a new base for counterrevolution in the region.
On the contrary, a victorious revolutionary Ukraine would be a huge support for Eastern Europe today doubly colonized.
That is to say what they all say the apologists of capitalism, which, for example, a company like What's App, which is a computer, an internet program, 50 employees and 2 apartmentsworth 40,000 million dollars, of which few thousand of imperialist parasites cut the millionaire stock This is ridiculous.
Capitalism, lives, expands only sending to ruin whole areas of the planet and industries.
Capitalism reconcentrated, with its cartels, and prepare for war, ie the industry producing goods with an unlimited market, since they are destroyed.
They are disputing the fate human civilization between gangs and imperialist bands.
Today more than ever, the alternative of civilization is socialism or war.
The last word is unsaid yet.08 opened a huge historical crisis in world capitalist system.
The crisis gave birth to a mass revolutionary offensive, which hit in every continent.
The highest point was the tendency of synchronization of revolutions in the semicolonial countries and imperialist ones; they were de-synchronized by treacherous leaderships.
Thus we witnessed revolutions in Maghreb and Middle East, which threatened to set on fire once again the spark of Athens and from there imperialist Europe.
We also witnesses the defeats and the escapes of Iraq and Afghanistan -which opened a “Vietnam syndrome” in USA, and prevent that country from attacking with military offensives all over the world like Bush did.
That is why USA, WB and IME stabilized their dominance with counterrevolutionary pacts, as the one today in Ukraine with Putin; or like we see with the same characters supporting Geneva II with killer AlAssad.
This is what allowed imperialism launching new counteroffensives and generalize them all over the planet, despite its crisis.
With pacts with the new Castroite bourgeoisie they got the support of United States working class to Obama; disarm Colombian resistance; and that “Bolivarian” governments (like Bolivia, Venezuela, Argentina, Brazil, Equator, etc) not only expropriate the revolution in the sub-continent, but also launch retrenchments, on behalf of transnationals against their working classes.
But to reach this point, imperialism had to order and organize all its agents.
As we saw with Syriza in Greece, those fronts of class collaboration only numb the masses, so then the generals impose a counterrevolutionary order.
The pact with Merkel, Hollande and Obama wants to close the crisis of the ones of the top, to close the revolutionary irruption of the Ukrainian masses.
On one side of the barricades there is Obama, Maastricht, hitman Putin and all treacherous leardeships of the world -some of them hung on the coattail of Kiev financial bourgeoisiewhich is heading the attack against the miners of Donbass, with the same repressive forces who slaughtered in Maidan Square under Yanukovich’s government.
There is another kind among left currents, like PTS of Argentina, that every time there is a war, every time the fights of the working class “militarize”, these socialdemocrat Kautztis misters say the class struggle stops; working class disappears.
They would say that in Ukraine there is a war between Putin and Obama, where masses do not intervene, when they are actually dying in the battle field.
They want the proletariat believe that bourgeoisie makes wars where 34 International Workers' Organizer they fight each other and do not use exploited people for it.
They cannot distinguish the interests and needs of the working class neither in wars, nor class struggle, nor elections.
On the other side of the barricades and trenches in Ukraine there are workers of Donhasss, defending revolution’s capital which was diverted and aborted in Kiev and today it stands up in the East.
Yesterday did it in Athens, to put down the spark of the European revolution.
It concentrated all treacherous leaderships to put down the fire of the Eatin American revolution and the anti-imperialist uprising and against war of United States working class, which even siege Wall Street.
Those leaderships prevent the world working class from concentrating their forces to hit centralizedly imperialism in the key places; this means unifying combats of the semicolonial proletariat with the working class of the imperialist countries.
Any tendency of the masses at international level -like we see todayto start tough classes offensives to hit and cause strategic defeats to the treacherous leaderships which imposed the current fence against world revolution.
Those are strategic blows of the exploited people because they make run the leaderships that submit them to executioners.
This is what we see in Brazil, where the left of the social pact cannot enter into exploited’s Brazil, outraged’s Brazil, the rebel Brazil and despite and against the parties of labour bureaucracy and aristocracy.
In this perspective -for these strategic combatsthere are preparing new forces of the ones who fight to refound 4th International.
Unify the Ukrainian working class to Putin or the killers of Kiev, means preparing the road to defeat beforehand.
He is Obama's hitman, who aiready kneeied before imperiaiism in Ukraine Unable of invading like Bush did, United States imperialism sent Putin this time to complete Al-Assad’s genocide in Syria.
Today they make him work as a hitman, after they made him kneeled in Ukraine.
There, as soon as Putin tried to bargain a slice of business, imperialism froze Russian oligarchy’s accounts abroad; it imposed “sanctions” by freezing their business with military industry and stopped gas exportation imposing the use of United States gas and therefore their exportations.
It was the biggest humiliation suffered by the Great Russian bourgeoisie since they exist as such in 1989.
Putin attacks and massacres in Syria since he has his hands tree for it.
Putin knows that smashing Russia, he strengths himself to discipline among the Muslim Republics of former USSR and even the Russian workers.
And it is a good deal tor imperialism having a hitman to use it when they need to smash the masses.
Putin’s army is not the Red Army of the Soviets’ Workers Repubiic. it is a white counterrevoiutionary army, at the service of CiA, sent to kiii and massacre the rebei masses and the Eastern peopies.
From the financial point of view, Russia is tied with multiple bonds of imperialist dependence.
Citibank has, only in assets, more than $ 10. million, with the largest bank in Russia, managing financial transactions and its customers include many of the multinational and Russian companies operating in the country.
Imperialist companies make huge and bulky business, supplying high technology including to the Russian military industrial complex.
All Russian navy and army depend on high technology of the imperialist powers.
In 2011 Putin signed a contract to acquire two French Mistral helicopter carrier, for 1. billion euros.
These vessels can accommodate up to 16 heavy or 35 light helicopters, 50 military vehicles, including a dozen tanks, four boats of assault and a half thousand soldiers.
This camp works virtually, it is a real simulator of any war situation, and the same can train an entire battalion, up to 30 thousand Russian soldiers, who travel to Germany every year to educate themselves militarily.
USA jumps with joy for these businesses that lost Russia, making today the French and German imperialism.
Therefore, the United States is doubly aggressive with Russia in the Ukrainian crisis.
The situation in Ukraine is serious, because it anticipates that the struggle for the vast Russian market will also be a commercial, political struggle and in the future, military of the imperialist powers who are fighting and the contest.
USA has placed in Eastern Europe (in countries like Poland or Hungary) a missile shield, which means a huge business for their transnational corporations.
Ultimately, this has gotten out momentarily the economic crisis of 2008, surrounded by a legion of leaders traitors payments that saved him from the proletarian revolution, increasing exploitation of the working class, the looting of the semi-colonial world and developing destructive forces, ie, weapons, high-tech, robotics dedicated to war, drones, or forces capable of destroying the entire human civilization.
Everything else is a lie of reformism that suggests that imperialism slows its expansion, then the crisis comes and with the same impulse like the previous one it expands again.
