BERLIN, Germany -A Russian newspaper claims to have an official government strategy document outlining the invasion of Ukraine that was prepared weeks before the Ukrainian government collapsed last year.
A boy looks at a bullet casing that he has found in a Russia-made trophy APC seized by the Ukrainian troops in Ukraine's east at an open-air exhibition in front of the golden-domed St Michael Cathedral in Kiev, Ukraine, Saturday, Feb., 2015.
Russian-made military trophies seized or destroyed by the Ukrainian troops were exhibited in the Ukrainian capital as an evidence of Russia's military presence in Ukraine's east, the fact that Russia have still denied, Ukrainian officials said.
The editor of Novaya Gazeta, Dmitri Muratov, reported the document during an interview with Echo of Moscow, a radio station.
In the interview, which was reported by news outlets Saturday, he did not reveal how the newspaper came into possession of the document in the media unfriendly Russian world, but said he had confidence it was authentic.
Novaya Gazeta is considered a rarity in Russia these days, an independent investigative newspaper that’s known to anger the Kremlin on a regular basis.
The editor said the paper’s plan is to publish the full details of the strategy document next week.
Muratov said the Russian document appears to have been drafted between Feb. and Feb. last year.
He said the overall strategy included plans on how to break Ukraine into automonmous sectors, immediately attaching now war-torn southeastern Ukraine to Moscow’s tax union, with a longer term plan for annexation.
The strategy document also calls for a public relations campaign to justify Russia’s intervention.
The newspaper did not release further details of the strategy at this point.
However, Muratov said that the strategy paper contradicts the Kremlin’s claim that it annexed Crimea as a reaction to residents there feeling threatened by Ukrainian nationalists in Kiev.
If authentic, the strategy document also would appear to have outlined the precise course of the pro-Russian separatist rebellion in the Donbas, which includes two regions, Donetsk and Luhansk.
Beyond that, Muratov said that while he could not definitively show who prepared the document, he could with some confidence speculate that the authors included Russian oligarch Konstantin Malofayev, who has been reported to have funded the pro-Russian uprisings in Crimea, including giving $1 million to the new mayor of Sevastopol.
Muratov said the document was passed from Malofayev to aids of Russian President Vladimir Putin, who then approved of the plan.
The report about the strategic document came as Russian news agency Interfax reported an early text of a Putin address next week for the “Defenders of the Fatherland” holiday.
