What is now known as the “Ukraine crisis” in the international media is hardly a properly Ukrainian phenomenon.
The first uses of this phrase go back to the pro-European protests that started in November 2013 and ended with a revolution that ousted former president Viktor Yanukovych in February 2014.
Yet even if the initial pro-European protests could be considered an internal Ukrainian development, their trigger lay beyond the country’s borders.
It was Russian foreign policy that has always been directed at preventing Ukraine from leaving Russia’s sphere of influence.
Since the annexation of Crimea in March, “the Ukraine crisis” seems an increasingly misleading concept.
Especially because the plans to annex Crimea and support separatists in Eastern Ukraine were designed by the Russian authorities several years ago and have little to do with the defence of ethnic Russians allegedly threatened by the new Ukrainian authorities.
When this happened, he said, Russia could no longer guarantee Ukraine’s status as a state and could possibly intervene if pro-Russian regions of the country appealed directly to Moscow.
We condemn this crime and we believe that it will be investigated and those responsible prosecuted and punished persons.” the Ministry said in a written statement.
The President of Lithuania Dalia Grybauskaite also expressed her condolences.
According to the Lithuanian Ambassador to Ukraine Peter Vaitiekűnas, Zelenets was kidnapped 12 days prior by a group of armed terrorists, his whereabouts since unknown.
Abduction and murder of the Honorary consul of Lithuania in Luhansk Mykola Zelenets was confirmed today.
This tragedy happened as result of criminal actions of the Russia-backed terrorists.
At their hands suffer residents of Donbas region, hundreds of citizens of Ukraine and other countries of the world have been murdered.
We extend our condolences to the relatives of the deceased and to the friendly people of Lithuania.
First of all, with his antagonism towards mass protests, which his regime systematically crushes in Russia itself, Putin feared that Maidan – which, after the “Orange revolution” in 2004, has become a name for a successful popular protest – could be somehow transferred to Russia and cause problems to his rule.Second, the signing of the Association Agreement between Ukraine and the EU, which was the initial demand of Euromaidan, could effectively pull Ukraine out of the Russian sphere of influence.
The Russian invasion and the Kremlin’s support – including arms, money and manpower – ofpro-Russian right-wing extremists in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts have drawn condemnation from the EU, but this condemnation was not unanimous.
While the mainstream political forces – conservatives, social-democrats, Greens and liberals – criticised the Russian aggressive interference in Ukraine, the radical right-wing and left-wing parties largely approved of it.
Historically, the strategic alliance between the far right and the left is nothing new, as well as the annexation of a territory of another sovereign state.
What these little ribbentrops also fail to understand is that Putin is cooperating with them only to undermine and corrupt their countries.
The far right cherish the utopic idea of returning to a nation state to bring back a mythic sense of national belonging.
Through undermining the EU politically, binding the EU countries to Russia economically, Putin aspires to turn Russia into a super power.
In this ominous reality, liberal democracy, rule of law, human rights, economic freedoms, equal opportunities and progressive values will be eliminated – as they have largely been eliminated in today’s Russia.
The EU may be no bowl of cherries, butPutin’s useful idiots and little ribbentrops in Europe do not imagine what Putin has in store for them.
Ukrainian forces are closing in on Russian-backed insurgents in the city of Luhansk, Ukrainian National Security and Defense Council spokesman Andriy Lysenko said at a press briefing in Kyiv on Friday.
The head of the NGO “Right Cause,” Dmitry Snehirev whose information came from witnesses and group members, told UNIAN correspondents that street battles had broken out in Luhansk, and that the Ukrainian military took control of the regional hospital and the surrounding area.
Multiple media outlets have disseminated a source in the regional state administration via Ukrainian News, stating that forces involving the National Guard had been fighting in Leninskyi district.
Ostro, a local news outlet, has also compiled eyewitness reports from social media chatter but did not state independent verification.
Despite these reports an official source in the Anti-Terrorist Operation refused to confirm these reports to Ukrainska Pravda at this time.
However, the headquarters of the Russian-backed militants in Luhansk claimed to have captured a group of National Guardsmen in a Luhansk suburb.
Earlier today a column of Russian reinforcements, witnessed by western journalists and confirmed by NATO, entered the Luhansk region as part of an ongoing stream of Russian forces and equipment over the porous border.
Yesterday, leader of the Luhansk separatists Valeri Bolotov resigned from his position citing injuries sustained in battle.
UK journalists Shaun Walker and Roland Oliphant seem to think it has, seeing Armored Personnel Carriers with official Russian plates cross the border.
Various other journalists documenting the situation have photographed columns of tanks and other heavy military vehicles heading in the direction of the border.
Self-proclaimed leader of the Luhansk People’s Republic Valeri Bolotov has resigned from his post.
The news follows a similar departure from the Donetsk Republic’s militant commander Igor Girkin.
The consequences of my injury do not allow me to continue work from this post for the benefit of Luhansk in a difficult war,” said Bolotov.
He recommended current ‘defense minister’ Igor Plotnitsky take his place.
Bolotov, a Russian native but raised in Luhansk, was a Ukrainian citizen before taking up arms in separatism.
A former Soviet soldier, he worked as a manager at a meat factory before leading a group of terrorists to seize the Security Service building in Luhansk, raiding its armoury.
Igor Girkin reported ""seriously injured"" Igor “Strelkov” Girkin is seriously wounded.
This is what was reported by the separatist media outlet, Novoros Inform.
The short briefing cites a source in the leadership of the New Russia separatist group.
The condition of the Minister of Defence of the DPR – severe”, – the report says.
Self-declared Deputy Prime Minister of the Donetsk Republic, Andrei Purgin, could not directly confirm the report, but did admit that Girkin had recently been in an area of intense combat.
According to my information, he was not in Donetsk, and near Shakhtarsk, Torez and Snizhne.
Denis Pushilin, who served as the ‘Prime Minister’ of the DPR before resigning and returning to Moscow, issued a video address confirming the news.
Separate DPR representatives, Vladislav Brig and Sergei Kavtaradze, issued identical statements calling the report “nonsense” in a talks with the Russian media outlets RIA Novosti and ITAR-TASS, respectively, which both labelled as an attempt at deliberate disinformation.
Former Ukrainian MP Oleg Tsarov also weighed in, saying he was not injured, though this was prior to the statements of Purgin and Pushilin.
Author M BabiakPosted on August 13, 2014 Categories War in the DonbasTags Donetsk, Girkin, Strelkov39 Comments on Igor Girkin reported ""seriously injured"" Following Russia’s announcement that it would be involved with the Red Cross in delivering humanitarian aid to Ukraine, questions surfaced on whether the action was unilateral, or with international support, or if the action would simply serve as a pretext to invade the country.
The ‘humanitarian’ convoy will specifically be aid for the city of Luhansk, delivered by international agents.
It will not include soldiers, and in addition to Ukrainian approval, has the backing of United States President Barack Obama, AP confirmed.
Meanwhile, the International Committee for the Red Cross office in Kyiv said they did not know anything about the humanitarian convoy set to enter the country.
Due to the complex humanitarian and social situation in the Donbas, Ukraine President Poroshenko took the initiative to send to Luhansk Oblast an international humanitarian aid mission.
In addition to goods, prepared by the Ukrainian side, the mission will also include an international component and, in particular, humanitarian assistance provided by the International Committee of the Red Cross, the United States, the EU and Russia.
