The first detailed account of United States policy toward—and relations with—Ukraine, the second most critical country in the post-Soviet space.
More than a history, it explains where United States policy succeeded or failed, and why, and extracts lessons from the 1992-2004 period that can usefully shape Washington’s policy today.
The collapse of the Soviet Union was a seminal event in the late twentieth century.
While hardly the great catastrophe bemoaned by Vladimir Putin—certainly not in the eyes of subject peoples who gained the opportunity to shape their own nations and destinies—it dramatically altered the geopolitical landscape of Europe and Asia.
Fifteen states emerged from the territory that mapmakers formerly called the Soviet Union.
In the mid-1980s, the Soviet Union stood as one of two global superpowers.
Approaching the fifth decade of the Cold War, it challenged the United States and the West politically, militarily, economically, and ideologically.
While some bloodshed occurred, mainly as long-suppressed ethnic tensions broke out, the end was far more peaceful than might have been expected.
The collapse saw Ukraine regain its independence from Russia as well as from the Soviet Union.
Ukraine had been a part of the Russian Empire or Soviet Union since Ukraine’s Cossack leaders signed the Treaty of Pereyaslav in 1654, except for a brief period from 1918 to 1921, roughly between the collapse of Czarist Russia after the October Revolution in 1917 and the formal founding of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in late 1922.
Official Washington was slow to recognize the coming collapse and showed a significant degree of ambivalence about the Soviet Union’s demise.
However, it became clear to all in December 1991 that the Soviet Union and its leader, President Mikhail Gorbachev, had no future.
The United States government then moved swiftly to establish relations with each of the twelve New Independent States, in addition to the Baltic nations of Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia, whose incorporation into the Soviet Union the United States had never diplomatically accepted and whose independence Moscow had recognized the previous September.
Of the new states, Ukraine was bound to receive a great deal of attention—indeed, the most attention after Russia.
With nearly 52 million people in 1991, it was the second most populous post-Soviet republic.
The largest country entirely within borders of the European continent, it lay just to the east of the nations of Central Europe.
Now freed of the Warsaw Pact, those states would soon begin to press to join the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , which would mean that Ukraine would find itself bordering two key European institutions as well as share a lengthy border with Russia.
How Ukraine developed was also bound to have an impact on how Russia evolved in the post–Cold War and post-Soviet world.
Ukraine seemed well placed to prosper as an independent state and become one of the early post-Soviet success stories.
The country also had a good portion of the Soviet Union’s industrial base, particularly in the high-tech, heavy-metal, aerospace, electronics, and chemical sectors.
Many analysts saw interesting prospects for mutually beneficial trade and investment.
Proximity to Central Europe was seen as an advantage, to the extent that reforms already moving forward in countries such as Poland might serve both as a model and as encouragement for Ukraine to set a reform path of its own.
These factors plus the existence at the end of 1991 of nearly 2,000 strategic nuclear weapons—warheads atop intercontinental ballistic missiles and warheads for air-launched cruise missiles—on its territory meant that Ukraine was bound to figure significantly in United States foreign and security policy calculations.
This book does not try to capture all that has happened in Ukraine since it regained its independence.
This book focuses instead on the U.S.-Ukraine relationship from 1991 to the end of 2004.
With the generous assistance of the Department of State, the National Security Council, and the Clinton Presidential Library, I was able to draw on my contemporaneous notes and records from much of that period in writing this book.
I should note that the content, opinions, and characterizations in this book are my own and do not necessarily represent official positions of the United States government.
I continued to follow developments there, first with the Center for Strategic & International Studies and, beginning in 2008, at the Brookings Institution.
I have had the opportunity to visit Ukraine regularly, to engage with senior Ukrainian officials, and to consult on United States policy toward Ukraine with officials at the State Department, the Pentagon, and the White House.
While I have tried to stay informed about what is happening in Ukraine and in U.S.-Ukraine relations, I have not had the front-row seat on United States policymaking that I enjoyed when in government.
The latter describes the key developments in U.S.-Ukraine relations from 2005 to 2016 but offers much less detail than the chapters covering the previous thirteen years.
Much can be learned from Washington’s experience in those thirteen years about how and why United States policies toward Ukraine succeeded, how and why they failed, and how the United States might do better in advancing its primary objective with Ukraine.
That is the kind of Ukraine that is best compatible with broader American interests.
Some lessons from the early years can be applied to United States and Western policy toward Ukraine today, as the country struggles to cope with two daunting challenges.
If it makes genuine reforms that solidify democratic institutions and get the economy growing on a sustainable path, but conflict continues in the Donbas, that is not success.
Likewise, if Kyiv reaches a genuine settlement of the conflict in eastern Ukraine and finds a way to address Crimea with Moscow, but reforms fail and the economy falls apart, that also is not success.
The first six chapters of this book describe the history of U.S.-Ukraine relations from 1991 through the end of 2004.
For much of that period, the bilateral relationship was strong, seen in both capitals as contributing to their foreign policy objectives.
The relationship found itself in more difficult straits in other years.
Chapter 1 briefly addresses Washington’s ambivalent approach over the course of 1991 toward the Soviet Union’s demise.
It also describes the first steps in establishing a bilateral U.S.-Ukraine relationship as the sides set about defining an agenda for engagement in the busy and uncertain early days of Ukraine’s regained independence.
No goal figured higher on the United States agenda for Ukraine than ensuring the elimination of those weapons—and it no doubt often seemed to many in Kyiv to be the United States’ only goal.
Chapter 3 covers 1995 to 1997, when the two countries filled out a broader relationship.
Among other things, they declared a strategic partnership and launched a special binational commission co-chaired by Vice President Al Gore and President Leonid Kuchma.
United States assistance to Ukraine began to grow as the two countries discussed ways to increase trade and investment.
Washington encouraged the establishment of a distinctive NATO-Ukraine relationship in order to deepen Kyiv’s links to the West and help ensure that it not be consigned to a gray zone of insecurity between institutional Europe and Russia.
The relationship made progress, particularly in aligning the countries’ approaches on nonproliferation.
The limits of the United States’ ability to encourage and affect economic and political reforms became more apparent, and concern arose in Washington that something had begun to go awry in Ukraine’s development as a democratic state.
Still, the start of 2000 brought a brief burst of optimism that Kyiv might finally get things right on economic reform.
Chapter 5 addresses the years 2001 to 2004, when bilateral relations entered a particularly difficult stretch.
Doubts grew about Kyiv’s commitment to real democracy, and Kuchma’s approval of an arms sale to Iraq badly shook Washington’s confidence in the Ukrainian leadership.
Meanwhile, the sides proved unable to find solutions to a growing number of irritating problems that burdened the bilateral agenda.
Only Kuchma’s readiness to dispatch troops to join the Iraqi stabilization coalition prevented a near-total breakdown.
Chapter 6 looks at the second half of 2004, the run-up to the presidential election, and the Orange Revolution.
It describes the United States effort to encourage a democratic election process and, when that failed, to help secure a peaceful outcome to the ensuing political crisis.
At the end of each of the first six chapters is a section entitled Reflections —my thoughts on how U.S.-Ukraine relations developed in those years, written with the benefit of time and the opportunity to look back.
Chapter 7 briefly recaps how U.S.-Ukraine relations developed from 2005 through 2016, and chapter 8 sums up key lessons learned and offers recommendations for how United States policy might today more effectively advance the American vision for a modern Ukraine.
In the coming pages I argue that, broadly speaking, Washington succeeded in mobilizing the right carrots—and sometimes sticks—to achieve its goals with regard to Ukraine’s foreign and security policies.
For example, Kyiv agreed in 1994 to transfer the nuclear warheads on its territory to Russia for elimination, destroy the strategic missiles, missile silos, and bombers that it had inherited from the Soviet military, and accede to the 1968 Nonproliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear weapons state.
United States policy proved less successful, however, in encouraging Ukraine to adopt the difficult political, economic, and anticorruption reforms needed for it to become a modern European state.
Promoting reform was high on the agenda when the president and other senior officials engaged their Ukrainian counterparts.
It was a top priority for the United States embassy in Kyiv, which hosted a large United States Agency for International Development mission to oversee American efforts to promote reform.
Washington devoted substantial resources—indeed billions of dollars—to the task.
In the late 1990s, for example, the United States provided Ukraine $225 million per year in FREEDOM Support Act funds, as well as assistance funds from other accounts, such as those of the Department of Defense and Department of Energy, for a total of $300 million to $350 million per year.
Ukraine also received assistance and low-interest credits from the international financial institutions, the European Union, and individual Western states.
But the reform push often encountered resistance, which hindered achievement of the American vision for Ukraine.
One obstacle to comprehensive reform was the leadership in Kyiv, which often seemed not to share the vision or lacked the will and ability to move in the direction of realizing it.
As ambassador, I regularly hosted dinners at the residence structured around a theme.
We had a good turnout, including officials from the ministries of foreign affairs and defense and the National Security and Defense Council, two parliamentary deputies, and representatives from Kyiv’s fledgling think tank community.
That prompted a round of laughter, which evolved into a serious and insightful discussion.
The upshot was that my Ukrainian guests saw their country’s biggest national security challenge as the inability of the leadership and political elites to agree on a strategic objective, develop a sound plan to achieve that objective, and then take the necessary steps to implement that plan.
The weak leadership included those who eschewed pursuing needed economic reforms because they feared the political consequences of the economic dislocation that might result.
It included presidents who got bogged down in political battles with the parliament or fights with their own prime minister.
And it included those—the epitome of which was Viktor Yanukovych—who placed greed, corruption, and personal political power above the country’s national interest.
The culture of political corruption that permeates the country has posed one of the biggest obstacles to Ukraine’s successful development.
In 1990, the year before the Soviet Union’s end, gross domestic product per capita in Poland and in what was then the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic were roughly equal.
By 2013, however, gross domestic product per capita in Poland was three times larger than that in Ukraine.
That change reflected the fact that Polish leaders had made the tough choices on reform and anticorruption measures and sustained political support for implementing those choices, while Ukraine’s leaders all too often fell short.
We did not fully grasp the dynamics within Ukraine and the motivations behind those resisting change, particularly those who saw the development of a modern Ukrainian state as posing a threat to their personal economic and political interests.
That might have led to different, and perhaps more successful, strategies to advance United States reform objectives.
The United States government might also have mobilized its resources earlier to assist reform efforts in Ukraine; significant reform assistance programs only began in 1994.
This was not a big surprise, since their political cultures are so different.
That direct approach was not always destined to be the most successful in Kyiv.
Ukrainian officials at times were too willing to say yes to American requests, doing so when they had no plan for getting to yes or perhaps no intention of following through.
Their attitude made for a good meeting, with smiles and handshakes all around, but it also led to inevitable frustration down the road when agreements seemed to have been forgotten or ignored.
Finally, the Ukrainian elite seemed to overestimate Ukraine’s geopolitical value between the West and Russia and assumed that Western support would continue—regardless of what Kyiv did or did not do—out of fear that the Ukrainians might otherwise turn back to Moscow.
Many of these problems continue to dog the bilateral relationship today.
A different approach might increase the prospects for a successful American policy, and for the successful Ukraine that that policy aims to support.
On the evening of December 1, 1991, Larry Napper, one of the State Department’s foremost Soviet experts and destined to be the last director of its Office of Soviet Union Affairs, walked the streets of Kyiv.
Niles to observe the independence referendum that the Ukrainians had held earlier that day.
The results of the vote streamed in, and they sent a resounding message.
In the end, with a large turnout, more than 90 percent of the voters had opted for an independent state.
Independence won even in Crimea, garnering 54 percent of the vote in the only part of Ukraine where ethnic Russians constituted a majority of the population.
Washington now had to prepare urgently for the final collapse of its Cold War rival and the emergence of the New Independent States, including Ukraine.
And, after that happened, the United States government needed to get about the business of establishing a relationship with the new nation.
At its height in the early eleventh century, Kyivan Rus’ was the largest state in Europe.
It entered a period of decline and fragmentation in the latter part of that century, culminating in collapse after the Mongol invasion.
The city would not become a major population, political, and commercial center again until the 1800s.
The west was where Ukrainian nationalism was strongest, and those holding the memory of the Holodomor often continued to regard Moscow as an adversary.
In eastern Ukraine, where a higher proportion of the population was ethnic Russian—though Crimea is the only part of modern Ukraine in which ethnic Russians constitute a majority—the population had a more positive view of Russia and of Russians, and they tended to see their identity linked more closely to Russia.
Ukrainian was more common in the west, while Russian—the language of the Soviet Union—was heard more frequently in the east and south.
The number of those who regarded Russian as their first language far exceeded the number of ethnic Russians, but most people in Ukraine, if they could not speak both languages, had a basic understanding of the other language.
As will be seen, however, regional, linguistic, and ethnic differences were swamped by the scale of the vote in favor of independence in 1991.
This division was based partially on language, though most Ukrainians were practical when it came to bridging language differences; it was not uncommon to hear two people in conversation on the street in which one spoke Russian and the other responded in Ukrainian.
The perceived east-west difference also reflected the fact that the bulk of ethnic Russians, some 17 percent of the population in 1991, resided in the east and south.
The east-west divide has some value for understanding Ukraine, but it is a useful prism only up to a point.
In the years after 1991 the line between east and west began to blur; for example, political parties based in the east began to make some inroads in the west and center in the 2000s, and vice versa.
Although residents of the eastern areas such as Donetsk and Luhansk wanted good relations with Russia, polls in April 2014 showed that a large portion of the population in the east wished to remain part of Ukraine.
In the run-up to its quiet end, the Soviet Union underwent dramatic changes during Mikhail Gorbachev’s time in the Kremlin.
They foreshadowed his willingness to allow greater political space and a degree of democracy and autonomy internally.
Gorbachev did not intend to bring down the Soviet Union, but the forces he unleashed did so.
In the Caucasus, the dispute between Armenia and Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh weakened Moscow’s hold.
The strongest push for independence arose in the three Baltic states—Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania—whose incorporation into the Soviet Union had never been recognized by the United States.
As the Baltic states pushed for greater sovereignty and ultimate independence, so did other Soviet republics.
On July 16, 1990, the Rada adopted a declaration of state sovereignty, one month after a similar declaration had been approved by the Congress of People’s Deputies of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, under the chairmanship of Boris Yeltsin.
Among other things, the Rada’s declaration asserted the primacy of Ukraine’s laws over those of the Soviet Union.
Foreign service officers Jon Gundersen and John Stepanchuk and Mary Kruger arrived in the Ukrainian capital in February 1991 to establish a consulate general.
Earlier attempts to open a consulate there had been derailed, first in 1979 by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, and then in 1986 by the explosion at the Chornobyl nuclear power plant, just sixty miles north of Kyiv.
The three arrived with a mandate to report on developments and gently encourage democracy and market economy reforms but to do nothing that would be seen as encouraging Ukrainian independence.
Their reporting, however, reflected the growing popular sentiment for independence and for Ukraine’s reestablishing itself as a sovereign state free of the Soviet Union.
Since the consulate had no classified communications ability, Gundersen and Stepanchuk made regular trips to Moscow, where they could draft and send classified reporting at the embassy.
They found the embassy skeptical about developments in Ukraine and what they might portend for the future of the Soviet Union, but they continued to believe the political trend in Ukraine was very clear.
As questions regarding the Soviet Union’s future grew, the consulate managed a stream of visits by congressional delegations and former senior officials, including Richard Nixon, Henry Kissinger, and Zbigniew Brzezinski.
The United States government could conclude that Gorbachev was finished—either because he would ultimately turn out to be at heart committed to the Soviet system, or because he would be overthrown by Soviet hardliners—and turn the focus of American attention to Yeltsin and leaders of the other republics.
Alternatively, Washington could stick with Gorbachev and the Soviet Union while engaging the republics—with the exception of the Baltic states, which were a separate issue—in other ways, for example, by establishing consulates.
By the summer, many within the United States government had come around to the idea of some level of engagement with the republics.
The United States’ ability to shape events within the Soviet Union was limited, however.
The prevailing wisdom recognized that and argued for riding things out and seeing what would happen.
Hundreds of thousands lined the streets of the president’s motorcade route, giving him an enthusiastic welcome.
Smart, and with good political instincts, he had a sense that things were changing, particularly after the July 1990 declaration of state sovereignty.
In the first part of 1991, he sought to be seen as the leader of a new, if not necessarily independent, Ukraine.
At the same time, he showed caution, eschewing any anti-Russian lines in public.
He indicated his desire to press for greater autonomy though did not raise independence.
Acting prime minister Vitold Fokin asked for most-favored-nation trading status.
He also sought investment, including in the privatization of Ukraine’s industries.
But he expected more direct dealings with Ukraine and other republics, as would be allowed by the union treaty that the Soviet republics were in the process of working out.
Consulate head Gundersen was tasked to pull Yanayev away for a few minutes so that Bush and Kravchuk could have a private word.
Following his meeting with Kravchuk, Bush stuck with a cautious approach in his speech to the Rada, reflecting White House concern that a sudden or violent breakup of the Soviet Union could adversely affect United States interests, in particular the security of Soviet nuclear weapons.
Nearly one-quarter of the seats were empty, though Kravchuk told the president that it was a relatively large gathering for the body.
He warned, Americans will not support those who seek independence in order to replace a far-off tyranny with a local despotism.
They will not aid those who promote a suicidal nationalism based upon ethnic hatred.
Not yet fully convinced that Gorbachev’s days were numbered, Washington waited for what would happen next.
If Ukraine indeed broke away, other republics would follow, and the Soviet Union would fall apart.
The White House believed the United States government should not intervene in any overt way.
Bush sought to carefully modulate his relationships with Gorbachev and Yeltsin, as the former’s influence waned while the latter’s was on the rise.
Washington watched as the Soviet government tried to work out an arrangement with the republics.
The consulate in Kyiv predicted a strong majority vote for independence.
The Ukrainian American community, which had organized to support the Rukh movement’s call for independence, increased its push for diplomatic recognition of Ukraine in the fall.
Three groups—Ukraine 2000, the Ukrainian National Association, and the Ukrainian National Information Service, assisted by the Ukrainian Weekly paper—mobilized letters and petitions from across the country targeted at building congressional interest in and support for Ukraine.
Robert McConnell, a political consultant who had served in the Reagan administration, became Ukraine 2000’s government relations committee chairman, drawing on his contacts in the executive branch and on Capitol Hill.
The effort produced a draft congressional resolution calling on the administration to recognize Ukraine, with ninety House sponsors and nearly thirty from the Senate.
Congress did not pass the resolution as a stand-alone measure, but it did pass it as an amendment to an appropriations bill in November.
The December 1 referendum asked voters whether they supported the August 24 declaration of independence adopted by the Rada.
Coincident with the referendum, the voters would also choose among Kravchuk, whom the Rada had appointed acting president, and five other candidates for the presidency.
When Sherman Garnett and Thomas Graham from the Defense Department paid a visit to Kyiv in late November, they found broad support for independence, including among pensioners who hoped for a better economic future.
The State Department dispatched Niles and Napper to Kyiv to observe the referendum.
The overwhelming vote for independence—90 percent in favor, with turnout exceeding 80 percent of the electorate—surprised the consulate staff as well as many Ukrainians.
A serious argument within the United States government for sticking with Gorbachev was no longer possible.
On December 3, Bush placed a congratulatory call to Kravchuk, who had handily won the presidential election.
The United States government, however, still held back from formal recognition.
As Napper recalled, no one seemed especially enthusiastic about the turmoil that might be unleashed by plunging a stake into the heart of the beast.
Kravchuk, Yeltsin, and Belarusian Supreme Soviet chairman Stanislav Shushkevich took care of that.
The three announced the end of the Soviet Union as a subject of international law and the establishment of the Commonwealth of Independent States, an as-yet-undefined institution that would link the post-Soviet republics.
United States officials began communicating with Ukrainian leaders and proposed key principles that would form a basis for recognition and the establishment of diplomatic relations, including democracy, respect for human rights, no use of force against political opponents, and market economy reforms.
Meeting in Almaty, Kazakhstan, on December 21, leaders of eleven of the Soviet republics endorsed the establishment of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Yeltsin’s military advisers took charge of the briefcase with the nuclear codes, and the hammer and sickle came down over the Kremlin, replaced immediately by the Russian tricolor.
Later that day, on Christmas evening, Bush gave a short televised address to the American people.
He announced recognition of Russia, Ukraine, and ten other now independent republics.
He noted that Ukraine and several of the other republics had given the United States assurances of their commitment to responsible nuclear security policies and to democratic principles.
