For a convicted felon dumb enough to lie to Robert Mueller after agreeing to a plea bargain, Paul Manafort sure gets a lot of credit.
To some, he’s the man who took a drifting presidential campaign and helped deliver an unlikely nomination for Donald Trump.
This represented a triumphant return to domestic politics after a decade in Ukraine, where Manafort polished the previously unelectable Viktor Yanukovych and took him to an improbable 2010 victory as that nation’s president.
But dig a little deeper into Manafort’s time in Ukraine and a different picture emerges.
Under President Yanukovych, Ukraine was a kleptocracy run by and for a gang of crooks who had carved up the country after the fall of the Soviet Union.
Manafort may have introduced Yanukovych to power dressing, a good barber, and a neat line in soundbites.
But, in the end, this made little difference in an election already bought and paid for.
It was because Manafort gave the campaign the international respectability it needed to conduct a huge money-laundering operation necessary to handle the theft of the country’s wealth.
Manafort, of course, is now in jail, having been convicted of multiple counts of financial fraud related to his role in Ukraine.
In November, he was accused by Robert Mueller, the special counsel looking into ties between the Trump Administration and Russia, of lying to federal investigators, putting his plea bargain at risk.
The underlying criminal charges against Manafort deal with how he tried to bring the money he had earned in Ukraine into the United States by illegal means, but do not fully explain why Manafort was working for players in Ukraine or the nature of their work together.
It is true that Manafort’s political savvy and experience were attractive to the men behind Yanukovych.
A longtime political consultant who specialized in representing repressive regimes, Manafort knew how to lobby successfully in the United States and elsewhere.
Moreover, Manafort’s record indicates that he didn’t give a damn who he worked for—just as long as the money came in.
He also worked extensively with the Angolan rebel leader Jonas Savimbi.
All three resorted to oppression, abduction, murder, and torture to achieve their political goals, and enriched themselves in the process.
Although Manafort’s client was Yanukovych, his route to Ukraine was via Russia.
His first contact was with long-time Putin ally Oleg Deripaska, who became one of the richest and most influential men in Russia after emerging on top from the bloody aluminium wars of the 1990s.
Akhmetov is Ukraine’s wealthiest oligarch and its most influential power broker.
While Manafort’s role was not key to the 2010 election, it was crucial in legitimizing the Yanukovych presidency and cranking up of the kleptocracy.
Manafort was initially unimpressed with Yanukovych, convinced he could never win.
But Yanukovych was Putin’s favored candidate, and he wasn’t going anywhere.
With the backing of most of the country’s leading oligarchs and the full support of the Kremlin, the party seemed likely to be in power for a long time.
The party had been caught rigging the election and was deposed in a popular uprising.
With corrupt leaders unseated by the Orange Revolution, rival Viktor Yushchenko assumed the presidency with a mandate to reform the system and root out corruption.
Infighting with former President Leonid Kuchma had obstructed party members in Donbas and Crimea, meaning that cheating was their only recourse to assuming power.
Yanukovych and the oligarchs behind him saw Lazarenko’s conviction as a threat to their lucrative racket.
They needed to improve their image abroad to allow them to clean their money offshore.
Manafort went to work on creating a Western-style campaign for Yanukovych, and introduced him to the world’s political elite.
He was tasked with coordinating the wide network of offshore accounts, businesses, and banks to ease the movement of money abroad.
He developed relations with powerful United States political actors who would be friendly to Yanukovych’s Ukraine and worked to improve the image of the oligarchy abroad.
In the process, Manafort got close to Yanukovych, regularly visiting his opulent Mezhyhirya estate, with its private zoo and gilded bathrooms.
He was Yanukovych’s preferred tennis partner, usually letting him win, and they would swim naked together in the private lake next to where Yanukovych’s personal galleon was moored.
While Manafort’s role was not key to the 2010 election, it was crucial in legitimizing the Yanukovych presidency and enabling the cranking up of the kleptocracy following his victory.
The first was the collapse of the Yushchenko government after a falling out with his Orange Revolution partner, Yulia Tymoshenko.
To survive in government, President Yushchenko had to make deals with the oligarch Akhmetov; this strengthened his hold on power, but stifled his ability to enact reforms.
The second factor was the Donbas, a region of Ukraine in which Akhmetov had almost total control.
Its industrial base was dominated by coal and steel, all owned by Akhmetov.
While Manafort’s role may have been incidental to Yanukovych’s win, it was crucial in what came next—the looting of a country’s assets on an industrial scale.
This was equally true of post-Soviet Ukraine, where politics and corruption were indivisible.
What was purportedly a modern democracy was in fact a kleptocracy, run by about a dozen men made wealthy by privatization deals following the fall of communism and the breakup of the Soviet Union.
In the Ukraine of the time, it was impossible to separate politics, business, and crime.
In GDP terms, this is 2,000 times more than is spent on an average United States election campaign.
Seats in Ukraine’s parliament could be bought and sold, and the millions candidates and parties spent to get elected would be repaid, many times over, with the levers of government at their disposal.
Speculators would buy a seat and then sell it off to the winning party at a handsome profit.
In turn, the winning party would sell off government posts that gave opportunities for graft and personal advancement.
However many millions candidates and parties spent to get elected would be repaid, many times over, with the levers of government at their disposal.
The most savvy businessmen would seek to buy and control a bloc of votes to better influence policy and budgets in their favor.
There were several ways that a Ukrainian oligarch could divest himself of his ill-gotten gains.
This might be through rewards or kickbacks to others who had helped, the buying of further political influence, or currying favor with political leaders in either Ukraine or Russia.
For the rest, Manafort’s business partner Rick Gates described in court testimony how he and Manafort had laundered money for several Ukrainian oligarchs by setting up offshore shell companies and bank accounts, mostly in Cyprus.
Yanukovych and Manafort’s cozy project came crashing down in early 2014, when the Maidan Revolution toppled the government and sent Yanukovych scurrying to Russia.
In his final year in power, Yanukovych had granted hundreds of millions of dollars worth of state contracts to his dentist son, Oleksandr, making him one of the wealthiest men in Ukraine at the time.
Another beneficiary was then-twenty-seven-year-old Serhiy Kurchenko, who in a single year built a business empire in oil refining, media, energy, and banking worth more than $3 billion, due to Yanukovych’s patronage.
What began as a peaceful demonstration about the nonsigning of a treaty escalated quickly into a bloody conflict due to a series of desperate and disastrous decisions, which cranked up the tension and made the protesters feel that they had less to lose.
She claims it was their father’s idea to “send those people out and get them slaughtered” on the fateful morning of February 20, 2014.
On the morning in question, the riot police suddenly retreated from their positions surrounding the protesters in Independence Square in Kiev.
Sensing victory, the protesters pursued the police up the hill in the direction of parliament.
Back at the main square, people around the stage started to suspect something was amiss.
Through the public address system, they implored the protesters to return.
The protesters flooded into the area vacated by the riot police only to be met by sniper fire.
With their wooden shields and yellow construction helmets, they were picked off one by one.
Many were killed trying to treat fallen comrades or to drag them back to the barricades.
More than fifty protesters lost their lives in the bloodiest day of the revolution.
He then returned to America and offered his services for free to the Trump campaign.
It is out of character for Paul Manafort to work for nothing, particularly when he’d just lost such a lucrative income stream.
As Kiev-based political commentator Paul Niland recently said in an interview for this article, “Manafort’s an opportunist.
The smallest amount of due diligence would have brought this to Trump’s attention and highlighted the dangers of associating with a man like Manafort.
Or Trump may have known about all the dirt on Manafort and just didn’t care.
For any oligarch wanting to acquire serious wealth, control of state gas monopoly Naftogaz was the most effective method.
Government subsidies kept the price of natural gas piped from Russia artificially low, which benefited Ukrainian households during the cold winters.
However, 8 percent of the nation’s GDP was spent each year on subsidizing Naftogaz, and the main beneficiary was not the Ukrainian consumer.
A few businessmen in Russia and Ukraine managed to shave off billions by diverting some of the gas and selling it to industry at vastly inflated rates.
Gas could be bought at $53 per 1,000 cubic meters and sold for as much as $410.
It is thought that corruption in the gas sector yielded profits of more than $3 billion a year.
Today, a properly regulated gas industry is Ukraine’s biggest taxpayer, contributing 14 percent of the total revenues of the state budget.
Each year, Yanukovych doled out large infrastructure projects to friends and family.
He was fortunate to become president just as Ukraine was preparing to co-host the prestigious UEFA European Championship, so there was a lot of money to go around.
Corruption is not unheard of in government procurement around the world, but kickbacks of 50 percent are unusually high.
The process is believed to have enriched the Yanukovych clan to the tune of $2 billion a year.
It is telling that Ukrainian has its own word—deriban—for theft from the state budget.
It’s difficult to do, but there is an art to it, and Yanukovych clearly mastered this art.
He is reported to have stolen $3 billion to $5 billion per year from state budgets.
And that was only due to public corruption; they made a lot of money privately, too.
A key method was “corporate raiding,” where the Yanukovych family forced a sale of a company at a price way below its market value.
Ukraine’s general prosecutor has estimated that Yanukovych and his associates stole a total of $40 billion from the state during Yanukovych’s time as president, and he personally amassed a fortune of $12 billion, according to Åslund’s report.
Even in a region where corruption is rife, the scale of the theft is shocking.
I was relieved to see this excellent article published in a progressive magazine.
Many leftists dismiss the Maidan Revolution as an American-backed plot against Vladimir Putin aka KGB Thug.
Now, of course, the same leftists see Venezuelan dictator Maduro as a target of American-backed opponents.
