Gérard BOSSUAT, European Union Liaison Committee of Historians/ Professor Emeritus, Université de CergyPontoise, France  Prof.
Wichard WOYKE, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Munster, Germany  Prof.
Dr. phil. habil Michael GEHLER, Universität Hildesheim, Germany  Prof.
Reinhard MEYERS, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Munster, Germany  Prof.
Dietmar WILSKE, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Munster, Germany  Prof.
Sylvain SCHIRMANN, Director of the Institut d’études Politiques de Strasbourg, France  Prof.
Gilda TRUICĂ, European Institute of Romania, Head of Communication Unit Editorial Staff Prof.
Reinhard Meyers Professor emeritus of International Politics, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster meyersr@uni-muenster.de Abstract Ever since Russia occupied the Crimean Peninsula in 2014, debating the concepts and boundary conditions of Hybrid Warfare has become an academic growth industry in European social science.
There is, however, no agreement on the exact content of the concept, nor on its qualitative characteristics, nor on its political implications.
While some sources stress its newness and see Hybrid Warfare as a further development of asymmetric warfare located in a postmodern gray zone between peace and war, others maintain that a combination of regular and irregular forms of war fighting has been with Humanity at least since Antiquity.
Hybrid warfare; Add-on concept of hybridity; Hybrid warfare plus; Gray zone; Warfighting in the 21st century.
As in February 1848, again a “…spectre is haunting Europe…” – now, however, no longer that of Communism as stated by Marx and Engels in their famous Manifesto (Manifesto, 2010, p.), but rather that of renewed Russian expansionism, as manifesting itself in a still somewhat garbled form in Georgia in 2008, and on the Crimean and in the Donbass from 2014 onwards.
Hybrid Warfare, so some Western strategic pundits have it, is the cleverly fiendish ruse by which Dark Vader undercuts and evades the defensive promises of Art.
And more – one of hybrid warfare’s most prominent characteristics – the “strategically innovative use of ambiguity…” – conveys to the offensive party qualities of camouflage, invisibility, and nonattributability, the likes of which originally have been, long ago, ascribed to Alberich the gnome2 in the Nibelung saga.
We would submit, however, that the difference between Wagner’s Rhinegold Ring as of yore and NATO’s predicaments today is that NATO has not yet found its Siegfried successfully grasping the magic cap in order to demystify and debunk the more bizarre outgrowths of the hybrid warfare discussion.
We use a combination of military and non-military means to stabilize countries.
We invite the reader to follow us on this little critical journey – and at the same time, we would like to draw his attention to the other contributions in this volume, spanning a fair arc from grappling with the definitions of hybrid warfare via its background in sociological and communication theory to Russia’s aims and policies in Georgia, on the Crimean, in the Ukraine and elsewhere.
H Carr, Henry Kissinger, Zbigniew Brzezinski, or Ernst Haas notwithstanding); the explanation could au fond be found in the dominant global role of the United States in the post-World War II world.
Some three and a half decennia later Stephen M Walt asked nearly the same question 6 The latter formulation is that of John R Davis who strongly advocates the formation of a hybrid mindset rather than the adding up of known forms of regular and irregular warfare to make up the new hybrid concept; more on this below.
The German strategic community has really risen to the Hybrid Warfare debate only as a consequence of the occupation of the Crimean peninsula by Russia in 2014; cf.
The debate is also slowly percolating through to the CEE and SEE members of the EU; paradigmatic examples are Jagello 2000 , Prague; Sandor , Budapest; Josan/Voicu , Bucharest.
Anton is dealing with the cognitive skills necessary in dealing with future war forms and hybrid threats.
It was dragged out from the relative obscurity of military theory circles to become a mainstream term used to describe a myriad of seemingly different security and defense challenges to the West.
The invention of new terms to describe and explain the challenges we face is a common tendency among security and defense analysts and practitioners.
And like many new terms that become widely used, HW has received a substantial amount of criticism.
Largely because the concept was deduced from looking at the enemy, thus shifting its definition and meaning according to the subject of analysis, HW lacks conceptual clarity.
It has been attacked for being a catch-all phrase or a buzzword with limited analytical value that does not contain anything distinctly new.
My suggestion is to start with a simple definition, which however informs much of the U.S.-American discussion of Hybrid Warfare.
Hybrid wars can be also be multinodal—conducted by both states and a variety of nonstate actors.
These multimodal/multinodal activities can be conducted by separate units or even by the same unit but are generally operationally and tactically directed and coordinated within the main battlespace to achieve synergistic effects in the physical and psychological dimensions of conflict.
Hybrid threats blend the lethality of state conflict with the fanatical and protracted fervor of irregular warfare.
In such conflicts, future adversaries (states, statedistinctions between peace, conflict and war, and for being stretched so broad as to become conceptually synonymous with grand strategy itself.
Just how far to extend the concept of HW to include the full spectrum of conflict without denuding it of its utility – or breaking the meaning of war by slipping into a broader discussion of coercion and competition—is still an open and heated question debate.
While these criticisms remain valid, it is also clear that the literature on HW, as well as its critics, provide fertile grounds for discussing the future of war and warfare as well as broader security and defense challenges to which the West currently lack responses.
What can be shown in all these cases is the additive character of the concept, the stringing together of a larger number of attributes around a common kernel or gravity center formed by a combination of regular and irregular and/or conventional and unconventional types, strategies, and tactics of warfare.
Granted – “…this may well form a hybrid set of threats and strategy, but it is not clear why the term “hybrid” should be used, beside its mere descriptive value.
Of course – if Marx and Engels would live today to see the effects of the 4th industrial revolution (Schwab 2016), they would still point to the development of the forces of production and nowadays the effects of digitalization as the main driver of the development of what faute de mieux we may call hybrid warfare plus, supported by the time-space compression of postmodernity and/or the victory of time over space which informs the sum total of globalization phenomena.
Cyberattacks, for instance, are enabled not through the generation of force but by the exploitation of the enemy’s vulnerabilities.
The medium is fraught with ambiguities about who attacked and why, about what they achieved and whether they can do so again.
Thus, deterrence and warfighting tenets established in other media do not necessarily translate reliably into cyberspace.
Schreier 2015; briefer Klimburg 2014, and for a more critical discussion Gartzke 2013.
Useful starter collection of English and German language articles in Sicherheit und Frieden/Security and Peace 33 2014.
Be this as it may – what we can discover in the Hybrid Warfare discussion is some sort of median consensus which moves the concept over and beyond the traditional competitive state-vs.-state zero-sum game perspective.
It implies a blurring of the distinction between military and civilian.
In other cases, states can also intentionally act in “hybrid” manners when they choose to blur the lines between covert and overt operations.
Of particular interest in this context are irregular forces clothed in uniforms without national identification tags.
As these irregular actors often are provisioned with modern military equipment, they can perform and resist organised military assaults in force-on force engagements.
On the contrary, hybrid actors seize every opportunity to engage in whatever space is available.
The main intention in the strategy for political subversion is to isolate and weaken an opponent by eroding his legitimacy in multiple fields.
It is a war that appears to be an incomprehensible sequence of improvisations, disparate actions along various fronts – humanitarian convoys followed by conventional war with artillery and tanks in, for instance, eastern Ukraine, peacekeeping operations in Transnistria, cyber-attacks in Estonia, vast disinformation campaigns on mass media, seemingly random forays of heavy bombers in the North Sea, submarine games in the Baltic Sea, and so on.
The diversity of hybrid tactics masks an order behind the spectrum of tools used.
It is this order and goal that makes it incumbent upon political leaders and strategic thinkers to classify such activities accurately within the political objectives discussed by Carl von Clausewitz, who noted that war is an extension of politics by other means.
A lot of these instruments and building blocks are of course not new at all, but part and parcel of the time-honoured toolbox of conventional warfare.
In short – it is not the blending of elements of regular and irregular, symmetric and asymmetric kinetic warfare which produces the specific character of the hybrid, but its location in the gray zone , where the once clear-cut boundaries between peace and war are blurred, where the attribution of individual acts of violence is left in the vague, or made unclear on purpose.
In the past, irregular tactics and protracted forms of conflict have mostly been marked as tactics of the weak, employed by non-state actors who…… not have the means to do better.
Others have argued that the concept is overhyped, ahistorical, and perhaps even meaningless…” 16.
If the spectrum of conflict is conceived as a line running from peaceful interstate competition on the far left to nuclear Armageddon on the far right, gray zone conflicts fall left of center.
The simple answer is that there is a yawning conceptual gap between the traditional models of war and peace that American strategists employ to pace plans and capabilities.
Increasingly, revisionist and rejectionist actors and forces exploit the “gray” space in this gap, militating against the U.S.-led status quo by purpose or consequence and challenging American efforts to effectively match and reverse mounting strategic losses.
Alas – a holistic materialistic view of history has become somewhat unfashionable over the last quarter century or so.
It may also spread disinformation (in target and third countries), exert economic pressure and threaten energy supplies.
In order to be successfully executed, a degree of integration between these elements is required, as is their subordination to some sort of strategic command.
If we want to differentiate between hybrid warfare and classic war, the main demarcation criterion, in our judgment is the use of the means that are primarily used to achieve the objectives of war.
In hybrid warfare, it is important that non-military means of subversive nature play the leading role.
Ideally, an attacking state need not make explicit use of military force.
The aim of the attacker is to control the minds of the political leadership and the population of the attacked state through propaganda , deceptive campaigns and intimidation by terror.
We see, so to speak, the dark side of NATO’s Comprehensive Approach, the planned, pre-arranged, and centrally coordinated use of diplomatic, military, humanitarian, economic, technological, and information technology tools for the achievement of political aims in a hard power political way.
In the end, we talk about the intrusion of military behavior into civilian ways of life – not, as the Comprehensive Approach might originally have intended, the permeating and incremental solving of hard conflicts by coordinated soft power, civilian actors, and well-minded international organizations (critical outline Wendling 2010), with the military providing only technical assistance from the wings.
Institut für Sicherheitspolitik an der Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel.
Asymmetrische und hybride Konflikte in einer multipolaren Weltordnung und veränderten sicherheitspolitischen Lage.
With introduction of the concept ‘hybrid warfare’ a new systematic element was established in scientific research.
Nevertheless, the concept is discussed rather controversially and often its scientific value is questioned.
Most of the literature describes the empirical phenomena of hybrid warfare, but does not provide a theoretical based argumentation.
This paper addresses the neglected aspect of systemic analysis by focusing on vulnerability of modern societies and outlines a concept based on the theoretical idea of safety, security and certainty to grasp the underlying driving factors of new forms and methods in asymmetric conflicts.
The analysis presented here shows that sociology and system engineering have already developed valuable conceptual definitions of safety, security and certainty that can be used for the analysis of asymmetric conflicts.
The missing link, closed by this paper, was an interdisciplinary approach to integrate these concepts into an analysis framework.
The findings indicated that the new forms of asymmetric conflicts can be understood as a concise and precise analysis of systemic weaknesses of nation states and their societies.
Still, Western European nations focus their security policy mainly on past challenges of war and peace.
Therefore, societies of these nations remain highly vulnerable to safety threats and uncertainty.
The presented theoretical framework supported this result and should, therefore, be of value to analysts and scientists alike aiming to identify the underlying systemic factors of innovative asymmetric conflict.
Hybrid warfare; Safety; Security; Certainty; Systemic analysis; Theoretical framework.
Difficulties arise, however, when an attempt is made to develop new concepts in the light of new emerging phenomena.
But with events in the Crimea during 2014 and the occurrence of sophisticated attacks in the cyber space (e.g.
Estonia 2007), analysts struggle with the challenge to explain the innovation in asymmetric conflicts.
The concept of hybrid warfare should solve the problem to explain why a nation state is using asymmetric methods and tactics and why this kind of conflict does not escalate into an interstate war.
Existing research often concentrates on the categorization of conflicts and has not treated the underlying systemic drivers for asymmetric conflicts systematically.
This is especially true in the case of hybrid warfare, in which western societies are attacked not with conventional means but with asymmetric methods both by irregular actors like insurgents, guerrillas or terrorist and by nation states.
Overall the new kind of asymmetric methods try to exploit the inherent vulnerability of western societies.
Inherent vulnerability refers to the systemic interdependency between security provided by nation states and safety demanded by the society.
One core assumption of this paper is that in western European nations with a high degree of interdependent social, economic and political processes the necessary connection between security and safety is undermined.
This is rooted in the observation that the safety demand of the society is not met by the available security instruments of the nation state.
The nation state as security provider does not fit into the requirements of a highly networked, data driven, globalized and specialized society and economy.
The aim of this paper is to support the argument above by outlining the challenges of existing definitions of hybrid warfare and in a second step by focusing on the missing part of a systemic perspective to this kind of conflict.
It will be argued that hybrid warfare does not implement a new instance of asymmetric conflict or warfare.
In contrast, it will be examined whether the perspective of systemic vulnerability can be helpful to understand the existence of hybrid warfare as a part of an innovative development of asymmetric warfare and conflict.
Hybrid warfare – definition of a phenomenon without epistemological surplus value There is a degree of uncertainty around the terminology of hybrid warfare.
The concept as it is discussed recently by scholars is by far not as precisely and concisely defined as necessary for a sound analysis of the phenomenon.
This definition highlights the variety of actors involved in such kind of conflict and stresses the importance of a comprehensive strategy and leadership.
By that Hoffman assumes a coherent planning and decision making process during warfare campaigns and operations.
This assumed strategic coherence can be challenged by questioning the coherent intentions and objectives of actors involved in the conflict.
Experiences from the comprehensive approach 18 in Western European nations confirm the difficulties to implement a synchronized and complementary strategy both in international missions and in national or European missions.
However, Hoffman’s definition is too broad to be very specific for analytical purposes and it is therefore necessary to think beyond the categorization of the phenomenon.
Traditionally, there is a clear distinction between peace and war in international law, dating back to the period of the formation of the European states system between the Peace of Westphalia 1648 and the Treaty of Utrecht 1713 , limiting the legitimate exercise of armed force to sovereign international actors.
Classical concept of interstate war and peace 18 Comprehensive approach is a strategy that combines military, political and civilian instruments to achieve a common goal in crisis and conflict management.
Both Hoffman and Münkler try to grasp the complexity of the phenomenon by describing its very character and nature.
While Hoffman stresses the point of how hybrid warfare is conducted from a leadership and decision-making point of view, Münkler outlines the legal implications for security policy and international relations.
Generally, neither Hoffman’s definition nor Münkler’s statements do support the idea that the concept of hybrid warfare can really provide epistemological value for research and analysis.
However, it is valuable to investigate Münkler’s notion about international law and to ask analytically if in international law indicators exist that can help in understanding the new conflict form.
As shown in figure 2, for a conflict to be labelled as a non-international armed conflict it is necessary to identify the involved actors and the minimum level of intensity of the conflict as well as the minimum level of organization of non-governmental actors.
If nongovernmental forces are supported, organized or even informally manned by another nation state the configurations of the conflict get even more complicated, because the status of such forces are not clarified by the concept.
Exactly this was the case with the unidentified forces – the so-called ‘little green men’ during the Crimean conflict in February 2014.
Obviously organized but due to missing badges not identifiable soldiers, presumably part of the Russian army, entered and occupied terrain on the Crimea and sized military facilities, public administrations and important businesses and companies.
Accompanied by information and cyber operations this conflict has shown a new brand of elements not covered by international humanitarian law so far.
Even though hybrid warfare uses an innovative brand of elements and presumably involved actors apply a comprehensive approach in conducting operations, in total the new aspect can be seen in the participation of nation states via an interface, ally or a proxy represented by non-governmental actors.
Hybrid warfare by implementing asymmetric strategies via non-governmental actors In conclusion, new and complex definitions of hybrid warfare do not grasp the underlying systemic interdependencies and influences.
With respect to international law it can be said that the new forms of hybrid warfare can be understood analytically as a form of asymmetric conflict and warfare enhanced by the active yet covert support of a nation state.
This is the essence of hybridization, and in the following hybrid warfare will still be labelled as asymmetric conflict and warfare.
Vulnerability – key target for asymmetric operations To understand the new form of hybridization it is more important to understand why actors apply such elements and which intentions of the actors can be identified.
One of the central arguments of this paper is that in asymmetric conflicts nation states as well as non-governmental actors try to target the weak points of the adversary by asymmetric means.
Mostly, such weak vulnerable points are critical assets within a social, political, economic or military system characterized by a high risk.
High risk means high costs in a case of possible damage of an asset combined with a rather easy way to attack it.
It is therefore crucial to understand vulnerabilities of a system to understand potential targets for actors using asymmetric methods.
One is that it reflects the security policy of western European nations and hence supports the empirical view of the phenomenon.
On the other side, it is one of those rare sources that clearly define the concept of vulnerability and by that supports the conceptual view.
The inherent logic of center of gravity is that not only the core strength but also the crucial vulnerability can be found in the capabilities and requirements to implement a successful policy or strategy.
Therefore, the main intention of an asymmetrically acting adversary is to exploit exactly those weak points that can endanger easily the overall strategy of a targeted actor.
Another example could be the development of an internet based economy for the purpose of achieving sustainable growth of the national economy in a highly competitive and computer technology driven globalized world.
For both examples the identification of weak points in the systems starts with the identification of critical capabilities for the center of gravity.
As depicted in figure 4 this could be the policy to unify actors in a coalition like NATO or to support innovation in internet based businesses.
The second step investigates the critical requirements necessary for the functioning of capabilities.
For the unity of actors in a coalition political decision-making processes that result in a political consensus or at least in a reliable majority are necessary.
With regard to the example of an internet based economy the reliability and sustainability of internet services and infrastructure is a necessary precondition for innovation development.
Having identified the requirements, one can logically derive the critical vulnerabilities of the system.
With respect to the consensus finding of political actors a vulnerable point can be clearly seen in the latent conflicting interests of allies as well as in latent free-riding tendencies.
Just as well the technological availability of IT services and infrastructure is a weak point for the internet driven innovations of highly connected businesses.
Center of Gravity and Critical Vulnerabilities Overall, a promising strategy in an asymmetric conflict will always target this chain of value for the center of gravity.
If this is done systematically and with narrow focus on the weak points it is hard to counter such strategies successfully.
So this can be seen as center of gravity of Russian operations in reaction to the expansion of NATO into Eastern Europe.
In the same sense the cyberattack on Estonia 2007 can be understood not only as a direct attack on IT infrastructure of a nation state but also as a strategic proof of a concept to harm innovative internet based economies.
In a larger scale this demonstrates the vulnerability of the Western European nations to such attacks.
Whilst the concept of center of gravity provides a better idea about the interdependencies between capabilities and requirements, it still does not explain the underlying causes for the vulnerabilities.
A triad that is not easily understood by English-speakers, but much better grasped by speakers of German.
The interesting finding here is that Burns, McDermid & Dobson already in 1992 mentioned this very aspect in an article about computer and system engineering.
Kaufmann had already discussed different aspects of security by addressing the interdependency between external threats to a society and individual stability of persons within this society.
As German speaking author he was not addressing the conceptual distinction between ‘safety’ and ‘security’19, but he developed a notion about the development of security with respect to the development of modern societies and people’s demand for security in these societies.
Later Daase worked on the conceptual notions of ‘security’ and based his analysis also on Kaufmann, therefore Kaufmann has influenced the discussion at a very early stage.
However, for this paper both Bauman and Burns, McDermid & Dobson have the 19 However, he uses German terms like ‚Geborgenheit‘, which translated as ‘security’ does not capture the distinctive meaning of this term in the German language.
Based on the perspective of system engineering the concepts can be useful to grasp the nuance of risks and threats to an object, society or actor.
Such a model can help to differentiate observable phenomena and by that support the categorization of risks and vulnerabilities of modern societies.
This will result in better analytical approaches to the impact of asymmetric or hybrid warfare.
As a starting point to develop a conceptual model Bauman's definition of the three different terms are helpful.
Later these definitions will be contrasted with definitions of the system engineering domain.
Whatever has been won and gained will stay in our possession; whatever has been achieved will retain its value as the source of pride or respect; the world is steady and reliable, and so are its standards of propriety, the learned habits to act effectively as well as the learned skills needed to stand up to life’s challenges.
Knowing the difference between reasonable and silly, trustworthy and treacherous, useful and useless, proper and improper, profitable and harmful, and all the rest of the distinctions which guide our daily choices and help us take decisions we — hopefully — will not regret; and knowing the symptoms, the omens and the warning signs which allow us to guess what to expect and to tell a good move from a bad one.
A more indepth analysis of the definitions reveals an overlapping between security and safety.
Nevertheless, the core idea of the triad is useful to distinguish between different vulnerabilities and the necessary requirements for protection.
At this point cognitive and social psychology steps in and provides a rich set of theories and empirical findings that validates Bauman's hypothesis Good conceptual models support the analyst and researcher in their scientific endeavour to produce new insights into a problem, given that the model really helps to differentiate between specific causes and consequences.
Therefore, a precise delimitation between explanans and explanandum in the model's arguments is needed.
Safety If actors are threatened with irreversible loss of ...then they feel personal existence and health... unsafe.
Certainty If actors are threatened with self-inefficacy … ...then they feel uncertain.
System engineering perspective An interdisciplinary approach can help to solve the problem of lacking precision in Bauman's definitions.
In engineering safety and security terms are often used to outline different aspects of risks of technical systems and processes.
In contrast to the fact that these terms are used frequently in the engineering domain there is no common and comprehensive definition in a single norm or standard.
In different international norms one can find singular definitions, but an overall definition is missing.
Remarkably, the authors looked for a more generalized definition even though they started with specific examples from computer and software engineering.
Later in their analysis they specify the concept with regard to critical services and the absolute or relative harm done to resources.
Philosophy of security Frederic Gros works on the different meanings that the term security has had in western societies and the historical development of the concepts.
Until today linkages exits between these developments and the current understanding of security, Gros argues.
Starting with Greek philosophers and their concept of security as the tranquillity of spirit or serenity; followed by the Christianity concept, that saw security as the absence of danger; later contractualist philosophers define security as the protection of a state and the guarantee of individual rights.
Today the security of resource, labelled as biosecurity, means the protection, monitoring and regulation of massive movements of people, goods and data which characterize modern globalization.
He points to the influence of globalization and the importance of continuity and safety in modern societies.
Integrated model The following table gives an overview of the definitions and shows the connections to the conceptual analysis framework of this paper.
Gros Own Analysis Framework Safety Guarantee of Absence of direct Protection of the Providing system of survival and harm to a user of individual being. systems that existential a system. guarantee existence functions.
Security Protection of Absence of other's Monitoring, Protecting system of vested rights and ability to harm a control and systems that social user of a system. regulation of guarantee existing and achievements.
No relative harm resource flows. functioning of nation of services to state. resources.
Certainty Decision-making Continuity of flow Sustaining system of based on reliable of resources. systems that indicators and guarantee existing and prognoses. functioning of nation state or society.
Integrity Absence of harm Implementing system to services by of systems that safety-critical or guarantee existing and security-critical functioning of nation events. state or society.
Conceptual overview With respect to the concept of a nation state in the sense of the Westphalian ideal and international law, the above provided distinction between security and safety leads to the assumption that with the separation between foreign and domestic affairs modern nation states guarantee the safety and certainty of their societies by mainly providing security against external threats.
For the following analysis it is stated that precisely this relationship between safety and security equals to the centre of gravity of nation states.
This is in the author’s opinion exactly the case in the phenomenon called hybrid warfare.
What can be seen there is an innovative approach of a nation state together with its asymmetrically acting allies, proxies or interfaces to attack another nation state in its safety domain.
Safety targeted as critical requirement of society Considering the phenomenon of asymmetric warfare one can see that nation states are faced with challenges that no longer target the classical domain of security.
The main focus is not the threat to the existence of a nation state in itself.
Therefore, policies that are trying to secure the existence of a nation state per se will fail to tackle most of the asymmetric challenges.
Unlike war between nations, the new threats are no longer targeting the physical and political existence of a state with its basic elements of territory, people and power.
Increased investment in conventional defence policy and by that in conventional armies will not solve the problem.
In most cases those attempts did not keep their promises, because classical distinctions between foreign and domestic policies on the one hand and civil and military domains on the other hand could not easily be harmonized.
This is especially true for highly interconnected and globalized societies with a high degree of interdependent markets and chains of production.
Therefore, it is not the security of such a nation state that experiences the biggest vulnerability, it is its safety.
The vulnerability gets even bigger if uncertainty is taken into account.
Modern societies are dependent on reliable and sustainable economic growth and development.
This in turn needs a business friendly environment and stable democratic majorities.
With progress of internet driven economies and acceleration of information flows in societies the disturbance of trust into future developments is having a greater impact on social and political cohesion than some decades before.
Such disturbance can have its origin in information manipulation, interruption or delay.
Western societies are confronted with a high demand for complex problem-solving capabilities.
Due to the increased demand for problem-solving processes in policy making and at the same time shrinking returns of such policies western societies are losing trust in political processes and hence certainty in their development or even existence.
Actors of hybrid warfare as well as transnational terrorism have recognized the vulnerability of modern societies to safety challenges long before.
They do not target the security of nation states directly and therefore do not aim at the existence of the targeted nation states in itself.
Recently, Rácz outlined a set of asymmetric methods and strategies which facilitated the success of Russia’s operations in the Crimean conflict.
Clever asymmetrically acting actors try to hit the safety of a society and by that undermine the legitimacy of a national security policy.
It is more effective to threateng. information infrastructure and the public information domain to endanger social safety in a society.
Combined with hard power elements which challenge national security, the impression is created that national security policy is not able to cope with security challenges.
So, it is enough to keep the threat on a high abstract level to undermine the legitimacy of national security policies.
International humanitarian law and the challenges of contemporary armed conflicts.
Report of 31nd International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent.
Untersuchungen zu einer Wertidee hochdifferenzierter Gesellschaften, Soziologische Gegenwartsfragen, N.F., 31, 2., umgearb.
Strategic Concept for the Defence and Security of the Members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Therefore, a social-constructivist interpretation will show that an important part of Russia’s “hybrid warfare” revolves around ideational factors and discourse constructions.
The first part will briefly present the origins and features of hybrid warfare.
The second part will tackle Russia’s hybrid warfare as a response to asymmetry at the global level.
Hybrid warfare; Russia; Eastern Ukraine; Constructivism; Narratives; Ideational factors.
The most recent concept which stirred up both controversy and adherence is hybrid warfare.
The non-linear form of warfare had been observed by American strategists already during the Cold War period.
Most in the field of strategic studies thought in terms of separate worlds of conventional interstate and unconventional intrastate military activity.
The term hybrid warfare has been used over the last ten years in reference to nonstate actors waging wars against militarily superior state adversaries, but also as illustrative term for Russia’s strategies in eastern Ukraine.
It was in 2007 that Franck Hofmann tackled hybrid threats as those that are simultaneous, fused and subordinated to one command unit.
Hoffman uses the “multi-modal” underlying nature in hybrid warfare in order to distinguish it from previous guerrilla tactics or from compound warfare whose aim was to pose a persistent threat by protracting the conflict.
In such a scenario, the militarily, technologically and numerically weaker side aimed at avoiding direct confrontations with the opponent and decisive battles were not strategically envisioned.
According to Hoffman, “Instead of separate challengers with fundamentally different approaches , we can expect to face competitors who will employ all forms of war and tactics, perhaps simultaneously.
Criminal activity may also be considered part of this problem as well, as it either further destabilizes local government or abets the insurgent or irregular warrior by providing resources, or by undermining the host state and its legitimacy” Hybrid wars, therefore, neither supplant conventional warfare, nor do they confine future threats to mere sub-state or trans-state irregular actors.
At the same time, hybrid wars will retain basic and brutal forms of violence, trying to instil terror and human costs, while exploiting virtual dimensions of warfare.
Hybrid wars basically combine cyber, kinetic, media, terrorist, and military command structures.
They blend malware and hacking with conventional military decision-making.
The terms “hybrid warfare” and “hybrid threats” seem to have been gradually incorporated in institutional lexicons.
As expressed by Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, “the security environment has changed dramatically.
Hybrid warfare and Russia’s response to asymmetry at the global level A considerable amount of recent literature links hybrid warfare with Russia’s actions in eastern Ukraine and the subsequent annexation of Crimea.
As already mentioned, Russia’s recourse to information warfare and cyber attacks are considered crucial in transforming the modes of waging war against Ukraine.
Other approaches focusing on the “hybrid” aspects of Russia’s strategies in eastern Ukraine reject the intertwining elements of hybrid warfare and the beginning of a new form of Russian belligerence.
The author shows that hybrid warfare is not necessarily a model for the future of warfare and does not indicate Russia’s mixed strategies “born out of weakness” or determined by global asymmetries.
But such strategies are effective only when directed against a weaker neighbour and only when some endogenous elements or situational factors facilitate their success.
Referring to Russia’s actions in 2014, “hybrid threats” and “hybrid challenges” are often emphasized in a post-conventional international security framework.
The most convincing criticism focuses on the speedy identification of a pre-planned new form of warfare which Russia has been designing over the last years and which had already been described by Valery Gerasimov, Chief of the Russian General Staff, in 2013.
In order to fully understand whether Russia’s strategies and combined tactics in eastern Ukraine amount to a novel and distinct category, labelled by many as “Russia’s hybrid war”, we should first consider the goals of Putin’s Russia.
This would also enable us to problematize whether Russia acted out of a weaker position, and in this sense we witnessed a form of asymmetric warfare, or out of a stronger position against a vulnerable neighbour, and in this sense we witnessed the manifestation of regional hubris.
Putin’s ultimate goal is not just to weaken former Soviet republics, but rather to react to global asymmetries.
As such, Russia needs to preserve its status of great power and to counteract not only a militarily stronger coalition of adversaries, but a Western ascendancy and a form of advancement of discursive persuasive power.
The latter is geared towards an international order wherein the United States and the European Union play the key roles.
What Putin ultimately wants for Russia is to be on equal footing with other major players of international politics.
Therefore, part of Russia’s hybrid warfare is propaganda and the construction of a Russian version of events.
This represents a discourse construction meant to reverse uneven global conditions and the impaired status of post-Soviet Russia.
This is precisely why Putin resorts to a narrative meant to rationalize and justify Russia’s actions.
Consequently, Russia should strive, according to the rationale, to regain its great power status and reverse post-Soviet international order characterized by the dominance of United States and Western Europe.
According to Bachmann and Gunneriusson, hybrid warfare entails, inter alia, the use of media as “force multiplier” which represents a fundamental tool for both non-state actors, such as radical Islamists, and for state actors, as the Crimean case revealed.
Even though the use of media is the common denominator, there is a huge difference to be noted.
Non-state actors like “Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab try to translate tactical success into terror, while in the Crimean and Ukrainian examples, Russia tried the opposite while denying being an active agent.
Building on this insightful observation, we shall emphasize the way in which Putin’s Russia tried to not openly reject the rules of war in international law, but to elude and alter them.
In this sense, Russia’s “hybrid war” is a reaction to a stronger opponent (the West, represented by two important actors, the United States and EU), whose weaknesses and vulnerabilities are identified and targeted.
Hence, Russia’s combined tactics reveal a very improved form of asymmetric warfare.
As Pomerantsev has put it, “feeling itself relatively weak, the Kremlin has systematically learnt to use the principles of liberal democracies against them” Russia’s tactics and modes of warfare could be best described in terms of the combination of covert small military operations with criminal disorder and hijacking social media, the blending of special forces, intelligence, malware, and local militias, but most importantly, in ideational terms, in terms of systematic and integrated attempts to reverse realities.
In what follows, we shall try to show how Putin’s Russia resorted to a construction of international reality in which international law and norms are not rejected as Westernmade, but reinterpreted and amended in a Russian-made rhetoric.
Russia’s hybrid warfare – corollary of the distribution of both capabilities and ideas This section will analyze Putin’s speeches referring to events in Ukraine and will identify systematic attempts to counteract a Western discourse by creating another version of events.
Building on conventional constructivist claims we shall try to show that an important part of Russia’s “hybrid warfare” revolves around ideational factors and discourse constructions.
Building on this understanding, we argue that Putin’s decisions pertaining to intervention in eastern Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea are embedded in an international material and ideational structure.
The material facts of international systems and the distribution of capabilities have always been considered decisive factors for assessing state behavior in Realist and Neorealist accounts.
In this section, though, we treat Russia’s recent foreign policy decisions as corollary of a distribution of both capabilities and ideas.
A Realist interpretation of events would focus solely on Russia’s decision to use threat and military power against the territorial integrity of a weaker neighbour, hence validating the states’ strength in military terms and the weakness of norms, rules and international law.
But, he was doing more than simply trying to fend off criticism or military reaction.
After all, Russia fought a war against Georgia in 2008 (and supported breakaway Abkhazia and South Ossetia) and there was no such drastic response from the international community.
According to former Russian TV producer Peter Pomerantsev, Russia’s decisions towards Ukraine amount to much more than information warfare operations.
He argues that “the new Russia doesn’t just deal with the petty disinformation, forgeries, lies, leaks, and cyber-sabotage usually associated with information warfare.
A careful reading of Putin’s statements reveals a re-description of events based on cautiousness towards international law, and not on defiance of rules.
Russia's armed forces never entered Crimea; they were there already in line with an international agreement.
In our interpretation, alongside all blended strategies employed by Russia an ideational force multiplier was also at work.
The construction of reality and the Russian-made narrative about the nature of intervention in Ukraine indicate the role of ideas and meanings.
Our constructivist interpretation stresses the role of perceptions, meanings, and shared beliefs which accompanied cyber, information and military means employed by Russia.
Such a narrative is meant to persuade audiences and to gradually shape Russia’s great power status in international politics.
Relying exclusively on combined tactics (as those employed in Ukraine), Russia would be confronted with the status of outcast in international politics.
Rather than self-marginalizing from the Western world, Russia’s main concern is to become an equal partner.
We argue that Putin’s Russia resorted to a narrative, a re-description of events which aims at shaping the construction of international reality in which international law and norms are not rejected as Western-made, but reinterpreted and amended in a Russian-made rhetoric.
Consequently, this is process wherein ideational facts and perceptions complete the military, cyber or technological strengths.
Putin’s narrative and efforts to confer legitimacy and to employ the key terms of international law represent a speech act.
One major conceptual pillar in Alexander Wend’s social-constructivism is symbolic interactionism.
Moreover, social interaction plays a major role in the development of the self.
By extrapolating the role of meanings and symbols to state behaviour, we could examine how states tend to take on the perspective of the generalized other in international politics.
Russia can only be a great power when the others acknowledge it and treat it as such.
Moreover, Russia’s great power status is dependent on the socially constructed recognition of such attributes in international politics.
Great power status in this respect entails much more than regional hegemony.
The ultimate goal is to push Russia’s preeminence so as it can really act as key player in international politics (on equal footing with the United States and the EU) and to persuade international audience of such status held by Russia at the beginning of the 21st century.
The formulation of such claims by Putin or other Russian political figures is not enough.
What is needed is the recognition of the international community in relation with which Putin is constructing a great power identity for Russia.
This assertion is valid for any state and was applied to the United States in various works.
One might argue that Putin’s Russia found itself in stark military and economic competition with the West.
Not only physical security needs are at stake here, but also self-esteem needs.
As some of Putin’s statements indicate, he is not formulating a worldview against international law or against the United Nations, but a reinterpretation of events.
In this sense, discourse and ideational factors are at work, much more than tanks or price of gas.
Conclusion In this article the aim was to tackle a different form of “hybridity” in Russia’s recent actions.
The latter are highly relevant in Putin’s attempts to construct Russia’s identity in relation or co-dependence with the others.
Georg F Fuchs Lieutenant Colonel, German Armed Forces Lecturer for Intelligence, Security and Strategic Studies georg.f.fuchs@gmail.com Abstract Modern warfare “blurs the lines between war and politics, conflict and peace, soldier and civilian, and battlefield violence and safe zones.
It is more important to understand the potential aggressor and its motivation to conduct aggressive action, than discuss the ways and means he will deploy during confrontation.
The adaptability, agility of forces and access to modern, global communication and modern technologies as well as resources, enables actors other than states and increases states’ portfolios during modern war fighting.
The discussion of the difference between asymmetric or irregular warfare and hybrid warfare is not academic only.
It is even to question if the so-called hybrid warfare is something new at all.
More frequently it is stated by experts that there is nothing new regarding hybrid warfare and it is just a new abbreviation for an old type of warfare.
The legal framework for international conflict is not meeting the modern conflict realities and it is required to review and adapt them accordingly.
Traditional mechanisms for conflict mitigation and the relevance of time and space during conflicts are changing dramatically and will inflict a far more complex conflict environment.
Near real time access to information, powerful pictures, the availability of the internet and access to resources and high sophisticated technology will increase the power of small proxies or networks.
The state will lose its monopoly of power and the borders between internal and external security within states and regions will diminish.
Modern warfare will be adaptive, agile, well-resourced and very unlikely conducted between states in a conventional manner.
The better states are willing to accept these changes and conduct modernization accordingly the better will they be prepared for future conflicts.
Hybrid warfare; Future conflicts; Permanent war; Dark networks; Cyber space.
The western countries expected to bring home the so called ‘Friedensdividende’31 and conflict seemed to be far away.
Although some political and intelligence analysts predicted a troublesome future, especially along the former borders of the Soviet Union, they had been accused by the majority of pessimism and negativism in their analysis.
For most analysts nothing could endanger the now likely everlasting peace after the two superpowers resolved their controversy over political ideas.
It seemed even, that Russia analysts thought about giving up their professions and wondered if they were still relevant and required.
Soon did they learn that the future will not be as peaceful as expected and the large block confrontation, starting after the end of the Second World War in 1945, was just overshadowing smaller conflicts which emerged out of the shadows after the Wall came down in 1989.
During this time with reduced state and border control, there emerged an increasing number of organized crime groups gaining enormous amounts of money and influence enabling them to either provide financial support or access to other resources like weapons and global terrorist groups, which caused thousands of casualties.
But the core problem for nation states started with the second Gulf War fought after the Iraqi military occupied Kuwait.
But the greatest challenge for the global society inherited by these conflicts was and still is that they question the western nation state model.
These developments had ensured for centuries that humanitarian principles and the protection of the civilian population during conflict, as well as brutality against enemy military, was regulated, and if not followed, responsible actors prosecuted.
All this was fundamentally questioned during the comparable short period of time since 1989, in overall less than 30 years.
These developments had an impact on the mechanisms for crisis prevention and on warfare.
This article will discuss modern types of warfare and immanent transformation of warfare since the end of the Cold War.
It will give a perspective for future warfare and what is to be expected during future conflicts.
Different concepts explaining modern warfare Since the Wall came down recent conflicts and emergencies heavily influenced the development of new concepts concerning future warfare.
To emphasize and discuss the most important ones, it is necessary to understand the situation in which these concepts had been developed.
The only remaining superpower, prepared to fight and win conventional battles, dominated the power structures globally.
The United States of America in concert with its Allies was able to defeat all potential military threats due to technological supremacy and overwhelming resources.
During two Gulf Wars this Coalition did destroy a strong conventional Iraqi military force in weeks, if not days.
Potential opponents needed to develop methods to threaten, defeat and weaken these mainly western powers.
On the western side the military did understand that their conventional power, although never beaten in combat, was not well prepared to defeat such an enemy.
Identifying these shortfalls strategists, academia and military did respond in developing concepts to better prepare the forces for similar conflicts.
The hybrid warfare concept is one in a row of many such concepts or models.
The most popular ones had been first the Unrestricted, second the contemporary, third the Fourth Generation and finally the Hybrid Warfare concept.
All four did reflect different military and political perspectives, explaining future conflicts based on the experience made in current and recent conflicts.
Out of this short and not comprehensive selection the hybrid warfare concept is the most recent.
It became especially prominent during the Russian aggression against Georgia and Ukraine.
The 4th Generation Warfare concept in contrary was developed because of “…a major geopolitical shift in which the fall of the Soviet Union ended a bipolar world; many ethnic and national groups quickly sensed a new opportunity for freedom or recognition.
We should not be surprised by these actors’ innovative methods and techniques of warfare as they release pent-up energy and pursue long-held ideological and nationalistic objectives.
This concept focused a little more on the development of military methods developed by nation states using the successful irregular warfare methods and integrated them into their conventional military, adding modern technology to the very basic kind of asymmetric or irregular warfighting.
If hybrid warfare is the way future conflicts are conducted and what hybrid warfare means is the question since many years.
His paper had been based on the insights from the Israel Defense Forces in Lebanon and Gaza.
The question still remains if the three selected aspects are really predicting the future of warfare or if they are just a reflection of past experiences.
In his doctrine and following papers he was far more trying to predict future warfare and review Russian doctrine accordingly and prepare his military forces to meet future requirements.
No, this knowledge was already available in concepts mentioned earlier.
In such conflicts, future adversaries (states, state-sponsored groups, or selffunded actors) exploit access to modern military capabilities including encrypted command systems, man-portable surface-to-air missiles, and other modern lethal systems, as well as promote protracted insurgencies that employ ambushes, improvised explosive devices, and assassinations.
Gerasimov published his prominent article in the Voyenno Promyshlennyy Kuryer, “The Value of Science is in Foresight” in 2013, four years later.
NATO’s comprehensive approach concept32 developed at the Lisbon Summit, in November 2010, described a very similar approach already three years earlier.
It is more likely that most experts tend to “win the last war” as Sir Basil Liddell Hart once wrote.
In doing so they frequently reflect past conflict forms and methods of warfighting but are not predicting the future.
Military means, although essential, are not enough on their own to meet the many complex challenges to Euro-Atlantic and international security.
This is the first time in this paper that the cause of conflict becomes more relevant then the methods used to achieve identified objectives.
The competitor’s in Future Warfare It is to believe, that a different way of discussing future warfare is necessary.
The named or identified objectives of an actor are the driving factor for political as well as military action and decision.
It makes a difference if you want to invade a country or if you just want to destabilize a region in order to stabilize your country internally and in parallel weaken a coalition.
These objectives can be described as ends, meaning the goals an actor wants to achieve or the purpose why he deploys power.
In order to achieve these ends, it is necessary to choose appropriate tactics, techniques and approaches following different ways.
Adversaries, either states or non-state actors, who employ irregular and hybrid warfare approaches that combine the conventional and unconventional methods are far more likely shaping a concept of future warfare.
This requires the employment of means which can be explained as resources, weapons, propaganda, etc., in order to achieve the actors’ ends.
Opponents employ these means not only to destroy, kill, and manipulate, but they do so for a purpose.
This approach to explain future warfare makes it easier to understand different methods used by state and non-state actors.
Meaning that either can choose to deploy irregular, terrorist or conventional methods to achieve its goals.
The difference is far more framed by available resources or means than by the status of an actor as a state or for example a network.
Although states are threats to each other due to their capabilities it is very unlikely that they develop an intent to attack other states by conventional means in the near future.
Non-state actors and networks are far more likely to pose threats to our societies.
These dark networks are becoming increasingly capable due to technological proliferation and access to sophisticated knowledge via the internet.
If the new terrain in which conflicts are waged is the mind of the people, the cyber space becomes more important than geographical territory.
This virtual space becomes real when people come to believe that it is worth joining a network or just accept a narrative.
The cyber space facilitates the spread of ideas and thoughts without any regulatory mechanism.
Daesh or the so called Islamic State is a good example how the cyber space can be utilized for spreading information, an idea and concepts for attacks.
A different but positive one is TED33 which claims that it spreads ideas.
At the end, it is to understand why and how decision makers and leaders as individuals act under certain conditions, to understand a developing threat.
It was the narrative which could either be religious, cultural, ethnological or political which influenced threat groups the most, created enemies and helped identifying other actors than the state.
Besides the technological dimension which was already discussed, the narrative is the most important driver for individual’s activities.
It is to be developed in line with social examination and leads to decisions about organizational structures.
Daesh did chose the lost caliphate as the narrative to convince people to join and develop a structure in line with former caliphates.
To differentiate conflict forms and the ways wars are conducted it seems to be necessary to discuss the narrative or cause of a potential future conflict.
The term hybrid warfare describes the way how conflicts are conducted but not the reason of a conflict and it does not differentiate actors.
Although both are closely linked together; it is nearly impossible to discuss the potential form of a conflict, without reflecting its potential cause, including the competitors.
The conflict form is just a developing and transforming way of warfare based on the cause, the availability of weapons, manpower and resources as well as the geography34 of the battlespace.
In this understanding the competitors, including available resources, as well as the circumstances in which a conflict is conducted, do influence heavily which type of warfare is chosen by the parties.
The attacker or aggressor is potentially choosing the methodology first and will impose power against the rival.
It is up to the defender how imaginative, agile, adaptable he and his forces are to meet these challenges successfully.
It is reflecting the concept of 4th Generation Warfare or the Contemporary Warfare model as developing models for ways warfare is conducted but far more focused on potential choices of an aggressor reflecting his capabilities, resources and chances.
Everything which seems to help him to be successful will be chosen or conducted against a defending or invading enemy.
Success in warfare is the capability to impose the aggressors will over the defenders and sustain it.
It remains to discuss whether any element of warfare has changed over time.
If the assumption is still valid that an aggressor’s will to achieve its objectives or ends is not necessarily a question of attacking or defending space but the will of the population, this would change ways and means dramatically.
Historically an attacking country does conquer land to impose its will over the opponent.
The territory is conquered against the will of the defender mostly against his military force which is to be defeated.
Because the attack is mostly conducted out of a situation in which the attacker has a superiority over the defender, it is the easier phase to conquer and far more difficult to control and defend the conquered territory over a long period of time.
This was the case for Nazi Germany during World War II in which the Wehrmacht won every major battle and conquered huge territories but was not capable to completely control either.
In this context one has to mention, that two different entities are to be recognized as potential aggressors.
One is still the nation state; the other is a non-national group or network which might be supported or sponsored by a nation or nations.
The circumstances which are framing the opportunities for either entity are different.
The nation state agreed on the legal framework at least once in the past, the non-nation did never.
Nevertheless, is it necessary for the non-nation to become recognized internationally to become recognized as a state at a point to become firstly a legal body and secondly a politically relevant entity.
The two current examples are Russia which conquered Crimea and attacked Eastern Ukraine indirectly by proxies and the so called Islamic State which was a non-state network and became a state-like construct.
Both used military power to impose their will against a defending nation and conquered territory aiming for the destruction or reduction of global or regional dominance to achieve or promote political objectives.
Military action was always supporting political objectives over centuries.
It might be necessary to highlight that it was a way to an end but rarely an end in itself.
It is not as important how someone defines modern warfare, and it really does not matter – what is more important is to understand the reason and narrative of a potential aggressor or opponent.
The symptoms might change within each conflict but the reasons for attacking are to be differentiated and identified to avoid confrontations.
These are regularly blurring the lines between combatants and civilian population and include all possible or necessary means, cross-departmentally and if possible internationally.
For the western nations, including their intelligence and military this does mean, that the challenge to identify either the activities or the individuals conducting violent action remains.
Our governments decide only in electoral periods and are just limited willing to threaten their political success by engagements in foreign countries.
The 37 See also McCulloh and Johnson who demonstrate throughout their study that context is critical.
Since these entities do not have to win a conflict, they just need to avoid losing it, or at least neglecting a defeat.
Taking the mentioned circumstances into account a potential western success in such conflicts is very unlikely.
The available capabilities and resources are shaping the ways and means of warfare.
The reason why nuclear weapons are becoming important again is the fact that they, in the same way as sophisticated anti-access and areal denial weapons, are providing the environment in which the effects of a potential military engagement will be so tremendous that no decisions are made to openly defend a threatened partner.
The deterring function of such weapons is not so much that of avoiding conflict entirely anymore, but to limit the measures against an opponent’s approach.
This has changed the way deterrence worked during the Cold War, in which the functionality was to avoid direct conflict entirely.
Nowadays the conflict is already eminent due to assumed involvement; a hybrid confrontation below conflict level and a subsequent escalation of force is far more likely.
Russia did assume an offensive campaign by NATO to expand its territory to the East to its disadvantage and in assuming it already became a competitor.
It is not important if this is true or not, the assumption is enough to enforce or allow action.
In employing A2AD weapons, which could be sophisticated air-to-air weapons or improvised explosive devices the opponents will to continue or begin an engagement or his freedom of maneuver, decision and action, is limited due to the cost of lives and resources.
Additionally, access to resources, by gaining territory, criminal activities, or support from sponsors do enable the development of improvised and adapted weapons, enabling actors to restrict freedom of action and decision even further.
Hybrid Phase Critical Phase Decisive Phase Hybrid Warfare Begin of Combat Operations Attacker Decision for War Preparation Sustainment Decline Defender Hybrid Response Preparation Sustainment Information and Intelligence The most critical factors in a hybrid environment are time and information as the graphic shows.
The momentum is always with the aggressor and it does not matter which kind of actor he is.
The longer a hybrid phase lasts undetected or without appropriate counter measures taken, the less likely is a potential success, even if combat starts.
The actors are using this window of opportunity to prepare for offensive action.
Western states or coalitions are unable to respond timely because of the intended activities below conflict level.
This gray zone during which different activities are conducted is legally problematic and own activities very unlikely supported by the western population.
In an acknowledgement of the ability to protract war in these circumstances, the threat will seek to wage war in more battle spaces and populations than United States forces can directly control.
In order to overcome these large grey spaces, it is important to understand their existence first.
Traditional rules and mechanisms like a formal declaration of war, the separation of combatants and non-combatants or civilians or the concept of deterrence do not work under these circumstances.
It may even be questioned if the so-called hybrid warfare is something new at all.
More frequently it is stated by experts that there is nothing new regarding hybrid warfare and it is just a new shorthand description for an old type of warfare.
Academia and practitioners alike are claiming that hybridity is exactly what happened during previous conflicts.
Although there are some similarities in several aspects of warfighting as a whole of government approach, it is probably better as an example to look at the development of the Russian doctrine concerning deception, misinformation and resistance after a foreign occupation developed since the Russian Revolution40 instead of assuming that Russia developed a new form of warfare.
It is to a lesser extend a totally new phenomenon but it is enabled by modern technology and conducted within today’s societies.
Information dominance operating in the cyber space is probably the most crucial capability in the future.
The fact that actors are able to spread information with extremely high speed to never before existing recipient numbers within our societies, not being limited by borders or state control, changes a lot.
The concepts which explain ways and means of warfare are not as important as the narrative and potential ends, intentions and objectives of an aggressor but the discussion about it is and will remain important.
If opponents are understood and their capabilities and available resources are not overseen, conflicts are manageable if the leadership is adaptable, agile and willing to make unpopular decisions.
Future conflicts will last long and time is working against western states and coalitions due to their tendency to avoid casualties and political turmoil.
The territory will not be geographically defined anymore but contains the narrative, fighting for the hearts and minds and potential support, cross borders and outside traditional legal and ethical rules.
It is necessary to develop agile processes, forces and modern legal frameworks meeting the challenges of blurring lines between internal and external security, law enforcement and military, civilians and combatants to name just the most important ones.
If these types of future wars are to be won it will take time, confidence and endurance.
The threat will not stay in foreign lands but will come to the West, as the attacks in London, Madrid, Paris, Brussels, and Berlin have shown.
If the opponents are not able to achieve their goals within their countries or regions they will continue to spread into Western communities and attack at their weak spots.
Borders are not providing security anymore and the capabilities of the cyber space are just beginning to emerge.
Finally, from the existing concepts of hybrid warfare, we retain the central themes of a deliberate synergistic effect, the concept of forms of warfare in a continuum, and the rapid organizational adaptation of hybrid threats which will continuously frame further discussions.
Guerrilla Strategies – An Historical Anthology from the Long March to Afghanistan, London.
Hybrid Warfare Concept, Directorate of Capability Integration, June 2012.
Reprogramming the Pentagon for a New Age, in: Foreign Affairs, January / February.
Teaching Strategy for 21st Century Conflict, Strategic Studies Institute, November, 22.
An Update, Perspectives on the Future Security Environment, Statement to the Subcommittee on Intelligence and Emerging Threats and Capabilities, United States House of Representatives Armed Services Committee, 13 February.
From Fourth Generation Warfare to Hybrid War, US Army War College; Strategy Research Project.
Georgia in 2008, East Ukraine in 2013, Crimea in 2014, and Syria in 2015.
Secondly, we will try to argue that the NATO military doctrine of deterrence has become obsolete, still envisaging the possible threats posed by a future Russian involvement in the Baltic and Eastern Europe in cold-war terms and not in terms relevant to the shifting international security environment.
This new ‘Russian invention’ could very well be used in the future against NATO member states in the Baltic region or Eastern Europe.
However, the frequency with which the term is employed alongside Russia’s military involvements in the former Soviet space or furthering Russian interests abroad seems, we believe, somewhat suspicious.
If we simply analyse the phases of which a “hybrid war” is composed (conventional and unconventional military tactics and operations, direct foreign involvement such as the support of political protests, economic warfare, cyberwarfare and informational and propaganda campaigns), we can reach the conclusion that it is not a novelty.
In addition, in one opinion , the emergence of “hybrid warfare” poses a series of interesting yet potentially dangerous consequences.
Firstly, there is no legitimate proof that the Russian Federation switched from its former Soviet “vital-space” geopolitical doctrine to the “Velikiy limitrofnyy doctrine”42 and then towards the so-called “Gerasimov doctrine”43 in just a decade.
While some argue that this type of geopolitical thinking is outdated, we disagree, as we believe that this concept is very much in line with the main strategic advantage that Russia possesses – its huge territory and large uninhabited hostile environment.
Acts of aggression are defined as armed invasions or attacks, bombardments, blockades, armed violations of territory, permitting other states to use one's own territory to perpetrate acts of aggression and the employment of armed irregulars or mercenaries to carry out acts of aggression.
A war of aggression is a series of acts committed with a sustained intent.
The definition's distinction between an act of aggression and a war of aggression make it clear that not every act of aggression would constitute a crime against peace; only war of aggression does.
States would nonetheless be held responsible for acts of aggression” ; Definition of Aggression, General Assembly Resolution 3314 14 December 1974.
As such, we consider that “hybrid warfare” cannot be totally equated or considered as Russia’s definitive replacement doctrine or as a purposely novel military theory or particularly, a new type of Russian threat towards NATO’s borders.
Taking into consideration the “hybrid” character of hybrid warfare, it seems very difficult to us to assume that any military doctrine involving the hybridisation and combination of Cold War era tactics with modern ones will become an original concept employed only by the Kremlin.
It seems, from the perspective of NATO and the US, that labelling Russian involvement in Ukraine and the Crimea is a reactionary and tardive response to a rapid upscaling, military investment and political muscle-flexing on the part of the Russian Federation which has surprised everyone, even though nobody seemed to think the same in 2008 as Putin invaded Georgia.
However NATO and the EU felt seriously threatened by the Russian annexation of Crimea and the war in the Donbass.
Consequently, a plethora of military analysts have rushed to classify the ‘new Russian threat of hybrid warfare’ in an effort to understand why all except the Russians have been caught off-guard in the shifting realm of modern warfare46.
But, continuing to envisage the Kremlin’s actions in Cold War terms poses in our opinion two significant draw-backs.
First, from NATO’s perspective, is shows the complacency and the strategic imbalance in which it finds itself as its military doctrine of deterrence has become obsolete, being severely limited by the Article 5 provisions, and by the fact the NATO cannot respond fast enough to the non-linear threats of today’s challenging security environment.
The usage of the term “hybrid warfare” is not a new choice of words48, neither from the syntax nor from the rhetoric aspects.
War has never been a static field, it changed alongside the development of human society and in fact, all wars were more or less hybrid, in the sense that they combined different tactics, aspects, instruments and methods to insure the victor’s advantage.
This happened not particularly in the sense of a positive shift towards modern military technology and increased capabilities, but in the sense of a limitation of traditional operations.
This is characterized by a change from the classic land-air-sea based warfare, theorized in the Cold War period, towards a more subtle deployment of forces such as surgical defence systems, and coastal defence systems, as well as landand sea-based as well as air-launched cruise missiles and tactical ballistic missile platforms.
If we consider the heavily criticised conceptualisations of Smith’s “modern wars” and Kaldor’s “new wars” , the scene was set for hybrid warfare as a novel area for discussion in academic circles.
Yet despite the fact that “both use of the term and the study of hybrid warfare are new compared to the long history of warfare” (Erol and Oğuz, 2015, 262), this changed because in the aftermath of the 9/11 and with the War and Terror and other non-linear conflicts (the 2006 Israel-Lebanon War, and the 2008 RussoGeorgian War), the asymmetric element became the defamatory characteristic of hybrid warfare.
In line with the above, Wither remarks on the inflection point, the year 2014, as a defining point from which hybrid warfare changed.
After 2014 the focus on Russia’s perceived success was at an all-time high, with the former NATO Secretary General Rasmussen affirming that the Russian involvement was a hybrid warfare.
Also, the United States Joint Forces Command defines the concept as being “any adversary that simultaneously and adaptively employs a tailored mix of conventional, irregular, terrorism and criminal means or activities in the operational battle space.
This is important if we desire to discern if the current Russian “Gerasimov doctrine”, which makes use heavily of hybrid warfare , can be considered as being either a new type of “hybrid warfare”, or has completely switched to “hybrid warfare” as their main military doctrine.
The first is the existence of a non-standard, complex and fluid adversary52.
Another is the employment of all types of war, conventional, irregular or terrorist, including even criminal behaviour 54.
This interpretation shows that strictly from the standpoint of the military, hybrid warfare is a relatively widespread tactic, not at all limited to only a handful of actors.
As a result, they become immoral and barely-legitimated methods of eluding international responsibility for acts which, in normal circumstances, would attract the culpability of the state in question.
Thus we can assume that the definition of “political warfare” proposed by Kennan 56 can very well overlap with the one of “hybrid warfare”, though in the sense of a hybridisation between complex political interests and compound military tactics.
Operational art integrates ends, ways, and means across the levels of war…without operational 55 The concept of “political warfare” could be explained as a means to limit the effects of a conflict or any other possible threat to national security, whilst keeping the state’s interests abroad well supported.
This is largely due to the extreme difficulty in dissociating politics from the military, especially in states without a clear separation of powers, and where the society is more or less familiarised with authoritarian regimes.
The different perspectives of “hybrid warfare” as the “new Russian military doctrine” and as a “deterrence factor” against perceived Russian “hybrid threats” Discussing the perception of the recent Russian involvements in East Ukraine and Syria, it is important to understand how the Russian Federation’s military doctrine has evolved and how it was integrated into the larger geopolitical context of the time.
After the fall of the Soviet Union, the Kremlin opted towards a doctrine characterized by revolutionary expansionism and initiative-taking actions as to insure its defence and interests abroad.
The end-result will be difficult to interpret, as NATO cannot initiate any retaliatory actions outside the provisions of Article 5, being limited only to deterrence measures.
This is particularly so in the Baltic region, though the deployment costs of a deterrence force and the difficult decision-taking process at NATO’s level are, in absolute terms, a significant drawback to any re-deployment plans.
Yet it is also true that the so-called “red line” has never been crossed , because Putin does not have the desire to provoke a conflict between NATO and Russia.
On this account, the whole bellicose posture in which NATO finds itself now, is not actually needed, with the exception as a badly needed reassurance factor for the Baltic and Eastern Europe NATO member states.
However, we believe that it’s very difficult from the perspective of abovementioned states to ‘trust’ Russia with not attacking them.
If we take for example, the 2007 cyberattacks on Estonia , Georgia in 2008 , the coup de main in Crimea58 and the protracted conflict in East Ukraine, all of these attest to the reluctance of the Eastern NATO Member states in their relationship with Russia.
This tactic, which has been used in the Luhansk and Donetsk regions (the Russianspeaking minority), brought into discussion the Russian minority in the Baltic States (Estonia in particular) as a possible vulnerability for a Russian involvement.
In addition, to complicate the situation, deterrence59 has always been seen as the best option.
This was seen as crucial after the independence of Kosovo in 2008 and the so-called “five-day” war in Georgia in the same year.
However, this was the case until recently , when Russia decided to destabilise Ukraine and annex Crimea.
Furthermore in 2015, Russia decided to simultaneously involve itself into both the Syrian Civil War and the fight against Daesh, taking the world by surprise once more.
Notwithstanding the ambiguity of the term “hybrid warfare”, Russia’s actions can be, 59 Discussing about deterrence, it is important to add that this concept were devised to deal with the threats posed by the former Soviet Union and not the Russian Federation.
In today’s terms, NATO’s defensive stance is not sufficiently aggressive to achieve the deterrence result.
This is due to the fact that NATO, as comprised by its 28 member states, requires a complicated system of prior approvals integrated in a slow decision-making process, which cannot hope to compete with the swiftness of Kremlin’s small group of decedents.
This clearly shows that NATO was designed not as a pro-active and offensive military alliance, but rather as a passive-defensive emanation of a political consensus in the military sphere.
Yet if we analyse the phrase we can clearly see that is points towards elements of “hybrid warfare” and therefore, NATO’s response towards the Russian threat of “hybrid warfare” would be a “hybrid warfare” of its own, to ensure that the deterrence factor is being implemented.
Yet what is most concerning is fact that the Russians have the advantage in using a relatively flexible decision-taking system , as compared with NATO’s system characterized by the fact that it uses complicated and timeconsuming consensus and consultation procedures.
Thus, NATO is forced to act as a defensive alliance and at the same time invest in deterrence moves to counter the “hybrid threat” posed by Russia to reassure its Eastern members.
They were replaced by light counter-terrorist and counter-insurgency units which were better suited to counter the problems posed by today’s security threats and which were shaped by the expeditionary tactics used in Iraq and Afghanistan.
As such, NATO which abandoned “standard tactics” finds itself in a difficult position to mount a defence against a possible traditional threat from Russia, threat which would involve, in its majority, conventional weapons and not elements of hybrid war.
In addition, one of the biggest problems we see when countering Russian hybrid tactics is their flexibility and adaptability.
If we take the example of Ukraine, in late 2014, the Russian switched from hybrid tactics to a series of surgical strikes, meant to 61 Or as Johnson sees it, as a modern STAVKA, as he argues that Putin has placed the entire Russian military and its population “at or near war footing”, by centralizing and restructuring the entire decision-making system.
It will be very problematic we believe, if NATO troops, trained to counter hybrid treats, will meet conventional enemy troops on the battlefield.
This is done by assuming that it, more precisely the highly controversial Russian-style of “hybrid warfare”, is in fact legitimate or gains legitimacy as a valid countermeasure.
In this light, Russia will continue to view the United States run NATO as the main antagonist and as its principal security threat.
As such, the relationship between Russia and the West will always be marred by fears of conflict, in spite of any actions undertaken to stabilize the situation.
He also writes that, in the case in Ukraine, the Kremlin considered that is was in fact the United States which launched a ‘successful operation’ to replace the former President Yanukovych with a puppet government, so as to forcefully rip Ukraine from the sphere of influence of Russia.
Therefore, the result of this was to use the past experiences for consolidating Russia’s defences against all possible threats.
Charap continues with the fact that this is not actually a new military doctrine, but in fact, an analysis of the ways and methods used by the United States in their military involvements abroad, again for defensive purposes.
This lead to the Annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in March 2014 and the subsequent tensions in Eastern Ukraine which erupted into an allout civil war.
In the first phase of the conflict Russian military personnel contributed to the defeat of the Ukrainian army.
In November 2014, by using humanitarian aid convoys, Russia supplied the separatists with a variety of military hardware and ammunition.
These events, which repeated in August 2015, were observed by the OSCE, which reported a number of special transit zones alongside the Donbass-Russian porous border, controlled by mixed separatist-Russian security forces.
In the early 2015, the Kremlin decided to abandon the ‘hybrid tactics’ it has used up until then and concentrate on ‘traditional tactics’ such as shelling Ukrainian Army positions from over the border and using “volunteers” to boost the ranks of the separatist forces.
Also, some evidence has surfaced which positively identifies elements of Russian armour used by separatist forces.
By analysing the underlying causes of the Russian intervention in the East of Ukraine, we can discern that the relative success which the Russian enjoyed is not at all due to their “new type of war” or the greatness of the “Gerasimov doctrine” but rather due to the special characteristics of Ukraine and the very special circumstances in which it finds itself.
Second. the relative ease with which Russia annexed Crimea and the ongoing conflict in Eastern Ukraine are mostly due to the pre-existing connections and interests in the region which pre-date the Soviet era altogether.
The bi-dimensional characteristic of Russia’s “hybrid warfare” – “war during peace” and “neo-imperialist” tendencies The first dimension, or “war during peace”, refers to the confusion and the elusive behaviour of a state actor by employing hybrid warfare so as to escape international responsibility for actions which, under ‘normal circumstances’, would be punishable.
Though the Russian Federation did receive sanctions after the Annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in 2014, they did little damage, as it made Moscow aware of the reactionary politics embraced by the West, and it gave a reason to strengthen the cooperation with the rest of the BRICS countries.
Needless to say that the EU suffered more because of the sanctions imposed, as it had to find different economic partners to whom to sell their goods which were banned from Russian markets.
Also, “war during peace”63 can also refer to the actions of Moscow with regard to the situation in the East of Ukraine.
First, it represents a potential threat to the regional hegemony of Russia in the post-Soviet space, Russia must never allow that.
Second, in the case in which the now Western-supported Ukraine will be forced to yield before the might of Russia, it will show that the West is weak and reactionary.
This is because we have long been accustomed to see an enemy in Russia and even if we are all aware of the changes which the world suffered after the fall of the USSR, we cannot avoid the feeling that Russia is reenacting previous scenarios.
To cut a long story short, we understand that times have changed, yet we still use pre-Cold War instruments to analyse and predict Russian foreign policy.
Depending on the economic ties and proximity it is still not a viable solution to choose not to invest in real technologies and strengthen the cooperation between NATO member states, steps which could prove critical in the future.
Though we do not agree with what the Russians have been doing in Ukraine, we cannot say that Putin’s Russia is not doing what some Western countries have been doing for a long time, irrespective of the reasons or rationale behind their actions.
If the Kremlin has been using “war during peace”, it is because the West first pioneered its use, since Russia is not capable to sustain a veritable hybrid conflict outside its area of control, in which sadly, Georgia, Ukraine, Moldova and the Baltic States are located.
The second dimension, is the neo-imperialist dimension of “hybrid warfare” seen from the perspective of Russia’s resurgence as a great power.
Van Harpen argues that “Russia is both a post-imperial state and a pre-imperial state”, giving the examples of certain moves64 that the Kremlin made to insure its interests in the adjacent regions are respected.
He also discusses that the political philosophy of Russia has changed little from the Soviet era.
The motivations behind the Kremlin’s actions are difficult to discover, due to the sheer number of scholars and analysts which still consider Russia as the direct descendant of the Soviet Union.
Alternatively, we can also look at the aggressive stance of Russia from the point of view of domestic politics, as a means to distract the populace’s attention from the difficult situation which gripped Russia after the Financial Crisis and the drop in oil and gas prices.
Conclusions Trying to make sense of “hybrid warfare” has become a new trend in the scholarly field concerned with the subject of military and operational tactics.
The answer to this comes when hybrid warfare is mixed with power politics and ruthlessness in pursuing national interests.
It blurs the lines between opposites and creates a grey space where nuances are more important than the relative truths.
Hybrid warfare has multiple dimensions, each specifically connected to a set of objectives and precise purposes.
On Russia’s intervention in Ukraine and the claims that it is using the concerted attacks as a rehearsal for a future involvement in Eastern Europe, the chances of a repeat of so-called Crimea or a Donbass scenarios elsewhere are, in our opinion, fortunately low.
However, we do not believe that “hybrid warfare” is a weak concept, only that its current interpretation is somewhat lacking.
Simply equating “hybrid warfare” with a Russian plan for world domination is just not feasible.
In this respect, Russia’s intervention in Ukraine should be interpreted using a different set of optics, that of the coordinated employment of certain instruments (military, economic, diplomatic, informational and cyber) in its perceived sphere of influence so as to ensure that its vested, national or vital interests are protected.
Though not a new invention, in the past decade, “hybrid warfare” has become the “catchall phrase” for a number of highly controversial actions undertaken by the Kremlin.
In our opinion, the rhetoric used in Western circles, or more correctly, the over-emphasis on trying to discern the ulterior motives in all of Putin’s moves, has made the West blind to the real problems as terrorism has clearly become the major threat for Europe’s well-being.
On the Asian theatre, the cooperation between the BRICS countries (half of them having nuclear capabilities), the increasingly cordial relations between Turkey and Russia, the economic and financial partnership between Russia and China which is heralding a ‘golden age’ of Eurasian economic ties and the words of President-Elect Donald Trump who no longer considers Russia an existential threat, are clear signs that an important change will come to pass.
Therefore, we will see more of this “hybrid warfare” in the future, but not between the old powerful actors but rather between the regional powers such as China, Japan, Iran and Saudi Arabia.
Also, between state actors and non-state actors, revealing once more the threat posed by terrorism.
As we saw in 2015 and 2016, Europe is not threatened by Russia, the menace posed by Daesh is the primary concern in Western Europe.
Comparatively, in Eastern Europe, where the terrorist threat is minimal, the major concern remains Russian aggression.
This dichotomy is important because it shows the differences in the approach and interpretations on the foreign policy moves made by the Kremlin.
This dual approach is not to be taken lightly, the West has always taken advantage of the fear and complex historical relationship between Russia and Eastern Europe.
On the opposite side, the close relationship between Russia and countries like France, Germany, and even Italy, constitutes the argument behind the idea that maybe the West has always used the East as a bargaining chip in its dealings with Russia.
As such, blaming the Kremlin of ‘inventing’ and ‘deploying’ hybrid warfare or hybrid tactics against NATO and the EU are, in our opinion, speculations and machinations in the grand scheme of legitimating NATO’s ever fledgling purpose in a changed world.
Addressing the problem from the perspective of international law, Russia does not have many options.
Due to the impediments within the UN Security Council, a repeat of the United Sates’ endeavours in Kosovo and Iraq are no longer possible, let alone achievable by Russia.
Consequently, born from the desire to circumvent an impossible vote on a resolution approving intervention, the usage of hybrid warfare is, in our opinion, a feasible bargain.
Blurring the lines between war and peace and the usage of “war during peace” may be the only way to achieve the compromise between vital state interests and the current rigid international framework.
Yet, if we accept this rationale, then hybrid warfare will not be associated with Russian interests, but with the interests of all important international actors.
In a similar optic, we see that NATO has taken the ‘initiative’ of switching from its characteristically defensive posture of deterrence.
Though a step forward in itself, it seems like a timid effort to keep-up to the changing times.
The façade which NATO has put up until now rested on the image of Russia as the everlasting enemy of Europe.
The weak Russia of the 90s exists only in history books and biased interpretations.
To keep-up the façade in order to continue to give NATO a raison d’être seems unwise, if not foolish.
If we take the positive aspect, it will encourage cooperation at the national level, giving NATO the muchneeded breath of fresh air.
However, if it will backfire, it will, paradoxically, make Europe and NATO weak by over-investing in countering the so-called hybrid threats from state actors, a threat which may never come.
The danger is that, whilst investing in defences against a clear source, it will also mean ignoring the serious threats posed by hybrid threats originating non-state actors.
The solution for such conflicts is in the best interests of Georgia and the Black Sea region, as well as of the European Union, because after the recent enlargement, the EU has two member countries from that region.
Another issue is the security role Georgia can play by providing the corridor for energy resources from the basin of the Caspian Sea to Europe.
The stereotype of these conflicts is that they exist in Georgia between different ethnic groups and become active from time to time.
This article argues that the 2008 war was not an intrastate war which happened inside the country between different groups, but it had also two participants from the international system.
Ethnic identities; National interests; Georgia; War, Constructivism; Realism Introduction The reason why I have decided to write an analytical comparison of the conflicts in Georgia in the 1990s and in 2008 is that there is little written on this subject and this article will fill the gap to some degree.
There are various studies written about the war in 2008 and the conflicts in the 1990s in Georgia, but they mostly offer a mere history of the conflicts and not the comparative analysis of the conflict that will try to exhibit the differences and similarities and provide a more thorough search for the real reasons behind these conflicts.
I will draw parallels with the Ukrainian conflict and show the similarities and differences there are with the conflicts in Georgia and how these experiences from Georgia can be applied to better analyse the current conflict in Ukraine.
To explain more why I have opted for this question for my research, which I will mention later, I shall state that nowadays many local conflicts have gained international importance and become matters of international disagreement.
As I will show in this article, this is the exact situation in Georgia's case and I will prove it.
The local ethnic conflict not only gained major importance for the international society, but it also de facto and de jure evolved from a local to an interstate conflict.
This is the reason why the main research question of this article is very important and provides new insight into to the so-called frozen conflicts in Georgia.
In the 1990s, the conflicts in Georgia were considered to be ethnic conflicts and the actors of these conflicts were the ethnic groups that were demanding independence and separation from Georgia and they were regarded as an intrastate war,e. one that happened inside Georgia.
But in 2008 there was a military conflict between two independent states – the Russian Federation and Georgia and it became an international military conflict.
I have reviewed the methodology through which the research question is answered and for a better explanation of the issue, I have resorted to different schools of international relations and decided which ones are better suited to the current cases.
Theory and Methodology For any article, the theoretical consideration is important and adds scientific value.
Thus, I have decided to base my work on the constructivism theory and explain the case with the help of the latter.
Nevertheless, I do not intend to give myself the benefit of choosing one of the International Relations schools I feel comfortable with.
I will challenge accordingly the explanatory power of constructivism with realism, which is one of the leading and most interesting schools in the field of international relations.
To answer the first question, I plan to argue in the main part of my article that these two theories best explain the cases mentioned here.
The second question already deals with methodological aspects, which I prefer to also include in the introductory part of my work.
This article is grounded on qualitative research, where analysis relies on argumentation and the findings stemming from it.
As far as the field of qualitative research methodology is concerned, I mainly use the comparative approach, which best suits the tasks and goals I aim to reach.
My purpose is to show that the 2008 war exhibits some similarities but was different in essence from the conflicts of the 1990s, and to discover the reasons why this change occurred in 2008.
The comparative method enables me to compare not only the cases, but also two international relations theories/schools which best explain the situation and offer a forecast and possible solutions.
As it results from the hypotheses, the main reason for the intrastate conflict is the outside force and the behaviour of it can be explained by Realism.
I will provide a theoretical explanation from Realism in the conclusive part of the article.
South Ossetia is a territory of 3900 square kilometres located within the Caucasus.
Whereas South Ossetia considers itself as being an independent State since its declaration of independence of 29 May 1992 and it has also been recognized by five Member States of the United Nations in the aftermath of the military conflict between Russia and Georgia in 2008 , the Georgian government, as well as the majority of Member States of the UN, consider it to be part of the Georgian territory.
The present-day conflict between South Ossetia and Georgia is rooted in a different understanding of historical facts and developments.
For a better understanding of the analyses of this work what will be made below, it is necessary to thoroughly explore history.
In 1989, South Ossetia lobbied for joining its territory with North Ossetia in Russia or for independence.
Georgia’s own declaration of independence from the former Soviet Union and subsequent repressive efforts by former Georgian President Gamsakhurdia triggered conflict in 1990.
In January 1991, hostilities broke out between Georgia and South Ossetia, reportedly contributing to an estimated 2,000-4,000 deaths and the displacement of tens of thousands of people.
In June 1992, Russia brokered a cease-fire, and Russian, Georgian, and Ossetian “peacekeeping” units set up base camps in a security zone around Tskhinvali, the capital of South Ossetia.
Monitors from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe did most of the patrolling.
A Joint Control Commission composed of Russian, Georgian, and North and South Ossetian emissaries ostensibly promoted a settlement of the conflict, with the OSCE as facilitator.
Some observers warned that Russia’s increasing influence in South Ossetia and Abkhazia over the years transformed the separatist conflicts into essentially Russia-Georgia disputes.
One must highlight the last fact about passportization from this historical review.
As it becomes apparent, south Ossetia and Abkhazia were parts of Georgia in the Soviet period and accordingly people residing in these territories were citizens of Soviet Georgia, but after the independence of Georgia from the Soviet Union, the Russian Federation gave its citizenship to the majority of the people who lived in other independent countries and were not citizens of the Russian Federation.
The hypothesis of this article claims that Russia is using different methods for reaching its interests so as to keep its influence on Post-Soviet Georgia and one of the methods used is granting Russian citizenship as leverage for manipulation.
The Georgians had declared a unilateral ceasefire several hours earlier, after another day of fighting between Georgian and Ossetian forces in and around the region’s capital, Tskhinvali.
But Georgia’s defence ministry said South Ossetian militias had nevertheless continued into the evening to heavily shell Georgian villages and positions.
By 1:00am on 8 August, Georgian troops had launched a large-scale military offensive on Tskhinvali, supported by artillery, and advanced quickly.
At approximately 1:30am, tank columns of the Russian 58th Army started crossing into Georgia from the Roki tunnel separating North and South Ossetia.
Apparently, the Russians had anticipated, if they did not actually entice, the Georgian move.
Prior to these opening events of 7-8 August, the security situation in South Ossetia had deteriorated sharply.
In July, four Georgian soldiers serving in the Joint Peacekeeping Force 3 were detained by the South Ossetian de facto authorities.
They were released after an ultimatum by Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili, but shortly thereafter, Russian warplanes flew over Georgian territory in an open warning to Tbilisi.
The South Ossetians and Georgians reinforced their forces and weaponry in the zone of conflict, in violation of ceasefire agreements.
In the past months, Russia also had been bolstering its position in both South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
Starting in March, talk of war – an attack on the southern part of Abkhazia – had been rife in Tbilisi.
A senior European diplomat said that U.S., German and European Union leaders had on repeated occasions talked Saakashvili out of launching an attack.
A South Ossetian told Crisis Group in late July that Russian advisers and military officers had recently arrived in the town of Java.
Russia also sent extra “peacekeepers” into Abkhazia in April and army railway workers on 30 May.
But in two months the railway crew repaired the rail link from Sukhumi to the city of Ochamchire which had been broken for years.
Moscow’s initial moves into South Ossetia as large-scale violence broke out there on 7-8 August were in part a response to a disastrous miscalculation by a Georgian leadership that was impatient with gradual confidence building and a Russian-dominated negotiations process.
But Russia’s disproportionate counter-attack, with movement of large forces into Abkhazia and deep into Georgia, accompanied by the widespread destruction of economic infrastructure, damage to the economy and disruption of communications and movement between different regions of the country, constitutes a dramatic shift in RussianWestern relations.
It has undermined regional stability and security; threatened energy corridors that are vital for Europe; made claims with respect to ethnic Russians and other minorities that could be used to destabilise other parts of the former Soviet Union, with Ukraine a potential target; and shown disregard for international law.
Russian actions reflected deeper factors, including pushback against the decade-long eastward expansion of the NATO alliance, anger over issues ranging from the independence of Kosovo to the placement of missile defence systems in Europe, an assertion of a concept of limited sovereignty for former Soviet states and a newfound confidence and aggressiveness in foreign affairs that is intimately linked with the personality and world view of Russia’s predominant leader, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin.
Georgia, too, has mishandled its relationships with Russia, South Ossetia and Abkhazia since 2004, abandoning real confidence building and often following confrontational policies towards the conflict regions.
Instead, President Mikheil Saakashvili and a small inner circle of bellicose officials used menacing and arrogant rhetoric that made the dispute with Moscow and the conflict regions bitter and personal.
The conflict between the two ethnic groups has roots that date back to the Russian Empire, so it did not start in the 1990s, as the Russian Empire was trying to create different identity groups on the territory of Georgia on the grounds of various ethnicity and ideational structures,g.
Ossetians have the belief that they are closer to Russians and have accordingly the right to join North Ossetia and Russia.
For example, Canada and Cuba both exist alongside the United States, but the simple balance of the military power cannot explain the fact that the former is a closer American ally, and the latter a sworn enemy.
The ideas about identity, the logic of ideology and established structures of friendship and enmity lead to the fact that the material balance of power between Canada and the United States, and Cuba and the United States has radically different meanings.
The South Ossetia case in Georgia is an example of how Russia tries to create leverage so as to control Post-Soviet countries.
During the 1990s, Russia’s policies towards the conflicts were largely supported by the secessionist forces, even if not always so unambiguously.
The main type of Russian support was directed through the conflict settlement mechanisms.
Russian-led peacekeeping operations have de facto guarded the borders of the secessionist entities, helping to maintain a status quo that was favourable to the secessionist sides.
The open phase of the conflict in South Ossetia lasted between 1990 and 1992 and claimed approximately a thousand lives.
As a result of the ceasefire agreement, there is a trilateral peacekeeping operation consisting of Russian, Georgian and South Ossetian troops.
A Joint Control Commission consisting of Russia, South Ossetia, North Ossetia and Georgia oversee the security situation and pursue negotiations on conflict settlement.
The OSCE (Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe) supervises the situation.
The conflict in Transnistria lasted for a few months in the spring and summer of 1992.
The war ended after the Russian 14th Army intervened on behalf of Transnistria and defeated the Moldavian troops.
A trilateral peacekeeping operation has been in place since the ceasefire was declared.
As in South Ossetia, the peacekeeping troops consisted of military forces from the two parties in conflict , and Russia as the leading peacekeeper.
The negotiations on conflict settlement were carried out in the so-called ‘five-sided format’, which consisted of Moldova and Transnistria as conflict parties, and Russia, Ukraine and the OSCE as mediators.
From these two cases, we can conclude that the main outside force is Russia and that it uses similar tools to reach its goals of influence to the ones mentioned above.
As Barry Buzan states in his book “Security-a New Framework for Analysis”, danger/threat is a social perception rather than existing materially, and the securitization of the issue happens according to this perception and not according to the real, materially existing threat.
This perception of threat is the result of the shared ideas, beliefs and values, which according to constructivists, have structural characteristics and exert a strong influence on social and political action.
Another tool for creating different identity groups so as to possess ground for influence in a country is to strengthen the affiliation of the ethnic minority groups to Russia.
Maybe they will change their mind in the future and claim they can live in a country next to the majority ethnic group, and so the social perception of the threat dilutes.
Thus, this was the reason why Russia implemented an illegal passport policy in Georgia, so as to claim that it had citizens living there and thus it benefitted from the right to protect them.
Attempting to legitimize its invasion, Russia asserted its sovereign right to protect its citizens against the aggression of another state.
As the international community responded to Russia’s actions, the focus was on the proportionality of Russia’s response and not whether the invasion was actually justified or legitimate.
Russia’s policy of conferring its citizenship en-masse to the citizens of another country seems like just such an arbitrary and abusive use of an acknowledged right.
Whether Russia’s passport policy is viewed as a creeping annexation or naked aggression, international law should not, and, this author believes, does not, legitimate such a scheme.
Ukraine, with its Western predilections and NATO ambitions, is potentially vulnerable to this doctrine.
The Baltic States have the protection of membership in the EU and NATO but also the vulnerability of large ethnic Russian populations.
The next step to a passport policy was to strengthen its influence and prepare the ground for a possible necessary invasion of the country, which eventually happened in 2008.
From the beginning, the ethnic conflict and the act of supporting ethnic minorities was enough for Russia to keep its influence on its Post-Soviet republic, but since the official declaration of the wish to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and especially after the Rose Revolution, as well as following the reforms which made Georgia's integration a real issue, Russia's politics became more aggressive and merely supporting separatists to maintain the status quo was impossible.
In 2002, at the NATO Summit of Prague, Georgia officially declared its Euro-Atlantic aspirations, thereby starting its NATO integration process.
Since 2003, following the ""Rose Revolution"" in Georgia, NATO-Georgia relations became more intense and dynamic.
This decision vividly marked a qualitatively higher level in NATO-Georgia relations and was a logical step forward from a partnership format towards the membership candidate status of Georgia.
The decision is a momentous political message on the way to Georgia's NATO membership.
To conclude, the reason why Russia invaded Georgia in 2008 was the fact that the old tool of controlling and manipulating Georgia with frozen conflicts was not effective anymore for reaching Russia's goal of keeping its influence on this Post-Soviet neighbour, since Georgia made a different choice, to integrate into western economic and security alliances, and the new reforms and development in Georgia made this a real perspective.
The main reason for the war is a geopolitical one Georgia was looking to the west and this was unacceptable for Russia.
I shall now present another two arguments to prove that Russia genuinely had as its strategic goal to stop Georgia from developing pro-western aspirations and preserve its influence on it.
Firstly, from the analysis of the ""Six Point Agreement"" which was negotiated between Georgia and Russia and which aimed to end the war between the Russian Federation and Georgia in August 2008, it results that Russia was conducting military operations outside the conflict zone, which is a clear indicator that its official reason, that of protecting its citizens in Georgia, was simply untrue, because in territories outside the South Ossetian region there were no Russian citizens.
Georgia had never recognized the passportization policy of Russia in South Ossetia and, accordingly, any person with this kind of passport would not be able to live outside South Ossetia, in the territory of Georgia that was controlled by the Georgian government.
The answer lies in what we have already mentioned, to control the whole of Georgia, change its foreign policy priorities and pro-western integration.
Moscow has strongly opposed the expansion of the Western military alliance to include former Soviet republics such as Georgia and Ukraine.
NATO promised Georgia eventual membership at a summit in 2008, but enthusiasm for Tbilisi's entry cooled after the brief war later that year, which saw Russian troops invade Georgia to protect Georgia's tiny rebel region of South Ossetia.
These similar circumstances make it possible to generalize some of the analyses and conclusions of this article in the light of the ongoing conflict in Eastern Ukraine, where ethnic minorities demand the separation from Ukraine, as it was the case of Georgia.
In the 1990s, the conflict was located inside the state of Georgia, but the 2008 war happened between two sovereign countries, Russia and Georgia, both members of the United Nations.
This means that the conflict changed from a local to an international one.
The second characteristic is the different status of Russia from what we have seen at the beginning of this article.
Russia had been the mediator in this conflict since 1990s, but after 2008 it became part of it.
To prove all this, what I have mentioned here is useful as it provides information about the Geneva talks, which mark the official international platform of negotiations after the Five-Day War in 2008.
The initiative goes back to the “Six-Point Ceasefire Plan” reached by the French President Nikolas Sarkozy and his Russian counterpart, Dmitry Medvedev, which brought to an end the military confrontation between Moscow and Tbilisi.
On Russian request, officials from Abkhazia and South Ossetia were also included in the talks.
Moscow’s demand coincided with that of the EU and OSCE, the latter also considering that the talks should be all-inclusive.
Thus, in October 2008, an international mediation process – the Geneva talks – started over the Abkhaz and South Ossetian conflicts.
The main failure of the talks has been the inability to prevent Russia from vetoing the extension of the UN and OSCE missions to Georgia’s breakaway regions.
Russia’s decision to withdraw its military troops from Perevi, a small Georgian village beyond the South Ossetian administrative border.
Hence, as we can see, unlike in the 1990s, Russia lost the status of mediator and became part of the conflict which in itself changed from a local to an international one, and this happened as a result of Georgia's choice and successful reforms after the Rose Revolution, meant to implement this new approach.
The fact that Russia became part of the conflict or, in other words, participated in this conflict as one of the parties involved, can be seen from the abovementioned chapter called ""Eruption of Clashes"", where it is shown that the Russian army invaded Georgia and was involved in a fight against the Georgian army.
The second argument is the Six Point Ceasefire agreement which was negotiated between Georgia and the Russian Federation on August 12, 2008 by Nicholas Sarkozy, President of France at that time, as the mediator between the participants in the military conflict65.
More proof that the Russian Federation is no longer a mediator is that in the Geneva Talks it does not have the status of mediator, but the same status as Georgia, which unarguably is one of the sides in the Five-Day War.
As per tradition, the main format for discussing Georgia’s occupied territories involved official parties from Georgia, the Russian Federation, as well as OSCE, UN, and EU representatives and the United States as co-chairs of the format.
I have striven to give this article a nonbiased and high scientific value, which has been my main goal.
For more thorough analyses we also need to discover how interests work according to constructivism.
The Social Construction of Power Politics,"" that: ""Identities are basis of interests.
From this, we can conclude that interests of identities are formed in the process of social interaction.
The same social interactions and perceptions of danger define enmity and friendship.
These minority groups which believe they possess different ethnic identities have the perception of danger from Georgia because of the abovementioned ethnic conflicts with Georgia at the beginning of the 20th century and in the 1990s.
They try to balance this perceived danger through the alliance with Russia and this makes them very dependent on Russia, as well because only Russia and another four countries recognize them as independent states.
Otherwise, if these conflicts are solved and Georgia is able to restore its territorial integrity, it will continue to move towards NATO until it becomes a member state.
It is in Georgia's best interest to be a member state of NATO because it provides collective security to all its member states.
This is not only the priority of a certain Georgian Government, but it is the choice of the citizens of Georgia which was approved by the plebiscite conducted on January 5, 2008.
Should Georgia pursue integration into NATO? 77.0% of Georgian citizens answered Yes.
At the beginning of the article I set out to provide an analysis from the standpoint of realism and constructivism.
When a researcher chooses only one theory it can provide good explanations for several things but there are also issues where the explanatory power of one of the theories is weak and another theory offers a better explanation.
So, the principle I have used has enabled me to exploit the potential of both theories.
I have divided the issues that would be better explained by constructivism and the other issues that would be better explained by realism.
This kind of method is correctly used if they do not produce controversial results.
But if they produce the results which answer to the researcher’s main research question and prove the hypotheses that the researcher suggests at the beginning of his/her work, the scientific value of a study will be stronger than in the case of using one theoretical school for explaining all the issues that a researcher wants to discuss.
But these local interests are partly, if not significantly influenced by the interactions at the international system level and on that level interacting actors are already independent sovereign states, and realism is the theoretical school that provides a strong explanation on the behaviour of states.
As the reader may notice, I do not support too much division between theories or explain all issues only from one theoretical perspective.
What I will do again is take the issues and explain them through the premises from realism, as a family of different dimensions.
The premises/suggestions which will be used for the explanation can derive from neo-realism, from classical realism or from other dimensions.
This makes the ongoing work issue-driven, which means that I write the work not to adjust to any of the theoretical schools or even to any dimension inside a theoretical school, but first I discuss the issue or suggest the hypothesis and then employ the theories which I believe best fit the explanation.
I will use several assumptions that Realism makes to explain the reasons why the Five-Day War erupted in Georgia in 2008 and why this case is useful for analysing the ongoing conflict in Ukraine.
This concept defines the autonomy of politics, and allows for the analysis of foreign policy regardless of the different motives, preferences, and intellectual and moral qualities of individual politicians.
Furthermore, it is the foundation of a rational picture of politics 2) International politics, like all politics, is for Morgenthau a struggle for power because of the basic human lust for power.
But regarding every individual as being engaged in a perpetual quest for power—the view that he shares with Hobbes—is a questionable premise.
In the fourth principle, Morgenthau considers the relationship between realism and ethics.
He says that while realists are aware of the moral significance of political action, they are also aware of the tension between morality and the requirements of successful political action.
Human nature could be inherently selfish and there is no chance for it to be changed.
As a result, humans will act to further their own interests even if the implementation of these interests is against and harms the interests of others.
International institutions and law play a role in international relations, but are only effective if backed by force or effective sanctions.
Another reason for this is that I have already discussed the interests of the ethnic minority groups when I explained them by means of constructivism.
As we have seen, Russia's interests were to stop NATO enlargement in Georgia and to keep its influence on Post-Soviet Georgia.
Thus, as realism says, for the states the most important driving force are interests and Russia successfully implemented/pursued its interests even though this was detrimental to the interests of Georgia and stopped NATO enlargement in Georgia.
The next assumption of realism claims that international institutions and law play some role, but are effective if they are supported by the power.
Effective sanctions also suit this case of Georgia; despite the fact that the international society and institutions recognize the territorial integrity of Georgia, Russia recognized the two breakaway regions of Georgia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia, as independent states.
The second is the Crimean Peninsula, which is now occupied by the Russian military.
The Kremlin views Ukraine’s European choice as a major security threat and the 2014 overthrow of President Viktor Yanukovych as Western-backed and aimed at isolating Russia.
It wants to keep Ukraine under its pro-Western leadership unstable, embroiled in open-ended military confrontation it cannot afford, so as to return it eventually to its sphere of influence.
Moscow often seems to play with several options, but its tactical fluidity is dangerous.
If we add the fact that has already been mentioned above, that Ukraine was promised together with Georgia to become a member of NATO, it becomes clear that the Russian Federation has the same goal in Ukraine that it had in Georgia.
These interests are to stop Ukraine's western integration and keep it under its influence.
Because Russia has similar interests in Ukraine to the ones it had in Georgia and because they show the will to use military power and even get involved in war and invade the neighbouring country to reach its interest.
Hence, there is a possibility that if Russia is not able to reach its strategic interests with the support of ethnic minorities, it will use its large army and start a full-scale war against Ukraine.
Russia will only avoid this kind of large military conflict if it sees a power and serious international support behind Ukraine; otherwise, realism says that for states, interests are the most powerful driving force and they will implement them even if they are against the interests of others.
Another assumption which I will repeat is that international institutions and law work or are effective if they are supported by power.
All OSCE member states, including Russia, have sworn to uphold these principles.
In line with such principles, Ukraine has the right to choose for itself whether it joins any treaty of alliance, including NATO's founding treaty.
This is why realism is right about institutions and law in international relations.
The reason why I believe that unlike the conflicts in eastern Ukraine, the case of Crimea is different is that Russia used another type of reasoning to invade another country, and this reason was a resurrection of historical justice.
If other countries uphold the same reasoning to resurrect historical justice, there is a high possibility that wars will erupt in various places in the world.
As a final word, I would like to mention that the goal of this article has been to analyse and discover the deeper reasons for the Five-Day War in Georgia in 2008, as well as to show the differences and similarities between the conflicts in Georgia in the 1990s and in 2008.
NAUMESCU, V /DUNGACIU, D The European Union’s Eastern Neighbourhood Today.
The Fallout, Tbilisi/Brussels, International Crisis Group, Report N°195.
The emergence of this kind of war specifically for the new globalized economy, increasingly integrated and polarized, has questioned traditional and conventional military thinking, generated a debate on the definition of the new concept of hybrid war and appropriate measures to take, in order to adapt to the new reality imposed by it.
The violent conflict between Russia and Ukraine that broke out in 2014 has become a case study for hybrid conflict thru which Russia revealed only the tip of the iceberg when it comes to reinforce its imperialistic view on foreign policy.
Russia will continue to wage a massive propaganda and information warfare campaign with the ultimate goal of undermining NATO and the EU by creating a pro-Russian narrative and even political change.
This article focuses on the Russian strategy of indirect warfare during the Ukrainian crisis, providing also an analytical overview of the political developments of relations between Russia and the EU following the 2014 events in Ukraine.
The concept of hybrid warfare is not new, and definitely was not invented by Russia.
In 1941, Adolf Hitler used a deception within a deception to surprise the Soviet Union with an invasion involving three million men, while in 1944, the Allies provided the truth with what Winston Churchill called a “bodyguard of lies” to deceive the German high command about the timing, location and size of the Normandy landings.
The Kremlin’s information war is part of Russia’s method of conducting hybrid warfare, which consists of a deliberate disinformation campaign supported by actions of the intelligence organs designed to confuse the enemy and achieve strategic advantage at minimal costs.
The nature of hybrid operations makes it very difficult to detect or even determinate ex post facto when they begin, since confusing the enemy and neutral observers is one of its core components.
It has become clear, however, that Russia is actively using its information warfare techniques in support of a hybrid-warfare effort to achieve its current objectives, namely federalization of Ukraine or Kiev’s concession of special legal status to the separatist – controlled regions of eastern Ukraine.
Russia considers Ukraine and Belarus as parts of itself, something that was lost with the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Moreover, it is considered, together with Belarus, to be a guarantee of Russia’s territorial integrity.
This explains why it expanded its borders to the West as far as possible.
For Russia, it was already difficult to accept the Baltic States becoming NATO members in 2004.
Moscow claims the West guaranteed that former Soviet republics and satellites would be left as a natural buffer zone.
In the hypothetical case of Ukraine joining NATO, the city of Belgorod that was deep inside the Soviet Union, would be on the border, and this is more than a sufficient motive for the Kremlin to take action against this hypothetical situation.
Since for Russia Ukraine is supposed to be a close ally or, at least, neutral, it considers the involvement of the United States and the European Union in Ukrainian internal affairs to be a direct confrontation to its regional interests.
Moscow is rightly convinced that Washington and Brussels were working to attract the Ukraine to their sphere of influence, ignoring Russia’s natural right to the region.
Russia’s goal has always been to make Ukraine a friendly and subordinate partner.
For the Kremlin, after the West’s interferences, this seemed to be further out of reach than ever, so Russia did exactly what it knows best, to destabilize a region in order to control its future.
In this article I will briefly revisit the causes, which generated the Ukrainian crisis, and the events up to May 2014, and then concentrate on the later intensification of the conflict and the aftermath of the ceasefire of September 5.
Strategic lessons might be drawn from this most recent stage in the conflict, looking in particular at the concept of hybrid warfare.
The third part of this essay provides an analytical overview of the political and institutional development of relations between the EU and the Russian Federation after the latter’s invasion in Ukraine.
Russian behavior during the Ukraine crisis was based on the traditional Russian idea of a sphere of influence and a special responsibility, and on the right to interfere with countries in its near abroad.
The former soviet states are nowadayssovereign countries that have developed differently and no longer have much in common.
Ukraine’s membership aspirations have been on the agenda since 2010, and NATO, as Mearsheimer suggested, did not trigger the whole crisis, the Ukraine-European Union Association Agreement provoked it.
The Russian leadership felt indeed threatened by NATO’s open door policy, but not that much as by the prospect of the EU’s soft power transforming its neighbor, the brother nation or Little Russia as Ukraine has been referred to since the 18th century.
One of the main measures taken by the Kremlin was Anatoly Serdyukov’s replacement, from the position of Minister of Defense, with Valery Gerasimov, in November 2012.
Until more will be revealed about the Russian decision-making process during the course of the Ukrainian crisis, any analysis relies on inferences about Russian President Vladimir Putin’s objective and calculations.
Putin viewed the break-up of the Soviet Union as a retrograde step” which created opportunities for Russia’s adversaries that they will not hesitate to exploit.
Against this backdrop, Moscow came to consider the overall political orientation of Ukraine as a vital interest.
Instead, it urged Ukraine to join the Russian-led Eurasian Union, an organization modeled after the EU concept, but under firm Russian leadership.
The deal between former Ukrainian president, Viktor Yanukovych, and Russia’s Vladimir Putin, also included the lowering of the price for Russian gas delivered to Ukraine, by about a third.
Putin’s intervention raised the stakes in the battle over Ukraine’s future.
It has also been suggested by former Polish Foreign Minister Radek Sikorski that this was combined with a threat to seize Crimea and possibly personal blackmail, based on evidence of the organized corruption of Ukrainian President Victor Yanukovich’s government.
Ukrainian intelligence had been aware of Russian operatives moving into Crimea earlier in the decade, with the possibility of annexation discussed from the middle of 2013, which is when the question of EU versus Eurasian Union was moving up the agenda.
However, later that day, he fled the capital for Kharkiv, travelling next to Crimea, and eventually to exile in southern Russia.
Yanukovich’s turn to Russia triggered the revolt in Kiev, the overthrow of his government and, in consequence, an apparently decisive Western turn of Ukrainian policy.
Initially, the Russians may have hoped to retain annexation as a threat to encourage Kiev to reconsider its West-oriented position, although, given the revolutionary enthusiasm in Ukraine, concessions to Moscow were less likely to happen, because when it comes to choose between an European future or one linked to Russia, it seems that the majority would prefer the first option.
The annexation of Crimea was a definitive move and introduced a problem into all later attempts to achieve a political settlement.
However, nothing concretely happened in order to force Russia to hand Crimea back, just a limited number of agitations, especially in Odessa, but they just gained a little attraction, with no concrete result.
Eventually, Russian efforts concentrated on the Donbas region and, in particular, the selfproclaimed Donetsk and Lugansk People’s Republics.
While the loss of these territorial slices directly challenged Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, unless the whole price was taken, the rest of the country would be left hostile to Russia, and more important, beyond its influence.
This would permit its embrace by the EU, and even NATO, in order to continue their approaches.
The question of why Putin took this step is of more than historical interest.
The first one is that Crimea annexation was a response to the threat of NATO’s further expansion along Russia’s western border.
The second interpretation casts the annexation of the peninsula as a part of a Russian project to gradually recapture the former territories of the Soviet Union.
The imperialist mindset of Vladimir Putin never allows him to accept the loss of Russian prestige that followed the end of the Cold War.
Doing so, Russia almost solved the problem of its naval presence in the black Sea and of its military base in Sevastopol.
Crimea relies almost entirely on Ukrainian supplies for power and water.
According to the Crimean energy ministry, the peninsula’s own power generation capacity covers less than 20% of peak demand.
In December 2014 Ukraine briefly switched off power to Crimea, so Russia considered, as a next step, annexing more Ukrainian territory (Hille and Olearchyk, 2015, Financial Times) in order to secure a land bridge between Russia and Crimea.
Also, Crimea was separated from main Russian military capabilities, thus, the peninsula is difficult to defend.
So, the security of the peninsula should be part of a new Russian strategy towards Ukraine.
The second Russian move in this crisis was the support for uprising in Eastern Ukraine.
It started in April 15, 2014, when irregular armed groups seized a couple of cities in the Donetsk region.
Soon, this uprising escalated in a full-scale war between separatist military forces and the Ukrainian army.
The causes of the uprising could be considered the desire of Donetsk and Lugansk regions to become federal entities in Ukraine.
Journalists reported that applications for Russian passports in Eastern Ukraine were being encouraged with food packages , so this action increased the number of Russian citizens that have to be protected.
In the beginning, one explanation was that Russian soldiers turned up in Eastern Ukraine by mistake.
After the battle for Donetsk Airport on May 26, the official narrative changed.
With Russia’s true ambitions still unclear, the controversial concept of “Novorossiya” emerged and the people’s governor Pavel Gubarev proclaimed it on May 24, 2014.
The Kremlin began in 2013 to set up a pool of rapid deployment forces, in order to be able to intervene in its neighborhood.
These well-equipped, welltrained, modern forces consist of Airborne Forces , Marines , GRU Intelligence Special Forces brigades, three or four elite Ground Forces units, as well as air and naval support.
The conflict became less of an external sponsored insurgency in eastern Ukraine and more of a limited war between Ukraine and Russia.
Russian information war is part of Moscow’s method of conducting hybrid warfare, which consists of a deliberate disinformation campaign supported by actions of the intelligence organs designed to confuse the enemy and achieve strategic advantage at minimal cost.
The nature of hybrid war operations makes it very difficult to detect or even determinate ex post facto when they begin, since confusing enemy and neutral observers is one of its core components.
Russia’s information warfare approach is designed to work within the limitation of the 21st century strategic environment and within Russia’s budget constraints.
The crisis in Ukraine turned into a hybrid war not only and so much because of a combination of forms of warfare – the use of Russian army special forces or elite units, supported by volunteers and irregular groups formed by loyal elements of the local population and former law enforcement officers against Ukrainian volunteer battalions and the regular Ukrainian army.
Russia’s Regional Strategic View At the very beginning of his term, Vladimir Putin suggested Russia should reassure its role in a multipolar world, one where no single regime has sovereignty.
Although there were clear signs of deepening the Eurasian trend in Russian foreign policy, Putin also tried to develop friendly ties with the West, especially with the United States.
The United States – Russian Strategic Stability Cooperation Initiative of 2000 is one example.
Moreover, NATO has wiped out politically and militarily most of Russia’s natural potential allies.
This can be exemplified by NATO’s expansion into the former Warsaw Pact space.
Since there are many factors outside Russia’s control, Vladimir Putin believes external factors can influence internal ones, and result in Russia’s crush.
Historically, Russia succeeded to use its influence on separatist authorities of Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and even Nagorno-Karabakh, as leverage to control internal and foreign policies of former Soviet Union states.
So, Russia successfully blocked all attempts of some former Soviet Union states to join NATO and EU because of unsolved territorial conflicts.
Second, usually Russia plays key roles in negotiations between separatist and central powers in the post-soviet area.
Also Russia is a member of 5+2 format negotiations on the Transnistrian conflict, is a part of the Minsk group on Nagorno-Karabakh, and it deployed its peacekeeping forces in Transnistria, South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
The Kremlin pushed this kind of solution in the Ukraine but President Petro Poroshenko quickly rejected this proposal.
Third, the regional actors need to pay attention to what kind of separatism was the Russian Spring in Eastern Ukraine.
Ideologically it has a pro-Russian, anti-Ukrainian and anti-Western appeal, and the creation of a region, even an independent state if possible, in order to ensure the security of the new-annexed Crimea and become a buffer zone between Russia and the West.
Yet, the Novorossiya project failed , as well as Russians hopes to build a land corridor to Crimea and a friendly buffer zone.
In terms of prosperity and the quality of life, pre-war Donbas was essentially on par with Kiev, significantly surpassing other Ukrainian and most Russian regions.
The Eastern Ukraine is also very important for Moscow because twelve types of Russian intercontinental ballistic missiles, along with spare parts and maintenance, come from the city of Dnepropetrovsk.
Fourth, the war in Eastern Ukraine caused additional pressures on the Ukrainian economy.
Also, because of this war, Ukraine became more dependent on Russian energy imports, because all its coalmines were situated in the Donetsk region.
President Poroshenko affirmed, for several publications, such as International Business Times, The Moscow Times or Newsweek, that every day of war Ukraine is spending 6-7 million dollars , without mentioning on which means, but one can assume that it is on military costs, army maintenance, the usual costs of war.
Russia succeeded to establish a couple of comfortable negotiation groups to deal with this crisis.
Rising complaints against Russian use of force in the Ukraine, as well as three waves of sanctions against Russia, proved that Moscow strongly needs a diplomatic formula to solve this crisis.
However, the success of all negotiations depends on partners and on format.
The group has been in existence since 2014 and has been the principal international mechanism for settlement of the Ukrainian crisis.
It is the “Four” who made the key political decisions while the OSCE Contact Group that played the first violin in the political settlement process back in the summer of 2014 was repurposed into technical executive.
The main decision – basically the only document hammered out by this group – is the so-called Minsk II Agreement, stressing the complex of measures for realization of the Minsk Agreements and containing the chief principle of political settlement of the Ukrainian conflict.
Excluding Poland and the United States from this group was a net gain for the Kremlin, because the latter would have supported a hard line position towards Russia, and by excluding Poland and the EU, Russia managed to isolate Ukraine.
The Minsk groups also were very comfortable for Russia, consisting of Ukraine, Donetsk and Lugansk separatist republics, OSCE and Russia.
The Minsk Agreements were signed on September 5, 2014, at the peak of the armed conflict between Ukraine and the unrecognized rebel republics in its Donbas region, calling on the sides to stop the clashes.
This approach helped to solve some low-politics issues and to establish a solid base of dialogue between Kiev and separatist regions, but, without Russia, the OSCE cannot realize important steps to solve the conflict.
Therefore, the Normandy 4 and Minsk formats are Russian net gains from this crisis, because Russia preserves the veto on the Ukrainian rapprochement with the EU, it discusses the Ukrainian problem directly with Germany and preserves its rights to be the arbiter in the conflict.
The EU is not facing such a choice yet, but there is a context in which the political choices currently being made are degrading the principles and the integrity of European politics.
The crisis in the Ukraine can be seen as a culmination of a negative trend from the post-Cold War era.
Armenia, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine were on Vladimir Putin’s list, but the real target and prize of Russia’s actions was Ukraine.
Putin’s power play in Ukraine was impulsive and improvised, but recognizing the limitations of Russia’s hybrid warfare is as important as recognizing its strengths.
Its success depends heavily on certain conditions holding in the minds of the adversary.
Hybrid warfare relies for success on taking advantage of the vulnerabilities of a stronger adversary.
Russian information warfare, particularly the doctrine of reflexive control, is a critical component of Russia’s hybrid warfare.
It plays on the reluctance of the Western leaders and peoples to involve themselves in conflict by surrounding it with confusion and controversy.
In the case of Ukraine, the West chooses inaction, and Russia’s information operations have provided support to the policy of inaction.
It was not until the shooting down of Malaysian Airlines passenger flight MH-17, on July 17, 2014, however, that the EU was forced to take a tougher stand.
At the end of July 2014, the EU agreed to impose tier three sanctions, a shift from a focus on sanctioning individuals to sanctioning key sectors in the economy.
This restricted Russia’s access to capital markets in the EU, prohibiting the buying or selling of bonds and equity as well as services.
The extension of sanctions signaled to the Russian leadership the status regarding sanction would continue, meaning that the EU will not give up easily in front of this type of aggression.
Combined with low oil prices, which is the real reason for Russian political nervousness, sanctions diminish Russian fiscal reserves and endanger its economic policies at home.
It is also true that sanctions, low oil prices or diplomatic talks will not change Russian policies regarding its neighbors.
This would be a situation that entails serious dangers for the EU and Russia as well as the countries residing in-between.
The rhetorical flirtations with Russia’s basic incompatibility with Western “repugnant liberalism” already evident before the crisis have been followed with an all-rhetorical assault combined with determined steps to use the full spectrum of Russian power to counter the EU’s influence in Ukraine.
To a degree, the crisis in Ukraine is in fact a proxy conflict between the EU and Russia.
To summarize, what some are seeing as a surprise in recent Russian politics is, in fact, the outcome of the carefully tailored policies of the current Russian leadership, which claims to draw its legitimacy from a special path of Russian development.
The EU internal split on Russian policy is less obvious, but it exists, and Russian intervention in the Ukraine remains a fact with unforeseeable consequences also internally in the EU, itself being challenged domestically, by financial crises, the refugee crisis, the Brexit file, apathy regarding deeper internal integration, or by the rise of the populist right.
Letter to Lloyd George on 13 August 1938, just before the Munich Conference.
GILBERT, M , Winston S Churchill, companion volume V, part 3: the coming of war 1936– 1939, London: Heinemann.
How the Russian Leader Used the Ukraine Crises to Consolidate His Dictatorship.
