Through an analysis of notions such as “status quo” and international law (in terms of who violated it), I attempt to show that Russia’s actions in Eastern Ukraine qualify as offensive coercion.
Backed up by force, Russia demanded that Ukraine implement a decentralization process and grant a part of Eastern Ukraine special status.
Knowing that Russia’s aim is to use Donbas as an instrument to control its political future, Ukraine refused to acquiesce to Russia’s demand without restoring its sovereignty in Eastern Ukraine.
With both sides refusing to budge, the crisis turned into a zero-sum game.
This article seeks to contribute to research on coercive diplomacy by focusing on offensive coercion.
Russia, Ukraine, Offensive Coercive Diplomacy, Alexander George, International Crisis, Foreign Policy, Eastern Ukraine, Donbas.
El uso de Rusia de la diplomacia ofensiva coercitiva contra Ucrania Basándose en el concepto de diplomacia ofensiva coercitiva, este artículo examina la estrategia de Rusia en el conflicto en Ucrania del Este y aborda la cuestión de por qué Rusia no ha logrado sus objetivos.
A través del un análisis de nociones como el “status quo” y el derecho internacional (en términos de quién lo violó), intentaré demostrar que las acciones de Rusia en Ucrania del Este califican como coerción ofensiva.
Sabiendo que el objetivo de Rusia es utilizar a Donbas como un instrumento para controlar su futuro político, Ucrania se negó a aceptar la demanda de Rusia sin restaurar su soberanía en Ucrania del Este.
Con ambas partes negándose a ceder, la crisis se convirtió en un juego de suma cero.
Este artículo busca contribuir a la investigación sobre la diplomacia coercitiva enfocándose en la coerción ofensiva.
Rusia, Ucrania, Diplomacia coercitiva ofensiva, Relaciones bilaterales, Política exterior, Donbas.
U kraine’s then-President Victor Yanukovych’s refusal to sign an Association Agreement with the European Union led to the beginning of a serious crisis in Ukraine.
After months of unrest in the country, Ukraine’s Parliament removed Yanukovych from office on February 21, 2014.
This act was followed by Russia’s military interventions in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine.
Through a skillfully executed operation, Russia invaded Crimea, which it then annexed following a controversial referendum.
However, they have consistently denied Russia’s military involvement in the conflict in Eastern Ukraine, despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary.
Alexander George , who coined this term, divided the concept into offensive and defensive variants.
As George himself focused on the defensive variant and subsequently most authors opted to use coercive diplomacy as a general label without making a distinction between offense and defense, offensive coercion has remained an underexplored concept.
It is asserted here that Russia’s strategy in Eastern Ukraine fits the pattern of offensive coercion.
George underlines these notions to make an aggressor–defender distinction in international crises.
I show that Russia employed military force against Ukraine in breach of international law with the intention of forcing its disputant to implement a decentralization process and grant separatist-controlled areas in Donbas autonomy.
Russia’s aim was to secure an enclave in Eastern Ukraine that it could use as a lever to control Ukraine’s political future.
Through the use of force, Russia also violated the agreements it had signed with Ukraine, thus disregarding its commitments to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty, borders, and territorial integrity.
The fact that Russia’s actions constitute an offense is evident in its denial of its military activities in Eastern Ukraine.
Unlike its Crimea operation, for which Russia sought legitimacy by referring to certain principles of international law , in Eastern Ukraine it adapted an approach based on strategic denial, which arguably amounts to a tacit acknowledgment by Russia of the offensive characteristics of its actions.
I aim to emphasize that making the offense–defense distinction in coercive diplomacy, as proposed by George but overlooked by his followers, is necessary because it enables one to make more astute assessments about coercive strategies.
As Russia pursued a strategy of offensive coercion with the aim of turning Eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region into a tool of Russian leverage, it found a highly motivated opponent who strove to deny the coercer the ability to obtain a sphere of influence inside its borders.
This involved ensuring the continuation of western sanctions against Russia, which, as requested by the West, required showing a political will that demonstrated that Ukraine wanted to resolve the crisis peacefully.
As a proof of this will, Ukraine enacted certain legislation regarding separatist-controlled areas.
Due to Ukraine’s continuing refusal to settle the conflict in a way that favors its opponent, Russia also found itself having to bear the cost of keeping war-torn Donbas as a functioning region.
In defensive “coercive diplomatic gambits” (Art and Greenhill 2018, 16), mechanisms such as the carrot-and-stick method can serve functional roles in facilitating a peaceful resolution to crises.
In cases of offensive coercion, however, as the present work illustrates, there is a high likelihood that the crisis will turn into a zero-sum game, because the coercer’s acts will likely have implications for the survival, territorial integrity, or political sovereignty of the target country.
This explains why Russia has been unable to exact compliance from Kiev regarding Eastern Ukraine.
Russia’s coercive gambit is made more difficult by the fact that it had already annexed a part of the disputant’s territory , thus strengthening Ukraine’s resolve to resist Russia’s demands regarding its Eastern Ukraine regions.
Overall, I aim to show why Russia’s strategy in Eastern Ukraine must be understood in the context of offensive coercion.
I also seek to explain the implications of this chosen strategy with reference to the question of why Russia has been unable to bring its coercive campaign to a successful conclusion.
First, I clarify offensive and defensive forms of coercion and show why making a distinction between offense and defense in coercive diplomacy is necessary.
Second, I discuss Russia’s coercive diplomatic gambit in Eastern Ukraine through an analysis of how it evolved through different phases.
Third, I collate the factors that led to the collapse of the status quo in Russia– Ukraine relations with reference to international law.
Finally, I present an argument on the prospects of success for Russia’s coercive diplomacy in Eastern Ukraine.
The Offense-Defense Distinction in Coercive Diplomacy When George conceptualized coercive diplomacy as a form of forceful persuasion, he drew a distinction between offensive and defensive forms of coercive strategies employed in international crises.
Employing a carrot-and-stick approach when necessary, coercive diplomacy, as developed by George, serves an alternative strategy, one that enables actors to achieve the desired outcomes without resorting to war.
Some authors nevertheless find it problematic to associate coercive diplomacy with defensive behavior due to the difficulty of making a clear-cut distinction between offense and defense.
By drawing on George’s conceptualization, an objective standpoint can be found, however, to distinguish between offensive and defensive forms of coercion.
Such an attempt is analytically useful because, by identifying the position of the coercer , one can make better judgments about the characteristics of coercion and thus more accurate judgments concerning the prospect for its success or failure.
The target country is expected to show greater resistance to an “aggressive” demand, such as territory or regime change, than to a “modest” demand, such as cooperating with the coercer to end the crisis on terms that are acceptable to both sides.
Conversely, attempts to overturn the status quo via a fait accompli point to the employment of offensive coercion.
George also notes that, to ascertain the opponent’s motives, it is imperative for policy makers to examine the disputant’s attitude toward established norms and rules in the international system.
Hence, attitudes to the principles of international law are a useful indicator in judging an actor’s tendency to adhere to the status quo.
Actors’ approaches to international agreements and/or treaties serve a similar function.
Maintaining the stability in interstate relations provided by signed agreements requires a commitment that both sides will continue to honor them.
However, states may withdraw from agreements or act in violation of the commitments stipulated in them.
States may produce justifications for violating the obligations arising from international agreements by declaring, for example, that they had signed them under pressure or the terms of the agreement in question are no longer applicable.
Despite such justifications, other signatory countries may find the abrogation of an agreement threatening, especially when the agreement concerns security-related issues.
Of course, there are cases where a mutually agreed-upon status quo is absent such as the Aegean and Kashmir disputes involving Turkey–Greece and Pakistan–India, respectively.
In sum, George’s offense–defense distinction offers a useful perspective through which coercive diplomatic gambits can be analyzed.
In making this distinction, one must try to find an objective standpoint, which requires paying less attention to how the protagonist describes its position and actions—because states almost always present themselves as defensive.
Given this tendency of states, even if an action is conspicuously and overtly offensive and results in the violation of another state’s sovereignty or territorial integrity, states tend to portray their actions as defensive.
A better way of determining whether the coercer has engaged in offensive or defensive coercion requires an examination of which side is responsible for the breakdown of a status quo.
Russia’s Coercive Campaign in Eastern Ukraine To provide a thorough analysis of Russia’s coercive campaign in Eastern Ukraine, it is necessary to emphasize, first and foremost, that Russia’s activities in this region were a direct continuation of what was undertaken in Crimea.
Highlighting some key individuals that played instrumental roles in both Crimea and Eastern Ukraine on behalf of Russia would suffice to underpin this contention.
When Russia commenced its military operation against Ukraine in Crimea, it was the Russian Black Sea Fleet troops that played the leading role in the occupation of the peninsula.
However, other pro-Russian elements also contributed to the operation by providing leadership and manpower.
Igor Girkin, an ex-GRU/FSB employee, was one of the leaders who took part in the occupation of Crimea.
Pro-Russian militants thus played an active role in the creation of a new political order in the peninsula.
Girkin and his 52 combatants’ arrival in Slovyansk was significant for the separatist insurgency in Eastern Ukraine, as, through manpower and “organizational expertise” , they were able to add momentum to a rebellion that had proved weak and ineffective during the early stages.
The Russian leadership also made clear that it was ready to protect this population.
With the emergence of a separatist movement in Eastern Ukraine, Moscow conveyed certain demands to Kiev and expected its counterpart to fulfill them.
By questioning the sustainability of a unified Ukrainian state, Russia signaled its intention to push for political decentralization.
According to Matveeva , individuals like Gubarev came to Russia’s attention after they had initiated a separatist movement against Kiev.
Nevertheless, Russia seized upon the separatist momentum and demanded Ukraine address local population’s grievances, as expressed by the self-declared mayors.
Russian leaders’ statements served to underpin the “political warfare” that was being waged at this stage.
In the midst of these events, Ukraine’s acting President Oleksandr Turchynov announced the beginning of an Anti-Terrorist Operation on April 15, 2014.
Russia increased its military involvement in the conflict in the face of the Ukrainian army’s advances.
Through such deeds, Russia engaged in “demonstrative military action” , signaling to Ukraine that it could escalate the pressure if its demands remained unmet.
Despite weapons and manpower provided by Russia, its military actions proved insufficient in stopping Ukraine’s advances.
Ukraine remained adamant about restoring its territorial integrity, despite softening its stance on certain occasions, such as declaring ceasefires as happened in June 2014.
Aware of Russia’s unwillingness for a broader military involvement, Ukraine, battle-hardened by then, made critical attempts to seize control of the border.
It had become clear in Ilovaisk that, even if it required carrying out conventional interventions, Russia would not allow the Ukrainian army to seize strategically important locations.
In the case of Ukraine, having suffered crushing defeats in Ilovaisk and Debaltseve, Kiev felt compelled to sign two separate Minsk agreements in their aftermath, which proves Russia’s success in exacting compliance.
The second agreement, the currently in force, was signed on February 12, 2015, and contains 13 provisions.
Collapse of the Status Quo in Russia–Ukraine Relations Despite its military activities in Eastern Ukraine, Russia has never admitted its involvement in the conflict.
After annexing Crimea, Russia provided various explanations to justify its military actions.
Given the presence of Black Sea Fleet troops in Sevastopol and their obvious role in the occupation of Crimea, a denial strategy was not applicable.
However, with regard to Donbas, an approach based on “strategic denial” was espoused .3 3Although the phrase “strategic denial” was employed by Burke to explain Russia’s policy during the Crimea operation, it is better suited for the case of Eastern Ukraine.
Similarly, Russia could not refer to the principle of self-defense because it never admitted to using force in Eastern Ukraine.
However, despite Russian leaders’ denials, separatist leaders on certain occasions did admit to the presence of Russian troops in Eastern Ukraine.
UN resolution 2625, adopted in 1970, has key stipulations relevant to the subject matter.
Every State has the duty to refrain from organizing or encouraging the organization of irregular forces or armed bands including mercenaries, for incursion into the territory of another State.
Russia’s supply of fighters and weapons on a continuous basis to an armed insurgency in Donbas, as well its direct interventions against Ukraine, constitutes a clear violation of these resolutions.
By using force against Ukraine, Russia overturned the status quo sustained by various bilateral and multilateral agreements.
As the conflict unfolded in Eastern Ukraine, the United States and the United Kingdom, not legally bound to help Ukraine, provided only limited support in the form of non-lethal aid.
Despite this approach, Russian leaders continued to deny the Russian military’s role in the conflict in Eastern Ukraine, which can be interpreted as a tacit acknowledgment of the illegitimacy of their actions.
However, the provision of such assistance was never admitted and Russia continued to present the armed conflict in Eastern Ukraine as an internal affair.
Prospects for Success Russia’s coercive gambit proved successful in persuading the Ukrainian government to seek a non-military solution to the crisis, which resulted in the signing of two separate Minsk agreements.
However, this arduous and lengthy process imposed significant costs on Russia politically and economically.
Moreover, as the key provisions of the Minsk Agreement have not been implemented yet, it is not clear whether Russia will be able to realize its ultimate objectives regarding Eastern Ukraine.
Aware of the difficulties of exacting compliance from the target country through coercion and the costs of conducting a comprehensive coercive campaign , Russia itself had decided to scale back its goals in Eastern Ukraine by choosing Donbas as the only area to be secured from Ukraine.
Ukraine’s motivation was a key factor in this process, as Russia found itself facing an opponent more formidable than expected.
Although in the early phase of the crisis Ukraine lacked the combat readiness it needed to deal with an armed insurgency, it soon gathered enough strength to take on the Russian-backed separatists in Eastern Ukraine.
The main development that fueled Ukraine’s motivation was the loss of Crimea.
From Ukraine’s perspective, the pro-Russian mobilization in Eastern Ukraine was a continuation of the separatist trend that had started in Crimea.
As the separatist wave reached Eastern Ukraine, Ukraine faced not just the prospect of the loss of Donbas but also that of Kharkiv, Dnipro, Kherson, Zaporizhia, and Odessa.
Compared to its Crimea operation, then, the main reason for Russia encountering a difficult conflict in Eastern Ukraine is Ukraine’s motivation to put up a determined struggle.
Only with conventional interventions by Russia could the Ukrainian army’s further advances be stopped.
Although Russia managed to secure Donbas from Ukraine, it found itself in a position of having to shoulder the economic burden of keeping the region as a functioning entity.
Damaged infrastructure in separatist-controlled areas adds another layer of difficulty to Russia’s efforts to create a viable living environment.
Moreover, with the MH17 incident, Russia’s relations with the West took a notable downturn.
Given the close economic ties between Russia and the EU, European economic measures in finance and energy sectors against Russia put a strain on the latter’s economy.
The EU also took steps that have contributed to Ukraine’s geopolitical estrangement from Russia.
Despite the unrest in Ukraine following the ousting of Yanukovych, the EU did not backtrack on its plans to sign an Association Agreement with Ukraine.
The agreement, which was finally signed on June 27, 2014, came into effect on September 1, 2017.
Although the Association Agreement does not envisage membership per se, Ukraine’s implementation of its provisions has facilitated its westward orientation.
Visa-free travel for Ukrainian citizens and Ukraine’s access to the European Single Market are landmark events in this process.
Ukraine’s increasing estrangement from Russia is visible in other areas.
A symbolically significant moment was the Ukrainian Orthodox Church’s split from the Moscow Patriarchate in January 2019.
During the post-Minsk phase, Ukraine further hardened its stance toward Russia by passing a law known as the “reintegration of Donbas,” approved by Poroshenko on February 20, 2018.
Shortly after the passing of the reintegration law, Ukraine announced the end of the ATO and its replacement with Joint Forces Operation.
Ukraine’s hardened resolve demonstrates the difficulties encountered by Russia during its coercive campaign.
Since the removal of Yanukovych, Russia’s main demand from Ukraine has been to adopt a decentralized system, which would enable Ukraine’s eastern regions to have relative autonomy.
Although the word “autonomy” is not mentioned in the Minsk Agreement, for a peaceful political settlement, Putin has emphasized the necessity of granting self-declared republics “autonomous rights” through constitutional amendments.
Kiev has rejected this demand because it understands that making constitutional changes without restoring security in Donbas would mean ceding control of the region to Russia’s proxies.
They would, in turn, become legitimate political actors because they would be guaranteed to win local elections.
For Kiev, only after fulfilling the necessary safety conditions and requirements, will it be possible for political parties to undertake electoral activities in the region.
Differences over priorities reveal that the situation in Eastern Ukraine takes on the characteristics of a zero-sum game.
As the coercer forces the target state to accept diminished sovereignty over a part of its territory so it can gain a sphere of influence within its borders, there is a high likelihood that, as the case of Ukraine proves, the coercer’s plans will be met with resistance.
In cases of offensive coercion, as the coercer’s actions will likely have implications for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the target country, concepts such as “proportionality” and the “carrot-and-stick approach” lose their functionality.
Ukraine understands that handing the control of Donbas over to Russian-backed separatists would mean that Russia will retain leverage with which to influence its internal political dynamics.
During the pre–Ukraine crisis period, when Russia wanted to apply pressure on Ukraine, it used Crimea for this purpose.
Crimea’s annexation rendered the peninsula a de facto Russian territory, indicating a loss of ability for Russia to exert influence on Ukraine from within.
But Donbas has the required characteristics to serve a similar function as Crimea.
Moscow’s plans to transform Donbas into a type of Russian leverage meant Ukraine needed to be prevented from defeating the separatists.
Although Russia achieved this goal, as time progressed, Ukraine realized that the stalemate in Donbas had also imposed costs on Russia and therefore refused to settle the conflict in a way that would favor its coercer.
The post-Minsk phase witnessed Ukraine’s employment of counter-coercion against Russia, for which western support is crucial.
In addition to seeking the West’s political and diplomatic support, Ukraine is also playing its part to ensure that the West maintains its sanctions against Russia.
To demonstrate its willingness for a political settlement, as outlined in two separate Minsk agreements, Ukraine has taken certain steps such as the passing of two separate laws in September 2014.
The passing of this law is an attempt to prove that Ukraine maintains the political will it had demonstrated in 2014 for a political settlement and that it is committed to the Minsk process.
As Ukraine refuses to implement constitutional reforms without restoring its territorial integrity, the likelihood of Donbas turning into a frozen conflict increases with each day.
That scenario means that the region would become a geopolitical burden for Russia.
Conclusion This article offered an in-depth explanation of Russia’s strategy in Eastern Ukraine, drawing on the concept of coercive diplomacy.
I argued that Russia has engaged in offensive coercion against Ukraine by forcing its disputant to enact constitutional changes aimed at decentralization and granting a part of its territory autonomy.
While Russia pursued this goal, it violated general principles of international law by resorting to the use of force against another sovereign state.
But it also violated agreements it had signed with Ukraine, in which it had made various commitments to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty, borders, and territorial integrity, and had promised not to resort to the threat or the actual use of force against Ukraine except in self-defense.
Key notions underlined by George to make a distinction between offense and defense—such as legitimacy, status quo, and international law—reveal that Russia’s actions against Ukraine suggest the use of offensive coercion.
Unlike the goal it pursued in Crimea, the purpose of Russia’s coercive gambit in Eastern Ukraine was not to gain territory but to secure an enclave with which to control Ukraine’s political future.
In the pursuit of this objective, Russia took Ukraine’s Russian-speaking population as its referent and demanded Ukraine address these people’s grievances following the ousting of Yanukovych.
Russia’s military actions have taken a heavy toll on Ukraine, causing it to lose more than 13,000 people as well as parts of its territory.
The fact that Russia has refused to acknowledge its military activities in Eastern Ukraine demonstrates the illegitimacy and offensiveness of its actions.
With reference to George’s offense–defense distinction, the offensive characteristic of Russia’s coercive campaign lies in that it retains no strategic or moral high ground to justify its military activities because it lacks the legal right to employ military force against the target country.
As Ukraine attempted to put down an armed uprising inside its borders and stop further territorial losses after Crimea, Russia prevented Ukraine from achieving this objective by defeating the Ukrainian forces, as witnessed in Ilovaisk and Debaltseve.
Russia’s offensive coercive gambit, however, encountered serious difficulties.
Having lost Crimea already to Russia, Ukraine waged a determined military campaign not to lose more land in Eastern Ukraine.
In the face of Ukraine’s determination, Russia minimized its goals in Eastern Ukraine and chose Donbas as the only area to be secured from Ukraine.
Facing western sanctions and bearing the costs of keeping the DPR and LPR as functioning entities, Russia’s coercive campaign has proven to be a much more arduous and costly undertaking than its Crimea operation.
I have emphasized that George’s division of coercive diplomacy into offensive and defensive variants offers a useful framework in the analysis of coercion, and Russia’s coercive gambit in Eastern Ukraine is indicative of the necessity of making this distinction.
Some authors have remained skeptical of the idea of making offense–defense distinction in the analysis of coercive diplomacy, arguing that what is offensive and defensive are determined by the subjective viewpoints of actors involved in an international crisis.
It is asserted in this article that actors may be aware that their position is indefensible, even though rhetorically they may produce justificatory statements to defend their position.
Expectedly, Turkey’s offensive coercive diplomacy has been a failure in this case, as the Assad government is still in power.
With more case studies, more rigorous assessments can be made on the success ratios of offensive and defensive coercive diplomatic gambits.
The likelihood of success in cases of defensive coercion is expected to be higher than those of offensive coercion.
If the coercer engages in acts that have implications for the target state’s sovereignty, territorial integrity, constitutional order, or regime, coercion is much more likely to be met with resistance.
This analytical context explains why Russia faced formidable difficulties in its coercive campaign in Eastern Ukraine.
Russia’s coercive gambit succeeded in bringing Ukraine to the negotiation table to solve the crisis through dialogue.
However, Ukraine has consistently refused to take the required political step, which means implementing the key provisions of the Minsk Agreement, without restoring its sovereignty over Donbas.
And Russia has continued to insist that constitutional changes be implemented by Ukraine and elections be held in Donbas to bring an end to the conflict.
With both sides refusing to budge, the crisis has become a zero-sum game.
Russia cannot convince Ukraine that its demands are proportional, especially after invading Crimea.
Nor can it utilize a carrot-and-stick approach to persuade Ukraine to soften its position.
The likelihood of Russia’s coercive diplomatic gambit delivering the desired outcome is uncertain at best.
In a bid to demonstrate his willingness to end the conflict in Donbas, Ukraine’s new president, Volodymyr Zelensky, reached an agreement with Russia on troop withdrawal and prisoner exchange.
As the fulfillment of this condition would amount to a failure of Russia’s coercive campaign, the prospect of ending the stalemate over Donbas remains uncertain.
The argument developed in this article also has implications for policy makers that might engage in acts of offensive coercion.
Actors have a higher chance of succeeding, if they prosecute and complete their offensive coercive campaigns swiftly.
The Crimea operation is a case in point because Russia seized the peninsula through a swiftly executed fait accompli, enabled by its already-present military units on the ground.
The second scenario would occur when the target country manages to resist the coercer’s demands and even engages in counter-coercion, thus imposing costs on the coercer.
It is also important to emphasize given Russia’s actions in Eastern Ukraine that balance of motivation is perhaps as important as balance of power in coercive campaigns.
It is in this respect that policy makers in coercing states must ponder beforehand how their request would be viewed by the target country, which would consist of various political and societal actors.
Because the issue at hand will involve something of value to the target country in cases of offensive coercion, political leadership in the target country may come under significant pressure from societal actors to defend their country’s rights and dignity in the face of coercer’s actions.
As the Ukraine case proves, a coercer’s actions may galvanize nationalist feelings and foster internal unity in the target country, thus complicating coercer’s plans to realize its objective.
Moreover, as the state prosecuting offensive coercive diplomacy lacks the means to justify its actions on legitimate grounds, there is a very low likelihood that it can employ diplomacy as an effective instrument.
Russia had this opportunity, as it had relied mainly on proxy forces and this would have allowed it to reverse course when it had become clear that Donbas would be a chaotic conflict zone.
But as a result of misjudgment, Russia further immersed itself in the conflict and ended up incurring significant costs.
In United States and Coercive Diplomacy, edited by Robert J Art and Patrick M Cronin, 3–20.
In Coercion the Power to Hurt in International Politics, edited by Kelly M Greenhill and Peter Krause, 3–32.
Center for Transatlantic Relations & German Council on Foreign Relations.
