Col McLay served as the Commander of the 98th Flying Training Squadron and Air Force Parachute Team.
In the final analysis, it is only through resolute action in implementing policy recommendations that encompass all instruments of power that the United States and NATO will be able to effectively deter Russian aggression and achieve their strategic interests in the region. iv Introduction Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and swift annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in 2014 put the West on notice.
NATO Membership and Article 5 Following independence from the Soviet Union in 1991, the Baltic nations moved quickly to cement links with the United States and Western Europe through membership in NATO in 2004.17 The U.S., in particular, led the push to secure early NATO membership for the Baltic republics.
Therefore, Russia’s main interest in the Baltic nations appears to be rooted in reviving nationalist pride and countering the humiliation of witnessing former republics join Russia’s main rival for regional influence, NATO.22 Indeed, Putin and Russian elites view the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 as “the greatest catastrophe of the 20th century” and a cause for continuing embarrassment.
As the primary architect of the Alliance, the United States has championed NATO, even after its primary raison d'être – countering Soviet Communist expansionism – no longer existed.
President Bill Clinton led diplomatic efforts to bring the Baltic republics to the forefront of NATO’s second round of expansion in 2004.32 Since that time, prominent United States leaders and academics alike have criticized this expansion into former Soviet republics as a reckless “political act, not a carefully considered 7 military commitment” which ignored Russia’s vital interests.
Underlying Schelling’s criteria is an important assumption that the object of deterrence must be capable of rationally considering the consequences stemming from the threatened use of force.
Tellingly, after the Baltic States gained their independence, some ethnic Russian residents were never granted “full citizenship”.42 This could become a point of exploitation, especially considering Russia’s use of ethnic Russians or Russo-phone Ukrainians living in the Donbass region of Ukraine.
When such events become apparent, the NAC must decide whether to act or accept the risk from inaction.
For example, a predetermined trigger might come in the form of positive identification of a Russian conventional military presence in the Baltic republics.
Third, the United States should contribute assets such as Close Air Support aircraft and Air Defense assets to the Baltic States, which would have a strong deterrent effect, demonstrate U.S. commitment to the region, and be readily available if military hostilities were initiated.
In light of the hybrid threats these nations face, the U.S. should make its economic assistance targeted and conditional on actions that minimize the Baltic states’ vulnerabilities.
