THE ANNEXATION In 2014, the Ukrainian Revolution overthrew MoscowOF CRIMEA backed president Viktor Yanukovych.
Russian troops The Crimean Peninsula in Ukraine was militarily annexed the Crimean Peninsula and invaded Ukraine’s annexed by Russia over February and March 2014. eastern Donbas region.
Since then, Ukraine has been Since that time, the region has been administered by engaged in open conflict with Russia.
The Crimea annexation is a part of the overall Russian This conflict has involved offensive military operations military intervention that took place in the aftermath alongside a campaign to discredit, undermine and of the 2014 Ukrainian revolution which includes the deploy information warfare against Ukraine.
Guide suggests that Russian disinformation does not operate according to a playbook, but is rather piecemeal Putin denied existence of Russian troops in Crimea and opportunist, involving a multitude of actors and for one year.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY RUSSIA AND DISINFORMATION Moreover, the GRU launched a covert influence Missile Brigade of the Russian Army.
The missile operation in Crimea the aim of which was to impact system was found to have been moved from Russian to key decision-makers and the broader public, paving Ukrainian territory before the downing of the MH17, the way for the military action, which began on 27 and afterwards, was taken back to Russia.
Numerous fake personas were created to after the downing of the MH17, the Russian government represent ordinary Ukrainians from across the country and its separatist allies in Ukraine’s east obstructed who were disenchanted with Kyiv’s opposition protests. access to the crash site for investigators.
These ‘paid trolls’ targeted comment sections on online articles, as well as on social media platforms of Twitter, The Russian disinformation deployed around the VKontakte, and Facebook – all weakly regulated spaces. downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight MH17 consisted The fact that the psyops in Ukraine appears to be GRUof a barrage of falsehoods.
Russia’s UN ambassador, led – hence separate from the Kremlin and the Russian glossing over how the MH17 was downed, said Russia Armed Forces – suggests that the GRU is proficient at ‘fully blames Kyiv’ for all the unrest in the region and the mixing of overt force and psyops, using technology. foreign minister Sergei Lavrov, rejecting Ukrainian claims that Russia was responsible for the attack.
The disinformation launched and misgivings about Western media and politicians’ during this campaign was not aimed to rally audiences accusations as well as Kyiv’s responsibility in the to Russia’s point of view, but to exacerbate social events.
This disinformation is now in the public domain, tensions and plant doubt about the presence of any forming fodder for a wide array of conspiracy theories. empirical truth.
The strategy is to exploit already salient issues and narratives in a society and use them to disrupt social cohesion.
With the Internet and social media, the CONCLUSION strategy becomes more rapidly and efficiently deployed, The evidence of both the annexation of Crimea and and the volume of disinformation grows exponentially. the downing of the MH17 provides several important lessons and implications for policy.
The first is the MH17 understanding that Kremlin disinformation can contradict itself, and that the Russian authorities and Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was a regularly media make little to no effort at redacting the trail of scheduled passenger flight heading to Kuala Lumpur falsehoods they leave behind, even after convincing from Amsterdam.
While flying over eastern Ukraine on evidence of their fabrication emerges.
The downing occurred in the various narratives further serves to fill the information open conflict in Donbas in an area controlled by prospace with many, often contradictory versions.
Second, the lack of any single narrative in these cases Details of the downing of MH17 have been established of disinformation in fact fit Russia’s overall goal in by the Joint Investigative Team , comprised of the undermining the credibility of perceived adversaries national investigative agencies of Australia, Belgium, by disrupting their own narratives.
In October Russian disinformation is important, these cases 2015 the JIT concluded that the MH17 was shot down show fact-checks do not stop the disinformation from with a BUK missile system of the 53rd Anti-Aircraft continuing to be circulated, even after the time of crisis 2 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY THE CASE OF UKRAINE has passed.
This supports work done elsewhere about the ineffectuality of countering Russian propaganda by disproving it.
Moreover, the lack of a single narrative means that more labour is required to debunk each version of events, something that may well be a deliberate feature.
Third, the ad-hoc nature of the disinformation in these cases, for example the shifting narratives after the MH17 downing, suggests that Russian disinformation is reactive and constrained by the circumstances.
Fourth, and last, the presence of conflict in Ukraine, even if war is not openly declared, is confirmation of the idea that Russia uses disinformation as a major strategic aspect of war.
While this idea began emerging after Russia’s conflict with Georgia in 2008, of which disinformation was a significant aspect, Ukraine’s case firmly solidifies this view.
About this project This research was funded via the Centre for Research and Evidence on Security Threats as part of the Actors and Narratives programme.
