MOSCOW As Russian-backed rebels entrenched themselves in a newly captured, strategically located town in southeast Ukraine on Friday, President Vladimir Putin bluntly strengthened Moscow's hard-line position that the government in Kiev must be compelled to negotiate regional autonomy.
Behind the message, and the wider military operation, analysts saw several Kremlin goals.
Most important, they said, is that Putin wants to force terms, first laid down in March, built around political changes in Ukraine that would weaken central government authority and ensure that the country cannot escape Moscow's orbit and certainly never join NATO or other important Western alliances.
Second, but perhaps more urgent, Russia wanted to take the pressure off the increasingly beleaguered rebel forces in Luhansk and Donetsk, which were at risk of capture by government forces, hence robbing Moscow of important leverage.
Third, there was the possibility that Russia was trying to establish a land route to Crimea, the southern Ukrainian peninsula seized in March.
Analysts noted, though, that such a possibility would mean a notable shift in policy.
Given that Ukraine has shown no willingness to negotiate, the Kremlin raised the pressure by increasing its support for the breakaway republics in southeastern Ukraine, he said.
Putin, in separate remarks at a nationally televised question-and-answer session with student supporters at a resort northeast of Moscow, accused Ukraine of stalling for time, hoping to control the rebels rather than talk to them.
Russian troops and weaponry were creating momentum for a counteroffensive along a significant new front that threatened Mariupol, a key southeastern seaport and one of the region's biggest cities with nearly half a million residents.
But evidence of a Russian presence was abundant, including unmarked Russian military vehicles without license plates.
A cashier at a Novoazovsk grocery store said Russian soldiers had purchased sausages and cigarettes.
The military commandant of the town, who offered only his nickname, Svet, said the soldiers there were with the Army of Novorossiya, rather than either of the main separatist groups, the Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics.
The militiamen flew the flag of ""Novorossiya"" or New Russia, a reference to Russia's historical claims over the area in southeast Ukraine that encompasses the rebellious Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
Ukraine and the West have accused Russia of increasingly brazen military aggression, sending troops, tanks and other weapons across the border to support the Ukraine rebels.
The Kremlin has denied the accusations and a top rebel leader asserted that any Russian active duty soldiers fighting in Ukraine are volunteers on vacation.
A takeover of Mariupol would go a long way toward helping the separatists gain control over land that would connect Russia to Crimea.
Russia lacks a land link to the peninsula, and the ferry route farther south has become a major bottleneck.
But analysts said that would mean occupying a lot of Ukrainian territory where there is little pro-Russian sentiment, possibly forcing a costly, bloody occupation of the type Putin has thus far sought to avoid.
The specter of a wider war might help President Petro Poroshenko of Ukraine convince citizens that some compromise with Russia is necessary.
But the initial reaction from Ukraine on Friday was to try to align the country more with the West.
The Ukrainian prime minister, Arseniy Yatsenyuk, announced a new bill to cancel Ukraine's status as a nonaligned country and ""restore its aspirations to become a NATO member"" as well as to join the European Union.
The proposal was considered unlikely to advance, as NATO cannot accept new members with disputed borders.
