BRUSSELS, Belgium -A newly-published transcript of Ukrainian crisis talks two years ago indicates that EU powers and the United States urged Kiev not to resist Russia’s invasion of Crimea.
The document, published by a Ukrainian parliament committee on Tuesday contains the official minutes of Ukraine's National Security and Defence Council on 28 February 2014.
The meeting, chaired by then acting president Oleksandr Turchynov, was called one week after former president Viktor Yanukovych fell from power and one day after Russian special forces seized government buildings in Crimea.
But ministers and others warned him that Ukraine couldn’t do it alone and that the West wouldn’t help.
It was systematically destroyed by Yanukovych and his entourage,” the defence minister, Ihor Tenyukh, said.
But he said Russia was holding military drills on Ukraine’s eastern border which involved 38,000 troops with armoured, air, and naval support.
Other ministers told Turchynov not to expect popular resistance because the “dominant” mood of people in Crimea was on the Russian side.
They blamed Russian propaganda, which had broadcast fake stories that Kiev “fascists” were coming to massacre Russian-speakers.
They also linked it to years-long “subversion” operations in Crimea by Russian intelligence.
Arseniy Yatsenyuk, the then PM, who had taken office just one day earlier, told Turchynov that the country had no money for a war because Yanukovych had stolen it.
Yatsenyuk went on to say it’s “a pity” that the United States Sixth Fleet pulled back two warships which had been stationed in the Black Sea, in a sign of Western intentions.
The 2008 war began when Russia-controlled fighters in the breakaway South Ossetia region in Georgia escalated skirmishes against Georgian troops.
When the then Georgian leader, Mikheil Saakashvili, fired back on the South Ossetian capital, Tskhinvali, Russia invaded Georgia proper.
Remember how Saakashvili swallowed his bait and lost?”, Tymoshenko said.
Valentyn Nalyvaichenko, Turchynov’s intelligence chief, echoed her warning.
The meeting bandied round ideas such as calling for UN Security Council talks, asking the West for financial aid, and urging Ukrainian expats to picket Russian embassies around the world.
The Ukrainian army, joined by volunteer brigades, did fight back when Russia’s hybrid forces, shortly afterward, also invaded the Donbass region in east Ukraine.
The conflict has so far claimed at least 9,200 lives and displaced more than 1 million people.
But Ukraine still hasn’t declared a state of war with Russia and Western powers still haven’t given it military assistance.
But with the West angling for Russian cooperation on Syria and on the refugee crisis, these could end in July.
The EU and United States say they won’t recognise Russia’s annexation of Crimea and that sanctions on doing business there will stay in place for the long term.
But even Ukrainian diplomats don’t think they’ll get Crimea back unless Russia changes, as in the 1990s, when the collapse of the Soviet Union undid former conquests.
