This article Lugansk People’s Republic examines Russian intentions by means of an analysis both of ofﬁcial rhetoric and of Russia’s actions in Donbass.
It concludes that far from instigating the rebellion in Donbass and using it to destabilise Ukraine, revise the international order, or seize additional territory, Moscow has largely been reacting to events and trying to gain some control of a process which was originally almost entirely outside of its control.
Its primary aim has been to get the Ukrainian government to negotiate directly with the rebels, in order to produce a permanent peace settlement based upon some form of special status for Donbass within Ukraine.
It has also used its inﬂuence over the rebels in order to persuade them to cooperate with the peace process set up at Minsk.
Russia’s objectives are very limited, and do not pose a serious threat to European security as a whole.
The war in Ukraine has led to an outpouring of literature analysing the intentions of Russia and its president Vladimir Putin.
This article examines what those intentions may be and their implications for European security by surveying Russia’s actions in the war in Donbass to date.
After describing various theories about Russia’s goals, the article analyses Russian decision-making processes, and looks both at ofﬁcial discourse and actual Russian deeds.
It concludes that rather than deliberately inciting rebellion in Donbass and using it to destabilise Ukraine as part of an effort to reshape the international order, Russia has largely been reacting to events and pursuing limited goals which do not threaten wider European security.
Views on what Russia wants Opinions on Russia’s objectives in Ukraine vary considerably.
At the most alarmist end of the spectrum are analyses which conclude that Russia wants to completely revise the existing international system.
Rovner raises the spectre of Russia attacking the Baltic States, saying that Putin ‘might be willing to try the same gambit in the Baltics on the pretext of defending ethnic Russians.
Slightly less extreme thinkers view Russian objectives as being limited to territorial expansion.
One of his key goals the creation of a land bridge from Russia to Crimea.
His long term goal may be the creation of ‘Novorossiya’, or New Russia, which would constitute all of southern Ukraine past Odessa to Moldova.
This same objective could also be achieved by pursuing so-called ‘Transdniestrianisation,’ in other words by means of a ‘frozen conﬂict’ in which the rebel regions of Donbass, like Transdniestr, become de facto independent.
On the more pro-Russia end of the spectrum, Sakwa denies that Russia is a ‘revisionist’ state.
Russian analysts overwhelmingly reject the idea that Moscow wants to acquire additional territory in Ukraine.
Whereas most Western observers believe that the call for autonomy hides a desire to extend Russian inﬂuence into Ukraine, various Russian nationalists believe that Moscow’s support for autonomy represents a face-saving way for the Kremlin to sell an impending betrayal of the Donbass rebels to the Russian people.
According to this viewpoint, Moscow has always opposed the uprising in Donbass.
They assess that Russia’s objective is to establish a new order in Ukraine which can sustain long-term peace.
Fundamental mutual economic dependency makes Russia interested in Ukraine’s stability.
Russian decision-making processes Determining Russian intentions is made difﬁcult by the fact that the Kremlin’s decisionmaking processes are opaque.
On the one hand, there is the system of open public politics, with all of the relevant institutions described in the constitution … at another level a second para-political world exists based on informal groups, factions, and operating within the framework of the inner court of the presidency.
There is a tendency to view the Russian state as highly centralised, with all authority resting in President Putin’s hands.
This implies that there is a single will behind Russia’s actions in Ukraine.
Sakwa, however, raises another possibility – that there are multiple competing wills, with policy emerging from the interaction of the various factions.
As Jensen says, ‘Russia’s system of power has not been a strict power vertical ruled only by one person.
Also important is public opinion which, while not a decisive factor in policy making, does serve to restrict policy options and can on occasion force the Kremlin’s hand.
Supposedly, the doves consider Russia’s most important interest to be a restoration of economic growth, which requires good relations with the West and the removal of sanctions.
They are willing to make considerable concessions in order to bring the war in Donbass to an end.
The hawks, by contrast, believe that making concessions is pointless, because Ukraine and its Western allies are bent on confrontation with Russia and will not accept any compromise.
This article concludes that Kremlin strategy has been rather more consistent than that last statement suggests, but it has been a middle-of-the-road, compromise strategy, designed to satisfy both hawks and doves, rather than a maximalist strategy of either aggression or surrender.
Ofﬁcial rhetoric The consistency of Moscow’s intentions can be seen in ofﬁcial statements by senior members of the Russian government, such as President Vladimir Putin and Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov.
From the start of the crisis, the Russian position has been that Donbass is part of Ukraine, but that political stability can only return to Ukraine if the people of Donbass feel secure, an objective which can only be attained by means of direct negotiations between the government in Kiev and the rebels.
Thus in April 2014, Putin remarked that they are citizens of Ukraine, but they should be citizens with equal rights in their country, that’s the entire issue.
In order to encourage such a dialogue, Putin unsuccessfully urged the rebels to cancel referendums they had planned for 11 May 2014.
His mention of the concept of ‘Novorossiya’ in April 2014 gave rise to speculation that Russia was seeking to annex all of south and eastern Ukraine, but Lavrov denied this.
He announced his support for the ceaseﬁre called by Poroshenko on 20 June, saying It is important that this ceaseﬁre open the way to a dialogue between all of the parties to the combat, so as to ﬁnd solutions that will be acceptable to all sides in order to ensure that people in south-east Ukraine have no doubt that they are an integral part of the country.
In September 2015, Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Mariya Zakharova reiterated this, saying ‘Russia, like the whole world, sees no alternative to the Minsk agreements.
In the same month Putin said, the most important thing is to establish direct contact between the authorities in Kiev and in the Donetsk and Lugansk republics, so that the Minsk agreements can be realised.
There needs to be constitutional reform to ensure the autonomous rights of the unrecognised republics. … this should be done, as the Minsk Agreements read, in coordination with Donetsk People’s Republic and Lugansk People’s Republic.
For instance, after meeting the leaders of Ukraine, France, and Germany in Paris in October 2015, Putin supported the fulﬁlment of the Minsk agreements and noted the importance of constitutional reform in Ukraine, but underlined that it was important to agree this with Donetsk and Lugansk.
Putin again mentioned the need for direct dialogue between Kiev and the self-proclaimed republics.
If all this rhetoric is to be believed, then Russia’s primary objective has to been to get Kiev to talk to its opponents in Donbass.
The extent to which ofﬁcial rhetoric reﬂects genuine motivations is, of course, disputable, but the consistency of the Russian statements does mean that they need to be taken seriously.
March–July 2014 From the moment that the uprising in Donbass began in spring 2014, some commentators claimed that the rebellion was organised not by local Ukrainians but by members of the Russian Army and secret services.
However, ﬁlms taken by Western journalists of seizures of government buildings show a very different story, as do accounts by various Western observers (e.g.
A vast plethora of militias appeared, as separate leaders established power over their own zones of operations.
The result was a chaotic situation over which nobody, let alone the Russian government, had any control.
It is true that some Russian citizens participated in the initial uprising, most notably 52 Russians under the command of Igor Strelkov who helped to seize buildings in the towns of Slavyansk and Kramatorsk.
Despite allegations that he was acting on behalf of the Russian intelligence services, Strelkov himself claims that he came to Ukraine in response to an appeal from Donbass activists.
Subsequently, when Ukraine’s newly elected president, Petro Poroshenko, declared a ceaseﬁre in June 2014, Moscow persuaded the then head of the DPR, Aleksandr Borodai, to abide by the ceaseﬁre and participate in the promised peace talks, despite Borodai’s initial refusal to do so.
No worthwhile evidence has ever been produced showing that units of the Russian Army were in Donbass in the early stages of the conﬂict.
The overwhelming majority of rebel ﬁghters have always been Ukrainian citizens.
As Mark Franchetti of The Sunday Times, who accompanied the rebel Vostok Battalion, reported on Ukrainian television, ‘Most of the people in the self-defence forces are from Donbass and the surrounding area.
However, little evidence has been provided to support these allegations.
Various private organisations recruited the majority of the volunteers, and those involved tell a different story to that provided by the Nemtsov report.
In fact, some volunteers hold extremist political views which are sharply at variance with those of the Kremlin.
For instance, Strelkov is a monarchist who associated with radical nationalists such as the head of the Russian General Military Union, Igor Ivanov, whom he appointed chief of the DPR Army’s Political Department.
The presence of people like Strelkov and Ivanov in high positions in the rebel leadership was indicative of the lack of control Moscow had over the rebellion in its ﬁrst few months.
The evidence also suggests that at the early stage of the conﬂict, the rebel militias supplied themselves almost entirely by capturing weapons and ammunition from the Ukrainian army and security services.
While commanding the rebels at Slavyansk, Strelkov regularly complained that he was not receiving support from Russia (e.g.
Jenzen-Jones carried out a thorough analysis of the weapons used by the rebels and their likely origins for the Australian organisation Armament Research Services.
Despite the presence of arms, munitions, and armoured vehicles designed, produced, and allegedly even sourced from Russia, there remains no direct evidence of Russian government complicity in the trafﬁcking of arms into the area.
The majority of arms and munitions documented in service with separatist forces have evidently been appropriated from the Ukrainian security forces and their installations within Ukraine.
August–September 2014 All of the above suggests that the initial uprising took place largely without Moscow’s encouragement or support.
From mid-July 2014, the situation changed and Russia began to play a more direct role in the conﬂict.
It seems likely that from around mid-July 2014, Russian artillery occasionally ﬁred over the border at Ukrainian units south of Donetsk and Lugansk.
Perhaps the most convincing evidence of Russian artillery having ﬁred into Ukraine is photographs of an artillery strike on a Ukrainian Army unit at Zelenopole on 11 July 2014.
Even if many of the rebels’ weapons were taken from the Ukrainians, they were using far more ammunition than they could possibly have captured.
The only plausible explanation is that the ammunition came from Russia.
In July and August 2014, the ﬁghting intensiﬁed, and the Ukrainian Army advanced closer to Donetsk and Lugansk.
As it did so, it repeatedly shelled those cities, and the humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine deteriorated substantially.
In this context, it would appear that in early/mid-August the Kremlin made a decision to try to bring the war to an end.
No peace settlement would work if the rebels did not agree to it, and if the rebel leaders were not able to get their subordinates to abide by the terms of the settlement.
Then, as a second step, Russia had to ﬁnd a way of persuading the Ukrainian government to end its military operations.
This required inﬂicting a serious military defeat on the Ukrainian Army.
First, after visits to Russia, the political leaders of the DPR and LPR, Aleksandr Borodai and Valerii Bolotov, resigned.
Next, Strelkov resigned too, obviously unwillingly and under considerable duress.
With a new rebel leadership in place, Russia now became directly involved in military operations in Donbass.
From mid-August 2014, Russian soldiers began posting messages on social media saying that they were in Ukraine.
In alliance with rebel forces, the Russians succeeded in inﬂicting a serious defeat on the Ukrainian Army around the town of Ilovaisk, allowing the rebels to recapture a signiﬁcant amount of lost territory, before on 5 September 2014 a ceaseﬁre came into effect following the ﬁrst Minsk agreement.
Because of this, the rebel leaders did not want to sign the Minsk agreement; it would appear that they did so only because Moscow insisted.
If Russia’s intent had been to destabilise Ukraine, seize additional Ukrainian territory or reshape the international order in some fundamental way, its behaviour at this point makes no sense.
If any of those had been the objectives, Moscow would have let the rebels keep on going.
The only explanation for the Russians’ actions is that their objectives were very different – to bring the war to an end, by ensuring that the Ukrainian government agreed to speak to the rebels and provided Donbass with some degree of autonomy.
October 2014–February 2015 The September 2014 Minsk agreement temporarily reduced the scale of violence in Ukraine, but neither side was really committed to making it work.
As a result, ﬁghting continued and eventually escalated into major battles around Donetsk airport and the town of Debaltsevo.
At this point, Russia appears to have increased the scale of the voentorg.
As the front lines were more or less static until late January 2015, the rebels cannot have captured this amount of ammunition from the Ukrainian Army.
In late 2014 and early 2015, foreign observers spotted a number of items of military equipment in rebel-held territory which were not believed to have ever been in the inventory of the Ukrainian Army, and which therefore were probably supplied by Russia.
Russian soldiers’ involvement at this stage of the war was probably limited mostly to activities such as reconnaissance, intelligence, and communications, rather than direct combat.
Meanwhile, Moscow was encouraging a process of state formation in the DPR and LPR, in order to rein in the local warlords who exercised too much independent power.
Meanwhile, other rebel leaders followed Strelkov’s lead and resigned, most notably the commander of the Gorlovka garrison, Igor Bezler and the Cossack leader Nikolai Kozitsyn.
It is not clear how these men were persuaded to quit, but it seems likely that some form of Russian pressure was involved.
Little by little, the new LPR and DPR authorities gained more control over the disparate rebel forces.
This proved useful when negotiations took place in Minsk in early 2015 on a new peace settlement.
By apparently obliging Kiev to negotiate with the rebels and offer some form of autonomy, these clauses satisﬁed Russian desires.
Rebel leaders Zakharchenko and Plotnitskii, by contrast, were not happy.
Their forces were advancing, and they wished to continue their military offensive.
According to one story, having been summoned to Minsk to do so, they refused.
Putin then sent Surkov to see them to persuade them to change their minds.
It is clear from this that Russia used its growing inﬂuence over the DPR and LPR not to encourage further military offensives, but rather the opposite.
March 2015–present The Minsk-2 agreement did not bring immediate peace.
Fighting continued throughout the spring and summer of 2015, albeit at a much reduced level.
Meanwhile, it seems likely that ofﬁcers of the Russian Army took over many of the senior positions in the rebel armies.
By autumn 2015, almost all the previously independent rebel units had been incorporated into the two corps.
The government has not provided any proof of this allegation, but it is credible.
Russian military analysts refer to the corps system as a means by which Russia has expanded its control over the rebels, and hints have emerged which apparently conﬁrm that Russian ofﬁcers play an important role within the corps.
For instance, Crimean blogger Boris Rozhin , who has proven to be very well informed on events within the rebel republics, refers to ‘curators’ accompanying the rebel forces.
In September 2015, for instance, Rozhin commented that, Fighting is low intensity, at the most remote parts of the front, where there are no European observers, staff ofﬁcers and Russian ‘curators’ … Where there are observers and ‘curators’ there is no shooting, even in response to the enemy’s provocations.
If Rozhin is correct, this reveals that the ‘curators’ have used their inﬂuence to make the rebels abide by the ceaseﬁre.
A number of other events conﬁrmed Russian claims that Moscow wants the February 2015 Minsk agreement to work.
In 2014, pro-rebel Ukrainian politicians, led by Oleg Tsarev, had established a ‘Novorossiya parliament,’ consisting of representatives from across the south and east of Ukraine, with the objective of creating an autonomous ‘Novorossiya’ throughout that part of the country.
While the decision was Tsarev’s, it seems probable that had the Russian government been supporting the Novorossiya project, he would not have felt it necessary to end it.
The freeze strongly suggests that Russia is not interested in creating a so-called ‘land bridge’ across southern Ukraine to Crimea, but instead prefers to work within the framework agreed at Minsk.
This was demonstrated again in October 2015, when the so-called ‘Normandy Four’ met for talks in Paris.
Kiev, however, has consistently refused to negotiate directly with the rebels.
Consequently, the required ‘dialogue’ with ‘representatives of particular districts of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts’ failed to take place in summer and autumn 2015.
In light of this, the rebels announced that they would hold local elections under their own laws.
In Paris, Vladimir Putin agreed to use his inﬂuence over the rebels to persuade them to cancel these elections.
At the Paris meeting, it was agreed that the elections would take place only after Kiev had passed a law giving the rebels amnesty and had negotiated with them ‘special status’ for Donbass as well as a new electoral law.
The Germans and French supported Russia in putting the onus on Ukraine to make concessions to the rebels.
This has been Moscow’s consistent position since the start of the crisis, and it remains true at the time of writing in late 2015.
Far from instigating the uprising, Russia was at ﬁrst largely reacting to events, and its actions have been directed towards gaining inﬂuence over a process which was initially entirely outside of its control.
Contrary to many of the claims outlined at the start of this article, it seems most probable that Moscow does not want, and has never wanted, to annex Donbass, let alone create a ‘land bridge’ to Crimea.
Nor is it seeking to overturn the existing international security system.
The evidence would suggest that rather than trying to force Ukraine to grant Donbass autonomy in order to destabilise Ukraine, Russia’s pursuit of such autonomy reﬂects a belief that a stable order can only be restored in Ukraine if the interests of those who opposed the Maidan revolution are taken into account.
What this means is that Russian actions in Donbass do not pose a serious threat to broader European security.
The evidence above does not justify claims that, if not stopped in Donbass, Russia will seek to destabilise other countries, such as the Baltic States, let alone that it will try to capture territory there.
What is not clear at the time of writing is what Russia will do if Kiev does not fulﬁl the promises it made at Minsk and Paris to talk to its opponents and grant meaningful ‘special status’ to Donbass.
Moscow’s policy to date has rested on an assumption that Kiev can be forced to make major concessions, not just on paper, but in reality.
If the Ukrainian government continues to refuse to concede what Moscow wants, the Kremlin may be forced to reconsider its policy and to accept some form of Transdniestrianisation.
This, however, would represent an acceptance of reality, rather than the intended outcome of deliberate policy.
Disclosure statement No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.
Origin of artillery attacks on Ukrainian military positions in Eastern Ukraine between 14 July 2014 and 8 August 2014.
Russia moves thermobaric warheads that ICINERATE targets into Ukraine while world’s attention is on Syria.
An examination of arms and munitions in the ongoing conﬂict in Ukraine, 2014.
Pressestatements von Bundeskanzlerin Merkel und dem französischen Präsidenten Hollande.
A retired Russian army ofﬁcer sends paid ‘volunteers’ to ﬁght in Ukraine.
Around 3–4 thousand Russian volunteers ﬁghting for Donetsk People’s Republic militia.
The Director of National Intelligence of the United States James Clapper states that Russia needs Mariupol to have a land corridor to Crimea.
