Share Russia Issuing Passports In Crimea; Ukraine Introducing Visas For Russians share Print Russia has begun issuing Russian passports to residents of Crimea, saying they are now Russian citizens.
Ukraine, meanwhile, has said the Foreign Ministry will start introducing a visa regime for Russians wanting to visit Ukraine.
Russia said it would study Ukraine's move before deciding whether to introduce a visa regime for Ukrainians.
With tensions high on Crimea, pro-Russian forces seized at least one Ukrainian naval base there on March 19 and captured Ukraine's naval chief.
There were no reports of violence as Ukrainian forces evacuated their facilities.
Officials in Ukraine also said they would withdraw from the Russian-led Commonwealth of Independent States , which groups ex-Soviet countries.
Ukraine, along with Russia and Belarus, was among the founders of the CIS after the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union.
The announcements on March 19 came one day after Russian President Vladimir Putin and pro-Moscow Crimean leaders signed treaties making Crimea part of Russia.
Crisis In Ukraine The annexation has been condemned as illegal by Western states, who have vowed to punish Moscow over the step.
In another development, Ukraine's government said it is drawing up a plan to withdraw its troops from Crimea.
Earlier, the pro-Russian Crimean authorities issued an order to Ukrainian troops to either join Crimean forces or surrender their arms and leave the peninsula.
He did not elaborate, but added that ""the number of elderly and children entering Russia has doubled"" since early March.Western Criticism In Washington, NATO chief Anders Fogh Rasmussen sharply criticized Russia's annexation of Crimea.
White House spokesman Jay Carney said Russia's seizure of a Ukrainian naval facility created a ""dangerous"" situation.
He said the United States urges Russia to start discussions with Ukrainian officials to ensure the safety of Ukrainian forces in the Crimean peninsula.
Meanwhile, Germany has meanwhile announced it has suspended a military deal with Russia in response to the annexation of Crimea.
The Economy Ministry said the export of a combat simulation center is ""not justifiable"" in the current situation.
In Britain, Prime Minister David Cameron told parliament that Russia should be cast out of the Group of Eight leading economic nations.
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon is expected to discuss the crisis when he visits Russia on March 20 for talks with Putin.
Ban is then scheduled to travel to Kyiv on March 21 to meet with Ukrainian acting President Oleksandr Turchynov and Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk.
With reporting by AFP and Reuters RFE/RL RFE/RL journalists report the news in 27 languages in 23 countries where a free press is banned by the government or not fully established.
