Anxious politicians in Kyiv fret nonetheless that western policymakers will come to regard the Donbas war as comparable with so-called &quot;frozen conflicts&quot; in the former Soviet republics of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Moldova, where fighting has ended, but without a political solution.
It would also give the Kremlin powerful leverage over Ukrainian politics and leave a question mark over the very concept of Ukrainian statehood. &quot;They&#039;ll do whatever they can to undermine Ukraine&#039;s democracy and its pro-western course, and to discredit the idea of Ukrainian independence,&quot; says Oleksandr Danylyuk, a Ukrainian military analyst of Russian hybrid warfare.
For their part, Ukrainian government ministers and defense officials say the conflict, far from being &quot;frozen&quot;, is very much a &quot;hot&quot; one.
No,&quot; says former prime minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk. &quot;The problem has been that the west has not sent a clear-cut message to Putin – that the west will never abandon Ukraine, that Ukraine is part of the western world and that, Mr Putin, you cannot even dream of taking over Ukraine or setting up new spheres of influence.&quot; Alexei Kudrin, a liberal ex-finance minister of Russia, estimates that the United States and EU sanctions have reduced Russian gross domestic product by half a percentage point a year since their introduction in 2014.
However, Alexander Valchyshen, head of research at ICU, an investment firm specializing in central and eastern Europe, doubts the sanctions will change Russian behavior. &quot;I&#039;m not saying the sanctions aren&#039;t working.
I&#039;m saying that they are not counteracting Russian intentions,&quot; says Mr Valchyshen. &quot;The Russians are not resource-constrained in Donbas and Crimea.
I am sceptical that the Russian government is so overburdened that it will withdraw from Donbas.&quot; Meanwhile, western capitals would like the government in Kyiv to make a more serious effort to win the hearts and minds of the roughly 4m civilians caught up in the Donbas conflict, especially those living in separatist-controlled areas.
All that said, Russia&#039;s intervention in Donbas has been the single most important factor of the past quarter of a century in accelerating the process of Ukrainian nation-building, politicians say. &quot;Ukrainians are finally getting to the point of creating a political nation,&quot; observes Ms.
The Javelins are important in symbolic as well as material terms,"" says Ivanna Klympush-Tsintsadze, Ukraine's deputy premier for European and Euro-Atlantic integration.
Some policymakers in Kyiv were aghast to hear Mr Trump speak warmly of Mr Putin and make no public criticism of Russian policies towards Ukraine.But Kurt Volker, the United States special representative for Ukraine negotiations, says these worries were overblown.
They'll do whatever they can to undermine Ukraine's democracy and its pro-western course, and to discredit the idea of Ukrainian independence,"" says Oleksandr Danylyuk, a Ukrainian military analyst of Russian hybrid warfare.Read alsoRussian-led forces amassing military hardware in occupied Donbas JCCCRussia denies direct involvement in the confrontation, despite widespread evidence to the contrary.
Some politicians in Kyiv seem lukewarm about reintegrating Donbas civilians into Ukraine's democratic life on account of suspicions that they might vote strongly, as in the pre-2014 era, for presidential candidates and parties less than enthusiastic about national independence and pro-western policies.All that said, Russia's intervention in Donbas has been the single most important factor of the past quarter of a century in accelerating the process of Ukrainian nation-building, politicians say.
