The industrial area of the Donbas includes much of the Ukrainian oblasti of Donetsk and Luhansk.
The Donbas coalfield lies primarily in southeastern Ukraine, but a small portion of it extends into Rostov oblast in southwestern Russia.
The principal exploited area of the field covers nearly 9,000 square miles south of the Donets River, but coal deposits also extend westward to the Dnieper River in the greater Donets Basin.
In different areas of Earth, one might find sweltering deserts, dense tropical rainforests, or bone-chilling tundras.
Each biome and habitat comes with its own selection of flora and fauna, and it may include physical features such as canyons, volcanoes, rivers, or caves.
Human beings have built homes in many different environments, settling the area and organizing it into units such as cities, states, regions, and countries, each with its own points of interest.
History has shown us, however, that it's not so easy to form societies or communities that fulfill these requirements for all members.
The fight for human and civil rights has persisted for hundreds of years and remains alive today, both within the borders of nations and on an international scale.
A literary work can transport us into a fictional, fantastic new world, describe a fleeting feeling, or simply give us a picture of the past through novels, poems, tragedies, epic works, and other genres.
The earliest Greek philosophers focused their attention upon the origin and nature of the physical world; later philosophers have theorized about the nature of knowledge, truth, good and evil, love, friendship, and much more.
Philosophy involves a methodical assessment of any and all aspects of human existence and experience.
The realms of philosophy and religion have sometimes intersected in conducting such inquiries as these.
As with philosophy, the study of religion underscores how humankind has long speculated about its origins.
The possibility of a higher being to which livings things owe their existence has long captived human thought.
Governments can also be classified by mode of succession; for example, ascension to governmental leadership may follow the rules of hereditary succession, or it may be determined through elections or by force.
Human beings have long been curious about the world in which we live, striving to identify connections among the phenomenons we witness and to understand how it all works.
The field of science has developed over many centuries as a way of studying and understanding the world, beginning with the primitive stage of simply noting important regularities in nature and continuing through the rise of modern science.
In both team and solo sports, the human body has been pushed to its limits in the name of improving athletic performance and in order to break record upon record.
The ancient Olympic Games are an early example of the contests in which humans have engaged to showcase physical prowess.
They include the most ancient forms, such as painting and drawing, and the arts that were born thanks to the development of technology, like sculpture, printmaking, photography, and installation art.
Britannica ExplainsIn these videos, Britannica explains a variety of topics and answers frequently asked questions.
Demystified VideosIn Demystified, Britannica has all the answers to your burning questions.
This Time in HistoryIn these videos, find out what happened this month in history.
Student PortalBritannica is the ultimate student resource for key school subjects like history, government, literature, and more.
COVID-19 PortalWhile this global health crisis continues to evolve, it can be useful to look to past pandemics to better understand how to respond today.
Britannica BeyondWe’ve created a new place where questions are at the center of learning.
Saving EarthBritannica Presents Earth’s To-Do List for the 21st Century.
Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
Feedback Type Select a type Factual CorrectionSpelling/Grammar CorrectionLink CorrectionAdditional InformationOther Your Feedback Submit Feedback Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.
The principal exploited area of the field covers nearly 9,000 square miles south of the Donets River, but coal deposits also extend westward to the Dnieper River in the greater Donets Basin.Donets Basin, or DonbasEncyclopædia Britannica, Inc.Mineral resources and industry in the Donbas Coal was first discovered in the Donbas in 1721, but exploitation did not begin until the early 19th century and became significant only after the first railway reached the area in 1869.
Development in the last two decades of the 19th century was rapid, and by 1913 the Donbas was producing 87 percent of the coal and 74 percent of the pig iron in the Russian Empire.
Despite erosion of its relative position by the development of new coalfields and despite setbacks in World War I, in the Russian Civil War following the October Revolution , and in World War II, absolute coal production continued to increase until the 1970s.
Donetsk coal mineCoal mine in Donetsk, in the Donets Basin, Ukraine.Andrew Butko The Donbas still has large coal reserves, much of it of high quality.
Of the proved reserves, about one-fourth are anthracite, concentrated chiefly at the eastern end of the field.
A difficulty of the field is that seams are thin, averaging just under 3 feet , and only 40 are thick enough to be worked economically.
Most thicker seams and those nearer the surface have been worked out, and mining is now deep—down to 2,000 feet for lignite and 5,900 feet for higher-quality bituminous and anthracite coals.
The area remains the largest single producing area of iron and steel in Ukraine and is one of the world’s major metallurgical and heavy-industrial complexes.
Iron ore is obtained from Kryvyy Rih to the west, and manganese is mined at Nikopol and Marhanets on the Dnieper.
The chief ironand steel-producing towns of the basin, together with Luhansk, Kramatorsk, and other centres, have a range of large heavy-engineering industries.
The chemical industry is well developed, based on coking by-products and rock salt mined in the Donets Basin near Artemivsk; the main chemical towns are Artemivsk and Slov’yansk.
Mercury is also mined in the Donets Basin, and cement making is important.
A wide range of light and consumer-goods industries have been introduced to diversify the economy and to supply the needs of the large urban populations.
History of the Donbas Early history through the Soviet era The Scythians had established a presence in the lands of the Donbas by the 7th century bce, and many nomadic peoples of the Western Steppe passed through the area over subsequent centuries.
By the 16th century the settled population began to grow, and control of the area was divided between the Zaporozhian Cossacks in the north and the khanate of Crimea in the south.
At this time the kings of Poland and the princes of Muscovy attempted to exert their influence in the region, and both enlisted the Cossacks to check the advances of the Tatars from Crimea.
The Crimean War , which cut off Russia’s access to imported coal from England, provided some impetus to the industrial development of the Donbas, but large-scale commercial exploitation of the region began only after the coming of the railways in the 1870s.
After several largely unsuccessful efforts to establish a metallurgical industry in the Donbas, an ironworks was set up in 1872 by Welsh engineer John Hughes at the site of present-day Donetsk.
The industrial economy of the Donbas began to expand dramatically after the completion in 1886 of a railway to the iron ore mines of Kryvyy Rih, and, by the beginning of World War I, the Donets Basin had developed into the principal ironand steel-producing region of the Russian Empire.
Soviet leader Joseph Stalin’s Five-Year Plans greatly accelerated industrial development in the Donbas during the interwar years, albeit at an enormous human cost to the Ukrainian peasantry.
Meanwhile, many of the workers attracted to the growing industrial cities in the Donbas came from Russia.
As a result, the urban centres of the Donbas became highly Russified islands in what had been a Ukrainian rural sea.
Many industrial assets were destroyed by the Soviets ahead of the German advance as part of their scorched-earth retreat, and the local population suffered brutal treatment under Nazi occupation.
The great devastation of World War II accelerated the reequipment of factories and mines with modern machinery, while concentration into larger units during reconstruction made economies of scale possible.
Donetsk, UkraineDonetsk, Ukraine, during the Soviet era.Novosti Press Agency The Donbas in independent Ukraine and the Russian invasion of the Donbas With the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Donbas became a major industrial engine of the economy of independent Ukraine.
The region also served as the political base of Viktor Yanukovych, a pro-Russian politician who would play a significant role in early 21st-century Ukrainian history.
Leonid Kuchma presented Yanukovych as his successor, but Yanukovych faced a strong challenge from opposition leader Viktor Yushchenko.
When Yanukovych and Yushchenko faced each other in the second round of the 2004 presidential election, exit polls gave Yushchenko the clear lead.
Yanokovych was declared victorious, however—a result that was quickly recognized by Russian Pres.
Yushchenko’s supporters maintained that the results were fabricated, and a mass protest movement that came to be called the Orange Revolution began in western Ukraine, where Yushchenko was generally regarded as the winner.
Meanwhile, in Syeverodonetsk, in the Donbas, a meeting of Moscow-supported politicians recognized Yanukovych as president and considered a referendum on whether the Ukrainian oblasti of Donetsk and Luhansk should become autonomous and ultimately secede from Ukraine and join Russia.
In December 2004 the presidential election results were annulled by the Supreme Court, and a second runoff was held, in which Yushchenko was declared the winner.
Instability would plague Yushchenko’s administration, however, and he was soon forced into a power-sharing agreement with Yanukovych as his prime minister.Viktor YanukovychViktor Yanukovych, 2010.
Eskinder Debebe/UN Photo Yanukovych was elected president in 2010, and he immediately pivoted away from the pro-European course that Yushchenko had set in favour of a strongly pro-Russian foreign and domestic policy.
In 2012 Yanukovych signed a law that granted local authorities the power to confer official status upon minority languages; in cities throughout the Donbas, this meant the recognition of Russian as an official language alongside Ukrainian.
In spite of Yanukovych’s obvious affinity for Russia, in late 2013 he signaled his willingness to conclude an association agreement with the European Union.
After a visit with Putin in Moscow, Yanukovych opted not to sign the agreement, and, within hours of the about-face, protesters took to the streets.
In February 2014 Yanukovych attempted to quash the demonstration with a bloody crackdown that killed dozens of protesters and destroyed his political base.
Impeached by an overwhelming parliamentary majority that included members of his own party, Yanukovych fled to Russia.
Within days Putin, deprived of his lever in Kyiv, invaded the Ukrainian autonomous republic of Crimea.
Putin spent the next month consolidating his grip on Crimea, and in April 2014 Russian-backed militants and Russian troops in uniforms that lacked insignia seized control of a broad swath of the Donbas.
Pro-Russian separatists in Donetsk and Luhansk proclaimed their independence, and fierce fighting continued throughout the region.Donbas; Ukraine crisisOn the outskirts of Donetsk, Ukraine, a heavily armed pro-Russian separatist showing off a bullet-riddled bus that was carrying Ukrainian nationalist fighters when it was ambushed on August 13, 2014.
Sergei Karpukhin—Reuters/LandovIgor StrelkovPro-Russian separatist leader Igor Girkin holding a media briefing on July 28, 2014, in the rebel stronghold of Donetsk, Ukraine.Dmitry Lovetsky/AP Images During the summer of 2014, the Ukrainian military pushed back Russian and separatist forces throughout the Donbas, recapturing the cities of Mariupol, Slov’yansk, and Kramatorsk and waging a pitched battle for control of the Donetsk airport.
Tens of thousands of people were internally displaced by the fighting, and damage to infrastructure within the conflict zone disrupted access to water and electrical power.
Several attempts were made to negotiate a cease-fire, and in February 2015 talks in Minsk, Belarus, led to an agreement that saw most heavy weapons being withdrawn from the line of contact that ran through the Donbas.Mirny, UkraineA bar providing the only light in a neighbourhood of Mirny, Ukraine, after months of heavy fighting between government forces and rebels led to electricity shortages in the Luhansk region in October 2014.
Petro Poroshenko.Alexander Zemlianichenko, Pool/AP Images This did not mean an end to the fighting, however, and by 2022 the war in the Donbas had claimed more than 14,000 lives.
From the beginning of hostilities, Putin had denied—implausibly—the involvement of Russian personnel in the Donbas war, but in late 2021 it appeared that Russia was preparing for overt military action against Ukraine.
Moscow stated that the massing of troops and matériel along the Ukrainian border was nothing more than an exercise, but Western analysts characterized the buildup as clear evidence of a planned invasion.
On February 21, 2022, Putin’s intentions were made clear when he recognized the independence of the self-proclaimed people’s republics of Donetsk and Luhansk.
Three days later Russian troops poured into Ukraine from Crimea, Belarus, and southwestern Russia, but their advance was soon checked by a tenacious Ukrainian defense.
As the Russian drive on Kyiv faltered, the focus shifted to the Donbas, where many of Ukraine’s most seasoned units were holding the line.
With his broader ambitions in Ukraine frustrated by a poor performance by the Russian military and overwhelming Western support for Ukraine’s government, Putin sought to salvage his “special military operation” by “liberating” the Donbas.
As his casus belli, Putin had claimed, falsely, that Ukrainian forces were carrying out a genocide against Russian speakers in the Donbas.
Ironically, the Russian invasion caused significantly more death and hardship than the previous eight years of conflict, and cities like Mariupol—traditionally strongly pro-Russian in their sympathies—were essentially razed by indiscriminate Russian artillery strikes.
