As the Commander of the Air Force Commissioned Officer Training and Reserve COT programs, she was responsible for initial officership and leadership training for approximately 1,600 newly commissioned chaplains, health professionals, and judge advocates annually.
As a strategist, she contributed to the Combat Air Forces strategic plan and programming guidance.
She was tasked as a strategy specialist to the Office of Defense Cooperation Division, European Command in 2010 to ensure policy and strategy linkage within a 51-country Area of Responsibility.
Abstract Russia’s long, volatile history has been shaped in part by violent struggles using the proverbial sword to maintain its survival and territorial integrity.
Despite the proven effectiveness of Putin’s hybrid approach as seen in Ukraine in 2014, there are diplomatic and informational actions that NATO can employ to blunt Putin’s sword.
In Putin’s hybrid approach, information is being used as an ambiguous weapon with effective results, unlike the more clear-cut conventional approach outcomes.
Within that context, a comprehensive communication campaign to counter Putin’s misinformation is imperative.
At the heart of this strategic campaign should be substantial counter-information operations and information defense intended not only to prepare the Alliance members and partners for Russia’s actions but also to expose Putin’s misinformation.
To reinforce this effort, NATO should revise the Article V verbiage to include the use of hybrid tools and explicitly articulate what will trigger an Article V response.
Without it, NATO could find itself ill-prepared to deal with Putin’s next ambiguous engagement that may very well be within NATO’s borders.
The result could be, at best, a weakened Alliance, shaken by uncertainty of the collective defense of its trusting members.
In the worst case scenario, Putin succeeds at permanently shattering the venerable North Atlantic security establishment.
Russia’s sword today displays a distracting ornamental exterior, while still retaining the piercing qualities from the days of old.
Riled by NATO’s expansion into his sphere of influence, Putin utilizes these tools by propagating pro-Russian misinformation in areas with larger ethnic Russian populations while conveniently looking the other way while Russian hackers attack former Soviet republics’ electronic infrastructure.
Although Ukraine is not currently in NATO, it is of deep historical significance to Moscow; the Russian elites view keeping Ukraine in Russia’s orbit a vital national interest.
The world largely stood by and watched as Putin’s misinformation operations and unmarked special purpose forces set the stage there for an illegal annexation of the Crimean peninsula in 2014.
Despite the proven effectiveness of Putin’s hybrid approach in Ukraine, there are diplomatic and informational actions that NATO can employ to blunt Putin’s cloaked sword.
Russia’s Struggle for Survival and Territorial Integrity Following Napoleon’s defeat, Russia emerged as a great European power and an influential player on the world stage.
Even so, “Britain nibbled at the extremities of the Russian territory” in the 1853-1854 Crimean war, leaving ethnic Russians on the peninsula under British control.
Throughout the nineteenth century, Russia utilized both military might and diplomacy to maintain its survival and sphere of influence in the region.
In 1917, while Russia internally struggled for its very survival as a nation during the revolution, externally, Russia’s sovereign borders were being drawn by the remaining great powers.
After World War II, Russia regained control of the Baltic states and Ukraine and maintained it until the collapse of the empire in 1991.
As the post-imperial dust settled, the “near abroad” former Soviet republics quickly sought and, in numerous cases, were granted independence.
The once-great Russian empire crumbled, leaving behind many ethnic Russians on the opposite side of new borders.
NATO subsequently welcomed new members from among former Warsaw Pact satellites of the Soviet Union as well as the three Baltic republics.
Russia has maintained a deliberate interest in strategically relevant former Soviet republics and favors a wide range of strategies to maintain footholds in them.
Irregular Warfare A violent struggle among state and non-state actors for legitimacy and influence over the relevant population.
They are designed to exploit ambiguity and assure Russia’s survival and territorial integrity while evading a NATO reaction.
Russia’s hybrid tools weave the fabric of its overall military doctrine.
In February 2013, General Valery Gerasimov, Russia’s Chief of the General Staff, claimed.
The broad use of political, economic, informational, humanitarian, and other nonmilitary measures...is supplemented by military means of a concealed character, including carrying out actions of informational conflict and the actions of special operations forces.
Under the pretense of protecting ethnic Russians wherever they are, Moscow applied several of these concepts to slice away the Crimean peninsula and assault eastern Ukraine right under the international community’s nose.
An examination of Putin’s recent use of hybrid tools throughout his neighborhood underseores the trepidation.
Russia’s Recent Use of the Hybrid Approach Although the Kremlin has long eontrolled the media and employed propaganda shamelessly, this is espeeially relevant in an age of almost immediate access to information to mueh of the world’s population.
For example, aimed at the large ethnic Russian populations in Latvia and Estonia, “Moscow’s large TV, radio and internet presence is part of a hybrid battle for the Baltic hearts and minds.Messages of nationalist sentiment are intended to keep proRussian attitudes in the forefront.
Some of Putin’s “information army” pose as journalists who appear on RT as “experts.The goal is to obseure the truth by spreading alternative versions of reality; this is designed to shed a positive light on Russia, distract audiences and diseredit Western sources.
The Kremlin’s latest propaganda effort—dubbed “Sputnik”—has opened at least 29 new media offices aeross Central and Western Europe, and is even setting up shop in Latin 4 America.
Moreover, Putin’s “online trolls work out of an office called the ‘Internet Research Center’ in St.
Not only do Estonian citizens rely heavily on e-commerce and online transactions, but the country’s leaders also use online briefings as a primary means of informing the public.
Undoubtedly, in a country so heavily reliant on the Internet for information and services, the denial-of-service attacks were particularly effective in Estonia.
A Case Study The Russian Hybrid Approach in Ukraine “The war in eastern Ukraine is a Kremlin-manufactured conflict.
The war’s toll-6,200 dead, tens of thousands wounded and maimed, and over 1. million displaced persons-is the direct result of Russian President Vladimir Putin’s efforts to establish control over Ukraine.
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs A closer look of Russia’s 2014 actions in Ukraine highlights Russia’s use of hybrid tools to accomplish its strategic objectives.
Though General Philip Breedlove, USAF, the Supreme Allied Commander in Europe, acknowledged “ their occupation of Crimea, Russia has developed a very strong Anti-Access/Area Denial capability in the Black Sea,”^^ the historical significance of Ukraine to Russia suggests there is more to Putin’s aggression.
Many Ukrainians desired closer integration with Europe and a corruption-free government chosen through a democratic election.
Organized by elements of Ukraine’s struggling civil society to protest the Ukrainian government’s turn away from an Association Agreement with the European Union, the cause broadened and turned violent following brutal beatings of student protesters and implementation of antidemocratic legislation.
Putin regarded this revolution as another instance of Western influence in his backyard and took advantage of a fractured society to wield his influence.
His fear of a democratic stronghold in “Little Russia”^^ prompted him to use all means available towards his objective of reorienting Ukraine eastward.
As described above, Russia’s state-dominated media also controlled the flow and content of information across much of eastern Ukraine.
Meanwhile, Russian equipment and special purpose forces in unmarked uniforms funneled in under the guise of normal resupply activity through the Sevastopol base under lease to Russia until 2044.
Moscow denied involvement and labeled these self-defense militias; in step with the misinformation already being spread, Putin proclaimed to the world that ethnic Russians were in danger in Ukraine.
A pro-Russian mayor was put in place in Sevastopol that declared he would not accept orders from the “fascist, illegal” regime in Kyiv.
Using a falsified referendum that was not internationally recognized, Putin signed a bill two days later annexing the peninsula to Russia.
Road-Testing Rapid Reaction Capabilities,” Problems of Post-Communism, November/December 2014, 48.
Even as regular troops streamed in, Putin answered charges of aggression that these were Russian soldiers on their holiday or recently discharged servicemen, all there of their own accord.
Furthermore, in December 2015, three Ukrainian power firms confirmed the existence of BlackEnergy malware on their servers that caused power outages across the country.
The same malware was reported in January 2016, from Ukraine’s largest airport, Boryspil.
This attack is particularly menacing since the airport is responsible for over half of Ukraine’s air traffic.
Although official investigations are ongoing at this time, these attacks are being attributed to Russian hackers and have information technology security experts scrambling to secure the country’s infrastructure from future attacks.
In May, “rebels from the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts declared the establishment of New Russia, an area including southern and eastern Ukraine.” 9 crossed the Ukxainian/Russian border.
Maintaining popular support throughout the Russian population is essential to Putin’s political power base.
Though the 2015 ceasefire indicated a decrease of the violent Russian intervention in Ukraine, Putin intends to continue to spin the story to his liking and employ his hybrid approach beneath the international radar to avoid NATO’s involvement in what he considers his domestic affairs.
Implications of Putin’s Methodology Ukraine, with its large ethnic Russian population and unstable central government, gave Putin an opportunity test the West with his hybrid tools while isolating the new reformist administration in Kyiv.
Additionally, as regimes were challenged, and in some cases toppled, throughout the Arab Spring and so-called Color Revolutions, Putin and the Russian elites expressed concern this “demoeraey promotion” would spread to Russia.
VS / . i«ELAHt> UNHID HnHIRKINGDOM LAN""* ■(IGIIIIi' DENMARK L ^ y^ iiCl MdW GERMANY , ^OlAND ' amitfC 0kJI^ BELARUS NATO membership in Europe Joining d«tts; □ FouncJofs* ■ l^SO-JOOO ■ 200O-prcs««l Canutes *Anc rH^4Ciic«(Mnd.
They do not clearly present themselves as “an armed attack” as Article V states.
Instead, they are intended to indirectly prepare the “battlespace”, should one be required, all the while undermining the unity of the European community.
As NATO determines what to do about Russia’s actions in Putin’s next area of interest, he could very well be on his way to securing his objectives without even mobilizing conventional forces or pulling the Article V trigger.
Recommended NATO Actions Using Diplomatic and Information Instruments of Power to Blunt Russia’s Hybrid Approach to Warfare After the fall of the Soviet Union and the disbanding of the Warsaw Pact, many questioned the relevance of NATO in today’s globalized world.
Russia clings to outdated notions of international relations, believing it is entitled to an exclusive sphere of influence.
Only now, Moscow wields an ornamental, but still razor-sharp, sword to maintain its territory.
The immediate concern for NATO’s leadership is who Putin might target next or worse yet, who is already under assault by Russian hybrid methods.
Two possible areas of concern are the Baltic states and the Black Sea region.
Formerly under direct Soviet rule, with large ethnic Russian populations and each fielding small defense forces, the Baltic states of Estonia and Latvia make a potential target.
Romania, Bulgaria, Moldova, and Georgia also present targets of opportunity in the Black Sea region.
These countries have vulnerabilities that Russia can use (or is using) for its own purposes.
Whether it is pro-Russian enclaves (Transnistria in Moldova or Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia) or economic dependence Moscow can exploit these issues as a foot in the door.
BALTIC STATES EU and NATO members with large ethnic Russian populations that Moscow has often charged are being mistreated.
Percentage of the population that is ethnic Russian in former Soviet Republics; 1% or less 2% to 9% 10% to 24% 25% or more LITHIUANIA RUSSIA BELARUS GEORGIA Russia recognized and set up military bases in two breakaway regions in 2008.
Georgia and most of the rest of the world hasn't recognized the territories.
RUSSIA UKRAINE MOLDOVA Ethnic Russians in ^ breakaway Transnistria region have asked Moscow for protection.
CIA World Factbook The Wall Street Journal ARMENIA— KYRGYZSTAN TAJIKISTAN AZERBAIJAN Source: The Wall Street Journal ""If I wanted to, Russian troops could, in two days, be not only in Kiev but also in Riga, Vilnius, Tallinn, Warsaw, and Bucharest.
A comprehensive co mm unication campaign to counter Putin’s misinformation is imperative.
Reassurance measures include bolstering the ongoing air policing mission and increased infantry exercises in the Baltics, additional ship transits through the Black Sea, and additional exercises of NATO air assets and infantry units in Poland.
This guidance requires an update and sharpened focus on a collective way forward.
The importance of seizing the strategic narrative and assuring the accuracy of the information is being communicated to NATO and United States domestic audiences alike cannot be overstated.
Specifically in the U.S., where the media is clearly not controlled by the government, a whole of government approach that distributes clear, concise and standardized messaging is required.
Since “the United States can help bring a free, fair and balanced press to these countries in which Putin is undermining truth and fact,”""^^ the message needs to reflect NATO’s way forward and be proliferated across the media spectrum.
Broadcasters funded by the United States government such as the Voice of America and Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty are instrumental in providing the truth to eountless citizens under Putin’s umbrella of misinformation.
This 2016 research effort comes on the heels of an updated strategic communication directive and seeks to identify “how Russia with the help of mass media influences the Euro-Atlantic values and redefines the meaning of democracy, media freedom, human rights, trust to international organisations, freedom of speech and other values in the Euro-Atlantic space.” 15 chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, is a tremendous advocate for exposing Putin’s misinformation.
We do not need to engage in an information war, rather we need to empower civil society, journalists and citizens to distinguish between fact and fiction.
To reinforce this effort, NATO should “clearly articulate what counts as an attack under Article For example, Estonia was nearly crippled by the cyber attack on its infrastructure in 2007.
Although cyber security was addressed at the 2014 Wales Summit, the Alliance concluded that determination on whether a cyber attack on one of its members invokes Article V action would be made on a case-by-case basis.Additionally, Russia’s “little green men” were successful in preparing Crimea for a Russian annexation long before the confirmed appearance of conventional forces on the eastern border.
With Russia choosing not to cooperate with international cybersecurity initiatives and already skilled in the use of unmarked special purpose forces, revised Article V verbiage to address the use of hybrid tools is imperative.
A resolute strategic communication program that includes counter-information techniques and information defense will uncover Putin’s misinformation and hamper his attempts to delegitimize Western institutions, create confusion and foster dissent.
This will better prepare member countries and partners for Russia’s hybrid approach as implemented in Ukraine Putin is still exploiting these methodologies within NATO countries today.
Czuperski, Maksymilian, John Herbst, Eliot Higgins, Alina Polyakova, and Damon Wilson.
A Primer on Modem Russian Unconventional Warfare, Ukraine 20132014,” , 38.
Ed Royce, “Countering Putin’s Information Weapons of War,” Wall Street Journal, April 14, 2015, 1.
Mark Conversino, Northeast Europe Regional Culture Studies lecture #1, 5 January 2016.
Three Aspects of Russia’s Current Information Campaign in Ukraine,” Journal of Slavic Military Studies, Volume 28, 2015, 301.
McIntosh, “Kyiv, International Institutions, and the Russian People,” 299.
A Pre-Emptive Strategy for Dealing with the New Disinfomation Wars,” Beyond Propaganda, London, England: Legatum Institute, September 2015, 30.
Getting NATO Ready for a New Cold War,” Survival, Volume 57, Number 1, February-March 2015, 60.
James Clapper, “Worldwide Threat Assessment of the United States Intelligence Community,” February 2015, 3.
