The Ukraine crisis exposed KEYWORDS the weaknesses of this strategy, forcing Russia to fall back on Russia; Eurasian Economic coercive means to keep Kiev from moving closer to the West.
Fears of such an outcome overestimate Russia’s ability to use coercion and underestimate post-Soviet states capacity to resist.
Rather than emerging as a regional bully, Russia is trying to push Eurasian integration forward by becoming a regional security provider.
The article relates these efforts to the larger literature on regional integration and security hierarchies – bridging the two bodies of theory by arguing that regional leaders can use the provision of security to promote economic integration.
Despite initial signs of success, we believe that the new strategy will ultimately fail.
Eurasian integration will continue to stagnate as long as Russia’s economic and soft power remain weak because Russia will be unable to address the economic and social problems that are at the root of the region’s security problems.
Introduction Over the last few years, Russia has tried to establish a “soft” hegemony in the post-Soviet region, using economic incentives and Soviet legacies of shared history and culture to entice post-Soviet states to join its regional integration efforts.
To further this goal, Moscow has even been willing to take responsibility for the provision of regional collective goods such as security, free trade, energy resources, and financial stability.
Russia’s efforts to entice Ukraine into its economic and political orbit have backfired, and Moscow now finds itself using military and covert means in order to destabilize the situation in that country and prevent it from moving closer to the West.
Moscow’s hope is that once the country’s turn to the West fails, Ukraine will have no choice but to participate in Russian-led Eurasian integration.
This article will examine the ways in which Russia’s approach to regional integration has changed in the wake of the Ukraine crisis.
However, this does not necessarily mean that Russia is now bent on using hard or coercive means to achieve its goals.
It is unlikely that Moscow will adopt the same tactics it has used in Crimea and eastern Ukraine in other parts of the post-Soviet space.
The leadership realizes that the costs of doing so are prohibitively high, as its behavior in Ukraine has already raised concerns and fears in other post-Soviet states, forcing the Russian government to reallocate precious economic resources toward calming these fears and reassuring their partners.
Rather than becoming a regional bully, Russia is trying to use the advantage it still holds in military and other hard-power resources to position itself as the region’s security hegemon, helping the region’s weak authoritarian regimes to deal with internal and external security threats, particularly those rising from the spread of Islamic radicalism represented by ISIS and instability in Afghanistan.
In doing so, Russia is pursuing a strategy very much in line with Lake and Morgan and Lake’s concept of regional security hierarchy.
By providing for these states’ security, Moscow hopes to gain the loyalty of the region’s other states and their participation in its project of regional economic integration.
We argue that Russia is thus trying to use its hard power to achieve what are primarily economic or geoeconomic goals.
Rather, it reflects the dearth of soft and economic power resources available to Russia to pursue the larger goal of regional integration, which Russia’s elites see as being a key to maintaining the country’s status as a great power in world politics in the years to come.
If Russia indeed emerges as revisionist challenger to the Western-led liberal order, the West will also have to share some of the blame.
In doing so, Western leaders took advantage of Russia’s perceived economic and soft-power weaknesses, not recognizing that this would provoke a hard-power response.
As a result, Russia has become further estranged from the Western-led order and sees the use of coercive and hard power as the only tools available to it to defend and promote its interests.
Russia’s Drive for Post-Soviet Regional Integration Russia has invested heavily in the process of regional integration of the postSoviet space.
Russian leaders believe that Eurasian integration is of key importance for reversing their country’s economic and geopolitical decline.
This new push for integration began in the late 2000s, and it is a significant ­departure from earlier policies.
The Commonwealth of Independent States 1 was initially designated as the main vehicle for regional integration in the 1990s.
Regional disintegration and the dissolution of economic and political bonds that had been created in the Soviet and Tsarist periods continued.
Despite its pro-integration rhetoric, Russia was not really willing to make the sacrifices and efforts needed to make regional integration work.
This was apparent early on when Russia withdrew its support for maintaining the CIS as a ruble zone in 1992.
Russia had neither the will nor the resources to counter the upsurge of nationalism throughout the former Soviet Union.
This policy served to reassure the Kremlin that since Russia subsidized these countries, it still maintained influence in the post-Soviet space.
At the same time, however, they steadfastly defended their sovereignty and resisted Russia’s efforts to tie them into Russian-led regional institutions.
Ukraine failed to ratify the CIS treaty and instead only accepted associate member status in the organization.
It turned down the invitation to join the Russian-led Customs Union and only accepted observer status in Eurasian Economic Community in 2000.
Other Central Asian states were also interested in integrating with the richer Russian economy.
Given its residual military capabilities, Russia found it much easier to establish itself as a regional peacekeeper and conflict manager.
Russia carried out peacekeeping operations in Moldova’s Trans-Dniester region and in Georgia’s region of South Ossetia in 1992 and then later in Georgia’s Abkhazia region and in Tajikistan in 1994.
Initially, the primary goal of these operations was to stop violence and prevent anti-Russian political forces from taking power.
Russia began to show a renewed commitment toward regional integration after the financial crisis of 2008.
Since then, Russia has intensified its efforts to promote regional integration.
These relationships exclude states such as Georgia and Azerbaijan, which are more interested in integration with powers in the Western bloc, and instead focus on building relations with states like Belarus, Kazakhstan, Armenia, and the Central Asian states, which are more amenable to integration.
The primary institutional vehicle for achieving Russia’s goals has been the CU, which was established by Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan in 2009 with the goal of eliminating tariffs and customs controls between their countries and creating a genuine common market and economic space.
The CU was transformed into the EEU January 2015, as additional measures were implemented to harmonize legislation among the three markets and set up an arbitration mechanism to settle disputes.
With Russia’s financial backing the EEU has also established a $10 billion crisis fund.
Belarus drew $3 billion from the fund in 2012, helping it to meet its international debt obligations and avoid having to go to the International Monetary Fund for assistance.
Armenia and Kyrgyzstan joined the EEU in 2015, and Tajikistan has been officially invited to join and is undergoing the ascension process for membership.
Access to Russia’s growing domestic markets and Russian finance, as well as discounted energy prices were all used to entice the post-Soviet countries to join.
On the elite level this includes shared political and economic networks rooted in Moscow, where many of the region’s elite continue to go to for business and education.
Yet, there is also a popular component, exemplified by the ubiquitous presence of Russian pop music, movies, and television series throughout the region.
The project, which enjoys strong support from the Russian government, is designed to promote the development of a common cultural and linguistic space that will unite the post-Soviet countries based on the shared legacy of Russian language, history, and culture.
In effect, Russia has tried to position itself as a benevolent regional hegemon that can provide regional collective goods, be they in the form of security, access to markets, acting as a lender of last resort in times of crisis, or the preservation of shared cultural legacies.
A Failure of Russian Economic and Soft Power In the prelude to the 2013 Ukraine crisis, Russia made sustained efforts to use its economic and soft power to bring Ukraine into its Eurasian integration project.
These efforts had to compete with those of the European Union to begin the process of Ukraine’s European integration via the signing of a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement and an “association agreement” that would begin the country’s political and economic transformation according to EU standards.
For its part, Moscow offered Kiev preferential access to its market through the Customs Union.
Moscow was also willing to provide Kiev with much-needed financial aid.
Ukraine’s financial position was dire, with the country owing nearly USD 60 billion in loans due by July 2015.
Russia’s decision to buy USD15 billion in Ukrainian bonds was thus a real lifeline to Ukraine’s struggling economy.
Another economic lever was Ukraine’s energy dependence on Russia, with more than half of Ukraine’s gas coming from Russia.
Russia tried to take advantage of its still-considerable soft power in Ukraine, manifest in the two countries’ strong historical and cultural ties.
Russian popular culture had a wide following in Ukraine as did the Russian media, which often disseminated the Kremlin’s views on current events – including the issue of Eurasian integration.
Moscow also invested heavily in pro-Russian media and cultural organizations and financed NGOs and civil society groups in Ukraine that would support Russia’s interests, particularly in Crimea and the eastern portion of the country.
Ukraine’s political and business elites were tied to the post-Soviet “old boy” power networks centered in Moscow.
This gave Moscow considerable leverage in terms of the elite’s material interests, which were often closely allied with Moscow’s.
Ukraine’s elites also shared a common worldview and political and business culture with their counterparts in Moscow.
Yanukovych wanted to bring state institutions under his centralized control, and he saw Russia’s centralized semi-authoritarian system as a model to be emulated.
Months of massive pro-EU demonstrations followed as many Ukrainians saw Yanukovych’s decision as selling out the larger national interest to Russia.
A sizable number of Ukrainians continued to support close ties with Russia and to reject NATO membership.
Nevertheless, the results, in terms of Russian foreign policy are clear.
In the end, all of Russia’s efforts to use economic incentive and soft power to entice Ukraine to join the Eurasian integration project failed.
Moscow found itself facing its nightmare scenario – the coming to power of a pro-Western government that was determined to turn Ukraine toward the path of Western integration and possibly even NATO membership.
This turn of events exposed Russia’s lack of soft power as well as its limited ability to use economic inducement to achieve its foreign policy goals – even in its own immediate neighborhood.
This failure forced Russia to turn to other, more coercive, hard-power means to achieve its goals.
Moscow looked to protect its core strategic and military interest in the country by orchestrating the annexation of Crimea.
The Kremlin was also determined to isolate the new government in Kiev and bring it to heel by stirring up ethnic conflict in the east.
Toward this goals, it helped to incite domestic malcontents in the Donbas and in Crimea who were bolstered by radical elements from Russia itself.
These forces were given generous military aid and support, including the deployment of regular Russian troops, to save them from probable defeat at the hands of the Ukrainian authorities in August 2014.
Eurasian Integration after Ukraine – Russia’s Declining Ability to Use Instruments of Soft Power Russia’s instruments of economic and soft power are beginning to decline even further in the wake of the Ukraine crisis.
Russia’ economy has been battered by Western sanctions and the steep decline in the price of oil.
Russian GDP growth was beginning to stagnate even before the crisis; in 2014, GDP grew by less than 1% and the ruble lost almost 60% of its value against the United States dollar.
This economic downturn has reduced Russia’s ability to use economic incentives and inducements to promote its Eurasian project.
As a result, Russia has become less attractive as a market for other post-Soviet states.
Russian businesses are also less willing to invest in neighboring countries as they face a credit crunch at home.
Over the late few decades, Russia has become a major destination for migrant labor throughout the post-Soviet space.
Russia is the country with the second largest number of immigrants in the world, after the United States.
Dependence on this source of income has given Russia tremendous political and economic leverage.
For example, the government of Tajikistan agreed to extend Russia’s right to base troops on its territory to 2042 in exchange for Russia raising the quota for the number of guest workers from Tajikistan that would be allowed to work in Russia.
With the economic downturn in Russia and the steep decline in the value of the Russian ruble, many of these migrants are now going home.
Migrant laborers are also sending back less money to their home countries.
Russia is becoming less attractive as a destination for migrant labor, and Russia may be losing a valuable source of soft-power leverage over these states.
The crisis in Ukraine has also exposed the limited appeal of Russia’s soft power – even within the post-Soviet space.
Russia’s approach to soft power has relied heavily on common cultural legacies.
A country must also have an attractive economic and political model that others admire and seek to emulate.
While some domestic interest groups in post-Soviet states may have close connections to the Russian political and economic establishment, Russia’s authoritarian political regime and corrupt oligarchic capitalism have little popular appeal beyond its borders.
Most post-Soviet states have authoritarian political regimes, and this has not significantly hindered Russia’s ability to project its influence.
Though the EU was unable to offer much in the way of material incentives, the European model of political and economic governance, which Ukraine would be obliged to accept if it signed the agreements with the EU, offered a way out of the morass of cronyism, corruption, and political manipulation that have plagued Ukraine ever since its independence.
For those who took to Maidan square to protest the Yanukovych government’s decision to back away from the EU, a turn toward the Russian-led Eurasian Union promised to maintain the status quo or – even worse – to increase authoritarians and open the country to economic predation by Russian oligarchs.
Russian Ethnic Nationalism Rears its Ugly Head With its ability to use soft power and economic incentives declining, Russia may shift to using hard-power resources – military force and political pressure – in order to push integration forward.
These hard-power tools were on full display during Moscow’s sophisticated operation to annex Crimea and (less effectively) its support of separatists in Ukraine’s Donetsk and Lugansk regions.
Moscow justified the annexation of Crimea by appealing to Russia’s right to defend its ethnic Russian kin throughout the post-Soviet space.
Putin made this the central theme of his 18 March 2014 Crimea speech, in which he announced Crimea’s “return” to Russia and justified his policies in Ukraine to the nation.
The speech can be read as a call to irredentism and a repudiation of the legitimacy of the post-Soviet division of borders.
The speech argues that in annexing Ukraine, Russia is correcting a historical wrong and suggests that the Crimean precedent can be repeated in other post-Soviet countries where Russian ethnic minorities face the threat of persecution, such as Kazakhstan and Moldova.
Even states whose close economic and political ties with Russia have forced them to tacitly accept Moscow’s policies (Kazakhstan and Belarus) have found subtle ways to voice their displeasure.
The Belarusian population closely identifies with Russia and has been largely sympathetic to Russia’s policies in Ukraine.
However, results from a national survey conducted by the Independent Institute for Socio-Economic and Political Studies in December 2014 seem to indicate that Russia’s actions in Ukraine have heightened anxieties about Belarusian national sovereignty and eroded support for union with Russia.
There is also subtle evidence that the threat of Russian irredentism has already begun to affect the bargaining calculus between Russia and Kazakhstan.
Russia has been unhappy with the Kazakh government in that it has not offered it the expected level of support on Ukraine.
Astana has refrained from directly criticizing Crimea’s annexation and Russia’s support for separatists in the east and has approached the subject very carefully, stressing the complex historical context under which the crisis has occurred and stressing the need for an end to the violence and a negotiated settlement.
Its support has stopped short of formal recognition, and it failed to support the retaliatory sanctions against agricultural products that Russia put in place in response to EU sanctions, a move that has ­significantly weakened the cohesiveness of the EEU’s trade and customs policies.
Though ostensibly complimentary, the statement can be interpreted as an indirect threat to Kazakh sovereignty and a warning of what may follow if Kazakhstan does indeed choose to leave the EEU .2 The use of these kinds of coercive tactics comes at a steep price.
If Moscow continues to go down this path it will erode the legitimacy of the Eurasian project and foster resistance on the part of subordinate states.
Both countries have also asserted their independence during the Ukraine crisis.
Rather than unequivocally backing Russia in its fight against the Ukrainian government, both have hedged against Russian domination by opening up channels of communication and cooperation with Kiev.
Moreover, EEU members and candidate countries have taken advantage of the Ukraine crisis to extract costly concessions from Russia in exchange for continued support for integration.
EEU member state Kyrgyzstan is asking for a payment of USD 1 billion to compensate for the losses that higher EEU import tariffs will incur to its re-export of Chinese goods to Russia and other EEU member states.
In the end, the use of force and coercion in Ukraine has made it more costly for Russia to continue its regional integration project at a time when its economic resources are diminished.
However, such a conclusion fails to capture the true nature of the shift in Russia’s regional leadership strategy.
The leadership in Moscow has backed away from coercive strategies even in Ukraine.
The initial euphoria over Crimea has given way to a more sober assessment of the costs of a more coercive approach – both in terms of the stiff resistance it is likely to meet from the smaller states in the post-Soviet space as well as isolation from the West.
Moreover, as has been examined in the above section, the post-Soviet states have actually been able to use Russia’s post-Ukraine international isolation to extract economic concession from Moscow in return for their continued support for integration.
At the same time, there is a growing appreciation in Moscow that Russia’s ability to continue to use economic incentives to ensure these states’ loyalty is now limited by Moscow’s own economic woes.
As a result, Russia has begun to shift its policy of regional integration away from economic issues and toward security and hard-power issues, areas where it continues to enjoy a distinct advantage.
Russia is not simply trying to use its hard and coercive power to reestablish empire.
Rather, Russia’s approach is to establish its influence in these states by taking the lead on regional security issues and by positioning itself as the main guarantor of the security of the region’s regimes against internal and transnationals security threats.
The Arab Spring and the rise of ISIS are of grave concern to the leadership in Central Asia and the Caucusus, both indirectly as a result of demonstration effects that may destabilize their own regimes (which are rife with corruption and weak in legitimacy), as well as directly, as jihadists that are currently fighting in the Middle East eventually come home.
These problems take on increased importance as the United States winds down its presence in Afghanistan, opening up the prospect of further instability and the Taliban’s return to power.
These threats are of growing importance as two of the most significant Central Asian nations, Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan, face the prospects of leadership successions due to the advanced age of their authoritarian presidents.
Thus far, the region’s leaders have been able to keep the lid on public discontent.
But recent events in Tajikistan are a reminder of just how fragile many of these regimes are.
In recent months, Russia has stepped up its security commitments throughout the region.
The topic of instability in the Middle East and the threat from ISIS were at the forefront of the CSTO’s September 2015 meeting in Dushanbe, Tajikistan.
At Russia’s initiative member states agreed to a number of reforms designed to address the ISIS threat.
Despite a direct request from the Kyrgyz government, the CSTO failed to send forces to Kyrgyzstan in May–June 2010 when riots between ethnic Uzbeks and Kyrgyz broke out in the southern part of that country, largely because the legal framework for such an intervention was not in place.
Russia has also used the CSTO to police cyber space throughout the region.
According to President of Kyrgyzstan, Almazbek Atambayev, The recruitment of our citizens to participate in the armed conflict on the side of ISIS is particularly troubling, as many have returned to continue their terrorist activities and recruit others to their cause in the countries of the region.
By supporting the Assad regime, Moscow is demonstrating its commitment to its Central Asian allies.
Most of them head secular authoritarian regimes that have narrow bases of social support based on clan or tribal affiliations and which face the prospect of active Islamist insurgencies.
Many of these regimes do not fully trust the United States and fear that any support they may get from Washington will require concessions on their part on democracy and human rights.
After prolonged foot-dragging, Kyrgyzstan finally joined the EEU in August 2015.
Though the two countries are wary that Moscow is using the conflict to promote its regional hegemony, they are also heavily dependent on Russia.
Armenia is a member of the CSTO and counts on Russia as a final guarantor if its security.
Russia has been able to play on regional security concerns to push forward security proposals that reflect its more narrow security concerns.
Up until now, Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan have jealously guarded their sovereignty and independence and stayed out of Russian-led integration efforts.
Realizing the limits of its economic resources, Russia has now invited China to participate in its projects of Eurasian economic integration.
Putin and Chinese President Xi Jinping have signed a memorandum of cooperation between the Eurasian Economic Union and China’s Silk Road initiative whereby the two powers would work together to promote the region’s economic development.
Moscow’s acceptance of China’s growing economic presence in Central Asia represents a dramatic reversal in policy.
Russia has gone from a strategy of trying to use economic incentives and soft power to push forward regional integration to one in which it is looking to use its hard-power resources to achieve the same goals by positioning itself as the main security provider for the region’s states.
This shift in strategy reflects a realization of the limits of its economic and soft-power resources as well as a newfound confidence in its hard-power capabilities.
Broader significance for the study of regions and regionalism While the focus has been on contemporary Russia, this study makes several contributions to our broader understanding of regionalism, and in particularly, the role that regional powers play in pushing regional integration forward.
This study illustrates the way in which regional powers can use hard power to pursue what are predominantly economic goals.
This study shows that even when a regional power’s ultimate goal is economic integration, it does not necessarily have to only rely on its economic or soft-power to push forward the integration agenda.
Hard-power tools or the provision of security (for example, through the deployment of peacekeeping forces) can also be used as a tool for regional powers that lack economic or soft-power resources.
Russia’s new strategy for regional integration is in line with Lake and Morgan and Lake’s work on regional security hierarchies.
According to these studies, dominant states provide order and security, and in turn, make demands on subordinate states, which benefit from the order and therefore come to regard the leadership of the dominant state as legitimate and necessary for the maintenance of order.
Dominant states form a kind of “contractual relationship” with subordinates in which protection is exchanged for loyalty.
As the dominant military power in the region, Russia is attempting to assert its authority by establishing hierarchical relations with the region’s smaller states that commit it to providing for their internal security in exchange for their participation in Russian-led regional integration projects.
Lake and Morgan and Lake focus on the security dimensions of the emerging hierarchical relationship.
However, Russia’s goals are shaped as much by economic interests as they are by security.
Russia is trying to leverage its security leadership to achieve its broader regional economic goals and advance regional economic integration.
The analyses of Lake and Morgan and Lake primarily focus on the external security threats that subordinate states face from other states; that is, in providing regional order, the dominant state keeps subordinate regional states from fighting one another.
This article also examines the leadership role that powerful regional states can play in protecting states from internal security threats, particularly those that have transnational or global dimension, such as Islamic radicalism.
As such, this is a heretofore ignored dimension of security leadership that may be of particular significance to regional powers that are trying to exercise their authority over developing states.
It is these kinds of internal threats, rather than threats from other states, that constitute the most acute threat to many of the post-Soviet countries, whose experiences of stateand nation-building are weak and whose domestic political regimes are poorly institutionalized and highly authoritarian.
Here, Russia has a comparative advantage over other possible security sponsors in that it is much more tolerant of these regime’s violations of human rights and anti-democratic practices.
Conclusion The crisis in Ukraine exposed Russia’s limited ability to use material incentives and soft power to integrate the post-Soviet space under its leadership.
As a result, Russian leaders have chosen to rely on the country’s still considerable hard power and military capabilities to push integration forward.
The alternative would mean giving up the pursuit of regional dominance and the Eurasian integration project, and is not considered to be a viable option.
It would be easy to place the blame squarely on Russia for this turn of events.
But the West – and particularly the architects of the EU’s Eastern Policies – also made a critical mistake in pushing for Ukraine’s Western integration without taking Russia’s interests into account.
In doing so, Western leaders took advantage of Russia’s soft-power weaknesses, not appreciating that this would provoke a hard-power response.
A more farsighted strategy would have also given Russia some stake in Ukraine’s future, instead of letting the question of Ukraine’s future devolve into a zero-sum contest between East and West.
Russia may have been willing to accept Ukraine’s European integration if it had also promised some tangible benefits for Russia.
If such an agreement had been offered from the very beginning, we may have been able to avoid the current crisis entirely.
A Ukrainian strategy that included Russia would also have allowed Russia to develop its economic and soft power so that it would not have to rely on its hard and coercive power to push regional integration forward.
Instead, we now have a Russia that has become estranged from the Western-led world order and which sees the use of coercive and hard power as the only tools available to it to defend and promote its interests.
In the absence of economic and soft power it may be logical for Russia to move to a strategy where it relies on its hard power to push forward its foreign policy goals.
Russia may be overestimating the usefulness of its hard-power resources in achieving goals, such as Eurasian integration, which will also require it to effectively exercise economic and soft power if they are to truly be successful.
Reliance on hard power can detract from its ability to develop its soft power and economic resources.
Investment in the military and the embracing of military commitments on its periphery and beyond places a burden on the Russian economy and creates resentment and fear of Russia among many of the smaller states in the region.
Because hard power is the only effective tool we have we see it as the solution to all problems.
While Russia and the rest of the world certainly face many new and pressing security challenges, Moscow’s preoccupation with the use of hard power may give rise to a skewed world view which exaggerates the degree to which the world is becoming more dangerous and disorderly and overemphasizes the effectiveness of traditional military means in addressing the actual threats that are emerging in an increasingly globalized and interconnected world.
Ukraine and Turkmenistan are only associate members, as they never officially ratified the CIS founding treaty.
Georgia withdrew from the organization in 2009 in the aftermath of the 2008 RussoGeorgian war.
In 2014, the Ukrainian government announced that it will cut all its ties with the organization and submitted a bill to the Ukrainian parliament to begin the process.
However, the United States criticizes the kind of gross human rights violations that often occur when authoritarian governments repress internal opposition.
For example, the United States was very vocal in its criticism of Uzbekistan’s government after it massacred protester in Andijan in 2005.
This prompted Uzbekistan to back away from the security ties it was developing with the United States and to increase security cooperation with Russia and China.
Disclosure statement No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Ivanter, Viktor Valery, Vladimir Yasinskiy Geets, Alexander Shirov, and Andrey Anisimov.12.
