The Kowalsky Program also sponsors an annual summer archaeological expedition in Baturyn, Ukraine.
Essays on the Humanities, History, and PoliKeo tics in Contemporary Ukraine, Poland, and Russia by Tomasz Stryjek.
The ‘Slovo’ Writers’ House in Kharkiv and the Unknown Destiny of its Inhabitants (The Tragic Fate of the Ukrainian Writer Mykhailo Bykovets during the Great Purge),” delivered by Dr.
From the Director “The letter kills, but the spirit gives life” would like our friends and enemies to rest assured that the Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies at the Univ. of Alberta is alive and well.
The period of its administrative reorganization appears to have completed its initial and most challenging phase.
Iam sure that, given good will, patience, and dedication to the principles of academic autonomy, an appropriate formula will be found. he innovative development strategy proposed several years ago is beginning to yield its first academic results.
The Contemporary Ukraine Studies Programme , established two years ago, already has a solid record of conferences, seminars, round tables, and publications.
This year, I am proud to say that we have residing at our Institute the first holders of the Stasiuk Postdoc Fellowships.
Three issues of the new electronic journal East/West have been published in the course of two years.
Volodymyr Kravchenko, CIUS director their ""Vision"" for the development of their centre to community stakeholders. [he Holodomor Research and Education Consortium has become one of the Institute's most effective units.
Significant changes will affect the Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine project; the main emphasis will transfer to the history and current state of Ukrainian Studies in the Western world.
The commemoration of this “less than round” anniversary of CIUS is an occasion not so much for celebration as for a sober assessment of what has been accomplished and what still lies ahead.
We must respond to the new challenges facing academic Ukrainian studies, the Ukrainian community in Canada, and the Ukrainian state.
This book contains research essays in Jewish studies by young historians from Lviv, Kharkiv, Kyiv, Dnipropetrovsk, and Luhansk.
Zaporizhia Archaeographic and ethnographic expeditions Village of Basan (Polohiv district, Zaporizhia region) Villages of Bohdanivka, Stepanivka-Druha (Pryoziv district, Zaporizhia region) Urban village of Verkhnii Rohachyk City of Polohy Publications 1.
Baturyn In the summer of 2014, the CanadaUkraine archaeological expedition carried out its annual excavations in Baturyn, Chernihiv oblast, Ukraine.
Journal of Ukrainian Studies , an online academic journal sponsored by the CIUS, published its inaugural issue in August 2014.
The journal's editor-in-chief, Professor Oleh S Ilnytzkyj, is currently working on future issues, one of which will be about the city of Kharkiv.
In June 2015 Tania Plawuszczak-Stech joined the EWIJUS staff as book review editor.
The editor-in-chief expressed his sincere gratitude to the outgoing book review editor, Dr.
East/West: Journal of Ukrainian Studies was envisioned as a peerreviewed scholarly venue for the dissemination of new interdisciplinary research on all aspects of Ukraine, past and present, especially from an international perspective.
According to Professor IInytzkyj, EWJUS is already living up to its mission by attracting contributors from Canada, the USA, Australia, and Europe.
More importantly, during its very short existence, it has earned an active following among readers.
Svitlana Krys As an online publication, EWJUS is able to track not only the number of registered readers on its site, but also the popularity of articles as evidenced by downloads.
Unlike the former JUS, which was based on subscriptions, EWJUS is freely available to anyone who simply registers on our site.
Visitors from 68 different countries have come to the EWJUS site to read abstracts and download articles.
The most active visitors and readers hail from Canada and the USA, followed by Ukraine, Germany, and Russia.
The popularity of our content can be gauged by the number of article downloads and page views of abstracts.
The Study of the Holodomor and Ukrainian Historiography” (Downloads: 34; Abstract views: 89) 3.
Two Memory Cultures at the Western Ukrainian Borderland” (Downloads: 29; Abstract page views: 99) 5.
The number of visitors is doubtless greater than that enjoyed by any other English-language Ukraine-oriented research journal in North America.
The challenge before us is to increase our editorial staff and financial resources, which will allow us to expand and cope with a larger number of submissions and technical issues.
Since this is an open-access journal, it must fund its activity from non-subscription sources.
The Holodomor—the Famine of 1932-33 in Ukraine—is a rich subject for study.
The Holodomor Research and Education Consortium was established as a CIUS project in 2013 to promote research and awareness of the Holodomor and its inclusion in school curricula.
One way in which HREC supports research on the Holodomor is the funding of projects that broaden access to eyewitness accounts.
One such source is a collection of letters amassed by the writer Volodymyr Maniak and his wife, Lidiia Kovalenko.
Written in the late 1980s and early 1990s, following the lifting of the taboo on discussing the Holodomor, the letters often begin with expressions of gratitude for the opportunity to speak on the issue.
HREC is working with Mr Bojczuk to transcribe the letters, which contain some of the first expressions from the general public in Ukraine concerning the Famine.
HREC seeks out opportunities to engage scholars from various disciplines in examining the implications of the Holodomor.
The “Communism and Hunger” conference attracted specialists on Soviet, Chinese, and Kazakh history.
HREC also encouraged the participation of early-career scholars through conference attendance stipends.
In 2016, the Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies celebrates 40 years since its founding.
To mark this special occasion, CIUS will be Organizing a series of events and activities focusing on Ukrainian Studies in North America.
We plan HREC holds grant competitions to support research and preservation of materials.
To date, HREC has made 21 awards, including a grant to support research on the Torgsin store system, where starving peasants traded gold and other valuables for food, as well as a micro-history of two villages and the role of local perpetrators there.
Professor Timothy Snyder of Yale Univ. presented this year's lecture on November 4.
The HREC mandate includes development of educational programs in secondary schools.
HREC prepares teaching materials, conducts training for educators, and is a partner in the Holodomor National Awareness Tour, a project led by the CanadaUkraine Foundation and funded by the Canadian government's Multiculturalism Inter-Action Program.
Through the lens of the Holodomor, the tour will promote understanding of the consequences of hatred and discrimination and highlight the values of freedom, democracy, human rights, and the rule of law.
A key feature of the tour is the Holodomor Mobile Classroom, a customized RV that will visit schools across Canada, featuring state-of-theart audio-visual and multimedia capabilities.
Bohdan Klid oversees HREC research activities, supported by Andrij Makuch; Director of Education Valentina Kuryliw oversees the education program.
HREC was established with generous support from the Temerty Family Foundation.
Bohdan Harasymiw, | Program Coordinator The mandate of CUSP (formerly Centre for Political and Regional Studies) is to develop new directions for CIUS, emphasizing research in the social sciences focused on Ukraine since independence in 1991.
In March 2015, CUSP held a three-day symposium to mark the anniversary of Ukraine's Euromaidan Revolution, in conjunction with the 49th annual Shevchenko Lecture.
The symposium included papers by Marta Dyczok, Volodymyr Kulyk, Vladyslav Hrynevych, Bohdan Kordan, Taras Kuzio, and Mychailo Wynnyckyj.
A round-table discussion comparing the revolutions of 2004 and 2014 featured David Marples, Robert Murray, Larissa Blavatska, Lubomyr Markevych, and Michael Bociurkiw.
This conference was extremely successful, unprecedentedly so in terms of attendance, engagement with the community, financing through outside fund-raising, and raising the profile of CIUS locally, nationally, and internationally.
CUSP also coordinated CIUS participation in International Week on campus on 27 January 2015.
Today, with a sophisticated IEU web site giving Internet users worldwide access to more than 6,000 articles, accompanied by thousands of illustrations, tables, and music files, the IEU is the most widely influential of all CIUS projects.
The IEU has been favourably reCIUS Newsletter 2015 ceived not only by the academic community but also by the general public and Internet viewers.
In 2014-15, the IEU site has been visited by up to 1,500 persons per day, and the IEU staff has received feedback and numerous queries from scholars, students, and other Internet users from various countries.
It thus reaches much wider audiences than our scholarly programs and publications.
Stech, with Andrij Makuch as senior editor, added new information to the site on a variety of topics and a focus time to exchange views.
Preferred topics of research proposals include identities, nationalism, regions, borders, social values, and historical politics.
Bohdan Harasymiw, is serving as the lead investigator of a three-year project on democratic reform of governance in Ukraine, funded by a grant of $100,000 from the Kule Institute for Advanced Study.
Projects and Programs PSSST ESS on particular subjects, such as the history, cities, and population of the wartorn Donets Basin region and southeastern Ukraine; the history of education in Ukraine; Ukrainian national parks and nature reserves; the history of landscape painting and portraiture in Ukrainian art, and others.
Fa EAS Mg LNA SESE RISES ATR OE Peter Jacyk Centre for Historical Research and NZ fey ET SALMA oe TS RL As it expands, the IEU project is developing new areas of particular focus.
Index Search Contact Address | Petro Jacyk Program for the Study of Modern Ukrainian History and Society Dr.
Hrushevsky Translation Project The 2014-15 academic year was one of intensive work on the Hrushevsky Translation Project.
Volume 10, which concludes Hrushevsky’s History of Ukraine-Rus’, was published in November 2014.
The volume deals with the Treaty of Hadiach and the years immediately after Khmelnytsky’s death.
It features an introduction by Yaroslav Fedoruk documenting the last years of Hrushevsky’s life and a bibliography by Andrew Pernal of scholarly works on the Cossack period published since the appearance of volume 8 , which documented earlier works.
The occasion was also a tribute to the late Honourable John Yaremko, a former minister of the government of Ontario and sponsor of the volume.
It was attended by over 70 members of the Toronto academic and general community, including the president of the Petro Jacyk Educational Foundation, Ms.
Uliana Pasicznyk serves as managing editor and Robert Romanchuk and Yaroslav Fedoruk as consulting editors.
Nearly complete is the editing of volume 4, which deals with political affairs in Ukraine under Lithuanian and Polish rule and is co-sponsored by the Shevchenko Foundation.
CIUS Newsletter 2015 Projects and Programs Yurkevich serves as managing editor and Robert Frost as consulting editor.
With work proceeding apace on volumes 5 and 2, the goal of publishing all the volumes of the History is approaching realization.
Pavlo Khrystiuk, “Chronicle of the Ukrainian Revolution” The Centre has secured $20,000 United States from the Ukrainian Studies Fund, Inc. to support the study of modern Ukrainian history.
Khrystiuk was a member of the Ukrainian Central Rada and a negotiator of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, which secured international recognition for the Ukrainian state.
The translator is Alan Rutkowski, a former Slavic librarian at the Univ. of Alberta.
Professor Mark von Hagen of Arizona State Univ. will serve as the scholarly editor of the volume, which will be a major Centre and CIUS contribution to the centenary commemoration of the Ukrainian Revolution of 1917-21 and the establishment of an independent Ukrainian state.
Marko R Stech, Uliana Pasicznyk, Tania Plawuszczak-Stech, and Frank E Sysyn.
At the founding meeting of the commission , Professor Yaroslav Hrytsak was elected program director, along with Professor Martin Schulze Wessel of Ludwig-Maximilpea iansUniversitat Miinchen as co-director.
The German Foreign Ministry has guaranteed multi-year funding for this important initiative to bring together German and Ukrainian historians.
Since July 2014, ULEC has engaged with the community on collaborative educational endeavours, pursued a number of exciting research projects, given conference presentations, submitted academic publications, offered innovative workshops, and organized successful professional development sessions for educators.
Olenka Bilash showcased ULEC'’s collaborative work with the community at the Engagement Scholarship Consortium International Conference.
Alla Nedashkivska at the International Engagement Scholarship Consortium conference, Edmonton, October 2014.
ULEC was also pleased to host two professional development sessions for educators from the Edmonton area.
One was devoted to the implementation of digital resources in teaching and learning Ukrainian and the use of technological tools to promote the differentiation of students with various levels of language proficiency, interests, and background knowledge.
ULEC is especially eager to continue and expand its professional development initiatives at the provincial, national, and international levels.
The Centre is also developing a vision for ULEC 2030 to be shared with the community.
We are continuing our work to develop and secure success for Ukrainian education, particularly with projects that engage the community, students, young leaders, and interested stakeholders.
We are proud of our accomplishments and will confidently approach the new challenges ahead of us.
Halyna Klid, who contributes to ULEC’s social media communications, design, production, distribution, and sales of resources; Mykola Soroka, who until January 2015 devoted his time to ULEC’s communications, fund-raising. and resource editing activities; and our research assistants Olena Sivachenko, Oksana Perets, and Cassian Soltykevych, who have generously assisted, and continue to assist, with the Centre's research and resource development projects.
Most of the articles address Ukrainian or Eastern Christian religious formations, but other religious groups, such as Jews, are also discussed.
In light of the modern-day globalization of Ukrainian religious groups and the rise of diasporas, some articles also cover Western Europe and the Americas.
Each of the major presenters, Olga Andriewsky ; Andrea Graziosi (Univ. of Naples Federico II); Fran¢oise Thom (Paris-Sorbonne Univ., Paris IV); Norman Naimark (Stanford Univ.); and Stanislav Kulchytsky (Institute of the History of Ukraine, Kyiv), addressed the significance of study of the Holodomor for the examination of one or more broader topics.
The Emergence of Ukraine: Self-Determination, Occupation, and War in Ukraine, 1917-1922 This volume, edited by a team led by the Austrian historian Wolfram Dornik, is a collection of articles by several prominent historians from Austria, Germany, Ukraine, Poland, and Russia who undertook a detailed study of the occupation of Ukraine by the Central Powers in 1918, the final year of the First World War.
The first section deals with military aspects of the conquest, the suppression of uprisings, and the retreat; it also discusses the administration of occupied territory, the economic utilization of the country, and the internal Ukrainian perspective on the occupation.
The second section details developments in Ukraine between 1917 and 1922.
The third section deals with the Central Powers’ policies toward the East and Ukraine in particular, while the fourth and final section is an analysis of the international context of Ukraine's efforts to establish a state during this period.
Eeponu Ukraine on the Historiographic Map of Interwar Europe Y«paina Ha icmopio2paqi4yHiu mani MiKeOEHHOT Eeponu / Ukraine on the Historiographic Map of Interwar Europe Co-published by CIUS Press and several other leading centres of Ukrainian studies in Europe and North America, this is a collection of articles by prominent scholars from Ukraine, Canada, Austria, and the United States dealing with an array of issues pertaining to Ukraine and Ukrainian historiography in the first half of the twentieth century.
The articles are based on papers delivered at a conference held at the Ukrainian Free Univ. in Munich on 1-3 July 2012.
These memoirs describe Ukrainian life in Austrian Galicia, interwar Poland, during the Soviet and German occupations, and in the emigration.
The introduction by Oleh Pavlyshyn discusses the role of jurists in Ukrainian civic life.
An afterword by Bishop Borys Gudziak deals with the prominent role of the Slyz family in Ukrainian community life, including the philanthropy of Dr.
Income from the fund is to be used for fellowships and scholarly projects in Ukrainian studies.
This book is available in a hardcover edition for $24.95. enon Koryr, Borwannip Meseniies, KOpilt Crruit, Banecaas Cxopoxon [Taman [pana \lasenttt Kupieta Pogy\oseskor0 | APXEOSONMMH AOC IAUKEHHA Y BATYPHHI 2013-2014 POKIB Apxeono2i4Hi OocniOx*KeHHA y Bamypuhi 2013-2014 poxie.
The Palaces of lvan Mazepa and Kyrylo Rozumovsky This is the fourth richly illustrated booklet presenting the work of Canadian and Ukrainian archaeologists and historians researching Baturyn, the capital of the Cossack state.
The publication surveys the history of Baturyn during its golden age under Hetman Ivan Mazepa, the destruction of the town by Russian troops in 1708, and its subsequent rebuilding by Hetman Kyrylo Rozumovsky.
The sack of Baturyn is described on the basis of eighteenthcentury French sources and Cossack chronicles.
The authors discuss the results of the 2013-14 CanadaUkraine excavations at the fortress and the hetmans’ estates.
They describe the remnants of the palatial residences of Mazepa and Rozumovsky and present computer reconstructions of their architecture and decoration.
Archaeological findings testify to the dynamic development of international trade, crafts, agriculture, and art in Baturyn up to 1708.
Comparing the Experience of Canada, Europe, and Ukraine,’ featuring earlycareer and established scholars who gave original papers on such topics as geopolitics and regional politics; European, regional, and trans-border cooperation; and borders and international law.
Being live-streamed, the conference attracted an unprecedentedly large audience—over 1,000 Internet followers.
A dinner was held for the presenters at which Derek Fraser, former Canadian ambassador to Ukraine, now at the Univ. of Victoria, spoke on Canadas policy toward Ukraine and Russia.
Symposium on Anniversary of Euromaidan Revolution On 9-11 March 2015, the Contemporary Ukraine Studies Program held a symposium on the first anniversary of the Euromaidan Revolution in Ukraine.
Scholars and experts from Canada and Ukraine spoke about the significance and consequences of this historic event as well as its influence on current international developments.
The first panel was devoted to the images, symbols, and identity of the Euromaidan Revolution.
Marta Dyczok (Univ. of Western Ontario, London, Ontario) spoke about competing narratives in media representations of the events in Ukraine.
As a result, international public opinion remains divided over matters dealing with Ukraine.
Volodymyr Kulyk (Institute of Political and Ethnic Studies, Kyiv) noted a dramatic change in Ukrainian national identity.
His research shows increased self-identification with Ukraine, greater pride in belonging to the Ukrainian nation, stronger attachment to national symbols, greater consolidation of the Ukrainian nation, enhanced solidarity with fellow nationals, increased readiness to defend Ukraine, and increased confidence in the power to change Ukraine for the better, making it a truly European country.
Vladyslav Hrynevych (Institute of Political and Ethnic Studies, Kyiv) looked into the conflict of competing historical memories fostering antagonistic relationships between Russia and other post-Soviet republics.
The Russian Federation's memory politics emphasize militarism, imperialism, anti-Westernism, and opposition to democracy and individual rights.
This runs counter to Ukraine's aspirations, based on European values of the rule of law, social justice, and personal freedom.
On the final day, Bohdan Kordan explored the origins, meaning and significance of the Euromaidan, highlighting the deep-seated changes in political and social consciousness that have occurred in Ukrainian society.
Taras Kuzio , speaking from the UK via Skype, pointed out that violence, criminality, and Russian nationalism had been sustaining Yanukovych’s regime.
Roman Petryshyn , Michael Bociurkiw, David Marples, Larissa Blavatska, Robert Murray, Lubomyr Markevych. but neo-Soviet and Russian nationalism that remains the biggest threat to Ukraine's democratic system and to European integration.
Mychailo Wynnyckyj (Kyiv-Mohyla Academy National Univ.) characterized the Euromaidan events as a triple revolution— national, bourgeois, and postmodern.
Update on Excavations in Baturyn In 2014 the Canada-Ukraine archaeological expedition continued excavating the remnants of Hetman Ivan Mazepa’s main residence in Baturyn.
Prior to 1700, he constructed a richly embellished brick baroque palace that was burned by Russian troops during their destruction of the town in 1708.
Many fragments of fine multicoloured glazed and terracotta floor, stove, and facade revetment tiles were found.
These decorative details of Mazepas villa represent the seventeenth-century Kyivan school of architectural majolica.
Researchers have prepared computer reconstructions of nine ornamental floor pavement patterns of the palace’s reception halls, living quarters, and office premises.
Of all the known early modern buildings in Ukraine, Mazepa’s principal residence in Baturyn stands out for the largest number, variety, and distinctive features of decorative types of ceramic floor tiles and pavement methods.
This attests to its comparatively large size, multistoried and multi-chamber architectural design, and exceptional embellishment.
Archaeologists have completed excavating the remnants of the spacious service structure at Mazepa’s court.
It probably housed either members of the hetman’s guard or Cossack officers from his retinue.
Bronze clasp and decorative appliqués from leather belts of Cossack officers discovered in the early eighteenth-century service building in 2014.
Sytyi. investigators have reconstructed three decorated belts of wealthy Cossack officers.
These were probably brought to early modern Baturyn from the Ottoman Porte.
Finds of imported goods indicate the trade connections of the Cossack capital with 14 CIUS Newsletter 2015 i CIUS News Northern, Central, and Eastern Europe and the Islamic East.
Archaeologists hope to locate the remnants of Orlyk's residence at the site where this heraldic tile was found.
In the fortress, ten seventeenthand eighteenth-century graves of burghers were exhumed in 2014.
Three of them can be identified as victims of the Russian assault on Baturyn.
The excavations of 2014 in Baturyn have yielded important data for research and reconstruction of the architecture and decoration of hetmans’ residences as well as the accoutrement of Cossack officers.
New archaeological finds testify to the vibrancy of grain agriculture, crafts, and applied arts as well as the town’s international commercial and cultural contacts before the onslaught of 1708.
CIUS, the Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies , and the Ucrainica Research Institute in Toronto sponsor the Baturyn project.
Volodymyr Mezentsev and Professor Martin Dimnik participate in this research and the dissemination of its results.
Nearly 50 students and scholars from universities in Chernihiv, Kyiv, and Hlukhiv took part in the excavations.
Fragments of costly milk-glass plates painted with multicoloured plant design, seventeenth or eighteenth century.14 excavations in the Baturyn fortress.
Broken ceramic heraldic stove tile found in the Baturyn suburb of Ostroh in 2014.
The first was awarded to Oksana Udovyk, who received a PhD in environmental governance from Sédertérn Univ., Sweden, in 2014.
The second was awarded to Ivan Kozachenko, who received a PhD in sociology from the Univ. of Aberdeen, UK, in 2013.
The two post-docs took up their appointments at CIUS in the fall semester of 2015.
Orest Martynowych was awarded for his proposal to arrange and catalogue part of the Michael Marunchak fonds at the Ukrainian Cultural and Educational Centre in Winnipeg.
John-Paul Himka to support the creation of a digital archive associated with the Sanctuary Project.
The fifth was awarded to Valentyn Kavunnyk to compile a two-volume index to diplomatic documents of the Ukrainian People's Republic.
Heather Coleman, Director, Research Program on Religion and Culture, CIUS), USA, and Ukraine.
Speakers and presenters from Austria, Canada, Germany, Israel, and the United States.
Bohdan Klid ; Bohdan Kordan (Chair and Professor, Department of Political Studies, St.
The lecture was organized by the Holodomor Research and Education Consortium at CIUS; the Petro Jacyk Program for the Study of Ukraine; the Canadian Foundation for Ukrainian Studies; and the Centre for Russian and East European Studies, Univ. of Toronto.
A History, and her most recent book, Iron Curtain: The Crushing of Eastern Europe, 1944-1956, won the Cundill Prize for Historical Literature.
Applebaum began her lecture by describing how Joseph Stalin's early career shaped his policies in Ukraine.
His extra-legal “revolutionary methods” included inventing a counter-revolutionary conspiracy as a pretext for using violence against opponents.
Applebaum explained how Stalin, as Lenin’s representative in Ukraine, witnessed two failed Bolshevik invasions and peasant rebellions that came close to succeeding.
The prevention of another Ukrainian peasant uprising was a central concern.
He ordered Kaganovich to turn Ukraine into “a real fortress of the USSR, a genuinely exemplary republic” “Without these and similar measures ... we may lose Ukraine,” he wrote.
Soldiers confiscated vegetables, fruit, and livestock as well as grain.
She described Putin’s “managed democracy,’ including the creation of fake political parties.
During Ukraine’s Orange Revolution in 2004, Putin saw “his” people threatened by democratic forces as he had as a young KGB officer in East Germany in 1989, when terrified KGB and Stasi colleagues burned their files as crowds filled the streets.
Since the demonstrations in Moscow in 2011, Putin has worked to ensure that no “colour revolution” could take place in Russia.
Vladimir Putin “knows that the successful westernization of Ukraine, even the creation of a relatively democratic, relatively prosperous, and relatively well-integrated Ukraine, is a dire danger for him,’ said Ms.
Like Stalin, Putin fears revolution in Ukraine as a threat not only to Russia but also to his own political survival.
Denysenko is Associate Professor of theological studies and Director of the Huffington Ecumenical Institute at Loyola Marymount Univ. in Los Angeles, California.
He suggested that, since 2009, leaders of the Russian and Ukrainian churches have composed narratives defining the features of their ideal civilizations.
The current turbulence afflicting Ukraine has shaped revisions of those narratives and elicited forceful counter-narratives defining what it means to belong to a given church.
Denysenko opened by summarizing the Russian religious narrative known as the ""Russkii mir"", or Russian World, a pastoral initiative developed and launched by Patriarch Kirill in 2009.
The ""Russkii mir"" defines the Moscow Patriarchate as an Orthodox civilization cultivating the traditional values of Holy Rus’, embracing the core peoples of Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and Moldova, and open to anyone with compatible values.
Denysenko then turned to exploring how this Russian narrative was revised in order to defend the ""Russkii mir’ in the wake of the Maidan revolution of 2013-14 and the ensuing war in Ukraine.
Patriarch Kirill and Metropolitan Hilarion Alfeev contributed to the revision of the narrative by asDr.
Nicholas Denysenko serting that illegitimate church groups both caused the violence in Ukraine and posed a serious threat to the safety and freedom of loyal adherents to the ""Russkii mir’ in Ukraine.
Professor Denysenko argued that the Ukrainian counter-narrative communicated by the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Kyivan Patriarchate responded to the Ukrainian crisis externally and internally by equating President Vladimir Putin of Russia with the biblical Cain and Pharaoh and calling upon its own adherents to refrain from acts of corruption that would place them in the company of the biblical Judas Iscariot.
The VOCKP’s counter-narrative assigns blame to Putin and the Kremlin, depicts the UOC-KP as a communion of sanctity, and describes the ""Russkii mir"" as a false promise resulting in slavery.
The Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church is the source of a second Ukrainian counter-narrative, noted Denysenko.
It proclaims the church's absolute solidarity with all Ukrainians regardless of ethnicity, religion, or language and defines the UGCC as a church of new martyrs who remain faithful to their people to the end, like The Heavenly Hundred of the Maidan.
The lecture concluded with a reflection on how church leaders might adopt a course of rapprochement to model peace for civil society.
Kulyk examined the most recent evolution of Ukrainian national identity, in particular the impact of the 2013-14 Euromaidan protest and the subsequent Russian aggression against Ukraine.
Kulyk relied on two nation-wide surveys conducted in 2012 and 2014, supplementing the data with that of focus-group discussions in Kyiv and Kharkiv in February 2015.
In his nuanced analysis, he demonstrated that national identity has become much more salient than territorial and Dr.
Volodymyr Kulyk 18 CIUS Newsletter 2015 non-territorial (gender, occupational, religious, ideological, etc.) identities.
Those already possessing a Ukrainian identity have become more radical and alienated from Russia and have embraced Ukrainian nationalism in the past and present.
At the same time, citizens’ readiness to identify themselves with the Ukrainian state is modified by the degree of their satisfaction with the current situation in Ukraine, which they consider to be a result of state policy.
The Euromaidan Revolution of 2014, also known as the Revolution of Dignity, was centred on Kyiv’s main square, as was the 2004 Orange Revolution.
To mark the first anniversary of the Euromaidan Revolution, CIUS organized a three-day symposium and invited the Ukrainian writer Andrey Kurkov to deliver the 49th annual Shevchenko Lecture, which served as its keynote event.
Andrey Kurkov is a world-renowned Ukrainian novelist, movie scriptwriter, and essayist.
A member of PEN International, he has published 18 novels, 7 books for children, and Andrey Kurkov more than 30 film scripts.
His works have been translated into 36 languages, including English, Spanish, French, Italian, Dutch, German, Swedish, Turkish, Japanese, Chinese, and Hebrew.
Among Russophone writers in the post-Soviet space, Kurkov commands the largest international audience and is also Ukraine’ bestselling author abroad.
Kurkov began with a personal account of his development as a writer in the context of the unravelling of the Soviet state and economy in the late 1980s, when he began to identify himself with Ukraine.
According to Kurkov, one of Ukraine's constant problems since its attainment of independence in 1991 has been the lack of state-builders among its political elite.
Ukrainian politicians have never regarded their country as national property; hence no agreement has ever been concluded with Russia to delimit Ukraine's territory.
This neglect also extended to Ukraine's informational and cultural space.
In the Donbas and the Crimea, media and information outlets were controlled by local elites, who used them to maintain a Soviettype mentality among the local population.
The Euromaidan Revolution was provoked by the actions of Viktor Yanukovych, who, ironically, wanted to avoid such a scenario, having lost power following the Orange Revolution of 2004.
During the first stages of the Euromaidan Revolution, demonstrators had no clear goals, and the Maidan became a forum for discussion resembling an open university.
Those discussions, the readiness of a minority of demonstrators to confront the authorities with force, and the subsequent war with Russia have all produced large-scale politicization.
As a result, Ukraine has entered a period of nation-building that is also a period of danger, since the road ahead is difficult.
It is clear that many Ukrainians want to live under the rule of law, but corruption is difficult to root out, especially when the country is at war.
Russias leaders hope that dire economic circumstances will exhaust Ukrainians, leading them to abandon the struggle with Russia and turn against their government.
Kurkov concluded that if there are no reforms, there may be a third Maidan revolution caused by mounting economic and social problems, which would be disastrous for Ukraine.
Professor Mihaychuk’s research interests include issues in nineteenth-century Ukrainian and Russian literature, particularly using a discourse approach to narration.
He is also an active translator, working currently on plays by Volodymyr Vynnychenko and Mykola Kulish.
Maxim Tarnawsky, Prof eorge Mihaychuk, Oksana Pisetska Struk the problem of developing a serious highbrow Ukrainian literature and culture in the context of predominant views of Ukraine in the early nineteenth-century Russian Empire.
From the imperial perspective, Ukraine was an intriguing, somewhat exotic backwater whose literature was perceived as entertaining light fare with a quaint flavor of the rustic provinces.
For Ukrainian authors and readers, this provinciality informed a distinct identity that enabled them to preserve the particularities of their culture and ethnos.
The “curse” of Mihaychuk’s title lies precisely in the difficulty of overcoming this provincial distinctiveness without abandoning a separate Ukrainian identity and culture.
Ukrainian authors in this period needed to demonstrate the dignity and capacity of the Ukrainian language and culture to embody the aesthetic principles of high culture both to their imperial detractors and to their provincial supporters.
The Struk Memorial Lecture is an annual lecture in English on topics in Ukrainian literature.
It honors Danylo Husar Struk, a prominent literary scholar who taught at the Department of Slavic Languages and Literatures of the Univ. of Toronto, where the lecture is held.
It is sponsored by the Struk Program in Ukrainian Literature of the Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies, a program founded in 1999 through donations by Struk’s family and friends.
Round-table discussion (held in Kyiv) on the history of the Ukrainian Cossack Hetmanate in honour of Professor Zenon Kohut, director of CIUS from 1994 to 2012.
Yaroslav Fedoruk (chair; Institute of Ukrainian Archaeography); Oleksandr Mavrin (Assistant Director, Institute of Ukrainian Archaeography); Svitlana Pankova (Director, Hrushevsky Memorial Museum); Dr.
Oleh Pavlyshyn (author of the introduction); Professor Frank E Sysyn ; Fr.
God’ Martyr, Historys Witness: Blessed Nykyta Budka, the First Ukrainian Catholic Bishop of Canada.
Taras Lupul, recipient of grants from the Govern20 CIUS Newsletter 2015 ment of Alberta’s International Education Awards-Ukraine and CIUS (Celestin and Irena Suchowersky Endowment Fund), Department of International Relations, Yurii Fedkovych National Univ. of Chernivtsi.
Mykhailo Hrushevsky, History of Ukraine-Rus’, volume 10, The Cossack Age, 16571659.
This event also honoured the late John Yaremko, a co-sponsor of the volume.
Bohdan Harasymiw, CIUS; Students from SLAV 299, “Europe and the Ukrainian (Euromaidan) Revolution,’ taught by Dr.
John’s Cultural Centre), Nadia Cyncar (Ukrainian Catholic Women’s League of Canada Edmonton Eparchy Museum, at St.
Remarks by Professor Natalia Kononenko, Kule Chair in Ukrainian Ethnography.
Sofia and Vasyl Shchudlyk, Khrystyna Kyrylych, and Thor Medvid, recipients of the Bohdan and Natalia Golemba Scholarship.
CIUS Newsletter 2015 21 CIUS Awards Awards Award administration is one of major activities undertaken by the Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies as part of its mandate to develop knowledge and support research in Ukrainian studies.
The many endowment funds established at the initiative of their founders yield annual income to sponsor education and research in the areas of Ukrainian history, law and economics, language and literature, women's studies, humanities, arts, and social sciences.
Archival Fellowship in Ukrainian Studies and Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for the Study of Modern j and Contemporary Ukraine.
Because of ever-increasing interest in Ukraine and its greater significance on the world stage, we experienced a high volume of applications this year, many of which were worthy of attention.
We would like to thank all participants for submitting their proposals and for their patience and cooperation during the adjudication process.
To meet the demand for more sponsorship opportunities, the Institute's fund-raising team is working intensively in search of new resources to fund projects.
To facilitate the process of award administration at CIUS, the administrative team plans to review and modernize the submissions process in order to make it more user-friendly and efficient.
In the first stage, a selection committee in Ukraine (including leading scholars in a number of subject areas, headed by Natalia Yakovenko) compiles expert assessments of publications issued in the preceding year.
Following discussion Oleksandr Zaitsev tre of the Kyiv Mohyla Academy National Univ. on 2 June 2015.
The award is intended to identify and recognize publications issued in a given year that are notable for scholarly excellence and impact among professional colleagues and the general public.
The authors whose works were selected received cash awards and souvenirs from CIlUS—glass statuettes of Inuit inukshuk as symbols of the unity of continents, people, and ideas.
A two-stage procedure guarantees wy transparency in the selection of and voting, the committee prepares a list of articles and monographs that is submitted to CIUS for consideration.
In the second stage, a CIUS jury votes on publications in two categories—best article and best monograph—to select winners from the list of nominees.
Myron Kapral Maksym Yaremenko DD CIUS Newsletter 2015 Scholarships, Fellowships, and Grants Awarded Undergraduate Scholarships Steven Kobrynsky Memorial Scholarship Cassian Soltykevych, Business Faculty, Univ. of Alberta.
Graduate Scholarships Stasiuk Master's Research Fellowship Leland MacLachlan, Political Studies, Univ. of Saskatchewan.
Helen Darcovich Memorial Doctoral Fellowship luliia Kysla, History and Classics, Univ. of Alberta.
Soviet Ukrainian writers under late Stalinism, 1944-1953” Oksana Vynnyk, History and Classics, Univ. of Alberta.
Oksana Udovyk, PhD in environmental governance from Sédertérn Univ., Sweden.
Archival Fellowship in Ukrainian Studies John-Paul Himka, History and Classics, Univ. of Alberta.
Stephania Bukachewska-Pastushenko Endowment Fund. f > oltykevych Cassian S Valentyn Kavunnyk, Institute of Ukrainian Archaeography and Source Studies, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine.
We Kysla Orest Martynowych, Ukrainian Cultural and Z Education Centre , Winnipeg.
CIUS Research Grants Andrii Bovhyria, Institute of Ukrainian History, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine.
Oksana Udovyk a a a EE LE SA oO ITE ETT EI EEE SO EE A EI EFFI GR EE SE CIUS Newsletter 2015 73) Yaroslav Denysenko, Institute of History, Polish Academy of Sciences.
Yaroslav Faizulin, Institute of Ukrainian History, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine.
Viktor Filas, Institute of Ukrainian Archaeography and Source Studies, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine.
Iryna Khromova, Institute of Ukrainian History, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine.
Vitalii Skalsky, Institute of Ukrainian History, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine.
Patrycja Trzeszczynska-Demel, Institute of Ethnology and Cultural Anthropology, Jagiellonian Univ., Cracow.
HREC Research Grants Olga Bertelsen, Munk School of Global Affairs, Univ. of Toronto.
Lubomyr Luciuk, Department of Politics and Economics, Royal Military College of Canada.
A documentary history.” ge sd Ie Olga Bertelsen Valentyna Yeremenko New Endowments Dr.
The fund will provide grants to scholars in Ukrainian studies or graduate students in that field at any post-secondary institution.
Preference will be given to research on the economy and economic history of Ukraine, or on topics in sociology, and particularly to applicants studying rural economics, economy or economic history, the modernization of the Ukrainian economy and its effects on society, Ukrainian economic thought, or Ukrainian society from the twentieth century onward.
Special consideration will be given to topics related to the Holodomor of 1932-33.
Recipient will be selected by a CIUS committee, based on demonstrated interest in Ukrainian studies and the potential impact of the proposed research.
The Yurkiwsky Family Memorial Endowment Fund The Yurkiwsky Family Memorial Endowment Fund was established at CIUS in 2014 with a principal of $16,800.
The fund will support the publication of research through the Research Program on Religion, with preference to research on the history of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church.
CIUS Newsletter 2015 25 Generosity and Philanthropy We make a living by what we get, we make a life by what we give.
The exceptional generosity of the friends of the Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies throughout the world, especially in Canada and the United States, not only funds our work but also helps keep the CIUS team motivated to excel in our field.
Grateful for your understanding of our needs, we thank all our benefactors for their support and confidence in us.
Some CIUS philanthropists and benefactors contribute every year to their own named endowments or other funds that support specific programs at the Institute.
Others donate to support our continuing work, allowing us to use the funds wherever the need is greatest.
Despite a drop in provincial funding to the Univ. of Alberta that has affected all departments, including CIUS, the continuous stream of income from these funds, combined with your ongoing generosity, helps us overcome these cutbacks and ensure the viability of Ukrainian studies.
Strategies for Giving to CIUS CIUS works closely with our donors and their financial advisors to develop gifting strategies that are personally rewarding, inspiring, and tax-effective.
Both individuals and organizations can establish named funds at CIUS, either restricted or unrestricted.
Restricted funds may have “purpose restrictions” for particular programs or activities of the donor's choice or “time restrictions” determined by the donor's specified time frame.
Unrestricted funds make it possible to shift the focus of CIUS research or activity to the most critical areas or needs at a particular time.
A Lasting Legacy The Institute's current endowment funds, listed below, support our various programs and activities.
The Program will focus on the themes of multiculturalism, regionalism, nationalism, and political elites, as well as on the sociocultural foundations of modernization in comparative perspective.
Endowed funds, which require a minimum initial investment of $25,000, can be named after the individual benefactor, a family member, or a loved one, creating living tributes to special people in the founders lives.
Current and future gifts increase both the value of funds and their potential to inspire significant activity.
What donors need to know is that the principal they contribute in initial and subsequent gifts always remains intact.
Only the proceeds from the investment of principal are used to support scholarly research, fund publications, produce educational materials, or develop new programs and resources.
Contributions may be made in cash, gifts of life-insurance policies or marketable securities, or bequests.
It is important to work with professional advisors to select the strategy most appropriate to your circumstances.
You could receive immediate tax savings and enjoy the benefit of seeing your gifts at work, or the gift may provide significant tax savings to your estate.
In 1998-2000, the Kowalskys increased the capital of their endowment by $1,650,000 and redirected it toward the newly established Kowalsky Program for the Study of Eastern Ukraine.
Since 1993, the fund has supported the Institute for Historical Research at the Ivan Franko National Univ. of Lviv.
Andrew's College to offer fellowships, support independent research, and facilitate research and publication by scholars in the field of religious studies.
Myroslawa Iwanciw of Elmwood Park, Illinois, in April 2006 in support of CIUS activities, with preference to Ukrainian students and scholars conducting research in Ukrainian studies.
The fund also supports exchange program students from the Ivan Franko National Univ. of Lviv.
Please direct my donation to: D1 The Contemporary Ukraine Studies Program —S D1 The East/West Journal of Ukrainian Studies 8 D1 Kule Ukrainian-Canadian Programioz0e) G1 Ukrainian Language Education Centrefo7354) BoiGexrc Se es colimecniniiiy Coa rrbos Sob Cs ERED Pe De 3.
It will be used for the purpose of alumni engagement and philanthropic activities.
Appeal code 04989 My Choice of Getting the CIUS Newsletter Learn about CIUS research, publishing and community outreach work by subscribing to the CIUS Newsletter.
When you inform CIUS of your intentions to leave a planned gift, you will be welcomed into the Quaecumque Vera Honour Society.
By sharing your plans with us during your lifetime, you will help us ensure your legacy is fulfilled.
Larissa Prychodko & Mr Andrew Prychodko Ukrainian Canadian Civil Liberties Foundation Casino Account $5,000-$9,999 Alberta Foundation for Ukrainian Education Society Casino Account Alberta Ukrainian Commemorative Society Casino Account John H & Marie Koziak Family Foundation Mr Alexander & Mrs.
Oksana Dexter Mr Roman Kolisnyk We would like to extend our sincere appreciation to each of you who supported CIUS in 2014-2015.
Your generous gifts, regardless of amount or designation, collectively impact CIUS in ways that benefit the whole field of Ukrainian studies in Canada and abroad.
Alexandra Hildebrandt Mr Jule Nazarevich Mr Michael Daypuk Mr Myron & Mrs.
Sonia Peczeniuk St John's Cathedral Branch Ukrainian Women's Association of Canada SUS Foundation of Canada The Franko Foundation The Shevchenko Foundation Ukrainian Canadian Benevolent Society of Edmonton Casino Account Ukrainian Canadian Professional & Business Association Ukrainian Foundation for College Education Ukrainian Senior Citizens Association of Marko Boyeslaw Casino Account Ukrainian Womens Organization of Canada Edmonton Society $500-$999 Dr.
Janet Dmytruk League of Ukrainian Canadians Edmonton Branch Casino Account Mr Cornell Stefaniuk Mr Hontscharuk Eugene Mr Ivan D Harrakh Mr Marc A Chikinda Mr Percy & Mrs.
Katherine Zalasky The Hon Michael J Savaryn The Ivan Franko School of Ukrainian Studies Ukrainian National Federation of Canada Ukrainian Self-Reliance Association Ukrainian Self-Reliance Association Calgary Branch $1-$499 Anonymous Anonymous Anonymous Anonymous Anonymous Anonymous Anonymous Anonymous Bohdan Medwidsky, Professor Emeritus Dr.
Walter Snihurowych eennnnnn renee eereee eT SSS LSE SSS CIUS Newsletter 2015 33 CIUS Donors TS EE ER SE TI SR ES ETS SL SS a TI CIUS Newsletter 2015 34.
Zorianna Kohut Jan Kowalyk Jean Waclawski Miss Donna Holowaychuk Mr & Mrs.
Judy Bohay Mr Andrew Srymanowke Mr Andriy Chomyn Mr Arthur Kowalchuk Mr Bob Kochtubajda Mr Bradley Martyniuk Mr David & Mrs.
Maria Shwed Mr George Brandak Mr George Horb Mr George Primak Mr Harry & Ms.
Evelyn Kardynal Mr Thor Tomkiw Mr Ihor Z Davydovych Mr Jerry Zrymiak Mr Jim & Mrs.
Judith Humnicky Mr Michael Necula Mr Mykhailo Wawryshyn Mr Myron Pawlowsky Mr Nestor & Ms.
Sharon Harras Mr Walter Kolanitch Mr Wasyl Drabik Mr Wasyl Mojsiak Mr William & Mrs.
Lois Miller Rose Michalchuk Sir / Madame Asce Blawatsky Univ. of Toronto Very Rev.
KopayIbCbKUX IIpu XapKIBCbKOMY yHiBepcnTeTi, 1loOM KepyBaTM Ta KOOPAMHYBaTU POOOTYy MM 3axXOgU B cxigHim Yxpaini.
XapKiBCbKUM Bis AIT ouomwe J-p Bonogxumup Kymikos, a 3amopi3sbkun — J-p Bonoynumup Minpues. [[porpama im.
Micma-Kopnopaujii Ha AoHOaci» . u-traditsiyniy-kulturi-ukraintsiv) Heeno6ni Kameeopii: Hapucu npo 2yMaHimapucmuKy, icmopino 1 nonimuxy 6 cyuacHux YKpaini, Ionut i Pocit Tomaiia Crpneka.
Co iIHHOBAaLiMHOTO PO3BUTKY, 3allponoHOBaHa KiJIbKa POKIB TOMY, IlOUMHa€ IIpMHo— CUTM Mepili akagemiyHi n0gn.
IIporpaMa BMBYeHHA Cy4acHol Ykpainu (The Contemporary Ukraine Studies Program), 3acHoBaHa JBa pOKM TOMY, BxKe Ma€ Ha CBOEMY paxyHKy NOBAKHUM Wepemik KOHMepeHUi, CeMiHapiB, KpyrmMx CToMB i nyOmiKaui.
Meroyqnunun WeHTp yKpaiHcbKoi Mosu IpeqCTaBUB 1A OOTOBOpeHHA HOBY KOHIJeHM10 Ta CTpaTerito CBOTO posBuTky 0 2030 poxy.
HayKosoOCBITHIM KOHCOPI1IOM 3 BABYCHHA Tonogomopy ctaB ogy i3 Have@eKTMUBHIMWMX BifginmiB KIYCy.
OCHOBHa yBara B HIM Il€peCHOCMTbCA Ha iCTOpitio Ta cydacHMM CTaH yKpaiHCbKNx CTyfin B 3aXiJHbOMy cBitTi.
Mu mMycumo pearyBaTn Ha HOBi BUKJIMKU, UO TOCTalOTb llepey, YKpaiHCbKUMM aKaJjleMidHUMU OCMI>KeHHAMM, Iepey] yKpaiHCbKO10 rpoMayor KaHay Ta yKpaiHcbKOr10 lep2KaBOro. je BCixX Apy3is KIYCy TOMYAMUTMCA TO Hac.
BuyjaHHsa MicTUTD OCJHUMbKi CTaTTi 3 EBPeMCbKMX CTYMIM MOMOFUX ICTOPUKIB 31 Jibpopa, XapKoga, Knesa, /HiltpomeTpoBcpKa Ta JlyraHcpka.
Cena borganiska, CrenaniskaJipyra (IIpva3sopcpKui paion, 3amopisbKa OO7acTb) 3. [loceneHHa MicbKoro Tuny Bepxuiit Poraunk (XepcoHcbkKa oOmacTb) 2.
Kpauniu aisopy4 — 0-p Boaodumup Kyaixos, akuu ovoawe XapKiBcokull Biddia.
Makc E-nowta: BroneteHb KIYCy 2015 Y }okyci — NpoeKTu Ta nporpamnu East/ West: Journal of Ukrainian Studies TIpodecop Oxnee labHuupkuun East/West: Journal of Ukrainian Studies — enexTpoHHui HayKoBun *ypHan KIYCy.
Tpere uncno NosBUI0CA y BepecHi 2015 poxy; y HbOMy IV ATb CTaTeit Ha TeH][epHi TEMM Ta JIECATb KHVOKKOBUX peueusin.
TonoBHun pefakTop, 1podecop Oner C DipHnubKnn, pale Hall HOBMMM BUILYCKaMU, OJMH 13 AKMX 6yfe IpMicBayeHuM M XapKosy.
Y yepBHi 2015 poxy Tana [DrapyuyakCrex cTamla uleHOM penakuii EWJUS AK pefjakTOP KHYDKKOBMX peljeHs3ilt.
InbuuybKiit BMCTOBIIOE INMpy MOFAKY KOIMIMHIN peqakTopui KHVDKKOBMX peljeH3il, ]-py CBiTMaHi Kpuc 3a ii 3pa3KOBy palo Haj] monepesHiIMM BuItycKamn.
J-p Kpuc OTpMMaysia MOcaM Polenta (assistant professor) aHrmiitcbKol MOBU Ta TOMOBU KaTefIpu yKpaiHCbKUx cTyfim YHinepcutety im.
Max’ }Oena , fe BOHa BOJHOUAC OOiMMae TOcafy FUpekTopa YkpaiHCbKOTO WeHTpy 3aco6is i PO3BUTKy.
Ha qymMKy mpodecopa InmpHmupKoro, EWJUS yxxe peamisye Iporomomeny Micito, ipuBabs10104M aBTopis i3 Kanagu, CILIA, Ascrpanii Ta Esponnu.
A-p Ceimaana Kpuc AK eleKTpoHHe BUaHHA, EWJUS Ma€ 3MOTY He JIMIMle Bi[CTexKyBaTN KIJIbDKICTb 3ape€CTpOBaHMUX YMTadiB Ha CBOEMy Be6-caliTi, a M MOMYyIAPHICcTb CTaTeu, IIpO AKY CBIJYUTb KIIbKICTb ix 3aBaHTaxeHb.
Ha BifMiny Big, cBoro nonepesHnka, JUS, EWJUS Oe3KOLITOBHO JOCTYNHUM AA KOXKHOLO, XTO IIPOCTO 3apeecTpyeTbcA Ha Moro BeO-canMTi.
HawakTUBHilIMMU € KOpMCTyBaui 3 Kanagu Ta CILIA, a 3a HUM 3 Ykpainn, Himeywuuun Ta Pocii.
BuMipATM MOMYIAPHICTb HallioTO 3MICTY MO>KHa 3a KIJIbKICTIO 3aBaHTaKeHb CTaTen 1 MeperiApiB Tana IlAasywax-Cmex aHoTalin.
Tako BIBI yBadl MOKYTb YUTATU CTaTTi be3MOCcepeqHbO Ha BeO-caMTi, He ckauyroun ix.
BuByeHHA TonogjomMopy Ta yKpaiHcbKa icTopiorpadia» (3aBaHTaxKenb: 34; Tepermayis aHotauii: 89) 3.
Bi KYIbTYPU aM ATM Ha 3aXif[HbOykKpaiHcbKoMy MorpaHMd4i» (3aBaHTaxKeHb: 29; neperiapis aHoralii: 99) 5.
WapTil 3a KaTacTpo@iyHnn i WIMpoKoMaCIUITAaOHMM WITYYHUM TOMO B YkpaiHi, MOTBepsPKYIOUN CBi,4eHHA ovesuguis.
OFHMM 13 TAKMX [pKepe € KO/IeKUiA IMCTIB, AKi 3i6panu IIMCbMeHHUK Bonogumup MaHak i Moro Apy2x«muna Jlipia Kopamenko.
HOKBI mpautoe 3 1. bowuyKom Hay po3slmMd@pyBaHHAM JIMCTIB, WjO MiCTATB leAKi 3 MepluMx CBI4eHb WIMpOKol TrpoMajicbKocTu mpo lonoyomop.
Li CBiJJ/4YeHHA OMyO7iKOBaHO Ha BeO-cauTi HOKBI — www.holodomor.ca; ix 3IpyNOBaHO 3a MICIAMM TOXO/P>KEHHA apTopis.
HOKBI urykae MOKIMBOCTI 3aNYYMTU HayKOBIIB 13 pis3HUX [MCcWMH JO FOCP2KCHHA HacyKIB [onoyomopy.
Bigrak Bocenn 2015 poxy HOKBI mposis cBoto Tpertr1o KoHdepenyito, «lono0g AK NOMTMYHUM iHCTPyMeHT», WjO6M MpoaHani3syBaTu CIMIJIbHOCTI UM BIJJMIHHOCTI MbDK yKpaiHCbKOI0, BIDMeHCbKOW, CyjjaHCbKOHO Ta ip/IAHJ[CbKOW TpareslAMn.
Kondepenia «KOMYHI13M 1 ronop» mpurarHyJla CileWAICTIB payAHCbKOI, KUTaMCbKOi Ta Ka3aXCbKOI ICTOPil.
HOKBI saoxouye fo yuactu MomoyUx HayKOBIIIB, AKi JIMUe MOUMHAIOTb Kap €py, Haflatoun CTMMeHAil Ha yuacTb y koHdepenuil.
Bignosiguy iHPOpMaliio0 MOKHa 3HaVTM Ha BeO-canTi HOKBI — www.ho+ lodomor.ca.
HOKBI tmposogutp KOHKYPC [paHTiB [1A JOCHiD>KeHHA Ta 36epe2KeHHA Tepmop»Kepen.
Ha cborogHi BIH BUVINB yxKe 21 Haropojly, 30KpeMa IpaHT Ha JJOC/Ii{>KeHHA CUCTeMM TOpriBmi «Toprcin», y AKIM 3HEMOKEHI Bill TOMOMy CeiAHN OOMiHIOBasIM 30N0TO Ta iH KOWITOBHOCTI Ha DKYy, 1 [paHT Ha MiKPOICTOPi#0 J[BOX Ci/I 1 pO/Ib, AKYy B HUX BifirpasM MicWeBi 31OUMHLU1.
Kpim toro, HOKBI 6epe Ha ce6e Mepekilay, ykpalHOMOBHMX JJOCI2KeCHb aHIIMCbKOIO MOBOW, 30KpeMa IlyOlikawjito 36ipHuka cTaTeuw yKpaiHCbKMUX CMemiAMICTIB 1 MOHOrpagii icropuka, 4-pa CraniciaBa Ky/IbuMWbKOrO, Meputoro nocmifqHuka [omofoMopy B HesasiexKHiN YxpaiHi.aBA AKU MOABI MX BUAaHb cydacHi yKpaiHcbKi JOCMIPKeHHA 3 Tonogomopy cTaHyTb JOCTYMHMMM JIA 3aXifJHbOl aBJMTOPIi.
Jjo MOBHOBaxKeHD HOKBI BXOJJMTb TAKOXK POSBUTOK OCBITHIX IIporpam y cepef{Hix WIKo7IaXx.
HOKBI rorye HapuasibHi MaTepiann, IIPOBOJUTb HaBUaHHA JIA BYUMTENIB, a TAKOK € lapTHepoOM y IIpoBejfeHHi HatjioHabHOro TypHe yCBiJOM/IeHHA lonoqomopy, — IIpoeKTy, AKU peanisye Kanayj[cbKo-yKpaiHcbkKa dyHaauia, a inancye KaHafchKui ypan,y pamKax IIporpamu 6aratoxysbTYPHOi B3aemogil.
HOKBI 6ys crBopenui 3aBq AKU Weqpin mpTpumui PyHAauii Ponuan TemeptTeis.
Ilani Mapra ba3tok — BUKOHaBYNM mupextop HOKBL. 3a fociigqHMybKy po6oty BigmoBigaroTp 4-p borgaxn Knig i MOTO 3aCTYMHNK, Marictrep AHApin Makyx; a OCBITHIO IIporpamy O4OIIHOE maui BawentuHa Kypunis.
Boedan [i apacumis, KopoouHamop npoepamu Meta IIBCY — possnparu HOB WOCHJHUUbKi HalipamMKu Aa KITYCy, 3 HarO/IOCOM Ha perloHa/IbHUx, MOJMTMYHUX 1 COMIAIbHUX JOCIIIDKeHHAX Cyd4acHol YkKpaiHuU, NOUMHAaIOUN 3 1991 poxy.
Y 6epesui 2015 poxy IIBCY MIpoBeyla TpUsJeHHMM CAMIIO31IOM, IIPMCBAYEHUM PiYHUIl yKpalHCbKOrO EspoMaityany, MOeEqHaBLUM Moro 31 Wyopi4Horo [[leBYeHKiBCbKOIO JIeKINE10, AKY BUTOJOCKB BiIJOMMN yKpalHCbKMM MMCbMeHHHK 1 KOMeHTaTOp AHypin Kypkos; Moro BUCTYII MaB IIpOBOKaTMBHUM HasBy «CKiJIbKM MaipfjaHiB MOTpiOHO YxpaiHi, 1106 3MinutTuca~» Ha CUMMO3IIOMI IpoOsBy4asIM JOMOBITI Maptu J|nuox, Bonogumupa Kyznxa, Bnayucnasa [punesnua, borgana Kopyana, Tapaca Ky3a 1 Mnxanna BuuHnupKoro.
Kond@epeniia Masia Has3BuuaMHun ycnix, OesmpeljeyqeHTHa i 3a KIIbKICT#O BIJBIAyBauIB, 1 3a B3aeMOsieE1O 3 TpoMajo10; PiHaHcoBaHa yepe3 30BHIIMHIM 30ip KOLITIB, BOHa NITBUMIWIa AK MICLIEBUM, TaK i HaljioHaIbHUM Ta MDKHapOsHIM CTaTyc KIYCy.
O aBAMTOpIEH, IO 3aNMMWIMaca VW W1C1A BiBeeHOro Ha JIMCKycito Yacy, abu OOMiHATUCA NOMAgaMu.
CTMciily BepCikO boro 3axOply Oy710 IIpeseHTOBaHO TIK]eCHb TisHiwe, nig vac TroKHa r10b6abHux 3HaHb, B E}MOHTOHCbKOMy YHiBepcuteti im.
Temn JOCMIPKeHb, AKMM HajjaBaTUMyTb llepeBary, — iJJeHTUYHICTb, HaljioHa113M, PpeliOHU, KOPJOHNM, COMUAIbHI IIHHOCTI Ta icTOpM4Ha MOITUKa.
JJBO€ CTUMeHAIATIB OTPAMyBaTMMyTb pidHi cTMNMeHAli B posMipi $38,000 ana po6orn B KIYCi.
Npoext ExyuKnonegii YkpaiHu B IHTepHeTI POSBUBAETHCA Aan KIYC sanouvatkyBaB npoeKT EXWMkKnonegii Ykpainnu B lHTepuHerti 2001 poky, cTaBia4uu 3a MeTy CTBOPUTM WIKOBMTO HOBe Jp>Kepesio id@opmayii mpo Yxpainy Ta yKpaiHyis — BIJbHUM iHTepHeT-OCTyN JO cTaTen Tipo Bci acleKTM YKpainnu Ta yKpalHcbkKOi Jjiacniopu.
EY] npuxubHo ciipMMHsyia He JIMIUNe aKaJ[eMi4HAa CHIIbHOTA, a WIMpila TpOMa{CbKicTb Ta iHTepHeTKopuictysBaui.
CIMWJIbHOTM VU IpeycTaBHMKIB IIMpwol TpOMafICbKOCTM, BKJIIOUHO 3 lpe3sujjexToM OcBitTHboi byHAawii im.
Kpim Toro, 3aBeplleHo pejjaryBaHHA 3-rO TOMY BUjaHHA, B AKOMY Myetbca mpo LanmiybKo-BommHcpKe KHASIBCTBO Ta Ky/IbTypy cycilimbcTBO KniscpKoi Pycn.
Ilona Pobepm Maroui, Opank E Cucun, Hadia Ayux.-4 P40, 3Aiba HanpaBo: cecmpu noKkittnoeo Isana Apemka, Posaai, Ayci ma Amanem.
BroneteuHb KIYCy 2015 Npoektu Ta neporpamu Ynana IlacigHuk BUKOHYye byHKUii BIJMOBIJaIbHOrO pefakTOpa, a mpod.
Jjo6irae Kina pefaryBaHHa 4-rO TOMY, B AKOMY MjeTbCA po nomituky B YKpainHi 7oOu naHyBaHHA Jinrsu u Tlompmi.
Ilasno Xpuctiok 6yB yneHoM Ykpaincpkoi Leutpasibxoi Pag Ta ydaCHUKOM TifroTOBKM Bpecr-JImToBcbKoro WoroBopy, Akuu 3a0e3Ne4uNB MDKHaposHe BU3HAaHHA ykKpaiHcbKint jepoKaBi. [lepexnayayu KHMOKKM — AjiaH PyTKOBCbKMM, KOJIMUIHIN OiOMioTeKap CHOB AHCbKOrO | Y 2016 poui Kanagcpxnit inctutyt yKpaiHCbKMx CTY iM BiIF3Hayae _ 40-piyus ceoro icnysanua.
Jina | TOrO, 1406 30cepeyuTu yBary _ HayKOBIiB 1 (pOMaf{CbKOCTM Ha | craHi yKpainosnasctsa B Ilisnivnuit BroneteHb KIYCy 2015 Yasua Ilaciunux, Tana Ilaasywak-Cmex i Opank E Cucuu.
Journal (YkpaincbkuM KaTOAMIbKUM yHiBepcntet, JIbBiB) 6ym0 o6paHo IIpOrpaMHMM J\MpeKTOpoM, a mpod.
Aana Hedawmkiscoka Ha MimHapoonHiu Kongepenujii «Engagement Scholarship Consortium», Edmoumou, wosmenb 2014 poy.
Onenka Binaaw Bueoaowmye Karwu0sy Oonosidn nid 4ac HauioHaAboi KonepeHuii B4UMEAIB YKPAaiHCbKOi MoBu « Ykpaincoka ocsima XXI», Eomonmon, 2-4 mpasbHa 2014 MIUYM rposis ite OH HacM4eHun 1 IpOAYKTMBHMM pik.
OCBITN, AK OT 3MilllaHa MOJe/Ib BABYCHHA Ta BUKafaHHa yKpalHCbKOi MOBM AK iHO3eMHOI; a TaKOXK OCP >KeHHA TeM, OB A3aHUX 13 yKpalHCbKOW JJBOMOBHOVW OCBITOIO Ta IHIMMMM OCBITHIMU IIporpamMaMu B Kanai.
MLIYM takox pao mposis mBi cecil 71a MpodecitHoro po3BMTKy OcBiTAH EqfMouTony Ta Amb6eptTu.
Kpim toro, MILYM mpawe Hag ctrpareriero CBOTO po3BUTKy 40 2030 poxy, Mpo AKy BiH NoiHdopmye rpomady.
MILYM mpopopxye posBuBaTu M 3a6e3neuyBaTM yciix ykKpaiHOMOBHIN OCBITi, OCOOMMBO B IIPOEKTAaX, WO 3a7ly4aloTb IpoMasly, CTyeHTIB, MONOJMUX MPOBIFHUKIB i 3aljikaBseHux oci6.
Y cBitii cydacHol rmo6ami3zayii ykpaiHcbKUx pemrinHux rpyl i 3pocTaHHA Jiacnop, J\€AK1 CTATTI IPMCBAYeHO 3axifHin Esponi ra [lippianin i [lisgennin Amepnii.
THE IMPACT OF THIRTY YEARS OF UKRAINIAN FAMINE STUDIES ies Edited by Andrij Makuch and Frank E Sysya Contextualizing the Holodomor: The Impact of Thirty Years of Ukrainian Famine Studies YnopsA,HMKU WUboro 36ipHuka HayKOBUX CTaTeu — AHypin Makxyx i Mpanxk E Cucuun.
Kooxken 13 rojloBHUx qonoBifzjauis — Obra AHpieBcbKa , AHfpea Ipatiosi , Ppaucya3 Tom i CraHiciaB KyapunupKun (lacruryt ictopil Yxpainn HAH Yxpainn) — 3BepHyB yBary Ha BaKAMBICTb BABYCHHA Tonoyjomopy JA OCT I>KeHHA OHIEl yu WIMpuiMnx Tem.
O TepuTOPiEto, e€KOHOMIUHE BUKOPMCTaHHA KpaiHM Ta BHYTpiUHbO-yKpalHCbKMM MOray, Ha okynaito.
Cnoragu Aqonpda Cruxa, AKUM WpaljroBaB Cy Aero B 3axifHin YkpaiHi MDK JJ[BOMa CBITOBMMM BIMHAaMM, OXOTIJIIOIOTH Mepiog, MDK 1889 1 1950-mu pokKamMn, fo dacy, KOJIM aBTOp OciB y Cnowly4eHux [rarax.
B MicAMOBI Kupa bopnca lya3aka MpeTECA po IIPOBIPHY pOwlb powMHU CrypKiB B XKUTT1 YKpalHCbKOi rpoMajIu, 30Kpema IIpO MeljeHaTcTBO Jj-pa Mapii DimepCyvpx, We poro IIpuxVusIbHMKa KIYCy.
CBoim 3amo0BiroM BoHa 3acHyBaza BiaHunm doug f-pis Mapii Mimep-Cimx« i Pyqonpda Dimtepa B KIYCi B kBirui 2014 poxy.
Toxoan 3 POHLAY NiTpMMyioTb cTMMeHAiI Ta HayKOBi IIPOEKTM 3 yKpalHCbKMX cTyMim.
BngaHua lpefcTaBise icTopiro BaTypuva BIpOOB*K 3O710TOI epu 3a reTbMaHa IBaHa Masenu, pymHalyiro MiCTa pOCIMCbKMMM BiMCbKaMn 1708 poxy, a TaKOoK MOTO Mi3Hillly llepe6yfoBy 3a retpMaHa Kupuiia Posymoscpxoro.
ABTOpU OOTOBOPIOWTh pesyiibTaTM CIVIbHUX KaHa]|CbKO-yKpalHCbKMX pO3KONOK opTelii Ta TeTbMaHCbKUX MaeTKiB y 2013-2014 pokax.
Bonu OnmMcyt0Tb 3aIMIIKN TlamayoBux pesupenuin Maseru Ta Po3yMOBCbKOTLO 1 IIpef[CTaBAAOTb eKCTep epy Ta iHTep epy.
NOpiBHAHHA FocBipy Kanan, Esponu ta Ykpaini, B AKIN B3AIM yuacTb MONOMi JOCHIPJHUKU Ta 3HaHi HayKOBIIi, UU1 OPUTiHaIbHi JOMOBIf{i CTOCyBa/IMCA TAKMX TeM, AK reonosliTMKa Ta periOHasIbHi MOMTUKM; EBpoleMcbKa, perioHasIbHa Ta TpaHCKOpyOHHa CIliBipallA; KOPHOHM 1 MDKHaposHE paso.
Unenu napnamenty JImuga JJankan i Ilirep longpinr Takox BucTymMa~n Ha KoHdepeuuii.
Cumnos3irom KIYCy fo piynnuyi peBonrouil E€BpomarvifpaH 9-11 6epe3Ha 2014 IIporpama BUBYCHHA Cy4acHol YKpaiHM pu KIYCi mposeyia cuMM103110M 13 HaroWM Mepuiol pidHMii peBovouli €ppomaipjan.
Ilepury cecito 6yno0 mpucBAdeHO o6pa3aM, CMMBOMaM Ta iffeHTMUHOCTI BroneteHb KIYCy 2015 pesomtonii.
J\-p Bonoyumup Kynuxk (Inctutyt MOMITMYHUX 1 ETHOHAMIOHAJIbBHUX WOcig»KeHb im.
Kypaca HAH Yxpainn, Kunis) Bigq3Haune [\pPaMaTM4Hi 3MiHM B YKpaiHCcbKin HaljioHabHiit imeHTMaHOcTi.
Moro NOCMI>KeHHA CBif4aTb po 3pocTaHHA caMoifjeHTUdikaii 3 YkpalHoro Ta rOpfOcTM Yepes HaslexKHICTb JO YKpalHCbKOI Halil, CU/IbHILLYy IIPMB A3aHiCTb JO HaljioHatbHUx CMMBOMIIB, OisbIy KOHCOMIalyito 13 Hosunu KIYCy yKpaiHcbKOi Haljil, 3pOCTaHHA COMiJapHOCTM 3i CMIBrpoMajjAHaMn, BULLY TOTOBHICTb 3axuijaTu YKpainy Ta OisIbLIy BIICEBHEHICTb y CU 3MiHNTM ll Ha Kpallle, WepeTBOPMBIIM Ha CIIpaBill EBpOMeNcbKy KpalHy.
M Kypaca HAH Yxpainnu, Kuis) npoanani3syBaB KOHQMIKT icTOPMYHMX aM ATeM, IO 3MILJHIOIOTb AHTarOHICTUUHI CTOCYHKM MbK Pocieto Ta 1HIMMn HOCTpayAHCbKUMM pecityOikaMu.
B octaHHiit eHb mpod. borgzan Kopan POSIIAHYB [pKepera, 3HaYeHHA Ta BaK/IMBICTb EBpoMalipfaHy, HarooIyIOUM Ha TIMOMHHMX 3MiHax y MOMITMYHIN Ta COMLAIbHIM CBIJOMOCTI, WO BiqOymuca B yKpaiHcbKOMy cycninpcetsi.
CUcTemMM YKpaiHu Ta il EBpOiHTerpawil. j-p Muxanno BunHuupKun (HayionambHun yH-T «KueBoMormaucbKa aKayjleMia») BU3HadMB nogil CBpoMavyjany AK NOTpPiMHy PeBOHOMiIO — HaljlOHasIbHy, 6ypxKya3Hy Ta MOCTMOsepHy.
Tlepiimn feHb CUMIIO3i1KOMy 3aBepmmmBca LleBueHKiBCbKOI0 WeKWIEIO «CKIJIbKU MaaHiB NOTpiOvHo YKpaini, wou 3MiHMTUCA’», AKY BUTOMOCMB CBITOBOI claBu YKpaiHCbKUM TIMCbMeHHMK Auypen Kypxos.
HlonoBHeHHA AO po3KonokK y Batypuni 2014 yKpalHCbKO-KaHaj\cbKa apxeovIOridHa eKCHeqUUIA MpOLOBKUNA POSKONKU 3a/IMIMKIB TOJOBHOL pesugjeHuli reTbManHa IBaHa Masenn y barypmuni.
Ilepeg 1700 Bin CHOpy4MB TaM OaraTo IpuKpallleHun yermanuit 6bapokosuit nanay.
JlocnifHUKU Mi{TOTyBaIM KOMI 10TepHi peKOHCTpyKUii eB ATM ClOCcobiB MOKPUTTA MifOT, 3acCTOCOBAHUX y 3aJ1AX JIA MpUMHATD, MOKOAX i cry KOOBMX IIpMMilljeHHAX Masally.
Cepeyl BigjomMux paHHboMofepHux cnopyy, Ykpainu ronoBHa pesupeHuiA Masennu y BarypuHi BUpisHAeTbCA HaMOibIO10 KiIbKicTIO i CBOEpifHICTIO BUABJICEHUX TaM OPHaMeHTaNIbHUX TUMIB KepaMid4HUx IVIMTOK 1 Bi TBOPpeHUX BapisAHTIB MOLJ€HHA HMMM Mipsor.
ApxXeOJIOrM 3aBepLIMIM PpO3KONKU PeWITOK BeNMKOi cry*KOoBOi cnopyyn nBpopy Masenn.
Tam “MoBipHo 30Mpalicb reThMaHCcbKi rBappiMi 4M KO3albKi oditjepn 3 Moro noury.
B Ui OyAiBnmi 3HaMuAM cpiOHi Ta MIJJAH1 MOJIbCbKI M POCiMCbKi MOHETH; 6poOH30Bi IYA3NKU; IpsKKy Ta YOTUPU dirypHi HakiagKu 3 perbepduumu BI3epyHKaMMU 1 [paBipyBaHHAM Bill JOpOrMx WIKipsAHMX CTapWIMHCbKMX MOACI; CBAHWeBI MYIUIKeTHI Ky/1i; ®omo 1.
Cepell 3aM1kiB cmay>K60BOi CHOpyAM Ta KOIMUIHBOI OaTypMHCbKOl dopteui 6y10 BiqHayeHO UMMazIO 14 BioneteHb KIYCy 2015 Hosunu KIYCy yiaMKiB BULLYKaHMX Tapi10K, BUTOHallafly Ha barypuu.
MDKHapOJHIX KOMePpHIMHMX 1 Ky/IbHa nepegmicti barypuHa Octpo3i TypHMx KOHTaKTiB barypuua Jo voro Oyo 3HalfeHo KepaMi4Hy ivy 3PpyMUHYyBaHHA B 1708 KaxJII0 3 pembedHMM TrepOom IInmuna BaTyPpUHCbKUM IIpO€KT CIOHCOOpvimka, reHepayIbHOro IIMcapa Tipu pytoTb KIYC, Iancpkum inctntyt ypagi Masenn, aku cTaBreTbMaHOM _cepeftHbOBIGHNMX CTygin ra B €Milpaliii 1 aBTOPOM Mepiol ocmifqHMuM 1HCTUTYT «Ykpainika» , yKpaiHcbKOl KOHCTMTyUii 1710 B Toponti.
Tpu 3 Hux BoHU apxeOJIOFI4MHUX JOC PKeEHHAX baryi HAYKOBIIB 3 YHIBeEpCUTeTIB BIJJHOCATb JJO 2KEPTB MOCKOBCbKOrO puna i my6mikayii ixHix pesymbTaris.
O6oe cTMMeHAIATIB MOUAIM CBOE cTaxkyBaHHa B KIYCi B OcinHboMy cemectTpi 2015 poxy.
APpXiBHY CTMMeHil0 3 yKpalHCbKUX CTY, WO CTajla MOKIMBOW 3aBJAKN NipTpumMui BiaHoro douay Credanii byxayescpxKol-IlacryuieHKo, CTBOpeHO 3 MeTOIO JOWOMaraTu CTyeHTaM i HayKOBIAM y 300pi apxiBiB, CIIPMATU HaABHMM apxiBHMM yCTaHOBaM KaTasori3yBaTu ado poobuTu yMdposi Konii ykpaiHcbKMx apxiBHMUx 3i6paHb, a TAKOK iHakile ONMCyBaTM apxiBHi KoNeKUIl.
UetBepry cTuneHsito Oyn0 HafaHo TamMapi Cxpunyi 41a poboru Haj] WyTiBHMKOM J[O apxiBHux PouAis YKpaiHcbKoi BiIbHOi aKajfemii HayK y CIIIA 8 Hpw-Mopky.
MOCTHOKTOPCbKy CTMMeHMil0 JIA BABYCHHA MOJepHoi Ta CyuacHol YKpaiHu, a TaKOK apXiBHy CTMMeH1I0 3 yKpaiHCbKUX CTYyHiM1.
Ilepemox{i OTPUMY10Tb CTAaTYyc JOCHIPHOTO CHiBpOOiTHMKa im. pogmun Cractoxis.
Kpim nposeyeHua cBoix WocmifqHux IIPO€EKTIB, CTMMeHMMATM MalOTb TaKOXK JOMOMaraTu u OpaTu yuacTb y IIAHyBaHHi JidibHocTu KIYCy.
Ha npvKiayax Yxpainu Ta Kanagu». pyry crumenpito Oyi0 HaffaHo Ipanosi Kosayenky, AKUM OTPUMaB JOKTOPCbKMM CTYMIHb #f is covjionorii 8B A6epgincpkomy yuiBepcnterti B 2013 poui.
IIpomoByi Ta JONOBifaui 3 ABCTPil, Kanagu, Himewaunn, [3painto Ta Cnonyuennx Iraris.
CnipopraHisaTopaMu mekyii 6yam HaykoBo-ocsBiTHin KOHCOpUiIOM BUBYeHHA LonOqOMOpy mupu KIYCi, IIporpama jocmippKeHb icTopii Ykpainu im.
Ilerpa AumKa mpm KIYCi, Kanagcpka pyHfaia yKpaiHcbkux cryin Ta Llentp e€BPOIeMCbKMX, POCIMCbKMX 1 eBpa3sificbKMx CTyMiMm TopoHTcbKoro yH-TYy.
A History» . 3a cBoro KHyDKKy «Iron Curtain: The Crushing of Eastern Europe, 1944-1956» ii Big3HauuaM IIpemiero im.
Ilani Anmen6aymM mouara CBOI0 JI€KI{1I0 OIMCOM paHHbOl Kap epu Viocuda Cramina i aK Bona cpopMyBasla Moro MoMiTMKY CTOCOBHO Yxpainnu.
Ilani Anmen6aym noacHuiia, AK Cramin, 6yfy4u npeyjcTaBHUKOM Jlenina B YkKpaiHi, CTaB CBiJ[KOM IIpoBally J BOX Oi bUIOBMUbKNXx iHBa3iU, a TAKOK MayoxKe Bax CeJIAHCbKMX IOBCTaHb.
BifjTak 3alOOirTU JabUIMM MOBCTaHHAM yKpaiHCbKMXx CeyIAH CTaIO Moro TOMOBHOW TypborTow.
BoHa onmcana IlyTiHosy «KepoBaHy JJ@MOKpartito», 30KpeMa CTBOpeHHA PiKTMBHMX NOMTMYHUX MapTin.
Bin «3Hae, WO ycrillHa BeCTepHi3allid YkKpaiHu, HaBiTb CTBOPeHHA BiJHOCHO JJEMOKpaTU4HOl, BiJJHOCHO YCHiMIHOi Ta BiMHOCHO OOpe iHTeIpOBaHOl YKpaiHUu CTaHOBMTb KpamHt1o HeOesiieky JIA HbOro», — Buronocuna nm.
TaddinttoHa Yuisepcutery Jlonona Mepimayxt B micTi Jloc-AHJpKerlec y Kamidopuii.
BonognMupa J|mamucpKoro npn KIYCi y ciiBlipatyi 3 IaCTUTyTOM CBATOTO Bonoyumupa.
Jiextopom 6ys f-p BonowumMup Kyiuk, 1poBisjHuM HayKOBUM CHiBpOOiTHUK Bifpzity eTHOMOMITONOTIi IHCTUTYTY MOMITMYHUX 1 ETHOHAIIOHaaOM IIpOJJEMOHCTPyBaTM AK, y CBOiN iHbopMalliMmHin OopoTbOi, WepKOBHi IpOBIZHUKM 300paxKyIOTb «iH» I}epKOBHI CIIIbHOTU. )-p JjenuceHKo po3iloy4aB CBOIO J€KU110 OLIAOM POCiMCbKOTO peiTiMHOTO HapaTUBy, BiJJOMOrO Tlij Ha3Boro «PyccKuM MUp» , — MacTOpcbKol iHiliaTMBU, AKy 2009 poy po3po6uB i BIPOBAaTMB MOCKOBCbKMM MaTpiApx Kipim.
Ilarpiapx Kipian i MMTpononmut Inapion MOKNAIMCA JO MeperiaAyy boro HapaTMBy CBOIM TBep/>KeHHAM, UJO He/leTiTMMHi IepKOBHI rpyi IIPU3BeM [lO Cilaylaxy HaCUJIbCTBa B YKpaiHi Ta CTBOpMIM Cepuo3Hy 3arpo3y Sesneni Ta cBOboOsi BipHUx NOCIMJOBHMKIB «PycCKOrO MMpa» B YxpaiHi.
Ha fymky f-pa Jlenucenka, yKpalHCbKUM KOHTpHaparTuB, AKUM Mporomocuja YkpaincbKa IIpapocnaBua Lepxpa KuiscpKoro WaTpiaApxary y BifMOBipb Ha yKpalHCbky KpM3y 1330BHi Ta 3cepeMHM, NopiBHroe Bragimipa Ilytina 3 6i6ni#HuMu KaiHom i @apaoHoM i 3aK/IMKae CBOIX BIDHMX yTPMMyBaTMcA Bi, KOPyNUIMHUx BUMHKIB, AOU He OMMHUTUCA B A-p Huxkoadc Aexucenko ToBapncTBi lOgn Icxapiora.
Len KOHTpHapaTuB 3BuHyBa4ye IlyTina Ta Kpemiib, ipef[CTaById€ CBO IlepKBy AK CaKpaJIbHy CIIiIbHOTY, a «PyccKun MUp» OMMCYye AK PaybIUIMBy OOiLAHKY, WO IIpusBepe JO paOcTBa.
Ha fyMky J-pa Jjenucenka, Yxpaincpka Ipexo-KatomubKa Llepxsa € p>xepenom inmoro yKpaiHcbKoro KOHTpHapaTuBy.
Jiexuia 4-pa Jjenucenka 3aBepmmnjlacAd MOTO pO3yMaMK IIpo Te, AK IjepKOBHi MpOBIJHAKU MOKYTb IpunHATM Kypc 3071 KeHHA, abu 3MOffeJOBaTU MMp [JIA TpOMaf{AHCbKOrTO cycilijibcTBa.
IJM€CHTMUUHOCTI, IfeOOTil, BATH CTOCYHKM» Ta HecaTKiB cTaTen B aHIJIO-, YKpaiHO-, pOCiMCbKOTa (bpaHKOMOBHMX HayKOBMX YacomMcax Ta KHW>KKax.
BiqMOBIFHO, TOAM OyhyTb OibIle IPMB A3aHMMU JO YKpaiHcbKOi [lepoKaBu, AKUJO BOHa CTaHe MOBHOWIHHOLW JeEMOKparieto.
LleHtpom pesontouli CBpomanpyaH 2014 poxky, 3HaHOI TaKOx AK PeBoMOU iA TIFHOCTU, Oya TONOBHA MOLWsa Knesa, AK i [lomapanuesoi peBositonil 2004 poxy.
Biq3HauuTu Meputy piaHuuio Cppomanypany, KIYC 30praHi3yBaB TpUeHHMM CMMIIO31I0M i 3alIPOCMB YKpaiHCbKOrO IIMCbMeHHUKa Aunppea Kypxkosa ipountarn 49-y piany Iesyenkiscpxy mex.
Ile saHeq6aHHA NOWIMpMioca M Ha iHmopMalliftHuM Ta KyIbTypHUM mpoctip Ykpainn.
Ha Jfon6aci Ta B KpmMy MicljeBi eqiTu KOHTposi1oBaIU UM JOCi KOHTpomto1wTb indopMalinHi BUJaHHA Ta BAKOPMCTOBYIOTD ix, abu 360eperTM COBETCbKY MeHTAaMbHICTB MICIJ€EBOTO HaceyIeHHAl.
Pesoviroyjiio CBpoMaljaHy CIpOBoKYBaJIM BUUHKM BikTopa AHyKoBuya, AKU, 3a IPOHIEO OM, IparHyB YHUKHYTM TaKOro ClleHapito MICA TOO, AK BTpaTUB Blafly BHACIIJOK IlomapanyeBoi peBomtouii 2004 poxy.
BHacifOK boro YkKpaina BCTyIMa y HOBMM, ajle BOWHOUaC HebesneyHUM, Tepiogy HaljieO6yyBaHHa.
Jligqepm Pocil Hafit0TbCcA, WO KaXJIMBi EKOHOMIYHI OOCTABUHU BUCHA@KaTb YKpaiHiiB i COHYKaloTb ix BIJMOBMTMCA Bi, OOpoTHON 3 Pociero Ta MOBCTAaTM MpoTM cBoro ypany.
Ilan Kypkos 3aBepimes CBIM BUCTYI MIpMiyljeHHAM, WO, AKIO He BiOyAyTbca pedopmn, BHaC/IIJJOK 3pOCTaHHA CKOHOMIYHMX Ta COMIAIbHUX Mpobsem TpeTa peBO/IOL iA Ha MavjfjaHi CTaHe MOKIMBOIO, a le OyjJe KaTacTpodoro mia Ykpainn.
B paMkax cBoro TypHe KaHajoro mlaH Kypkos jjaB inTepB 10 raseTaM «Toronto Star» i «Edmonton Journal». 16-a WOpi4Ha MeMopiaANbHa NeKUIA im.
Jlo moro oct THU bKUX iHTepeciB HaslexKaTb yKpaiHCbKa Ta pocificbKa jlitepatrypu XIX CTOJI., 30KpeMa BUKOpUCcTaHHA JWMCKyPCMBHOTO MifXOf,y }O HapaTuBy.
Miraituyk € akTMBHUM TepeKlajjaueM, AKMM 3apa3 pale Hall llepekjlayjaMu 11 ec Bonoyumupa Bunumuenka Ta Mukonm Kyzima.
Crpyka — WOpi4Ha JIeKUiA AHTIMCbKOIO MOBOIO Ha TEMM YKpaiHCbKOi itepatypu.
Apocnas DefopykK, KepiBHMK (IHCTMTYT yKpalHcbKOl apxeorpadii Ta D>Kepeno3HaBCTBa im.
Ilerpa Auuka npn KIYCi ta mpodecop YkpaincbKoro KaTOJIMUbKOTO yH-y); leraHa ApouleHko (WupeKTop HayKOBoi 6i6mioteku HayionambHoro yH-Ty «Kuespo-MornuaaucpKa AKajlemia»); a TaKOK HayKOBi CHiBpoOiTHUKM HAH Yxpainu, icropuku Bixtop Bpexyueuko, Tapac Uyxmi6, Irop Iupuy, Typanmi Deprag, JImMutpo Bupcpkui Ta OxcaHa FOpKosa.
Ayam PawxrapfiT, romoBHMM pesakTop *KypHasy «New Eastern Europe» ; mpod.
B 3ami 3acifjaHb [OpupzManoro dbakynbtety /I[bBiBCcbKOrO HaljioHajyIbHOroO yH-Ty im.
B-Bo KIYCy, 2014. [lig uac nopii 6yn0 BILaHOBaHO aM ATb MOKiMHOTO MeljeHatTa IBaHa ApemkKa, cloHCOopa IjbOrO TOMY. 11 rpygua.
Iloka3 JOKyMeHTAasIbHOrO PisbMy «He6ecHa COTHA» 1 MCKYyciA IIpo peBov10ui10 CBpomawsfany.
Onicaa Biq6ynaca quckycia 3a Y4acTM CTYJeCHTIB 3 Kypcy «SLAV299» Anb6epTcbKoro yH-Ty Ta 110Ka3 JOKYMeHTasIbHOrO PibMy «He6ecHa coTH”». 4 mororo.
Ppaucec Csupina 3 fellapTameutTy icTopii Ta KIACMYHUX CTyAiM AmbOepTcbKOroO yH-Ty; enmckon Jjasuy, Motto (YxpaincbKa KaTOAMIbKa e|MOHTOHCHKa Ellapxis); 0.
Vocadarta); Kapeu JIemicki (My3eu Otuis Bacunian, Manpep, Amp6epta). 27 moToro.
Ppank E Cucun, aupextop Llentpy yKpaincbkux iCTOPMYHUX FOcmpKeHb KITYCy.
YaacHuKM MporpaMu CTYJ€HTCbKOTO OOMiHY MbDK JIbBiBCbKMM Hal{ioHasIbHUM YH-TOM im.
Codia Ta Bacwib Ulyaiuknu, Xpnctuna Kupnam4 Ta Irop Megsinb, AKI oTpumMazn cTMMeH All im. borgzaHa Ta Haranii TomemOis.
Io6u 3agoBombHuTu HoTpeby B OinbLIMx CIHOHCOPCbKUX MOXKIMBOCTAX, KoMaHa KIYCy, mo mpatiioe Haj] 30MpaHHAM KOUITIB, AKTMBHO LyKa€ HOBi MOXK/IMBOCTI aia pinancyBaHHA Mpoextis.
Moon nonermmmrTu mpowec HajjaHHA Haropog ta FoTauim KIYCy, aqminicrpaTmBya rpyna KIYCy naanye nepermanyTM M MOfepHi3syBaTu powec NofaHHA 3aAB, abu 3pobOuTu Moro TeruimM i ePeKTMBHILIMM JIA MOWLyKauis.
Llen IIPOeKT CTABMTb 3a METY 3HaXOMTU Ta Bif3HauaTU My Onikawii, WO 3 ABMAMCA BIIPOJOBXK POKy M MatOTb BUCOKy HayKOBY AKICTb i pO3ronoc cepey KOMer Ta IIMpwioi rpoMayicbKocTu.
Ilicna o6ropopeHHa Ta rOJOCyYBaHHA KOMITeT FOTYE «KOPOTKUM CIMCOK» CTaTev Ta MOHOTpadii, Aki IpOMOHY10Tb Ha posrmay KIYCy.
Ha gpyromy ervatii *«ypi KIYCy rovnocye 3a ny67ikauii B ABOXx KaTeropiax (HaMKpalija CTaTTA i HaltKpallja MOHOrpadia), 1106 obpaTu TlEPEMOKIIB 13 Ipesj}CTaBseHOro CIMcKy KaHAMparis.
Hapnicn inteeKTyasIbHOi icTopii» Ta Mupona Kanpana «JltoqM"" kKopnopatii.
CTUNeHAll 4A acnipaHtiB | HOKTOPaHTIB JlocniQuvubkKa MarictepcbKa CTUneHpiA IM. poauHn CracioKiB Jlinang, MaxJloxnen, kadeypa nomironorii Cacka¥eBaHCbKOro yH-Ty.
Conomia Ilapana, kadeypa HiMeybKuUx i COB AHCbKUX CTyqiMt Manito6cpKoro yH-Ty.
Ta cy4acHol YkpaiHu IpaH KosayeHko, FOKTOp coionorii FOais Kucaa d Tpesop Epaaxep ae Oxcana YoosuKk A6epyincpxoro yu-Ty B Hotaanpii.
Oxcana Yaosnk, FoKTop opraHi3anii JOBKIINA CoOfeplOpHCbKOLO yH-TY B Isenil.
ApxiBHa CTMNeHgia 3 yKpalHCbKUX CTypin Ipan-Ilapio Xum«a, ellapTament ictopii Ta KJIACMYHUX CTyAiM AmbOepTCbKOrO yH-TY, Egmoutou.
Banentrun KaspyHunk, IncrutyT yKpaiHcbKol apxeorpadii Ta #>Kepem03HaBcTBa im.
Opect Maprunosuy, YkpaincbKun KY/IbTYPHUM Ta OCBITHIM OCepefOK, Binuiner.
Cmedanii Byxaueecoxoi-Iacmywenko. @®unun Coxan, YkpaiHcbKO-KaHaj[CbKUn WOCIiJ;HO-HOKyMeHTalimHnit WeHTp, Topouto.
JocnifHVUubkKi FpaHTu KIYCy Aungpii bosrups, Ixcruryt icropil YkpalHn HaionambHoi AkajeMii HayK YKpalHu, Kunis.
Apocaas Jjenxucenko, IncturyT icropii Tlonpcepkoi Akajfemii Hayk, BaputaBa.
Apocnas Mansynin, IactutyT icropii Yxpainn HaiionantbHol AkajjeMil HayK Yxpainn, Kuis.
Bixtop Minac, InctutyT yKpaiHcbKoi apxeorpadii Ta f>Kepeno3HaBcTBa, im.
Ipuna Xpomosa, lucrutytT icropii Ykpainn HaionambHoi Akajemii Hayk Yxpainu, Kuis.
Jlina Kammenko, Kapenbcbkuit 1HCTUTYT Yuipepcntery cxigqHbol Dintanpil.
Oxcana Komtymbko, kadeyjpa eKOHOMiGHUX Hayk MazitencpKoro yH-Ty, Cram6yn.
PomaH CxakyH, InctutyT icropii Llepxsu YkpaiHCbKOrO KaTO/IMIbKOTO yH-TY, JIppis.
JIeeka ma Mapitixu Baoiu. tOpit Bonommu, IlonrapcpKui HaljiOHaJIbHUM MeqaroriuHun yH-T im.
LT REE Oa ST Ee EE SO SI DT TT IE IRR I TT ES SELLE RT SO NSE BOGE SL BE EEE BroneteHb KIYCy 2015 2) Haropogu KIYCy JlocnigHuubkKi rpaHTu HayKOBO-OCBITHbOrO KOHCOPLIIOMy BUBYCHHA [onogomopy Onpra beptencen, Ulkona rno6anbHux cipaB im.
BaneHTuna bopncenko, HayKosi apxiBHi OHM pyKOMNMciB i POHOSATINCIB IHCTUTYTY MMCTeL|TBOSHaBCTBa, oubKIOpMcTUKU Ta eTHOMOTIi im.
JIto6omup JlyutoK, kadeppa nomituKu Ta e€KOHOMIKM KopomiBcbKoro BiMCbKOBOrO KoneyKy Kanan, Kinrcrou.
O-pa Bacuna Ipuxogbka Leu Hopmn doug, i3 WouaTKOBMM BHecKoM $10,632, 3aCcHYBa/IM B rpygHi 2013 Jlapuca IipuxogpKo (IInesent Pupx, Miuuran) ta Anppia I[puxoppxKo (lamang Bunmppx, Texac) Ha BIIAHYBaHHA aM ATM CBOrO YONOBiKa Ta 6aTbKa, q-pa Bacuna B IIpuxogpKa , mpodecopa kadempu OionoriuHux Hayk Jjep>KaBHoro yHipepcutery im.
Mou HaflaBaTuMe [paHTu OCTiPHMUKaM 3 yKpaiHCbKUx cTyfiM a6o acnipaHtamM y ui WapMHi B Oyaqb-aKOMy 3aklaf{i BULOI OcBiTu.
POAUHU LOpKIBCbKIX lJepxsu. cTMMeHAIATIB) OOMpaTMMe KOMiTeT KIYCy, cimpatouncn Ha IIPOABJICHMM iHTepec JO yKpaiHCbKMXx CTyfiM Ta NOTCHUIMHUM BIIMB IPONOHOBAHMX JOCII{PKeEHb MemopianbHui BINH OOHA Memopianbuni Bian doug im. poqmun IOpKiscbKux 3acHOBaHo B KIYCi 2014 3 mouaTKogoro BHecky $16,800.
