To negotiate with Putin, United States President Donald Trump and his advisers recognize that it is important to look well beyond his statements and optics and fully grasp what he wants.
Putin seems to have Russia sitting on Ukraine and moving at a deliberate pace on the Minsk peace process.
Moving slowly on the peace process has given him an upper hand to a degree, as other parties involved are required to respond to his whims.
The ideal geopolitical response to the global power crisis is a connection between US, and Russia.
In 2017, the foreign policy efforts of the administration of United States President Donald Trump evinced a desire not to isolate Russia, or allow engagement with it to fall off.
He does not want to settle on a long-term stand-off in which peace, particularly in Europe, is placed at risk.
He believes the United States and Russia can be good neighbors on the same planet.
Zbigniew Brzezinski, the renowned United States foreign policy scholar and former United States National Security Adviser, stated that sophisticated United States leadership is sine qua non of a stable world order.
Finding a way to establish an authentic positive relationship with Russia is a struggle United States administrations have engaged in for a few decades.
Trump said he would try to find the solution, and explained that he would give it his best effort.
However, critics depicted Trump as being a naïve neophyte, outmatched by Russian Federation President Vladimir Putin.
They warned of the dangers of Trump dealing with the sly, experienced Russian leader.
While the Trump administration remained outwardly positive about working with Putin, it was not in fact overly optimistic about that.
Trump and foreign and national security policy officials in his administration were always well-aware of the fact that Putin and his government can more often than not be disingenuous.
Yet, Putin is the duly elected president of Russia, and its head of state.
Moreover, for now, Putin is the best leader available to keep Russia’s complex society somewhat stable.
He has managed to contain extremist political elements that might seek war with Russia’s neighbors, NATO, or the United States directly without thinking it through and he has suppressed morally void organized criminal elements that might wreak havoc globally.
Moscow views Ukraine as being part of its sphere of influence, its “near abroad”, and its hope would be to bring it into Russia’s fold, willing or unwilling.
The United States and other Western powers support Kiev’s desire to be an independent actor.
Long before the mass protests in Kiev began in 2014, circles there were quite pro-Western and welcomed entrées from the EU to take a westward path.
However, as the United States and EU responded to the Russian occupation of Crimea, another crisis arose in the east of Ukraine, in a region known as Donbass.
Pro-Russian separatists in its Donetsk and Luhansk provinces took over entire towns and declare the independence of the territory captured.
The Kiev government has sent the Ukrainian Army into those region to reclaim its sovereign territory.
Western officials insist that Russia has actually been controlling both the civil administration of the self-proclaimed countries as well as the fighting.
The Minsk Agreement was intended to create a ceasefire, yet thousands of violations were committed by both sides on a daily basis.
The combatants have maintained fighting positions too close to one another.
Tanks, mortars, artillery, and multiple launch-rocket systems could be found where they should not have been.
Under the Minsk Agreement, Ukraine, the Russian Federation, France, and Germany on February 11, 2015, agreed to a package of Measures to mitigate and eventually halt the conflict in Eastern Ukraine.
There was supposed to be a constitutional deal on the future of Donetsk and Luhansk by the end of 2015 but that went nowhere.
The direction which the region may turn will be determined either by the US, EU and Ukrainian Government, intent to keep all of the Donbass in Ukraine, albeit with part of its population reluctant to live under Kiev’s control or by Russia and pro-Russian separatists intent on establishing the region’s independence and tying it umbilically to Moscow.
From the additional space in Ukraine he holds, Putin can exert his influence in the region.
The direction which Eastern Ukraine may turn will be determined either by the US, EU and Ukrainian Government, intent to keep all of it in Ukraine, albeit with part of its population reluctant to live under Kiev’s control or by Russia and pro-Russian separatists intent on establishing the region’s independence and tying it umbilically to Moscow.
During a Moscow news conference on January 15, 2018, Russian Federation Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov summed up Moscow’s thinking on Ukraine.
Lavrov explained that on a political level, Russia respects the territorial integrity of Ukraine but only within the boundaries that were designed after the referendum in Crimea and its reunification with the Russian Federation.
The possibility that Putin would not make himself available for deals that would lead to resolutions of disputes and contentious issues that would satisfy the administration was undoubtedly among the big “what ifs” administration officials considered and planned for.
Trump and those who could be called the “stone hearts” among his officials have not been surprised by anything Putin has done.
The Trump administration came into office eager to engage Putin in order to improve relations, but did so with its eyes wide open.
Trump’s vision and pronouncement of his intention to engage was wrongly viewed as a pro-Putin deference.
Critics predicted disaster if Trump attempted to negotiate on things he did not really understand with the cunning, ruthless Russian leader.
Trump also received words of caution about Putin from Members of Congress from his own Republican party.
The repeated warnings remind of Act II of William Shakespeare’s The Life and Death of Julius Caesar, in which Caesar dismissed information concerning the conspiracy against him.
He rebuffed Calpurnia pleas that he “not stir out of his house” on the Ides of March.
He rejected augurers’ claim that the discovery that an animal sacrificed as an offering had no heart was a warning sign.
In Act III, Caesar ignored a letter from Artemidorus outlining the conspiracy and identifying the conspirators, and a few lines further down, he was assassinated.
The possibility that Putin would not make himself available for deals with Trump that would lead to resolutions of disputes and contentious issues that would satisfy the administration was undoubtedly among the big “what ifs” administration officials considered and planned for.
They would hardly be naïve and sentimental about any United States adversary or competitor, let alone Russia.
The jumping off point for attempting to establish better relations with Russia inevitably became getting clarification and reaching some resolution of the issue of Russia’s meddling in the 2016 United States Presidential Election.
The Trump administration wanted answers due to its own concerns and wanted to respond to crushing domestic pressures to find out what happened.
Putin was approached by Trump about the 2016 United States Presidential Election meddling and the the possibility of rebuilding US-Russian relations and possibly creating a new era cooperation.
If things had gone well, the stage would have been set, for better or worse, to move along the road from forgiveness,to acceptance, to restoration, and then rejoicing in Washington and Moscow.
However, as sure as when the rain falls from the sky it hits the land, Putin would only offer denials about the meddling.
Nevertheless, Trump listened very closely to Putin’s positions and ideas, and developed an understanding of his way of thinking.
On Ukraine, the Trump administration clearly understood that provocative actions would have destabilized an already fragile situation.
In addition to Trumps talks with Putin, there have been multiple talks between Tillerson and Lavrov during which Ukraine has been discussed in a fulsome way.
Trump has left no doubt that he wanted Russia to leave Ukraine alone, and that is the position that the Russians are hearing from him, Tillerson and all other United States officials.
Trump gave foreign policy speech in Warsaw that made clear his administration’s objectives and principles.
Yet, even before that speech, Russian officials had begun to make claims that Trump’s words and actions were the causality for its attitude and behavior toward the new administration.
Putin is clearly a clever tactician, but it is unclear whether he is equally shrewd strategist on the global stage.
He has served as Russia’s leader as president and prime minister, one could discern through his expressed concepts and intentions, as well as his actions, that he may be leading Russia in retrograde toward the past, albeit In his effort to maintain his grip on Russia, Putin has resurrected the old systems to control the populace with which he grew up with and is most familiar.
That has essentially dragged systems in Russia back to a simulacrum of the Soviet-era domestically and Moscow’s sort of neo-Cold War approach geopolitically.
Still, while armed to the teeth with nuclear weapons, Russia may no longer have the capability to be flexible militarily and may be unable to be a decisive superpower in the world.
While the West Plans, Russia Conquers ISIS in Syria” and “How Russian Special Forces Are Shaping the Fight in Syria: Can the United States Policy on Syria Be Gauged by Their Success?”, greatcharlie mistakenly assessed that Russia entered the war in Syria determined to shape the war on the ground and the war’s ultimate outcome given the military power it brought to bear on the problem and the sense of exigence expressed by Putin when he declared that Russia needed to act.
Putin emphasized that Russia would attack ISIS, eventually driving it and other Islamic militant groups from Syria, and restoring Assad’s control over the country.
Over time, it became clear that Russia lacked the capability to do that despite appearing to have the capacity.
Russia also demonstrated a lack of will or desire to do more and to increase its presence in Syria to enable its forces to act decisively.
Perhaps one could glean much from what has happened in Syria to examine and assess Putin’s efforts in Ukraine.
Despite any shortcomings observed in Russia’sees military performance in Syria, there can still be no doubt that it can still effecrively act as a divisive power.
To that extent, Putin has tasked the Russian military and other security services with mission of eroding existing and burgeoning democracies wherever they sees them.
Indeed, as the EU and NATO expanded eastward, Putin decided to pull independent countries that were once part of the Soviet Union back into Russia’s orbit.
That process usually begins with contemptuous murmurs against home country’s identity, language, and national symbols and then becomes a “rebel yell” for secession.
It was seen in Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan, South Ossetia and Abkhazia in Georgia, Transnistria in Moldova, and more recently in Crimea, the Luhansk and Donetsk in Ukraine.
Each time an ethnic-Russian space was carved out of a country, Putin gained a base from which he can exert his influence in that country.
Still, despite the activities and some successes of pro-Russian political elements, in the larger territories of those former Soviet republics occupied by Russian Federation armed forces and elsewhere in the sphere of the former Eastern Bloc, political thinking of the people of those countries has not turned in agreement with Russia.
Mistakenly, greatcharlie assessed that Russia entered the war in Syria determined to shape the war on the ground and the war’s outcome given the military of power it brought to bear on the conflict and exigence expressed by Putin when he declared Russia’s need to act.
Over time, it became clear that Russia lacked the capability to act decisively, although appearing to have the capacity.
One might infer much from this with regard to Putin’s efforts in Ukraine.
Vera gloria radices agit atque etiam propagatur, ficta omnia celeroter tamquam flosculi decidunt nec simulatum potest quicquam esse diuturnum.
Many Western military analysts have proffered that Putin’s moves in Ukraine would certainly be followed by many more, to reclaim former Soviet republics and more.
Along with the capture of Crimea, Abkhazia, South Ossetia, Transnistria, Putin’s determination to hold on in Eastern Ukraine served to substantiates such concern.
Yet, it is unclear how Putin’s approach on Ukraine fits into his plans to make Russia better.
It is unclear how Russia’s capture of Donetsk and Luhansk would do for Russia in any real respect.
As mentioned earlier, despite his shortcomings, he is the best authentic option available to lead Russia for now.
Putin restored order in his country after the internal chaos of the 1990s.
It was perhaps his initial career as an officer in the Soviet Union’s Komitet Gosudarstvennoy Bezopasnosti known better as the KGB, that made reestablishing the power of the state a central part of his efforts.
Putin has been a figurative mother to Russia, nurturing it in the best way he knows how.
That idea might face some disapproval from Russian citizens who feel shortchanged of their civil and human rights, as well as opportunities to fulfill their ambitions, and feel burdened by anxieties.
Still, whenever, the metaphoric waves have gotten higher, Putin has kept his ship, Russia, right and steady.
Putin and a Moscow seem to be still playing the great power game in Europe, and happy to play it alone.
To an extent, that would support assessments by analysts and scholars in the West who believe Putin sees everything in terms of conspiracy.
It may be that the Obama administration’s approach to Ukraine and other former Soviet republics irked Putin to the extent the he is now swinging after the bell colloquially.
He may be stirring difficulties due to political expediency, soothing hardliners political elements at home.
It is not completely clear why rather than seek agreements and what he feel are advantages from contact with the US, Putin seems determined to get into a scrap with the Trump administration.
If Donetsk and Luhansk were left in the hands of pro-Russian elements, it is questionable whether Russia would become stabilizing force in region along with its newly formed, Russia would be taking on a new, difficult situation akin to those in its Southern and North Caucasian provinces.
Any resistance, peaceful or violent, would likely be dealt withh eavy handedly by Russia and its allies.
Reconstruction in the Donetsk People’s Republic or the Luhansk People’s Republic would require a lot from Russia.
Donetsk and Luhansk were net consumers of foreign imports and dependent on Russian gas before the conflict began.
They sit in a region that is considered a rustbelt, needing to be refitted at the cost of billions of dollars Moscow may never have.
Lacking any significant resources from the United States and the rest of the international community to rebuild, the only viable long-term goal in Moscow would be to convert the Donetsk People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s Republic into versions of South Ossetia, Abkhazia, Transnistria.
It would likely receive the recognition of very few countries, Russia’s allies, but not the United States or major powers of Europe.
The two quasi-countries would in many ways be shut off from the rest of the world. and may never see a postwar economic upturn.
Observing the effects of few months of rain and wind on the ruins of cities and towns, Moscow might recognize that it truly cannot support them in a way that would allow for their rebuilding.
An authentic assessment will be left to the economic experts, but there undoubtedly will be a great additional strain on Russia.
The situation would only worsen if pressure was placed on Russia over Ukraine through future sanctions.
Putin very likely has considered what Russia would be like after he, as one might presume he accepts, is called to heaven.
It would seem that now while on Earth, he is doing much to saddle future generations of Russians with two economically impoverished basket cases that they will need to care for, to pay for.
In Donetsk and Luhansk, future generations might abandon their homelands for “the other Ukraine” or points further West.
In the future, a Russian leader might very well try to reverse what Putin is attempting in Ukraine due to financial strains caused.
Taking on Donetsk and Luhansk might very well be a great miscalculation, another step toward sealing Russia’s fate as a second tier superpower.
Perhaps the type of success Putin really wants for Russia out of his reach, not by some fault of his own, but rather because it’s problems are so heavy, may run too deep.
He may have run out of real answers to put Russia on real upward trajectory given the capabilities and possibilities of the country using all tools available to him.
In a significant endeavor, there is always the potential to become lost.
To that extent, consciously or unconsciously, Putin may simply be procrastinating, postponing an authentic look at the situation.
The success that the United States found in rallying the Syrian Democratic Forces against ISIS and other Islamic militant groups, as well as its success across the border with the Iraqi Army, Iraqi Security Forces, and the Kurdish Peshmerga against ISIS, may convince the United States and Western allies to develop plans for a new initiative regarding Ukraine.
The United States and European countries no longer appear ambivalent about committing to the requirements of European security, which in many respects can be costly and risky.
The success that the United States found in rallying the Syrian Democratic Forces against ISIS and other Islamic militant groups, as well as its success avross the border with the Iraqi Army, Iraqi Security Forces, and the Kurdish Peshmerga aainst ISIS, may convince the United States and Western allies to develop plans for a new initiative regarding Ukraine.
Rather than have talks on the status of Ukraine remain in stalemate at the negotiation table, one could surmise that the United States might organize a vigorous overt and covert training and equipping of Armed Forces of Ukraine, particularly the Ukrainian Ground Forces That may in turn give those forces the capability to independently regain territory claimed by the Donetsk People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s Republic.
Kiev may, on its own volition, make use of its new arms and capabilities to do just that with such speed and power that nothing could be done rapidly in reaction.
The Ukrainian Air Force could be used in ways to support friendly ground movement that has never witnessed before.
Kiev has not recognized the the rebellious movements in Donetsk and Luhansk.
It has not recognized the autonomy or the secession of those provinces.
As far as Kiev is concerned, the entire territory of the Donetsk and Luhansk provinces are still Ukraine’s sovereign territory.
For Kiev, agreeing under the Minsk Agreement that the borders between Donbass and Russia, and border control must be administered by the Ukrainian government reflected its position, its belief.
The United States has asked Russia to take its forces out of Ukraine and hand Crimea back to Kiev’s full control.
The reality is that getting the Russians out of Crimea, at least in the near term, may be impossible.
However, getting them out of Eastern Ukraine is another thing altogether.
Moscow may be willing to seek some resolution on Ukraine at the negotiation table to halt the total collapse of the forces of the Donetsk People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s Republic forces and whatever units the Russian Federation might have mixed in with them.
Ukraine is delicate issue in the Kremlin, but Putin and his advisers do not appear too far down the road to recurvate on it.
It could be hypothesized that the collapse of pro-Russian forces in Ukraine would not play well politically at home.
Moscow could again use the argument that it must defend ethnic-Russian in Ukraine by request.
Putin has abstained from more vigorous moves against Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
In response to the collapse of the two pro-Russian states, Putin, taking an asymmetric approach, could lash out against the Baltics.
Yet, all this being stated, Russia may not be so certain that it could sufficiently respond militarily, extrapolating from what was observed in Syria.
Rather than cope with deadlocked talks on Ukraine, one could imagine the United States organizing a vigorous overt and covert training and equipping of the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
That may in turn give those forces the capability to independently, on its own volition, retake most or all of Eastern Ukraine now in the hands of pro-Russian separatists with such tempo and power that nothing could be rapidly done in reaction.
