On 14 November, the International Criminal Court issued its preliminary findings that “there exists a sensible or reasonable justification for a belief that a crime falling within the jurisdiction of the Court ‘has been or is being committed’” within the Crimean and Donbas territories of Ukraine.
The ICC report was uncompromising in recognising the annexation of Crimea as a military conflict between Russia and Ukraine, and classifying it as an occupation.
The ICC said that it was also trying to determine whether the war in east Ukraine between Russian-backed separatists and government forces “could be actually international in character” and thus fall under the relevant articles in the Rome Statute.
Such a finding could open the way for prosecution of Russian troops found to have committed crimes on Ukrainian territory in the course of the conflict.
In a predictable response, President Putin signed an executive order withdrawing Russia’s signature from the 2000 Rome Statute, which established the ICC, citing “dissatisfaction” with the body’s “one-sided and inefficient” work.
Although Russia had signed the Rome Stature, it had never formally ratified it, which makes the withdrawal largely symbolic.
A number of African states are planning withdrawal on the grounds that they believe that the ICC has focused disproportionately on cases relating to wars and conflict in Africa.
Even so, while the ICC conclusions comprehensively demolish the narrative that Russia continues to peddle to the world, there is no prospect of any prosecutions for many years to come.
The latter justified their actions saying that they could not endorse the report because Russia was not alone in posing such threats and the motion appeared to be have been given equivalent status to the non-state militants of the Islamic State.
Left-wingers denounced “neo-McCarthyism” that risked harming media freedom by treating suspect outlets as agents of Moscow.
The motion drew an angry reaction from President Putin, who told a press conference in Moscow – without any hint of irony that after lecturing Russia on democracy Europe was now trying to silence dissenting opinions.
As everyone is still coming to terms with the implications of a Trump presidency in the US, the French Presidential election period has begun with the French Republican party holding the first round of its open primary, in which seven candidates competed for the nomination.
Current opinion polls show that, in some scenarios, she could be a clear winner.
This was Parliament’s refusal to ratify a Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence, also known as Istanbul Convention.
Parliamentarians were concerned about the parts of the convention that mention gender identification and sexual orientation.
The text of the convention says that the victims’ rights should be protected without discrimination on any ground, including, among other things, sexual orientation and gender identity.
After a heated discussion, parliamentarians voted to send the ratification bill back to the parliamentary committee, which leaves the position unclear as to the extent to which Ukraine’s parliament is fully committed to European standards of equality.
The Prosecutor General’s Office Special Investigations Chief Serhiy Horbatyuk said in an interview that the Russian government had confirmed that the questioning would take place on 25 November.
Vitaliy Serdyuk, Yanukovych’s defense lawyer, told Radio Svoboda that his client will be questioned at the end of November via a video link to Rostov-on-Don, where Yanukovych has been living since he fled the country amid the 2014 EuroMaidan Revolution.
Yanukovych will be questioned as a witness in the case against five Berkut ex-officers Pavlo Abroskin, Serhiy Zinchenko, Oleksandr Marynchenko, Serhiy Tamtura, and Oleg Yanishevsky, who are accused of shooting 48 EuroMaidan activists on Kyiv’s Instytutska Street in February 2014.
Yanukovych himself faces several charges of mass murder and of official misconduct, but given the protection he is being given by the Kremlin, he is unlikely to be called to answer the charges any time soon.
Donald Tusk, President of the European Council, will host the 18th EU-Ukraine summit.
He will represent the EU together with Jean-Claude Juncker, the President of the European Commission.
The November summit could confirm a further €15 million in support of an anti-corruption programme and €104 million for public administration reform.
It is also likely that visa-free travel for Ukrainian citizens to the EU will take a step forwards, with the necessary procedures being launched through the European Parliament.
However, Ireland and the United Kingdom will not be subject to the visa-free regime.
In accordance with the EU treaties, their visa regime remains subject to national and not EU legislation.
