Ukraine's new president, Petro Poroshenko, takes part in inaugural festivities at St.
Even though there are great sacrifices of the people of Ukraine before my eyes.
Agence France-Presse — Russia demanded the release of two journalists on Saturday that were detained by Ukrainian security forces at a checkpoint in the restive east of the country.
The journalists — sound operator Anton Malyshev and cameraman Andrei Sushenkov — were working for Russia's Zvezda, or Star channel which is owned by the Russian defense ministry and airs patriotic programs.
The reporters were handcuffed and questioned at a checkpoint outside the eastern Ukrainian city of Slovyansk on Friday before being taken away in a helicopter, Zvezda reported.
A Ukrainian soldier searches a driver at a check-point in the eastern Ukrainian city of Slovyansk on June 6, 2014.
Ukraine's National Guard said Saturday it had detained the journalists ""on suspicion of monitoring and collecting information"" at the checkpoint.
The journalists were carrying press accreditation handed out by the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic, the National Guard said.
The Life News reporters were freed a week later following the intervention of Chechen leader Ramzan Kadyrov.
Agence France-Presse — United States Secretary of State John Kerry Saturday voiced hope that there would be a breakthrough on ending the Ukraine crisis, enabling Washington to avoid imposing new sanctions against Russia.
I'm confident there are ways forward, we look for Russia's help and our hope is that we won't have to move to more serious sanctions and other steps,"" he said.
Agence France-Presse — Russian President Vladimir Putin on Saturday ordered the border service to reinforce the state border with Ukraine, the Kremlin press service told Russian news agencies.
Putin issued the order for border guards to take all necessary measures to prevent illegal crossings, Russian news agencies reported, after Kiev admitted Thursday that three of its border posts had been seized by separatists.
Reuters — Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko called in his inaugural speech on Saturday for separatists in the east of the country to lay down their arms, and said he would guarantee a safe corridor for Russian fighters to go home.
I want peace and I want peace to happen,"" Poroshenko told parliament after taking the oath.
Ukraine's new President Petro Poroshenko looks on during a ceremony of his inauguration in Kyiv on June 7, 2014.
Agence France-Presse — Petro Poroshenko was sworn in as Ukraine's fifth post-Soviet president on Saturday, amid a continuing crisis with Russia.
Poroshenko, a 48-year-old billionaire who won the presidential election on May 25 with 54. percent of the vote, took the oath in the Ukrainian parliament in Kyiv.
He vowed to maintain the unity of his country, as the east is embroiled in an uprising by pro-Russian rebels.
Speaking in parliament, Poroshenko promised the residents of the Donbass region, which is largely in rebel hands, that he would decentralize power and guarantee the free use of the Russian language.
At his inauguration, Poroshenko said there would be no compromise with Russia on his pro-European stance and the status of the Crimean peninsula.
An armed pro-Russian militant holds hands with his girlfriend in front a barricade at a check-point in the eastern Ukrainian city of Slovyansk on June 6, 2014.
A woman and her daughter walk in front burned vehicles in the eastern Ukrainian city of Kramatorsk on June 6, 2014.
Elderly people sit in front a barricade set outside the city hall seized by pro-Russian separatists in the eastern Ukrainian city of Kramatorsk on June 6, 2014.
Young people walk past a barricade at a check-point in the eastern Ukrainian city of Slovyansk on June 6, 2014.
Reuters — Pro-Russian separatists shot down a Ukrainian army plane as fighting raged in the eastern town of Slovyansk on Friday, a day before the inauguration of pro-European billionaire businessman Petro Poroshenko as Ukraine's president.
The self-appointed mayor of the city, Vyacheslav Ponomaryov, said an Antonov An-30 intelligence plane had been shot down.
The residents who saw it applauded,"" Ponomaryov told Reuters by telephone.
A spokesman for Ukraine's ""Anti-terrorist operation"" or ATO, later confirmed a plane had been shot down but said it was an An-26 transportation plane carrying humanitarian aid.
The Ukrainian army and defense ministry were not available to comment on the reports.
A photographer in Slovyansk, a city of 130,000 people in the province of Donetsk bordering Russia, said she saw the plane, visibly on fire, slowly descending but did not see it crash.
Residents said the sounds of shelling reverberated around the city on Friday.
One separatist in Slovyansk told Reuters there had been shooting in the city center and that there were casualties, although he did not know how many.
Pro-Russian militants run near their check-point in the eastern Ukrainian city of Slovyansk on June 6, 2014.
Resident Larissa Akincheva said she stayed away from her work as a store clerk due to the heavy shelling.
There are signs that an increasing number of families are fleeing the violence in the two regions.
With the Donetsk airport still closed after heavy fighting almost two weeks ago, people are taking to their cars and driving to the border.
At a small border crossing in Izvaryne about 70 kilometers southeast of Luhansk, a queue of more than forty cars inched along the hot sun-warmed tarmac toward the Russian border.
Pedestrians cross the Ukrainian-Russian border at the Ukrainian check-point of Izvarino, in the Luhansk region, eastern Ukraine, on June 6, 2014.
Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty reported that residents who feared getting caught in the crossfire between Ukrainian soldiers and rebels have starting leaving the eastern city of Luhansk.
In some offices people were allowed to leave work early to race home,"" RFERL reported.
A power vacuum has developed in Luhansk, since separatists took over the regional administration building late in April and intimidated elected officials into silence, RFERL reported.
The full RFERL report paints a grim picture of how life has changed for civilians in eastern Ukraine since the beginning of the crisis.
People walk on a platform of a railway station in the southern Ukrainian city of Odessa after arriving by train from the eastern Ukrainian city of Luhansk on June 6, 2014.
Reuters — Russian President Vladimir Putin said on Friday that he welcomed plans put forward by Ukrainian president-elect Petro Poroshenko, with whom he had a brief initial meeting earlier, to stop the violence in Ukraine.
However, he also said Ukraine must stop what he called a ""punitive"" military operation in its southeast region and warned Russia would retaliate with measures to protect its economy if Kyiv signed an association pact with the European Union.
Reuters — United States President Barack Obama urged Russia's Vladimir Putin during a brief informal meeting in France on Friday to seize the opportunity to ease tensions in Ukraine after the election of Petro Poroshenko as president, a White House official said.
MOSCOW, Russia — Ukraine’s border service announced on Friday it had closed eight checkpoints along its porous eastern border with Russia, highlighting Kyiv’s increasingly fragile grasp over its eastern frontier under the weight of rebel attacks.
It also arrives amid claims by Ukrainian officials that a steady influx of fighters and supplies from Russia has fed the violent insurgency in the east, a statement the Kremlin disputes.
But both rebel leaders and volunteers themselves have recently freely admitted — including to GlobalPost — that fighters from across Russia have traveled to eastern Ukraine to take up arms against the military.
Pro-Russian armed militants stand guard at a barricade in front of a regional state building seized by separatists, in the Ukrainian city of Luhansk on June 2, 2014.
In the past several days alone, separatists have staged brazen raids on bases in the Luhansk Region — where the rebel leadership has declared a “People’s Republic of Luhansk” — and reportedly forced guards into abandoning several of them.
Ukraine’s State Border Guard Service said Friday it had fought off a separatist attack late Thursday night at a border crossing in the neighboring Donetsk Region, in which a number of rebel vehicles were destroyed.
The developments unfold as Ukrainian President-elect Petro Poroshenko and his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, met on the sidelines of a D-Day commemoration ceremony in Normandy on Friday and agreed on the need to speed up the peace process.
Poroshenko, who will be sworn in on Saturday, has promised a swifter and more effective military operation — which Kyiv has pitched as an ""anti-terror"" operation — against the rebels.
But that goal has so far proven elusive, especially after an alleged air strike on the separatist-controlled Luhansk regional administration building earlier this week killed eight civilians and strengthened rebels’ resolve.
Ukrainian officials blamed the attack on a botched attempt by rebels to shoot down a fighter jet.
The increased violence has spurred Russia to call for a humanitarian corridor, with Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev claiming on Thursday that thousands of civilians had flocked to Russia.
Ukrainian officials, however, disputed that claim, saying no such humanitarian crisis exists.
Poroshenko will likely outline his plan for calming the crisis in eastern Ukraine in his inaugural address on Saturday.
Reuters — Pro-Russian separatists operating from the grounds of a church in the eastern city of Slovyansk killed a member of the Ukrainian interior ministry's special forces and seriously wounded two others in a mortar attack on Friday, the ministry said.
Slovyansk has been at the heart of a two-month insurgency in the Russian-speaking east by rebels opposed to the overthrow of a Moscow-leaning president and the formation in Kyiv of a pro-European government.
Fighting in the eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk has intensified since the landslide election of Petro Poroshenko as president on May 25 which followed the fall and flight of the pro-Moscow Viktor Yanukovych in February.
A picture taken on June 6, 2014 shows a destroyed building of the Dubrava camping in a forest not far from Stanichno-Luganskoye village, near the eastern Ukrainian city of Luhansk.
The new incident took place on the eve of the inauguration in Kyiv of Petro Poroshenko as president.
The pro-Western businessman has promised to unveil a peace plan soon to end the rebellions in the east.
Late on Thursday, Ukrainian forces fended off an attack by separatists on a border post about 95 km to the east of Donetsk.
The Border Guard service said five Ukrainian personnel were wounded in Thursday's attack and, according to its ""preliminary information,"" 15 separatists had been killed in the attack.
The rebels’ two armored personnel carriers, one of which had the name of the separatist formation ""Battalion Vostok"" painted on it, and a military transport vehicle covered in bullet holes stood abandoned at the checkpoint.
A spokeswoman for the separatists said she had no information about losses from the rebel side.
Reuters — The leaders of Russia and Ukraine met on Friday for the first time since Moscow annexed Crimea as world leaders commemorated the 70th anniversary of the World War Two D-Day landings in France.
French President Francois Hollande and German Chancellor Angela Merkel brought together Russia's Vladimir Putin and Ukrainian president-elect Petro Poroshenko for a 15-minute meeting before an official lunch for visiting world dignitaries.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Petro Poroshenko and Russian President Vladimir Putin seen after their lunch on June 6, 2014 in Benouville, France.
Hollande's office said the two men shook hands and agreed that detailed talks on a ceasefire between Kyiv government forces and pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine would begin within a few days.
They also discussed political steps to de-escalate the crisis including Russian recognition of Poroshenko's election as well as economic relations.
The president invited Poroshenko to Normandy as his personal guest at the last minute in an effort to break the ice between Moscow and Kyiv even as fighting continues in eastern Ukraine between government forces and pro-Russian separatists.
World leaders and veterans earlier paid tribute to soldiers who fell in the liberation of Europe from Nazi German rule, at a series of ceremonies around the Normandy beaches where allied forces landed on June 6, 1944.
Wreaths, parades and parachute-drops honored history's largest amphibious assault, in which 160,000 US, British and Canadian troops waded ashore to confront German forces, hastening its defeat and the advent of peace in Europe.
Flanked by stooped war veterans, some in wheelchairs, United States President Barack Obama joined Hollande to commemorate victory and reaffirm US-French solidarity before the 9,387 white marble headstones of fallen United States soldiers at the Normandy American Cemetery.
Reuters — The United States should press Ukraine's new leader to stop violence and talk to separatists, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said after meeting United States Secretary of State John Kerry on Thursday, Russian media reported.
Speaking to journalists after talks with Kerry in Paris, Lavrov said Ukraine's pro-Western government should take the first step to stop the fighting and voiced confidence its opponents in eastern Ukraine's Luhansk and Donetsk regions would follow suit.
The G7 leaders, holding a summit without Russian President Vladimir Putin, threatened on Wednesday to impose harder-hitting sanctions on Russia if it does not help restore stability to eastern Ukraine, where pro-Russian militias operate at will.
Lavrov and Kerry met a day before commemorations of the 70th anniversary of the D-Day landings, which opened a second front and helped an Alliance including the United States, Britain and the Soviet Union defeat Nazi Germany in World War Two.
Ukrainian soldiers man a checkpoint near Slovyansk in the Donetsk region of eastern Ukraine on June 4, 2014.
Reuters — Russia said on Thursday its ambassador to Kyiv would attend the inauguration of Ukrainian president-elect Petro Poroshenko in spite of Moscow's harsh criticism of Ukraine's attempts to crush pro-Russian separatists.
Scores of separatist fighters and Ukrainian troops have been killed in heavy fighting in eastern Ukraine as Kyiv has intensified its ""anti-terrorist operation"" since Poroshenko was elected on May 25.
It was unclear whether any other Russian officials would attend Poroshenko's inauguration ceremony on Saturday.
Pro-Russia militants guard a check-point on the outskirts of the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk on June 4, 2014.
Earlier on Thursday, a disturbing but unverified video made the rounds on social media, purporting to show a separatist leader in eastern Ukraine overseeing the execution of two men.
Kyiv Post's Christopher Miller writes that acting President Oleksander Turchynov's official statement on the video may point to the video actually being authentic.
In his statement, Turchynov ""vowed to avenge the men's deaths and said he holds Russia's leadership responsible for their execution,"" according to the Kyiv Post.
The separatist leader thought to be speaking in the video is Igor Bezler, nicknamed ""Bes,"" which means ""Demon"" in Russian.
The two men supposedly executed are believed to be a Ukrainian activist and the head of the local Ukrainian Security Service in Artemivsk.
At this moment, all agreements have been violated by the Ukrainian side.
He warns Turchynov that another pair will be shot within an hour, and two more at one and a half hours, and so on, until all the officers in captivity are dead.
The Interpreter's live blog has more on whether this video could be authentic or fake.
Reuters — The United States will strengthen its presence in the Black Sea region using part of a $1 billion fund promised to NATO allies on Russia's borders, and will continue to send warships to the area, Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel said in Romania on Thursday.
The tour coincides with a visit by President Barack Obama to Poland this week, when he promised to increase military support for eastern European NATO members, including a $1 billion fund to support and train the armed forces of NATO states.
Formerly a secretive Communist state, Romania is now a member both of NATO and the European Union.
Bucharest has been among the staunchest supporters of Western sanctions against Russia, has hosted joint military exercises with United States forces on its soil and participated in navy drills in the Black Sea.
Hagel was on a visit to the Romanian port Constanta, which recently hosted United States ships carrying out the navy exercises and where the Aegis guided missile cruiser USS Vella Gulf is currently berthed.
The $1 billion fund will allow for a ""stronger presence of United States ships in the Black Sea,"" Hagel said, adding that the presence of the Vella Gulf was an expression of Washington's commitment to regional security.
In this United States Navy handout, the guided-missile frigate USS Taylor and the Turkish frigate TCG Turgutries conduct a tactical maneuvering exercise on May 11, 2014 in the Black Sea.
Seven of the world's leading industrialized nations met in Brussels over Wednesday and Thursday, and Russia was pointedly not invited.
This was the first Group of Seven meeting that did not include Russia since the 1990s.
President Barack Obama said on Thursday Russian President Vladimir Putin must recognize and work with Ukraine's new government and stop ""provocations"" along its border, or face tougher sanctions from members of the G7 group of nations.
Vitali Klitschko, the leader of Ukraine's UDAR party, took his oath of office on Thursday morning, after being elected as Kyiv's mayor.
Klitschko was one of the opposition leaders at the forefront of the Maidan protests in Kyiv's Independence Square.
He was also a presidential candidate in Ukraine's elections until he withdrew and threw his support behind the eventual winner, Petro Poroshenko.
Before turning to politics, Klitschko was the World Boxing Council's reigning heavyweight champion.
Senior Correspondent Dan Peleschuk talked to Klitschko about his political aspirations long before the Ukraine crisis began.
Reuters — Ukrainian President-elect Petro Poroshenko said on Wednesday he would try to secure support at meetings with world leaders in France this week for a plan to end violence in eastern Ukraine, and may discuss the question with Russian leader Vladimir Putin.
Unveiling the first details of his plan after discussing it with United States President Barack Obama on a visit to Poland, Poroshenko said it would involve de-centralization of power to the region, local elections, and an amnesty offer.
Ukrainian leaders have mooted similar proposals in the past but they have been quickly discarded, and failed to stem clashes between pro-Russian separatists and government forces, which have been mounting this week.
Poroshenko, Putin, Obama and most European leaders will be at commemorations in Normandy, France this week to mark the 70th anniversary of the D-Day landings during World War Two.
The amnesty would be offered to ""people who did not commit crimes,"" he said, without elaborating.
Ukraine's government, backed by Poroshenko, is conducting a security operation to try to defeat pro-Moscow insurgents in eastern Ukraine.
There has been heavy loss of life, and Russia has accused Kyiv of violating international law.
Senior Correspondent Dan Peleschuk traveled to the pro-Ukrainian region of Dnipropetrovsk as violence raged between pro-Russian militants and Ukrainian forces in the east.
DNIPROPETROVSK, Ukraine — While bullets fly and artillery shells explode in parts of rebel-held eastern Ukraine, that’s not the case here in Dnipropetrovsk.
A southeastern region that borders the violence-plagued east, Dnipropetrovsk has emerged as a pro-Ukraine stronghold while a separatist insurgency rages on next door.
To those familiar with Ukraine’s social and political divide, that might seem somewhat strange.
But as the separatist conflict in the neighboring region of Donetsk intensifies, it has provoked what observers here describe as a strong counter-reaction.
Just because it’s not a bastion of Ukrainian nationalism — like large parts of western Ukraine — doesn’t mean Dnipropetrovsk's locals aren’t patriotic.
Soon after one crosses from neighboring Donetsk into Dnipropetrovsk, that notion of implicitly belonging to Ukraine becomes evident.
Lampposts along a main road that leads to the regional capital are painted with the colors of Ukraine’s flag — blue and yellow — while towering billboards feature patriotic messages.
Ukrainian flags drape from buildings and hang from car antennae in the city of Dnipropetrovsk.
To be sure, the patriotic displays have much to do with the post-revolutionary politics in the city, home to many of Ukraine’s most famous –– and infamous –– politicians, including former President Leonid Kuchma and former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko.
On a side note, Tymoshenko cast her ballot in last month’s presidential election in this city.
Shortly after Yanukovych’s ouster last winter, the new Kyiv authorities installed as the region’s governor oligarch Ihor Kolomoisky, who’s been credited with reining in would-be separatists.
One of Kolomoisky’s more controversial methods — vilified by Russia’s state-run propaganda machine — has been to offer cash bounties for armed separatists and their weapons.
He also launched an anti-separatist police force and a local “self-defense” unit, both of which are reportedly funded in part by local businessmen.
Perhaps the most striking action Kolomoisky took — surprising in its simplicity — was to compromise by opening up a dialogue with pro-Russian elements and others displeased with the government.
Borys Filatov, a local business tycoon who now serves as a deputy to Kolomoisky, outlined that approach in an interview with the Financial Times last month.
But even before the separatist crisis unfolded in Ukraine’s east, Dnipropetrovsk seemed unlikely to descend into the same pro-Russian frenzy.
Bogatyrev, who edits the independent Popular Newspaper, called the separatist east an “enclave” that’s long sought to pitch itself as a unique region whose decrepit factories and coalmines feed Ukraine’s budget.
The separatist movement in Donetsk and Luhansk was fueled by angry pensioners and disenfranchised, blue-collar workers.
Dnipropetrovsk, Bogatyrev pointed out, is not only better off economically than its eastern neighbors, it’s also more diverse culturally and socially.
And unlike its eastern neighbors, this region doesn’t seem to share a burning nostalgia for the USSR’s heyday.
During the months-long pro-European protests known as “Euromaidan,” activists here staged sizeable pro-Ukraine protests, some of which reportedly outnumbered the pro-Russian demonstrations that were held simultaneously.
Whether Dnipropetrovsk’s renewed patriotism is natural or state-sponsored, some locals find they’re ready to fight for the cause.
On a recent, rain-soaked afternoon, Sergei Seroklin, a 40-year-old handyman, approached a downtown recruiting station for the “territorial self-defense battalion,” eager to sign up.
The flyer posted outside guaranteed enlisted men $500 per month and officers up to $840, as well as legal support and insurance.
Interestingly, Seroklin — a stout, muscular man with military experience — says he wasn’t a particularly ardent supporter of the anti-Yanukovych demonstrations.
Nor is he a big fan of Ukraine’s president, Petro Poroshenko, the billionaire chocolate magnate elected in a landslide vote last month.
But Seroklin says watching his country slide deeper into turmoil is not an option.
Balancing his four-year-old daughter on his hip, Andrei Bander, 37, said he feared he would not be back any day soon.
We will head to Russia though because it's clear we need to leave Ukraine.
I don't see anything good left here,"" he said, waiting for a taxi in the no man's land beyond the check point with only a few small bags.
While some families, mainly women and children were trying to leave, some men waited in their cars to get back to the town but were not being let through the roadblock by Ukrainian forces.
Soldiers fired warning shots in the air when one car, coming from the direction of Slovyansk, tried to drive up to the check point.
Children and their mothers leave the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk on June 4, 2014 for their safety.
Reuters — NATO's top military commander accused Russia on Wednesday of destabilizing eastern Ukraine through the use of Russian-backed forces and demanded that it stop interfering.
While a majority of the troops Russia had close to the Ukrainian border — previously estimated by NATO at 40,000 — had withdrawn or were in the process of withdrawing, some appeared intent on staying, United States Air Force General Philip Breedlove, NATO's supreme allied commander in Europe, said.
It is very clear that the Russian influence is a part of this,"" he said.
US Secretary of State John Kerry has raised concerns with Moscow about reports of Chechens and other fighters crossing into Ukraine from Russia to join the rebellions against the leadership in Kyiv.
Acting Ukrainian Defense Minister Mykhailo Koval attends a defense ministers meeting at the North Atlantic Treaty Organization headquarters in Brussels on June 3, 2014.
The narrative is unclear, as the BBC reported that separatists ""seized"" a border guard base and a National Guard base, while the Associated Press said Ukrainian forces ""abandoned"" a military outpost in Luhansk.
According to the AP, Ukrainian forces left their post after running out of ammunition in an hours-long gun battle with pro-Russian militants.
Luhansk saw a day-long exchange of gunfire on Monday, and each side blamed the other for an explosion that killed at least two people.
While rebels said the destruction was caused by a Ukrainian air strike, Ukraine said it was the result of a misfired heat-seeking missile launched by the rebels.
Tracer bullets fired by pro-Russian militants at the patrol service regiment of the National Guard of Ukraine based in eastern Ukrainian city of Luhansk on June 3, 2014.
A pro-Russian militant holds a grenade and Kalashnikov as he rests on June 4, 2014 after the separatists seized the building of the patrol service regiment of the National Guard of Ukraine based in the eastern Ukrainian city of Luhansk.
A pro-Russian militant examines damaged Kalashnikov rifles on June 4, 2014 at the building of the patrol service regiment of the National Guard of Ukraine based in the eastern Ukrainian city of Luhansk.
Reuters — Government forces pressed on with an offensive in eastern Ukraine on Wednesday, claiming they had inflicted heavy losses on separatist fighters, though this was denied by the rebels.
Losses to the Ukrainian side were more than ours,"" Aleksander Boroday, ""prime minister"" of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic, was quoted as saying by Interfax news agency.
Describing the fighting as ""heavy,"" the government forces spokesman, Vladyslav Seleznyov, said two servicemen had been killed and 45 wounded.
Ukrainian troops man a check-point near the eastern Ukrainian city of Slovyansk, Donetsk region on June 4, 2014.
The offensive in Slovyansk followed a daylong firefight on Monday in Luhansk, a town further to the east on the Russian border, after an attack by separatists on a border guard camp.
Zhanna, a resident of a nearby apartment block, said she saw guns and ammunition being removed from the base.
Reuters — United States President Barack Obama on Wednesday called Ukraine's President-elect Petro Poroshenko a ""wise selection"" to lead the country and pledged more military aid to help address security threats from Russian-backed separatists.
Obama, speaking to reporters after a meeting with Poroshenko in Warsaw, said they discussed the new leader's plan to restore peace, boost economic growth, and reduce energy dependence on Russia.
US President Barack Obama and President-elect Petro Poroshenko of Ukraine hold a meeting in Warsaw, Poland, on June 4, 2014.
The Kyiv Post is reporting that senior military and security officials informed acting President Oleksander Turchynov of the ""anti-terrorist"" operation's success in parts of the Donetsk region.
Many of the town's women and children have left in recent days as the fighting got worse.
We counted the number of fires and impacts,"" Daria, 27, a resident who said she was trying to leave with her daughter, said by telephone.
A woman leaves with her daughter during an ongoing shoot-out between pro-Russia militants and border guards in Luhansk, eastern Ukraine on June 2, 2014.
He put the number of dead and wounded on the separatists side at about 300.
President-elect Petro Poroshenko called for a resumption of military operations by government forces to quell rebellions by pro-Russian militia across the Russian-speaking east after scoring a resounding election victory on May 25.
With tension high between Ukraine and Russia, the crisis is certain to dominate diplomatic exchanges when the newly-elected Poroshenko meets world leaders this week ahead of his inauguration next Saturday.
He is expected to meet United States President Barack Obama and other European leaders in Warsaw on Wednesday and will see Russia's Vladimir Putin at World War Two D-day celebrations in France on Friday, though no formal talks are planned.
Emergency doctors evacuate a wounded border guard from the Federal Border Headquarters building in the eastern Ukrainian city of Luhansk on June 3, 2014.
Reuters — The United States is reviewing its military presence in Europe as a result of Russia's intervention in Ukraine, the White House said on Tuesday at the start of a four-day European trip by President Barack Obama.
Obama will call on Congress to support a ""European Reassurance Initiative"" of up to $1 billion to increase United States military rotations on the continent, it said.
The effort would involve increased participation by the United States Navy in NATO naval force deployments, including ""more persistent deployments"" to the Black and Baltic seas, it said.
Agence France-Presse has more on the proposed European Reassurance Initiative.
Reuters — Fighting raged in eastern Ukraine for the second straight day on Tuesday as the army rolled out an offensive against pro-Russia separatists holding the city of Slovyansk and claimed to have inflicted losses on the rebels.
The fighting in Slovyansk followed a day-long fire-fight on Monday in Luhansk, a town further east on the border with Russia, after an attack by separatists on a border guard camp.
At least two people were killed in the city center of Luhansk, which like Slovyansk is under separatist control, by a blast which rebels said came from a Ukrainian air strike but which the Ukrainians said was caused by a misfire of a heat-seeking missile by the rebels.
The Kyiv government says the fighting is fomented by Russia, which opposes its pro-Western policies, and accuses Russia of allowing volunteer fighters to cross into Ukraine to fight alongside the rebels.
A teenager examines burned cars near a Federal Border Headquarters building in the eastern Ukrainian city of Luhansk on June 3, 2014.
If they refuse to lay down their arms they will be destroyed,"" said Vladyslav Seleznyov, a spokesman for the military operation.
He could not confirm reports of wounded on the Ukrainian side around Slovyansk, but he said there were preliminary reports of dead and wounded among the separatist fighters.
Defense analyst Dmytro Tymchuk, who is recognized as having good military sources, said separately that one person had been killed on the Ukrainian side and 13 others wounded when a Ukrainian military column was attacked on its way to Slovyansk from its base in Izyum, to the north-west.
The Russian Foreign Ministry threw its weight behind the separatists' argument, calling the reported ""air strike"" a crime committed by Kyiv against its own people.
Reuters — At least two people were killed and several injured on Monday in an explosion in Luhansk which separatists controlling the eastern Ukrainian city said was the result of an air strike by the Ukrainian military.
This was denied by the Kyiv side, which said it was caused by separatists who had launched a heat-seeking rocket at a Ukrainian plane but the missile had zeroed in instead on the rebel-occupied regional administration building.
A video clip published by local people on a Russian social media page showed two bodies lying in parkland near the main regional building, one of them that of a woman.
Interfax quoted unnamed separatist sources as giving a higher death toll of five.
The video showed a man pumping the chest of a prone victim to resuscitate him while other people carried other casualties in makeshift stretchers made of blankets.
Malysh quoted eyewitnesses as saying more than 10 wounded had been taken to the main regional hospital.
Earlier, defense analyst Dmytro Tymchuk, who is seen as having reliable military sources, said Ukrainian security chiefs had begun a ""full-scale operation to neutralise terrorist groups"" in Luhansk.
Vladyslav Seleznyov, a spokesman for the operation against the separatists, denied there had been any air strike against the regional administration offices.
But he acknowledged air strikes against two separatist checkpoints in Luhansk region.
A heat-seeking device was launched but it turned out that it fell on the fighters themselves and destroyed part of the wall of the administration building,"" he told Ukrainska Pravda online newspaper.
Separatists had fired the missile from the roof of the state security building they are occupying but it homed in on the main administration building, also held by the rebels, a senior military official, Aleksander Rozmaznin, was quoted by Interfax as saying.
Recruits of volunteer battalion Donbass take part in military exercises on the shooting range of Ukrainian National guards near Novo-Petrictsi village, not far from Kiev on June 2, 2014.
For weeks, the hulking administration building, its facade obscured by junkyard barricades of tires, wood planks and barbed wire, was home to the disenfranchised, largely blue-collar masses that’d driven the protest movement here.
Inside the Soviet-era monolith, the corridors were scattered with broken furniture and festooned with anti-Kyiv slogans and crude denouncements of both Ukrainian and Western leaders.
It was the separatists’ answer to the sprawling barricades and tent encampments of Maidan, the nerve center of the months-long anti-government protests in Kyiv.
On Thursday, the Vostok Battalion fighters appeared — masked and heavy weapons drawn — and cleared most of them out of the building within hours, a move leaders said was aimed at rooting out looters and other ruffians that had plagued their ranks.
In flak jackets and mismatched camouflage fatigues, men from eastern Ukraine, Russia and Ossetia cleaned their weapons side by side in a former Ukrainian army base, now the headquarters of a separatist militia in the city of Donetsk.
Battalion Vostok — or the East Battalion — is a heavily armed, well-organized fighting group that has burst onto the scene in Ukraine's Russian-speaking east and appears to be seeking to lead the fight to prise the region from Kyiv and merge it with Russia.
The group encountered at the former Ukrainian base included a total of at least five fighters from the Russian Caucasus region of North Ossetia and from a Russian-backed enclave of Georgia.
They acknowledged they had been fighting alongside Chechens from Russia's former rebellious region of Chechnya, but these, they said, had now gone home.
The presence of fighters from Russia and other parts of former Soviet space is likely to feature prominently in talks this week when Ukraine's President-elect, Petro Poroshenko, meets United States President Barack Obama and later, possibly, Russia's Vladimir Putin.
Pro-Russian armed militants of Vostok Battalion rest near the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk on June 1, 2014.
Just south of his homeland is South Ossetia, a Russia-dependent breakaway region of Georgia, which is populated by the same, mostly Orthodox ethnic group as the northern part.
In 2008, Moscow and Tbilisi fought a brief war over South Ossetia, which Russia now considers an independent state, though it is unrecognized internationally.
Reuters — Russia's envoy to NATO on Monday accused the Western alliance of encouraging the use of force by the Ukrainian government in eastern Ukraine and of hampering efforts to find a peaceful solution to the crisis, Russian news agency RIA reported.
RIA quoted Alexander Grushko, who met ambassadors of NATO member states in Brussels, as saying ""unprecedented"" activity by the alliance near Russia's borders was adding to tension and could undermine existing security arrangements.
At a meeting that showed the sides were ""far apart"" on the Ukraine crisis, which has brought ties to a post-Cold War low, NATO envoys accused Russia of backing armed rebels in Ukraine, an alliance spokeswoman said.
NATO suspended all practical cooperation with Russia in April to protest its annexation of Crimea, but left the door open to contacts at ambassadorial level or higher in order to allow the two sides to discuss ways out of the crisis.
The Western military alliance has sought to reassure eastern European allies alarmed by Russia's takeover of Crimea by stepping up exercises and sending more fighter aircraft and ships to the region.
It is excessive, inappropriate, and weakens stability, security and predictability in the Euro-Atlantic region,"" state-run RIA quoted Grushko as saying.
He said that ""demonstrations of military muscle and calls for increased military spending"" were ""a dead-end street.
Ukrainian President-elect Petro Poroshenko and the pro-Western authorities in Kyiv have defied Russia's calls for an end to the government's military operation against pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine.
The NATO allies commended Ukraine's May 25 presidential election as a clear vote for the unity of the country and urged Russia to ""engage constructively"" with Poroshenko, said the spokeswoman, Oana Lungescu.
They also called on Russia ""to stop the flow of arms and weapons across the border, to stop supporting armed separatists in Ukraine and to withdraw in a full and verifiable manner their troops from the Ukrainian border,"" she said.
Pro-Russian militants of the so-called 'Eastern battalion' rest at a camp in the forest near the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk on June 1, 2014.
It appears there was an explosion of some kind in Luhansk, following the attack by separatists.
What remains unclear is what caused the explosion, and who was responsible for it.
The Ukrainian military have denied any air strike in Lugansk, saying most probably something detonated in the building.
The pro-Russia crowd are adamant that one of the SU 27s that flew overhead hit the building with some kind of missile.
Firemen climb to the Regional State building seized by the separatists after an explosion in Ukrainian city of Luhansk on June 2, 2014.
Reuters — A fierce battle was underway on Monday in Ukraine's rebellious east after a pro-Russian militia attacked a Ukrainian border post with automatic weapons and grenade launchers in the early hours.
Security sources said a force of separatists had occupied the upper floors of a nearby apartment block and were shooting into the border post on the southern edge of Luhansk, a city very close to the frontier with Russia.
There has been no let-up in firing for seven hours now,"" border post spokesman Oleh Slobodin said.
Pro-Russian militants and firemen run away as they leave the Regional State building they seized during a shoot-out with Ukrainian border guards in the eastern Ukrainian city of Luhansk on June 2, 2014.
Ukraine's eastern region has been riven with separatist armed rebellion for the past two months which the Kyiv government says is fomented by Russia.
It says armed fighters from Russia and the Caucasus region are fighting alongside rebels who are fighting rule from Kyiv.
Another statement from the Ukrainian border service said the separatists at the Luhansk border post were sniping from private apartments and had stopped people leaving the residential block they had occupied, making it difficult for the border guard forces to return fire.
The Ukrainian army is taking part in an ""anti-terrorist"" operation to try to crush the rebellions in the east.
Border guards said on Monday that the army had not yet reinforced to help them fend off the attack in Luhansk.
