Russia is opposed by the USA, NATO, the EU and the rest of the world if necessary; these enemies are demonized and appear as a home of evil.
Global conspiracy, Jews and Masons continue their existence in the Russian propaganda.
In addition, images of the fascists as a symbol of evil and the Victory as a triumph of good was formed and has been maintained for over 70 years, and these ideas were the basis of the Soviet identity, which is still there.
By manipulating these ideas, propaganda causes emotional reactions which are often stronger than rational arguments.
The situation in Ukraine was intentionally moved into the plane of this myth , since it makes the whole system immune to rational denial, shifting the conflict from the rational to the emotional sphere.
Since the USSR is identified with Russia, all who struggle against fascism, continue the cause of Russia, and Moscow is their ally, inspirer and patron.
Events in eastern Ukraine are in a strange way covered along with historical overviews.
References to the ""Great Victory"" are inserted everywhere in propaganda texts.
It's hard to say which entity in the east and south in one way or another does not support this myth.
Even Ukraine itself regularly, at least once a year on relevant dates, continues to glorify the Great Victory, maintaining the irrational perception of history.
In geopolitical terms, Russia speaks of itself as the centre of the Slavic world and cultivates ""Slavic"" and ""Eurasian"" identity for its audience.
The myth about the ""triune people"" and ""brotherly nations"", invented by the Soviet propaganda, is being actively spread in Ukraine.
It is also worth mentioning the associated myth about the ""Russian world"" as an environment of Russian language and mentality.
Typical images from the Russian segment of the Internet, February 2014 Remember how long society could not believe that the war may start.
The idea that Ukrainian and Russian soldiers can shoot each other was unacceptable, it was in the category of fiction.
Fortunately, the reality quickly dispelled this myth for many Ukrainian.
Those who preferred the myth, perceived Ukrainians as enemies and traitors.
Working with the population in occupied territories, the Crimea, February 2014.
In Crimea, this myth is spread to justify the occupation; in the east and south it is spread to justify the separatist movements.
Miners and pensioners want to live with dignity and salaries and pensions are higher in Russia People are just tired to count kopecks and live from salary to salary.
The cult of militarism and the Russian army, justification of expansion and annexation of territories of other states.
We can assume that these messages are designed for the Russian audience, but because of the corresponding segment of the Internet and together with the spread of Russian nationalism in the eastern Ukraine they reach us as well.
Russia is culture and spirituality Great cultural and spiritual heritage of the Russian people deserve proper recognition.
It should be noted that some products of Russian culture are conductors of the modern Russian propaganda by themselves, namely myths of Slavic unity, the ""Russian soul"", cult of autocracy and militarism, etc.
These products are an integral part of the information space where citizens of the eastern and southern Ukraine remain, and their impact should not be belittled.
The Russian propaganda demonstrates the conflict in the east as a clash between good and evil, light and darkness.
The myth of the ""Russian soul"", an irrational world view and lifestyle which is sustainable and viable due to such irrationality, is specific for the Russian idea.
The meme ""this country cannot be defeated"" is an example of promotion of this myth on the Internet.
Often this myth is combined with the myth of confrontation of Russia with foreign enemies.
It brings religion motives in Russian propaganda; the conflict in the east gains features of the struggle between good and evil, God and Satan.
You know, it is immediately visible when a person says a chant and when he/she speaks in their own words.
The texts seems to be identical, however the content is radically different.
The cultivation of the myth of Russian spirituality occurs against the background of demonizing the USA and Europe.
The myth of ""the decaying West"", which in Soviet times was of economic importance, now assumes the role values and spiritual meaning.
And myths on which this cult is based, are mainly based on those that we have considered above.
Kiev residents are alien people Ukraine is the project of the USA and Western special services.
This myth is based on the directive about the global conspiracy and continuation of the Cold War.
It is actively promoted by the Russian media, separatist groups, a number of political parties and on the Internet; in the south-east local media are engaged in promoting it as well.
Orientation of the new Ukrainian authorities on integration into European structures in the Russian propaganda turns to identifying with them and therefore all the labels which ""decorate"" enemies of Russia are applied to Ukraine.
Typical image of the Russian segment of the Internet, May-June 2014 Publications on pro-Russian and separatist resources build ""right"" associations.
The Ukrainian equivalent of the image of fascism is the image of a Bandera follower; the myth about ""Bandera followers"" is associated with the archetypes of betrayal and blood vengeance , and with it the myth of the Victory easily activates negative emotional states among the audience.
In fact, due to the constant updating of this myth, division of Ukraine to the east and west is maintained, which gained mythological traits itself and organically fits into the whole system of concepts outlined above.
Ukrainian patriotism in service of Russian propaganda ""Representatives of political authorities in the country had serious disagreements for many years, in which they were engaged instead of addressing the problems of peoples inhabiting it, or addressing disagreements between the east and west of the country,"" Crimean Information Agency quoted head of the Federation of Crimean Tatar Communities U.Selya.
They are not 'right', they speak Russian, demand federalization, do not recognize Bandera followers as heroes, try to make Russian an official language.
The most vivid representative of the right movement in Ukraine, the Right Sector, occupies a proper place in Russian propaganda.
Maydan, and therefore the entire new Ukraine, is associated with the Right Sector.
Russian propaganda associates the Right Sector with fascists as well ; simultaneously they played a key role in the events on Maydan and in the military operations.
The ""fascist"" Right Sector defines the politics of Ukraine, including the politics in the east.
This is the position of the Russian mass media, the controlled sector of the Internet, separatist groups, a number of local media and political parties in the eastern Ukraine.
May-June 2014 Kiev is responsible for the conflict in the east Kiev started the war against its own people.
This statement contradicts the common sense, but it does not contradict the virtual reality of Russian propaganda.
Especially if in this reality ""westerners"" never liked the east and always wanted to do something bad to residents of the east.
Currently, this stereotype is actively spreading in the east and the south of Ukraine.
They call the terrorists ""militia"", position the Donetsk people's republic and the Luhansk people's republic as legitimate governmental entities, and their decisions as laws of full value.
There are hundreds of killed people,"" the head of Luhansk regional council V.Holenko said.
But the ""demonstration of children"" in Slavyansk on 6 May was the real masterpiece of propaganda.
Regularly there are rumours that in certain cities the Ukrainian army poisons water in the water supply system.
Currently, these rumours take the form of ""news"" on the web sites of separatists and terrorists.
For example, we recorded facts of shelling the settlement with mortars.
The mine was filled with several layers of gauze where there were unknown larvae, worms and wool.
A video from a Russian TV channel was circulated on the Internet, where a terrorist speaks about liberation by Ukrainian army of Shchastya town near Luhansk.
They eliminate local residents, kill women and children, they kill everyone who is from 16 to 50 years old.
A Syrian girl that was presented as a victim of the Ukrainian military.
In this myth, there never was understanding and dialogue between the east and the west.
This stereotype is extremely dangerous not only because of subtle mimicry of Russian propaganda.
The myth is formulated in such a way that it fits well into the public dialogue, is included into the public agenda, requires a relevant response from Kiev.
They say and do what Kremlin manipulators impose on us, not what is necessary, and this plays into the hands of the aggressor.
Nobody hears Donbas,"" read the address of the Donetsk City Council to the parliament of Ukraine dated 7 May 2014.
Justification of fighting Having created the momentum ""from Kiev"" and the momentum ""towards Moscow"" in the audience, they still have to convince people that movement in this direction is possible and success is guaranteed.
All the citizens are united in their desire to separate from Kiev and return to the bosom of Russia.
All the detained people participated in clashes during the disturbances in Odessa,"" the presenter said.
Russia will not leave the ""Russian Spring"" to its fate and will come to aid for sure.
Representatives of the Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics always say that military assistance is a question of time.
Billboard in Donetsk, June 2014 However, the assistance is not only of military nature, it may be humanitarian as well.
The article contains illustration in the form of a picture allegedly taken on the Ukrainian-Russian border.
The Ukrainian army is demoralized, anarchy reigns there, it is poorly equipped.
This is a classic propaganda wartime trick, which adds enemy soldiers confidence in their combat superiority.
Soldiers reported that their commanders keep soldiers in complete informational isolation.
Only for communicating with a civilian neo-Nazis can shoot both soldiers and civilians.
But youngsters do not want to kill children and their mothers, not all youngsters know whom they are actually trying to kill,"" one of the warlords of terrorists S Zdrylyuk said.
They do not want to fight for the junta, however they fear that they may be shot just as policemen in Mariupol.
There are few people ready to fight for militia, few people are ready to be completely involved in the civil war.
Therefore the desire to escape from this horror somewhere dominates,"" the Novorossiya web-site writes.
Here the Ukrainian military systematically shell country territories, but instead of locations of militia they hit gardens of local residents,"" the Luhansk XXI Vek newspaper wrote.
March-June 2014 Ukraine is an incapable state Ukraine can last just a few days more because it is an incapable state, a sick organism that lives on a respirator.
Over the last fifteen years, they cultivated a myth of loans as a slave yoke that the IMF, the USA and other countries hung on Ukrainians.
This image is linked to the myth of the global conspiracy, demonized image of the United States and the nostalgia for the Soviet Union.
Due to this relationship, the economic dependence from Russia , which also emphasized by the propaganda, is not perceived as a problem, but rather an argument that proves objectivity of the ""brotherhood of peoples"" and the inevitability of future reunion.
In addition to confirming the alleged incapability of Ukraine , it also justifies the separation of the region from the Ukrainian state, provides confidence in the bright future after separation.
This myth persists in the east, and it is actively supported by separatists themselves, local media, business and political figures.
An information war against Ukraine began long before winter events in Kiev.
All that time somewhere deep in the consciences of people there were mines of delayed action and they only waited for the moment to explode all together and destroy, in addition to walls of buildings in Slavyansk and Mariupol, hundreds of lives.
Fundamentals of the Russian myth, which infected citizens in the east and in the south of Ukraine, were laid not during recent decades, but long before Ukraine gained its independence; so fighting them will last much longer then the counter terrorism operation.
It may last for decades, of course, provided that Ukraine will implement at least some measures to fight this myth.
