Five years ago this week, Russia was finishing its illegal annexation of Crimea, trying to legitimize it by a so-called referendum.
The annexation was going on for a whole month from 20 February 2014, until Russia established full control over the peninsula.
However, during this whole month, the 15,000 Ukrainian troops located in Crimea didn’t shoot to defend themselves and the peninsula from the Russian invasion.
A transcript of the National Security and Defense Council meeting held on 28 February 2014, which we publish below, reveals the real state of Ukraine at the end of February 2014 and allows judging whether Ukraine’s decision to not protect Crimea by force was right.
But at that time, Ukraine, still reeling from the Euromaidan revolution and flight of ex-President Yanukovych, needed at least some time to improve the extremely low combat capability of its armed forces and redeploy troops in order to secure all 1974 kilometers of the border with Russia in the East.
At the onset of Russian aggression on 21 February 2014, 20,000 Russian soldiers were already in Crimea and 38,000 more stood along the Ukrainian border in the East.
No matter who you will agree with in the published RNBO discussion below, special attention should be paid to the words of Yuliya Tymoshenko at the end of the RNBO meeting.
Currently, she is among the leaders in presidential elections and strives to lead the country and its Armed Forces, but in 2014 she recommended Ukraine be like a “dove of peace” and argued against the redeployment of Ukrainian armed forces from the West to the East when Russian aggression was already at the gate.
This RNBO meeting took place directly in the walls of Parliament, and most of its participants just began to fulfill their duties.
Andriy Senchenko, Representative in the Parliament, Former Deputy Prime Minister for Economic Reforms of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea.
The question that we must discuss today is the threat to our territorial integrity.
This is a question of de-facto direct aggression of a neighbor state against Ukraine.
This is a matter of separatism, which is artificially supported and spread on the territory of Ukraine.
The first aspect, which is very threatening, is the full use of the Russian Federation’s military personnel.
Second is the migration to the enemy’s side and carrying out of war crimes by servicemen, “Berkut” special service and other law enforcement officers of Ukraine who serve in Crimea… They turned completely to serve the coordinated military invasion carried out by the political and military leadership of Russia.
The third extremely dangerous element is the fact that airports and other transport infrastructure of Crimea are taken under control, or blocked by the masked or already unmasked servicemen of the Black Sea Fleet of the Russian Federation.
The fourth element is the massive support of the Russian Federation’s actions by locals.
We must prevent shooting and victims among the civilians or the Black Sea Fleet of the Russian Federation so that the military pressure of Russian and pro-Russian structures does not find any justification for establishing complete military control over the infrastructure, military units of Ukraine, or even over the whole territory Crimea.
Many of them do not accept the new power and are not to execute orders, or have already betrayed their oaths altogether.
The situation in the Naval Forces of Ukraine is particularly difficult.
The moral and psychological climate in the leadership is extremely low, if not to say traitorous.
The head of the Sevastopol division of the Ministry of Internal Affairs have resigned… In addition to the police, we have around 1,000 internal troops in Crimea, which, I hope, will be able to carry out orders.
We are establishing contact with servicemen who have not betrayed, but there are very few among the police.
We have the lists of the personnel of “Berkut” who have defected to the aggressor’s side with their weapons and forwarded it to the prosecutor’s office to initiate criminal cases.
Those seizing strategic objects in Crimea are special forces, which underwent military training in the hotspots of Russia.
In order to respond appropriately to threats, I ask you to allow our Armed Forces to be brought to full combat readiness.
It was systematically destroyed by Yanukovych and his colleagues under the leadership of Russian special services.
Today, we will be able to gather a military group of about 5,000 troops from the whole country who will be capable of carrying out combat missions.
I ask for permission to conduct large-scale military exercises because the readiness of most of our units to carry out combat missions is highly dubious.
However, 1.5-2,000 at most would be ready to carry out orders with the use of weapons.
From the Russian side, in addition to the Black Sea Fleet forces, there is a constant deployment of the assault units and the Special Forces of the Chief Intelligence Directorate of the Russian Federation General Staff to Crimea.
We intend to make a statement on holding consultations at the level of foreign ministers within the framework of the Budapest memorandum.
The Russian aggression against Ukraine should be urgently considered by the UN Security Council.
This is because they saw Sashko Bilyi in one of the Oblast Councils with a gun.
As long as the law in Ukraine is not followed, until the occupation of buildings and property by so-called “patriots” continues, the enemies of Ukraine will have strong arguments to do the same.
We can not talk about urgent membership in NATO, it will cause even greater Russian aggression.
In 2008, real military Russian aggression started on the territory of Georgia thanks to the signing the Membership Action Plan in Bucharest.
I would ask you, the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Prosecutor General, and the Ministry of Defense to work out in camera the technology of detaining the criminal agents implementing a military operation against Ukraine, and delivering them to Kyiv.
There’s separatism, there’s terrorism, because they cooperate with terrorists who hold the Crimean parliament and seize strategic objects.
We must capture what the armed forces of Russia are doing, as much as possible.
We have no opportunity to introduce it in Crimea, we can not involve the internal affairs agencies, which do not exist today, as well as the Security Service.
This must be created, and only then can we talk about introducing some kind of law.
And we will be accused, as the central authority, of provoking conflict and blood in the Crimea by “flexing muscles” which we don’t have.
According to the Minister of Defense, we have no strength to defend Kyiv.
We have a lot of patriotic guys who are will serve, but they need uniforms to wear, weapons, and proper training to fight.
It is impossible to deploy the untrained guys to the Crimea because the military personnel of the Russian army armed with the most modern weapons are there.
This will be used as a reason for deployment of troops into continental Ukraine.
I did not want to speak, but as the leader of the largest party I cannot keep silence.
The price of today’s decision is incredibly high and we do not have the right to a mistake.
I have been consulting with the most experienced people and I can say that Putin wants to implement the Abkhazia scenario and only waits for us to give him a reason.
If we had at least one chance out of a hundred to win, I would be the first to support active measures.
I have also talked with our foreign partners, and they also confirm – Russian troops on the borders, and ask not to make any moves.
We have to listen to them because without them we are completely powerless.
Therefore, we have to beg the whole international community today to stand up for Ukraine.
We must become the most peaceful nation on the planet, just behave ourselves like peace doves.
For example, invite leaders of European countries to a peace summit in Kyiv or Crimea.
The information from our channels fully confirms Russia’s readiness to deploy troops concentrated along our border.
Both Americans and Germans in one voice ask us not to start any active actions, because, according to their intelligence, Putin will use it to start a large-scale land invasion.
We have to hear Western partners, and they need time to make decisions.
If we consider the level of readiness of Russian troops on our eastern borders, then we must do everything to be able to defend ourselves; Russians will take into consideration only strong players.
We need a full mobilization of the country, we must immediately begin to transfer existing forces from the Center and West to East and South.
We must do our utmost to be able to defend ourselves, including solely by our own means, if there is no military assistance from the West.
Therefore, I can not avoid putting a decision on the introduction of martial law in the country for voting by the National Security and Defense Council.
