There are several objective reasons why the agreements reached during the Minsk negotiations cannot be completed to the end by any of the parties.
This article is an attempt to organize information, received from open sources, on the contradictions that exist in the process of the Minsk negotiations.
It is necessary to stir up parochial and national feelings in them separately.
We need to convince everyone that the Georgians are placed in Abkhazia.
Russia's imperial policy has led to the occupation of several countries' territory by that state.
Russia is trying to present its armed aggression against these countries as internal conflicts.
The essence of a hybrid war is that kind of misleading attempts and trying to present an external armed aggression as internal conflicts on the occupied territories.
Currently, the international community believes the Minsk negotiations to be one of the means to deter the Russian aggression.
However, for Russia, they are a tool to make Ukraine surrender its interests and, in fact, to capitulate.
Moreover, as it will be shown below, the text of the agreements was written in Russia and in the interests of Russia itself.
Furthermore, the agreements reached clearly contradict many articles of the Constitution of Ukraine.
At the same time, due to the existing contradictions, they cannot be completed by any of the parties.
We present an attempt to systematize the existing contradictions in Minsk agreements below.
Most of the facts outlined below are taken from publications and interviews of the ex-judge of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine, the first Prosecutor General of Ukraine, merited lawyer of Ukraine Viktor Shishkin.
He carried out extensive work on legal assessment of all aspects of the Minsk negotiations.
Below, there is one of V Shishkin's speeches, where he considers the compatibility of the Minsk agreements with the legislation and Constitution of Ukraine in a most detailed way.
Let us start with President Petro Poroshenko's order to confer powers on Leonid Kuchma during the Minsk negotiations.
As it follows from the text of the Order, Leonid Kuchma is granted authority only to represent Ukraine, but not to sign anything.
Besides, that order mentions that Leonid Kuchma acts on a voluntary basis during the Minsk negotiations.
Consequently, the representative of Ukraine in the trilateral contact group has no right to sign any document.
According to the Minsk agreements, we make commitments under some international document.
However, article 9 of the Constitution of Ukraine stipulates Ukraine's international treaties are only binding if ratified by the Verkhovna Rada.
In other words, international treaties become national law if the Parliament gives its consent for them to be binding.
The Minsk agreements were not ratified either by Parliament of Ukraine or by the Parliament of Russia.
The Minsk agreements are thus not binding for Ukraine, since they were not ratified by the Parliament, and the representative of Ukraine at the negotiations in Minsk, Leonid Kuchma was not authorized to sign them.
Apart from Leonid Kuchma, Ukraine is represented by Viktor Medvedchuk at the Minsk negotiations.
Viktor Medvedchuk appears in a number of criminal cases, in particular the case on the illegal privatization.
It is Viktor Medvedchuk who is the main ideologist of separatism in Ukraine.
Under his direct participation the separatist organizations in Ukraine were created and funded through him by the Kremlin.
Later they became the basis for the formation of the armed terrorist groups.
It is Viktor Medvedchuk who is the author of the idea of the so-called ""decentralization"" and the federalization of Ukraine.
It is Viktor Medvedchuk who supervised the preparation of the so-called ""referendum"" in Crimea and the preparation of Crimea's takeover by Russia.
It is Viktor Medvedchuk who is now blackmailing the People of Ukraine by the execution of prisoners of war.
Although the collaborators in power say that Medvedchuk is busy with the release of prisoners of war.
In addition to Medvedchuk on the side of Ukraine in the negotiations, a close friend of Medvedchuk's Nestor Shufrych is involved.
By the way, he does not appear anywhere in official documents and is also an odious pro-Russian politician.
She is known for her statements that the Russian-Georgian war was started by Georgia.
On the part of the terrorists some Zakharchenko and Plotnitskiy are taking part in the negotiations.
There is no document confirming their powers as representatives of anyone or anything.
Those individuals' participation in the negotiations is not required by any documents.
In Ukraine, the world's first precedent was set, when the terrorists are one of the parties of the negotiations.
Although in fact, the Russian regular troops operating on the occupied territories meet the definition of ""terrorists"" very figuratively.
If we can call a spade a spade, this is a Russian armed attack on Ukraine.
Moreover in this case, negotiations were initiated and are conducted with the representatives of the puppet administration created by that aggressor.
That sort of ""agreements"" have nothing to do with international agreements.
The representatives of Ukraine at the Minsk negotiations didn't therefore have the legal powers to.
The evidence of this fact results in the Ukrainian people's adequate attitude towards the Minsk negotiations.
It was often said that the Minsk agreements were written in the Kremlin and were essentially aimed at the capitulation of Ukraine to the Kremlin.
Suffice it to recall the human rights activist, political prisoner of the Soviet concentration camps, the Ukrainian 1st, 2nd and 4th convocations MP, the Hero of Ukraine, one of the authors of the Declaration of Independence of Ukraine Stepan Khmara's appeal to the People of Ukraine.
In his appeal, he directly and reasonably highlights the fact that Minsk negotiations are nothing more than a surrender of Ukraine's interests and the capitulation of Ukraine to the aggressor country of Russia.
The Ukrainian government cannot sign something, that contradicts the national legislation.
In particular, it cannot make commitments on changing the status of territories, if it is stipulated by the Ukrainian laws.
It is proposed to announce the amnesty for the terrorists who committed war crimes.
This paragraph highlights the inadmissibility of persecution of the terrorists' leaders.
Those who will victimize terrorists for their crimes, automatically become outlawed.
In fact, the Ukrainian collaborationist government and the Kremlin use the participants of the negotiations, France and Germany, in order to give international status to their fraud.
The essence of the fraud is to surrender the interests of Ukraine, freeze the war in the Donbas region , freeze any issues related to the liberation of the occupied Crimea, and discharge war criminals from responsibility for the committed crimes.
It is impossible to hold elections when people have guns outside, and on the territory there are foreign troops and mercenaries.
In particular, it is impossible to hold elections where there is no Ukrainian government, and then to withdraw and establish control over the border.
It is impossible to hold elections until normal conditions for the vote are created.
It is necessary to withdraw occupational troops from the occupied territories.
The elections in Donbas region on such terms is the only way the return of the Ukrainian legitimate authorities to these territories.
Actually, this paragraph confirms that according to the Minsk agreements, elections in the occupied territories will be held under the control of terrorists.
On this basis, Petro Poroshenko at the time, began the propaganda company inside Ukraine, that purportedly, if the Constitution is not amended in terms of decentralization, then Minsk-2 will not be fulfilled.
The precedent was created when the country-aggressor requires amendments to the Constitution of the country, which it attacked on.
The purpose of it, ultimately, is to give a constitutional right of self-determination to the occupied territories.
In this case, Poroshenko uses the Minsk agreements in order to lobby his own interests.
The conditions of martial law exist regardless of whether the head of the state declared this law or not.
According to Viktor Shishkin, the fact that Petro Poroshenko, as the President, does not respond to these conditions by imposing martial law is only his personal position.
The conditions of martial law or state of emergency exist objectively, creating legal relations peculiar to such a state and do not depend on the subjective position of those who in accordance with his constitutional powers should respond to them by the introduction of this state, however, they do not invoke such actions.
First, proper acts were adopted, in particular, the Act of Ukraine ""On military-civil administrations.
Secondly, there are numerous amendments to the laws relating to the prosecution of war criminals.
And this means a direct prohibition to amend the Constitution of Ukraine.
The President himself does not have a right to sign this provision , much less to give such assignment or task to someone else.
Nobody had the right to commit oneself with the obligations to change the electoral law, to amend the Constitution of Ukraine and to sign such commitments with Russia and militants on behalf of Ukraine.
It is only the Parliament who can make laws and decide in what order this should be done and in what period.
Not only is Ukraine dictated the essence of the law, but also the period in which it must be taken.
In the Minsk agreements, no word is said about the de-occupation of Crimea.
Crimea is mentioned neither in Minsk-1, nor in Minsk-2, nor in the Geneva agreement dd.
Which adds further credence to the Kremlin authorship of the text and the collaborationist essence of the negotiators.
On September 21, 2016, in Minsk, the agreement on the withdrawal of troops from three areas of Donbas region was signed.
The text of the document says that the ""units of the Armed Forces of Ukraine and armed forces of separate regions of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts of Ukraine"" are liable to decoupling.
This is certainly a serious concession of Kiev to Moscow, and it can be regarded as the agreement that Russia is not involved in armed conflict.
These men and their subordinates before were not considered to be such representatives.
These ""concessions"" are likely made under the pressure of Berlin and Paris.
Most accurately the future prospects of the Minsk negotiations were described by the former Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine Volodymyr Ogryzko.
It is also impossible to expect that Moscow will easily back down and withdraw their troops.
The Russian side does not understand the necessity of making serious decisions until it is forced to do it.
And it can be only forced by a strengthening of economic sanctions, on the one hand, and on another by a dramatic increase in military capabilities of the Ukrainian army.
Otherwise, the negotiations will reach a blind alley, and I do not exclude any scenarios in the future, including negative ones.
What to do with ""the Minsk agreements that have no alternative"" The people of Ukraine are widely discussing the Minsk negotiations issues.
Below there are published specific constructive suggestions that were stated by different people at different time.
And they are a good alternative to the Minsk process that reached a blind alley.
To admit that the ""agreements"" constitute, in fact, an ultimatum for Ukraine, delivered by Putin.
To claim that Ukraine was forced to agree to the terms of the ultimatum through a military pressure and outright aggression of the Russian Federation.
To declare that Ukraine will perform the terms of ""Minsk ultimatum"" only if they do not threaten the integrity, sovereignty and constitutional order of Ukraine.
To declare that the full control restoration of Ukraine on the state border with Russia in the Donbas region is an undisputable condition for further actions to restore the democratic public sector, lasting peace and order on the territory ""of separate regions of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts ""of Ukraine. withdrawal of all the citizens of the Russian Federation, persons without citizenship and foreigners who got on the territory of Ukraine illegally, so that in a way not provided by the laws of Ukraine, from the Donbas region to the territory of the Russian Federation.
Any separate contacts of international organizations, bypassing Kiev is what the Kremlin wants the most.
All negotiations with Russia or Western countries should be conducted with a mandatory requirement of Crimea de-occupation.
To increase the pressure on the Kremlin, starting the elaboration of the documents on the reparation for damage caused as a result of the military aggression.
The continuation of the war is the biggest lever of pressure on Ukraine for Russia.
These are ""hybrid"" negotiations, that were started in collusion and in a close coordination with the ""hybrid"" Ukrainian authorities.
This is a way not to stop the war but to continue it on terms that are primarily beneficial to the Kremlin.
If the international community allows the collaborators in power of Ukraine surrendering the interests of Ukraine, everyone will lose.
First of all, it is Europe that will lose a powerful military ally on the border with the terrorist state an aggressive Russia.
