The massacre of the protesters and the police during the “Euromaidan” mass protests in February 2014 contributed to the overthrow of the Ukrainian government and ultimately to a start of the civil war in Donbas, Russian military interventions in Crimea and Donbas, the Russian annexation of Crimea and an international conflict between the West and Russia.
It examines trial and investigation testimonies of wounded protesters, relatives of the killed protesters, prosecution and defense witnesses, and top officials of the Yanukovych government.
The study also analyzes results of forensic ballistic and medical examinations and investigative experiments, and videos and photos of the Maidan massacre made public during the trial.
Such evidence includes testimonies of the absolute majority of wounded protesters, several dozens of prosecution witnesses, dozens of defense witnesses, and 14 self-admitted members of Maidan snipers groups.
Videos presented at the trial showed that times of shooting of the absolute majority of protesters did not coincide with times of shooting by the Berkut policemen, who were charged with their massacre.
Forensic medical examinations determined that the overwhelming majority of the protesters were shot from steep directions from the sides or the back.
Initial ballistic examinations did not match bullets extracted from the bodies of killed and wounded protesters to the Berkut Kalashnikovs.
Forensic examinations of the bullet holes by the government experts for the Maidan massacre trial suggested that Berkut policemen were shooting in the Hotel Ukraina snipers above the Maidan protesters and in trees and poles.
The analysis shows cover-up and stonewalling of the investigations and trials by the Maidan governments and the far right.
The prosecution denied that there were any snipers in the Maidan-controlled buildings.
Not a single person is convicted or under arrest for the massacre of the protesters and the police almost seven years after one of the most documented mass killings in history.
This mass killing was a tipping point of the conflict in Ukraine and led to government overthrow.
It also ultimately led or contributed to a civil war in Donbas, Russian military interventions in Crimea and Donbas, and the secession and annexation of Crimea by Russia and international conflicts between Ukraine and Russia and the West and Russia.
This study reviews main findings of previous academic studies and divergent narratives by the Western, Ukrainian, and Russian governments and the media concerning the Maidan massacre, and analyzes trial and investigation testimonies, results of forensic examinations for the prosecution and the Maidan victims lawyers for the trial, videos and photos presented at the trial, and cover-up and stonewalling of the investigation and the trial.
The GPU arrested in April 2014 and charged the Berkut special company commander and two members of this police unit with the murder of 39 out of 49 killed Maidan protesters on February 20 on Yanukovych order.
The trial of two policemen from a Berkut special company began in January 2015 after the arrested Berkut commander was released by a court and escaped from Ukraine.
It is noteworthy that a killing of a Georgian protester on February 20 was not included in the charges, and circumstances of his killings have not been officially disclosed.
The Prosecutor General of Ukraine announced in 2019 that the investigation of the Maidan massacre was complete.
The prosecution presented all its evidence at the trial of the five Berkut members before they were released by a Kyiv court of appeals under President Zelensky’s order and exchanged to Donbas separatists in December 2019.
The trial examined by that date all evidence presented by the prosecution, including testimonies of relatives of killed Maidan protesters, almost all wounded Maidan protesters, prosecution witnesses, videos and photos of the massacre, forensic medical and ballistic examinations, on-site investigative experiments, and documents.
Testimonies of most of the Berkut defense victims were also presented at the trial before it stopped, and a verdict stage was expected in Spring 2020.
The trial was suspended because of the release and exchange of the Berkut policemen.
The Maidan massacre trial resumed since for 2 Berkut policemen, who returned from the exchange to Donbas 4 separatists, and in absentia for 3 Berkut policemen who remained in separatist-controlled Donbas.
Viktor Yanukovych, his SBU, Internal Troops, and Berkut commanders were charged in absentia with ordering the Maidan massacre only several years after this massacre but they were not brought to the trial because they resided in Russia or Russian-annexed Crimea.
The GPU and DBR announced in November 2021 that their investigation of Yanukovych, his ministers of internal affairs, defence, and the SBU, Internal Troops, and Berkut heads and commanders for the Maidan massacre was finished.
Expanded charges against them for the massacre included perpetration of a terrorist attack, mass killing, and creation of an organized criminal group.
The Berkut commanders and members, ex-president Viktor Yanukovych, his SBU, Internal Affairs and Internal Troops heads and commanders, and their lawyers denied their involvement in the Maidan massacre and stated that the Maidan leaders and snipers massacred the Maidan protesters.
This is the highest profile political crime in Ukraine and one of the most significant in contemporary Europe in the 21st century.
The Maidan massacre trial in Ukraine is the trial of the century because of its political significance.
While this case involved several dozen killings of the Maidan protesters, many of the moments of these killings and the special company of the Berkut police shooting were captured in various videos, while communications of SBU Alfa snipers and commanders during the massacre were intercepted and recorded.
Most of them were transferred to the State Bureau of Investigations in 2019 to continue the investigation.
The GPU during the entire investigation was headed by Maidan politicians or confidants of Poroshenko and Zelensky, both of whom publicly blamed the Yanukovych and the Berkut police for the massacre.
Maidan victims lawyers, who were themselves Maidan activists, publicly supported the GPU investigation after criticizing it initially for being too slow.
A then head of SBU in the Kyiv region was charged with responsibility for the killings of some of the killed Maidan protesters on February 18 and 19 by ordering SBU operation to seize control of the Trade Union building.
But the trial of the Berkut policemen did not start because they were released by courts and ended up in Russia.
The GPU stated that four policemen were killed and several dozen wounded by unknown persons of unknown allegiance from the Music Conservatory and the Maidan area at the start of the Maidan massacre on February 20.
The GPU charged in 2018 a Maidan protester with killings two police officers after he publicly admitted in his Ukrainian media interviews in 2014 and 2016 such killing and/or shooting of the p, and he was released and escaped from Ukraine after intervention of the Prosecutor General of Ukraine, who was one of the Maidan leaders.
The documents from his investigative criminal case show that associates of Bulatov in the Automaidan testified in 2014 after the Maidan and in 2019 that he staged his own abduction, torture, and crucifixion.
One of them testified that Bulatov told him shortly before his disappearance that he planned to stage his own abduction.
Another testified that she heard from Bulatov and other Maidan activists about need for some “fiery information” in order to regain popularity of the Automaidan, and that his staged abduction accomplished this.
Other Automaidan leaders testified that there was no rationale for Bulatov’s kidnapping and torture because he was removed from the Automaidan leadership a couple of days prior, and they regarded his staging his own kidnapping as a real possibility.
Two of them also testified that the light wounds and his appearance did not match his statements about being kidnapped and tortured for a week without food.
A government forensic expert determined in his expert report for the investigation after the Maidan that Bulatov’s wounds, including a cut of a piece of his ear, could have been inflicted by himself or by someone else with his agreement using sterile materials and disinfecting wounds, because they did not have any signs of infection.
The government forensic expert also determined that there was no damage on his hands that would be consistent with Bulatov being handcuffed.
This is consistent with a testimony by David Zhvania, a former associate of Poroshenko and the head of the parliamentary committee during and after the Maidan.
He stated that Maidan leaders, whom he names, staged the abduction and 8 crucifixion of Bulatov and most other high-profile cases of violence, such as the Maidan massacre.
In another case, an investigation by the Military Prosecutor Office in Lviv found that an elderly Maidan protester was killed and several wounded in Khmelnytskyi by another Maidan protester from the SBU porch that was then occupied by Maidan protesters.
The GPU reversed this investigation as politically inappropriate and charged an SBU Alfa officer for shooting the protesters from the second floor inside of the SBU building.
But the Security Service of Ukraine publicly stated that the GPU investigation was falsified.
This is consistent with the content analysis showing that the protesters were shot from the SBU porch and not from the second floor.
Previous Studies and Conflicting Narratives of the Maidan Massacre In spite of its importance to the politics of Ukraine and global politics the Maidan massacre have been central subject of only a few academic studies.
Then such groups of concealed shooters or “snipers” massacred the unsuspecting Maidan protesters from Maidan-controlled buildings or areas, such as the Hotel Ukraina, Bank Arkada, Zhovtnevyi Palace, and Horodetskyi Street and Muzeinyi Lane buildings.
Kudelia argues that the violence was initiated by the Maidan protesters, who killed and wounded many policemen and that the Berkut police then massacred unarmed protesters in turn.
However, they were not based on a comprehensive analysis of this crucial case of political violence and uncritically accepted claims by the Maidan politicians and the Ukrainian and Western media concerning the massacre perpetrators and organizers.
For instance, Wilson stated citing Maidan activists and Ukrainian media reports that government snipers, led by Internal Troops and SBU Alfa commanders, massacred Maidan 11 protesters from the government buildings and the Hotel Ukraina and Kozatsky Hotel and one of the snipers was killed in the Hotel Ukraina.
However, the Internal Troops and SBU Alfa commanders, named as being in charge of the massacre, were not charged by the prosecution in Ukraine and some of them continued to serve in commanding positions after the Maidan.
But the previous studies did not examine systematically evidence revealed by Maidan massacre trials and investigation.
There is not a single academic study of trials and government investigations of the Maidan massacre.
Then President Poroshenko, Oleksandr Turchynov, the Head of the National Security and Defense Council, and the head of the SBU stated in February 2015 that Vladislav Surkov, an aide of Russian President Vladimir Putin, was personally coordinating foreign “snipers” on the Maidan but presented no supporting evidence.
However, Serhii Leshchenko, a member of the Poroshenko’s faction in the parliament, revealed that Surkov arrived in Kyiv by plane after the massacre was already over.
For instance, Joe Biden, the United States vice-president, spoke to Yanukovych on February 20, 2014 right after the massacre and demanded a withdrawal of the security forces, specifically snipers and paramilitary units most responsible for the violence.
However, the United States and other Western governments did not release their intelligence assessments and other information concerning this massacre, and results of such reported involvement of the FBI in the Maidan massacre investigation also were not revealed.
Such Western governments stance concerning the Maidan massacre investigations and trials contrasts with their various public statements and other forms of involvement concerning other politically important criminal cases and trials, such 13 as the Yuliya Tymoshenko trial during the Yanukovych presidency, cases of corruption in the Ukrainian government after the “Euromaidan,” and the successful United States administration pressure to remove Viktor Shokin as the GPU head.
The European parliament rejected 17 requests by one its members to include investigations of the Maidan and Odesa massacres on its agenda.
In these letters, he named such People’s Front leaders, as Oleksandr Turchynov (the acting president after the Yanukovych overthrow and the current head of the National Security and Defense Council), Andriy Parubiy, (the head of the Maidan Self-Defense and the current head of the Ukrainian parliament), Serhii Pashynsky (the head of the presidential administration under Turchynov and the current head of the National Defense and Security committee of the Ukrainian parliament), and Arsen Avakov (the current Minister of Internal Affairs) as organizers of the Maidan massacre.
He called for international investigation of this mass killing and stated that he would then provide such evidence.
Oleksandr Yakymenko, the SBU head under Yanukovych, testified in a Russian court concerning the “Maidan coup” in the end of 2016 that the SBU identified by name several Maidan snipers who massacred the police and protesters, and that they included some Georgians, a former SBU Alfa officer, who then reportedly worked in the Fatherland party security.
Klyuyev also stated that Turchynov, Parubiy, and Pashynsky organized the massacre of the police and the protesters 15 and used the Right Sector and leaders of Maidan parties, including far right Svoboda, in the dark.
However, he did not make public the specific evidence in support of his statements.
They did not question the official investigation conclusions that the government forces on the orders of the Yanukovych government were responsible for the massacre of the protesters and relied on the investigation findings.
It is noteworthy that the Bellingcat organization did not conduct any analysis of the Maidan massacre, even though its founder promised to do it.
Google news searchers produced no reports of major revelations from these trials and investigations or evidence of the massacre of the protesters by “snipers” from the Maidan-controlled buildings and the massacre of the police by the far-right organizations.
It also reported a 17 statement of a unidentified GPU prosecutor that he examined a version that both police and the protesters were killed by the same shooters.
Italian, Israeli, and United States TV documentaries, Macedonian TV, and Russian media showed in 2018-20 testimonies of eight former members of the Georgian military.
They stated that they were members of the Maidan snipers groups, which included snipers from Georgia, the Baltic States, and Parasiuk-led group in the Hotel Ukraina and the Music Conservatory and that they were ordered by Maidan leaders and ex-Georgian leaders to massacre both the police and the protesters and assassinate then president Yanukovych and that they witnessed such massacre by the Maidan snipers or were involved themselves.
Ukrainian media reports generally, with some notable exceptions, presented the Maidan government and GPU prosecution version of the massacre.
But the media in Russia, with some exceptions, also did not report the revelations from the Maidan massacre trial and investigations.
The Russian media often relayed statements about this massacre by Yanukovych and his former government members, who found refuge in Russia, and by self-reported Georgian snipers.
The absolute majority of the witness testimonies are by direct eyewitnesses.
Testimonies of indirect witnesses concerning the Maidan snipers are primarily by Maidan protesters and politicians and pro-Maidan journalists.
Such “statements against interest” relayed 19 by indirect witnesses are accepted in criminal law and trials in the US, Canada, and other Western countries.
Media interviews of prosecutors, Maidan victims’ lawyers and Berkut lawyers, and various media reports about the Maidan massacre trials and investigations are also examined.
Trial and Investigation Testimonies Although the official investigation denied existence of snipers in these Maidan-controlled buildings and areas, the absolute majority of 72 wounded Maidan protesters, with whose shooting on February 20 Berkut policemen are charged and whose testimonies were revealed at the trial, testified at the trial and/or the investigation that they were shot by snipers from Maidancontrolled buildings or areas, witnessed themselves snipers there, and/or were told by other Maidan protesters during the massacre about such snipers.
At least 28 wounded protesters testified at the trial and/or the investigation that they were shot from the Hotel Ukraina, the Bank Arkada, and Zhovtnevyi Palace, Muzeinyi Lane and Horodetskyi Street buildings and other Maidan-controlled buildings or areas.
For instance, Borys Kharchuk testified during the trial on September 22, 2016 that he was wounded by a sniper from a Hotel Ukraina window.
He said that he was shot immediately 20 after he saw two persons in black clothes and black balaclavas in a Hotel Ukraina window between the fourth and the sixth floor, and one of them was aiming a rifle.
Kharchuk demonstrated his own position in the moment of his shooting and locations of his entry and exit wounds at a significant vertical angle.
Volodymyr Venchak says that he was wounded in the back from the Hotel Ukraina.
Andrii Khalak said in the investigative experiment video that he was shot from the Hotel Ukraina based on his position and his wounds location.
Ivan Filipovych suggested at the on-site investigative experiment that he was wounded from Zhovtnevyi Palace based on his position and locations and a steep direction of his entry and exit wounds.
Petro Ladym testified during the investigation that there was shooting from the Hotel Ukraina and that he saw snipers in windows of Zhovtnevyi Palace shooting people.
Ivan Plish stated that he was wounded near Zhovtnevyi Palace in the back of his head from the Hotel Ukraina and that he saw 3-5 people with weapons, including with an apparent assault rifle, on the roof of the Hotel Ukraina.
Pavlo Onufriiv testified during the investigation that there were one or two snipers in black uniforms on the roofs of this hotel and Zhovtnevyi Palace and that he was shot by a sniper that might had been located on the hotel roof or the roof of Zhovtnevyi Palace.
He identified these two Maidan-controlled buildings along with Bank Arkada on the map and a number of undisclosed buildings that he saw snipers at with his binoculars.
Yuri Slyvka testified at the trial and the investigation that he saw three snipers who shot Maidan protesters from the roof and a window of the Hotel Ukraina.
Vitali Karpyn stated at the trial and at the investigative experiment 21 that he clearly saw gunshots from the Hotel Ukraina, in particular gun flashes.
For instance, forensic examinations of his wounds and clothing determined that Venchak was shot in the back from a steep direction when he was filmed from the Hotel Ukraina advancing towards a Berkut barricade.
Similarly, Sviatoslav Kolesnikov testified during two investigative experiments and his first interrogation in 2014 that he was wounded from upper floors of the Hotel Ukraina.
His wounding from the Hotel Ukraina is consistent with his description of his position at the moment of the shooting that he demonstrated during both investigative experiments, his wound in the right shoulder, and its steep direction.
A video showed Maidan protesters taking cover under this bridge and pointing towards shooting from the upper floors of this hotel at the direction of the bridge at about the same time as Kolesnikov was wounded on the bridge.
Yuri Kravchuk testified at the trial that he was wounded first two times from a sideway direction from the Bank Arkada and not from the Berkut barricade in front of him.
He determined this because he was taking cover behind a tree from the Berkut, because the bullet did not go through a tree and because he saw down flying in front of his face from a bullet hole in his jacket.
Similarly, a government ballistic expert during an on-site investigative experiment concluded that Roman Kotliarevsky was shot from a sector ranging from the Hotel Ukraina to Bank Arkada.
This wounded Maidan medic stated during this investigation experiment that he was most likely shot from the Bank Arkada based on the steep direction of his wound channel.
The moment of his wounding was filmed by CNN from the Hotel Ukraina and used by the media in the West and in Ukraine as evidence that the government forces deliberately targeted even medics.
A forensic ballistic report, which was made public during the trial, found that this medic was shot from the same 7.62x39 caliber weapon, which was used to kill Mykola-Oleh Pankiv.
Several wounded protesters also testified about witnessing snipers in the Maidancontrolled Music Conservatory and the Maidan barricades near the Maidan stage in the early morning of February 20.
Volodymyr Venchak testifies at the trial that he saw two or three 23 persons with weapons on the Music Conservatory roof circa 7:30-8:00 am and that a politician on the Maidan stage warned protesters about snipers there.
Andrushko saw one protester on the Maidan shooting at Berkut from a hunting rifle and another protester there with a Kalashnikov assault rifle or its hunting version.
They were often changing positions between the Maidan and the Music Conservatory.
The Prosecutor General Office of Ukraine investigation determined based on their testimonies and investigative experiments that almost half of protesters were wounded on February 20 from other sectors than the Berkut police and did not charge Berkut with their shooting.
Since the trial and investigation testimonies of commanders of government sniper and countersniper units and other evidence, such as videos, revealed that that government snipers arrived in their positions when almost all protesters were already killed and wounded, and therefore could not massacre theses Maidan protesters this suggests that at least the absolute majority of these 77 protesters were wounded from the Maidan-controlled buildings or areas and that absolute majority of them also testified concerning snipers in the Maidancontrolled locations.
The Prosecution and in 2021 the Maidan massacre trial refused to classify Olesia Zhukovska, a Maidan female medic, as a victim in a trial of Berkut policemen who are charged with this massacre.
She was turned into a Maidan “icon” after tweeting that she was dying shortly after she was filmed on the Maidan running to an ambulance with blood on her clothes.
Numerous Ukrainian and Western media reported that she was wounded by the Berkut police or 24 government snipers.
This Maidan medic testified as a witness in the Maidan massacre trial in 2021 that she was wounded from direction of the Maidan-controlled Hotel Ukraina based on her reported entry and exit wounds locations in the neck.
However, she admitted in an interview with a Ukrainian journalist that she was not wounded.
This Ukrainian journalist reported that a Maidan activist revealed that the wounding of this Maidan medic was staged by the Maidan SelfDefense leadership and that her surgery conducted shortly before the massacre was misrepresented as her exit wound.
This Maidan activist reportedly revealed that there was an intention to stage a false flag killing of a female protester in order to galvanize public support for the Maidan and blame the government forces.
But because there was reluctance to kill a woman, the leadership of the Maidan Self-Defense decided to stage a fake wounding of the female Maidan medic by misrepresenting her neck surgery as her wounding.
However, a Maidan protester standing near hear was killed in the same Maidan spot right after she was filmed running to the ambulance with blood on her neck.
Two protesters said that they saw that he was shot from the Main Post-Office building, which was then the Right Sector headquarters.
The testimonies of the absolute majority of wounded Maidan protesters concerning snipers in Maidan-controlled locations were consistent with testimonies of several dozens of prosecution witnesses and relatives of killed protesters at the Maidan massacre trial and the investigation.
These prosecution witnesses were supposed to provide testimonies supporting the prosecution charges that the Berkut policemen massacre the Maidan protesters and the denial of the existence of any snipers in the Maidan-controlled buildings and areas.
However, they 25 testified concerning snipers in the Maidan-controlled locations massacring protesters and the police.
For example, Dmytro Holubnychyi testified at the trial that other Maidan protesters wondered during the massacre whether ""ours at ours"" and told him that there were shooters on the Hotel Ukraina.
He was filmed as a teenage protester in one of the most widely publicized videos of the Maidan massacre, including in “Winter on Fire” Netflix documentary, which omitted evidence of Maidan snipers.
Pastushok testified that he, and other three protesters from the Volhynian company were filmed by the BBC running away along with other protesters and the BBC TV crew after shouts about “a sniper” in the Hotel Ukraina.
Pastushok saw someone opening a window in the Hotel Ukraina on the 7-9 floor and waving at them not to shout about this sniper, aimed his rifle, raised it, and waved his hands giving a similar sign.
He testified to the government investigation that Oleksandr Khrapachenko, who was then next to him, was shot from across the Instytutska street, in particular, the left wing of the Hotel Ukraina.
Pastushok also stated that the protesters were shot at from the Hotel Ukraina when they carried Khrapachenko.
Kulish testified at the investigation that the gunshot that killed Poliansky was from the Hotel Ukraina and that protesters shielded them from the Hotel Ukraina when he and other protesters carried him.
His wife testifies at the trial that Vasyl Aksenyn before he passed away told another Maidan protester that he most likely was shot from the Hotel Ukraina.
This matches killing of Viktor Smolensky, who was shot there along with a female medic.
The Omega commander testified at the trial that his Internal Troops unit of snipers was in its base near Kyiv when circa 9:30am he received an order to deploy because the Maidan side used weapons on the Maidan and there were killed policemen and protesters.
When the Omega snipers opened windows on the third floor of Kabmin Club were shot at, and bullet hit a window frame and walls.
The Omega commander said that based on the bullet holes in Kabmin Club the shooting at the Omega snipers was likely from the 5-7th floors of the Hotel Ukraina.
He stated that the Omega snipers saw gunshot flashes from the 5-7th floors of the Hotel Ukraina.
They reported gunfire from the 5-7th floors of the hotel and the attic of Zhovtnevyi Palace.
He said that locations of the shooters at the police included the Music Conservatory, the Hotel Ukraina, and attic windows of Zhovtnevyi Palace after it was occupied by Maidan protesters.
An Ukraina TV correspondent testified that one of policemen behind a truck Berkut barricade said that there was shooting at them.
Policemen said that they noticed shooting from the Hotel Ukraina to the police barricade direction.
He testified that snipers later arrived in a bus to check whether there was shooting from this hotel.
His video operator testified at the trial that he filmed a government sniper targeting a window in Hotel Ukraina on the 6th or 7th floor.
This 27 video operator also testified during the interrogation that the police warned them about shooting from Hotel Ukraina.
Their Ukraina TV video, which was posted by the Right Sector on YouTube, presented these Omega snipers as a death squad which killed the Maidan protesters, and it was broadcast by many TV channel as evidence that they massacred the protesters.
Then the coordinator of the special forces of the Internal Troops testified that Maidan snipers started shooting first and that they massacred the Berkut police and Internal Troops on February 20 not on their own as a group but in a planned action by the Maidan leadership.
Both Security Service of Ukraine and the Internal Troops intelligence on the Maidan reported that two vans with about 20 armed men in military-style fatigues arrived to the Music Conservatory right before shooting at the police started from there.
The Internal Troops intelligence also reported that Maidan protesters guarding a barricade near the Conservatory were told to leave shortly before the massacre and that smoke from burning tires was used to cover snipers.
He also testified about reports of the Maidan snipers in the Trade Union building, the Hotel Ukraina, and Muzeiny Lane building.
His special forces unit came under fire by snipers from the tall building under reconstruction in the Hrushevsky Street area and later found evidence of sniper positions there.
The commander of the SBU Alfa snipers testified that his unit was deployed from an SBU base circa 10:00am because of information that sniper weapons were used on the Maidan and that there were both police and protesters killed.
He and other members of his unit stated at the trial that their order was to act as counter-snipers and that they observed the Hotel Ukraina 28 and roofs of buildings.
Similarly, the UDO snipers testified at the trial that they received an order circa 10:00am to locate a sniper in the Hotel Ukraina because there was information that a sniper in the hotel was shooting at the police and that they were deployed to Cabinet of Ministers building around noon.
The commander of the UDO counter-sniper unit testifies that he was told by his commander that there was shooting from the Hotel Ukraina and received his order to take 3 snipers, go to Cabmin and determine from which hotel window there was shooting.
His understanding was that someone was shooting at both sides,e., the government forces and the Maidan protesters.
His commander told him to determine from which window there was shooting from the Hotel Ukraina and that this information would be reported to the SBU leadership, which would use its Alfa special unit to neutralize the shooter.
The Omega snipers commander also testified that the Alfa unit of the Security Service of Ukraine and his Omega unit of the Internal Troops were ready to clean out the shooters but their passage to the Music Conservatory and another building was refused by the Maidan leadership.
The testimonies of the commanders and snipers of Alfa, Omega, and UDO sniper units and other prosecution witnesses show that snipers in the Hotel Ukraina and other Maidancontrolled buildings shot not only at the protesters but also at the police and government snipers, that the government units of snipers were deployed to their positions only after the massacre was long underway, that they had orders to locate snipers who shot the police and the protesters, and that snipers were located in the Maidan-controlled buildings, such as the Hotel Ukraina, Music Conservatory, and Zhovtnevyi Palace.
The commander of the Internal Troops during the Maidan in his video-link testimony at the Maidan massacre trial said that his observers reported that snipers were shooting at the protesters and the police, including the Internal Troops, from top floors of the Hotel Ukraina and other Maidancontrolled locations, such as the Music Conservatory.
He also stated that the SBU Alfa negotiated with Andrii Parubii, then the head of the Maidan Self-Defense, to search for these snipers at the Hotel Ukraina but that Parubii refused to allow this.
Ex-president Viktor Yanukovych during his video-link testimony as a witness in the Maidan massacre trial also stated that he received reports about snipers shooting from the top floors of buildings whose entrances were guarded by the Maidan forces.
Many Berkut policemen testified at the trial that they or other Berkut servicemen were shot from the Music Conservatory in the early morning of February 20.
The testimonies by the absolute majority of the wounded Maidan protesters and several dozen of prosecution witnesses are generally consistent with testimonies of 8 Georgian exmilitary for the Maidan massacre trial and with their interviews in American, Italian and Israeli TV documentaries and Macedonian and Russian media.
Three of them testified at the Prosecutor General Office of Belarus on request of the Prosecutor General Office of Ukraine following an appeal of Berkut lawyers in the case of the killings and wounding of the police during the Maidan massacre.
The Maidan massacre trial in November 2021 admitted as evidence a testimony of one of these Georgians who confessed of being a member of a group of Maidan 30 snipers.
Three self-admitted Georgian snipers gave written depositions to Berkut lawyers for the Maidan massacre trial, two provided notarized letters to the Ukrainian courts and offered to testify via a video link from Belarus.
These Georgians stated that they and other members of sniper groups from Georgia, the Baltic States, received orders, weapons, and payments from specific members of the Maidan leadership and former Georgian government leaders and commanders to massacre both protesters and the police in order to stop a peaceful agreement that was to be signed by Yanukovych and Maidan leaders.
They stated that they also received shooting instructions from a far-right linked ex-US Army sniper.
These ex-Georgian military members testified that then saw Georgian, Baltic States, and specific far right Sector-linked Ukrainian snipers shooting from the Music Conservatory and the Hotel Ukraina, in particular, before 8:00am on February 20. specific Maidan-controlled buildings.
They said that there were four groups of Georgian snipers on the Maidan with total of 40 members, including themselves.
One of them stated without revealing his identity in a United States documentary that he shot the protesters from the Hotel Ukraina40 Another said that the plan involved assassination of Viktor Yanukovych.
Most of these Georgians revealed their names, passport numbers & border stamps, copies of plane tickets, videos and photos in Ukraine or Georgian military, and other evidence in support of their testimonies.
The ex-commander of the special armed Maidan Self-Defense Company, who was named along with his father as snipers by these Georgian ex-military, and two members of his company admitted in Ukrainian media interviews and one in a BBC interview that they shot the police from the Music Conservatory and the Maidan barricades in the morning of February 20.42 31 The GPU investigation confirmed these public admissions.
Another member of this Maidan company confessed in a leaked video of his interrogation of providing a hunting version of a Kalashnikov assault rifle to members of this company to massacre the police and witnessing such shooting.
He also testified that snipers in the Hotel Ukraina massacred the Maidan protesters.
In contrast, there were no such testimonies admitting involvement in the massacre of the Maidan protesters, witnessing such involvement, or getting such specific information from others 32 by the Berkut policemen, ex-police and SBU commanders, and ex-Yanukovych government officials.
This includes both those charged with the massacre in Ukraine or in absentia and those who were not charged and continued to serve under the new Maidan governments.
All Berkut policemen, two Omega servicemen, and Kyiv SBU head, who were arrested and charged with the massacre, denied that they massacred the Maidan protesters.
In contrast, the absolute majority of testimonies of wounded Maidan protesters about being shot by the Berkut police or snipers in government-controlled buildings or about snipers in these buildings are not corroborated by videos, forensic medical examinations, and other evidence.
In the small minority of remaining cases, such evidence is either absent or contradictory.
For instance, Kolesnikov, reversed his testimony about being shot from the upper part of the Hotel Ukraina and backed in his trial testimony prosecution charges that he was wounded by a Berkut policeman on the ground behind a Berkut barricade, in spite of the evidence described above.
Moreover, a timestamped video, which was used by the prosecution as evidence that Kolesnikov and other Maidan protesters were wounded and killed by one of the Berkut policemen being tried, showed that this policeman behind a Berkut barricade was not shooting at all at the time and around the time of the Kolesnikov’s wounding.
Many protesters, such as Yuri Kravchuk, who testified during the trial about being wounded from such Maidan-controlled locations, as the Bank Arkada or the Hotel Ukraina, still accused the Berkut police in shooting them.
However, the government investigation, videos, eyewitness testimonies, and cell phones tracking showed that all Berkut policemen charged with the massacre of these protesters and other government units and snipers were in other locations during the massacre and not in these Maidan-controlled buildings.
For instance, Oleksandr Huch the Volhynian company of the Maidan Self-Defense commander, stated that he thought based on his position that he was shot from the Cabinet of Ministers building.
However, his position in a Norwegian TV video, which was not shown at the trial, the ricochet impact seen in this video, and his wound location and steep direction suggest that he was shot from a Muzeinyi Lane building on the left and somewhat in front of him.
An onsite investigative experiment by the government forensic experts, including a ballistic expert, determined that Huch was shot from a sector of fire which included Muzeinyi Lane buildings. .46 Similarly, Ivan Halamai claimed at the trial that he was wounded from a Berkut barricade.
However, the locations and the direction of the bullet wounds, his position in the video at the time of his shooting, and the steep slope of the bullet in his x-ray in the upper left leg point to a gunshot from the top of the Bank Arkada and not from the Berkut barricade on the similar ground level.
The government investigation and the Maidan massacre trial and the Yanukovych state treason trial did not reveal any evidence of an order or orders to massacre the Maidan protesters by then President Yanukovych, his Internal Affairs and SBU chiefs, SBU, Internal Troops, and police commanders.
The Prosecutor General of Ukraine and the head of its department in charge of the Maidan massacre investigation stated that they did not have evidence about involvement of the Russian government and Russian snipers in the Maidan massacre.
The trials and investigations in Ukraine also did not reveal any evidence of the involvement of any other foreign governments and foreign government snipers, including the US, the UK, Georgia, the Baltic States, Poland, etc.
However, the videos of Berkut on the ground near Zhovtnevyi Palace and behind two barricades on Instytutska Street shooting live ammunition from AKMs and videos of killing and wounding of specific protesters were shown at the trial separately or in a compilation of 16 videos, which were shown simultaneously and made difficult to discern such details.
The trial confirmed that specific times of Berkut shooting and specific times of killings of Maidan protesters did not coincide in the synchronized videos of the Maidan massacre with a small number of exceptions.
This means that it was physically impossible for the Berkut 35 policemen to shoot the absolute majority of the protesters when the exact times of their killing and wounding do not coincide with the times of the Berkut shooting in synchronized videos.
The prosecution charges stated that about two dozen members on the special Berkut company massacred the Maidan protesters during brief police advance and retreat on the ground near Zhovtnevyi Palace and then from behind two barricades on Instytutska Street.
All these Berkut policemen were filmed in numerous videos and National Bank security cameras for almost entire time from their deployment to the end of the massacre.
For instance, forensic medical examinations by the government experts for the prosecution, a testimony of his sister at the trial, and a single bullet hole in his helmet in synchronized videos show that Yuri Parashchuk was killed in the back of his head when he faced the Berkut police.
This means that the Berkut policemen charged with their killing could not physically shoot them.
Some videos shown at the Maidan massacre trial revealed Maidan snipers.
A recording of a live broadcast of Espresso TV showed a Maidan protester giving a Kalashnikov-type firearm to another protester at the Maidan barricade in front of the Maidan stage during a standoff with the police and another protester shooting from a hunting rifle in the direction of the police.
The video showed the police retreating from the Maidan in about 20 minutes afterwards before 9:00am.
This video matches unbroadcast CNN video which showed the armed special Maidan company members going to this barricade and shooting in the direction of the police.
Unbroadcast segments of the most famous video of the Maidan massacre, which was filmed by the Belgian VRT News TV and shown at the Maidan massacre trial, show two Maidan protesters luring a group of other protesters to advance shortly before they would be massacred there.
One of these two protesters at the trial and one in the media interviews could not explain why they did this.
The VRT video also includes a protester shouting to the other protesters in this group not to move ahead because there is shooting from the Hotel Ukraina.
He warned that they shoot from the hotel all protesters together and that there were gunshots from there.
The VRT News video then shows a bullet hitting a tree in the direction of this group of the Maidan protesters.
One of them pointed his hand towards the hotel and shouted about gunshots from the hotel and that they shoot to take down the protesters and asked the shooters there not to shoot.
Six wounded protesters from this group testified at the Maidan massacre trial and the investigation that they or their group were either shot from this hotel and other Maidan37 controlled buildings, witnessed snipers there or were told by other protesters about them.
SBU Alfa snipers and commanders stated at the trial that recoding of their intercepted radio communications of SBU was selectively edited and was made after they were deployed to the Cabinet of Ministers building to locate snipers in the Maidan controlled Hotel Ukraina and other buildings.
This audio recording was widely publicized in the Ukrainian media after the Maidan massacre as evidence that these government snipers massacred the Maidan protesters.
Results of Forensic Examinations Findings of forensic medical examinations, which were done by government experts for the prosecution and were made public during the Maidan massacre trial, revealed that the absolute majority of protesters were shot on February 20 from side and back directions and from top to bottom directions.
Since videos and photos showed that the absolute majority of the killed and wounded protesters faced the Berkut police in front of them on the same or similar ground level and that Maidan-controlled buildings were generally behind them and on the left and right side, this forensic evidence means that they could not have been shot by Berkut but were shot by snipers in the Maidan-controlled buildings.
One does not need to be a forensic expert to understand this since bullets do not fly like guided missiles in order to hit the protesters from the directions and height that do not match the locations of the Berkut police.
These forensic medical examinations indicated that 40 out of 48 protesters with whose murder Berkut policemen are charged were shot dead from significant vertical angles based on the directions of their wounds.
At least 36 of these protesters were killed when the Berkut policemen were filmed on the same or similar level on the ground.
Just one killed protester had nearly horizontal entry and exit wounds, but he was snot sideways.
Another was killed, inter alia, by a handgun bullet behind a wall that made it physically impossible to shoot him from the Berkut positions.
Similarly, 48 out of 51 wounded protesters, whose wound directions were revealed at the trial and with whose shooting on February 20th Berkut policemen were charged, had wounds at significant vertical angles.
They indicated that Ivan Bliok was killed from Vepr carbine, a hunting version of Kalashnikov machine gun.
Two protesters were killed by expanding hunting bullets, whose calibers did not match calibers of weapons used by the special Berkut company, whose members were charged with killing these protesters.
A forensic ballistic examination conducted by government institute experts on the prosecution request with use of an automatic computer-based IBIS-TAIS system in January 2015 39 found that bullets extracted from killed protesters, trees, and the Hotel Ukraina rooms did not match police database of bullet samples from any 7.62x39 caliber Kalashnikov assault rifles of members of the entire Kyiv Berkut regiment, including the special Berkut company charged with the massacre of the protesters.
The government investigation determined that most of protesters killed on February 1819 were shot with hunting pellets and smoothbore rifles used in hunting.
The court decisions revealed that the weapons used by the wounded checkpoint attackers in Sloviansk on April 20, 2014 were the same weapons from which two Internal Troops servicemen were killed, and three other policemen wounded on the Maidan on February 18.
The court rulings specifically referred to two Right Sector activists, who were wounded during a Right Sector attack of the separatist checkpoint and many other Right Sector members as suspects in GPU investigation in killings and wounding the police on the Maidan.
However, the wound locations of the three killed Maidan protesters in the 3D model do not match the wound locations in the forensic medical examinations of the bodies and clothes and locations of appearing bullet holes in shields and a helmet of these protesters right after they were shot.
For instance, according to forensic medical examination, Ihor Dmytriv was shot in the “right side surface” and the “left side surface” of the torso “from the right to the left, from the top to the bottom, and a little from the front to the back” with the entry wound 20.5cm higher than the exit wound.
A Maidan victims’ lawyer visually demonstrated at the trial that these wounds locations of were in the right and left sides.
In the video of their examination of Dmytriv right after his shooting, Maidan medics also show such locations of his wounds with no wounds visible in the front area, contrary to the 3D model.
Several Maidan protesters and medics pointed to snipers there shortly before and after these three protesters were killed.
Cover-Up and Stonewalling It is striking that almost eight years after one of the best documented cases of the mass murder in history, there is not a single person convicted or under arrest for the Maidan massacre of the protesters and the police.
The prosecution did not charge anyone for wounding 77 protesters, or almost half of all wounded protesters on February 20, after the investigation determined that they were not shot from the Berkut positions but from other sectors, which implies Maidan-controlled areas.
The Prosecutor General Office has been headed by Maidan politicians or close allies of the Maidan presidents of Ukraine and President Zelensky and the investigation of the massacre was under control of Maidan government leaders from the start.
Two factions of main Maidan parties blocked creation of a parliamentary commission concerning Maidan massacre during the Poroshenko presidency.
The failed investigation, the prosecution, and to a large extent trial are consistent with cover-up and stonewalling of the investigation by the Turchynov, Poroshenko, and Zelensky governments and the investigation by the Prosecutor General Office, the State Bureau of Investigations, and the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
The law also prohibited investigation of the Maidan participants for such crimes and specified that such evidence that was already collected had to be destroyed.
Two out of five Berkut policemen, who were arrested for several years and tried for the Maidan massacre on February 20 were released by the trial judges because of the lack of evidence.
All Berkut policemen were released and exchanged to Donbas separatists by a Kyiv court on an order of President Zelensky within a several months of the expected verdict.
A Ukrainian journalist, who headed in 2014 the civic council of GPU, stated that the Minister of Internal Affairs of Ukraine, who was a member of the Maidan leadership, was involved in transferring the Berkut special company commander from Ukraine.
The GPU investigation denied that there were snipers in Maidan-controlled buildings and did not investigate them.
The Berkut policemen on the ground shooting openly from Kalashnikov’s were not snipers by any definition.
The GPU initially stated in March 2014 that its investigation identified snipers who massacred the Maidan protesters, identified their locations, and seized their weapons, and that foreigners were investigated in the involvement of the massacre.
However, the heads of the Prosecutor General Office, the Security Service of Ukraine, and the Ministry of Internal Affairs reversed these statements without any rationale offered and announced during their join press conference in April 2014 that the special Berkut company massacred the Maidan protesters.
The Prosecutor General Office reversed without any explanations their own previous investigation findings that at least three protesters were killed from the Hotel Ukraina and 10 others were also killed from significant heights and charged the Berkut policemen with their killings.
Similarly, the GPU charged an Omega sniper and an Omega machine gunner with killing one protester each even though it previously charged and tried the Berkut policemen for killing these two protesters.
However, government forensic examinations presented at the Berkut trial, testimonies of protesters, who were next to them and witnesses killings of these two protesters, and videos of their killings show that it was physically impossible to shoot them from Omega and Berkut positions in front of them.
The courts released both Omega members because of the lack of evidence even before their trials.
The Maidan massacre trial judges refused requests of self-reported Georgian members of Maidan sniper groups to testify at the Maidan massacre trial by video links from Belarus.
The Prosecution General Office of Ukraine claimed that these Georgians were fake, and Maidan victims lawyers called them “actors” and denied that they even visited Ukraine even though they provided their real names and aliases, passports, plane tickets to Ukraine, videos, photos, and other evidence corroborating their identities and their visits to Ukraine.
Armenian and Belarusian government agencies confirmed identities of some of these Georgians.
Nadia Savchenko stated that people from the armed group that she saw arriving on the Maidan are in the Ukrainian parliament and that she saw as one of Maidan leaders brought the snipers to the Hotel Ukraina and that she saw shooting from this hotel.
A Right Sector sponsor and a leader during the Maidan massacre said that he and other Right Sector activists found and photographed three positions of snipers and their exit routes in the Maidan-controlled buildings, and one of the snipers found there was released by Maidan leaders.
Several Maidan activists said that they witnessed that some snipers were captured by Maidan protesters, in particular, in the Hotel Ukraina but were evacuated by Maidan leaders and then disappeared.
Davyd Zhvania, a former associate of President Poroshenko and the head of the parliamentary committee during the Maidan, stated that the Maidan leaders, whom he named in 45 his videos, “arranged” the Maidan massacre.
He said that then Maidan opposition leaders had blood on their hands and wanted to seize power in Ukraine.
He stated that the Maidan leaders knew in advance about the Maidan massacre, in particular, shooting at the police, and called their members of the parliament before the massacre not to go to the Maidan so that they won’t be killed.
Similarly, a public statement by a Maidan member of the parliament that one of “titushky” leaders, who was involved in killing of a journalist on February 19, worked for a business of leading Maidan activists and that they knew about the massacre in advance also was not been investigated.
Neo-Nazi C14 leader and members took refuge in the Canadian Embassy shortly before the Maidan massacre and stayed there during the massacre, and one of its ex-leaders stated that the C14 leader knew about the massacre in advance.
The same concerns a statement of the Estonian foreign affairs minister telling the EU foreign affairs chief in an intercepted phone conversation about a Maidan medics leader’s statement that both police and protesters were shot by the same “snipers” because their wounds had the same distinctive features.
Two Ukrainian writers in their book quoted a Maidan leader from far-right Svoboda and a the deputy head of the parliament from Svoboda saying that a Western representative before the massacre told them and other Maidan leaders that the Western governments would turn on Yanukovych if casualties among protesters would reach 100.
Ukrainian media revealed in 2019 that Kyiv prosecutors during their investigation found that killers of two traffic policemen during the Maidan massacre were among Maidan snipers.
These killers received phone calls from prominent female and male parliament deputies from one 46 of Maidan parties after killing these policemen during a traffic stop.
The investigation after these findings was transferred to the police controlled by the same party and completely stalled.
The female deputy description matches Tetiana Chornovol, a former far right activist, who was presented as a Maidan hero and a victim.
But she was put under house arrest and then released by the court and the trial has not began in this case.
The GPU investigation failed to determine bullet trajectories with help of forensic ballistic experts even after the Maidan massacre trial ordered such examinations, specifically to determine if these trajectories were from the Maidan-controlled buildings.
The investigation, with some exceptions, instead of ballistic experts used complex forensic examinations by medics to determine sectors of fire without on-site visits and any measurements and explanations provided.
Unexplained reversals of testimonies of many wounded protesters concerning snipers in the Maidan-controlled buildings and areas at the Maidan massacre trial compared to their testimonies previously provided to the investigation are consistent with cover-up.
The same concerns unexplained reversals of forensic examinations of bullets and directions of wounds of protesters a few weeks before the investigation submitted the case to a court for the trial.
The completely different findings of the new ballistic examinations that protesters were killed by bullets from specific Berkut Kalashnikovs reversed findings of some 40 pervious forensic ballistic examinations, including computer-based ones.
Synchronized content analysis of the 47 videos of the Berkut police and several such killed and wounded protesters along with locations and directions of wounds in forensic medical examination, testimonies of eyewitnesses among Maidan protesters, and on-site investigative experiments by government ballistic experts show that Maidan protesters were shot from Maidan-controlled buildings and could not have been physically shot from the Berkut positions in spite of the reports of matching bullets.
Key pieces of forensic evidence of the massacre on February 20 disappeared when it was under the Maidan opposition or Maidan government control or when it was in the possession of the Maidan government investigation without anyone responsible identified and prosecuted.
Such evidence includes almost all shields and helmets of killed and wounded protesters since bullet holes in them or their absence could easily identify locations of the shooters.
Several trees with bullets and/or bullet holes were cut in the Maidan protesters massacre area and in the Berkut barricade areas after the massacre, and the prosecution admitted this three years afterwards.
The first Prosecutor General of Ukraine under Zelensky said that the investigation of the Maidan massacre and other Maidan crimes was sabotaged and was organized in such way that it did not find who ordered these crimes.
He stated that a part of materials disappeared during this 48 investigation.
He questioned as to why the Berkut members, who were charged with the Maidan massacre, were imprisoned for four years without a verdict.
Videos and their own admissions showed the involvement of Chornovol and far right Maidan activists in this arson attack.
But until February 2020, the Prosecutor General Office of Ukraine investigated his death as a result of a fire and not an arson attack.
A leader of a Maidan organization and its members were revealed and investigated by the Prosecutor General Office for evacuating and hiding firearms of the special Berkut company charged with the massacre of the protesters on February 20.
The landscape, the street, and trees on the site of the massacre would be almost completely changed into a park and a new Maidan massacre museum.
This would make physically impossible for the investigation to finally conduct on-site investigative experiments to determine bullet trajectories.
Investigations of the massacres of the police and the protesters were separated even though they happened on the same days and in the same places.
There were no forensic examinations comparisons of bullets extracted from bodies of the police and the protesters in spite of various evidence that they were shot by same groups of snipers.
Its fate became uncertain after the exchange of the five Berkut policemen to separatists by President Zelensky.
Several attacks by 49 the neo-Nazi C14 and other far right groups disrupted and threatened the trial.
There is no such evidence of systematic cover-up by the Yanukovych government leaders and Berkut members.
The Yanukovych treason trial revealed various evidence that he fled Ukraine following several associations attempts by Maidan forces, including the far right.
He and his Internal Troops commander volunteered to testify via video links about the massacre at the trial.
Two of the Berkuts, who were exchanged to separatists, voluntarily returned from the separatist-controlled Donbas in order to continue to participate in their trial.
Like Berkut policemen openly staying in Ukraine and not hiding or leaving Ukraine after the Maidan massacre until they were arrested and charged with the mass murder, these actions do not suggest cover-up or stonewalling of the investigation on their part.
There is also certain evidence of involvement of the far-right Svoboda or Svobodalinked activist and bot or troll accounts in the cover-up of Maidan massacre perpetrators and evidence.
Several dozens of identical or nearly identical English-language accounts and pages on all major social media (Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, VKontakte, YouTube, Redditt, etc. and various forums, such as Ukrainska Pravda forum with the name of the author or fake names, denounced the author as a “falsifier of the Maidan massacre and modern Ukrainian history” and claimed that the author falsified the evidence of that Maidan protesters were massacred by the Maidan snipers.
Such social behavior is also unauthentic compared to typical social media users.
The text of comments posted by Svyatoslav Gut, a far-right immigrant activist linked to Svoboda, under Ukrainska pravda articles concerning the Maidan massacre investigation using his personal Facebook account is basically identical to the idiosyncratic text of these social media accounts and online forums and bot and troll comments.
They call the author the falsifier of the Maidan massacre and ask to Google such phrase.
The first name of Svyatoslav Gut, the Chicago location, and age match the aliases, such as Slavw and Slav70, the Chicago IP location, and the age of the creator of these multiple social media accounts and pages and posts in the online forums, the Ukrainian media, and Wikipedia.
The person with the same alias used “scientific anti-Semitism” to justify the OUN-led pogrom and mass killing of Jews in Lviv during the Nazi occupation in 1941.70 The same person also created or edited hundreds of Wikipedia pages in Ukrainian and English concerning the far-right OUN, the UPA, and Nazi Germany and included similar justifications and apologetics of their mass murders of Jews, Poles, Russians, and Ukrainians.
He describes himself as an immigrant from Lviv, and he apparently has bachelor degree in accounting and also a certain background in software.
Such evidence includes testimonies of the absolute majority of wounded protesters, several dozen prosecution and dozens of defense witnesses.
The Prosecutor General Office investigation Determined that about half of Maidan protesters were wounded from other locations than the Berkut police positions on the ground.
Since the investigation and the trial did not reveal any “third force” snipers, this means that the Maidan snipers with the involvement of the elements of the Maidan leadership perpetrated this massacre.
This is consistent with various evidence, such as videos of Maidan snipers in the Maidan-controlled buildings and areas during the massacre and testimonies by 14 self-admitted members of Maidan sniper groups.
Videos presented at the trial confirmed that specific times of shooting of specific protesters in the absolute majority of cases did not coincide with times of shooting by the Berkut policemen and directions of their shooting.
This visual evidence alone shows beyond any doubt that the Berkut policemen, who are charged with the massacre of the protesters, did not massacre at least the absolute majority of killed and wounded Maidan protesters on February 20.
The videos made public during the trial, such as the Belgian VRT TV video, provided evidence that 52 the Maidan protesters were lured and then massacred by snipers from the Maidan-controlled buildings, such as the Hotel Ukraina.
Forensic medical examinations determined that the absolute majority of the protesters were shot from steep directions from the sides and back.
This is consistent with locations of the Maidan-controlled buildings and areas and inconsistent with the locations of the Berkut police on the ground.
Forensic examinations of the bullet holes by the government experts for the Maidan massacre trial suggested that Berkut policemen were mostly shooting above the Maidan protesters into the Hotel Ukraina, which was the main location of the snipers.
Killing and wounding of a small minority of protesters by the Berkut police, in particular, by ricochets or in crossfire with snipers in the Maidan-controlled buildings, cannot be excluded because of the lack of publicly available data or because of contradictory data.
But their killing and wounding in the same locations and at the same time as other protesters suggest that most of them were also likely shot by the Maidan snipers.
The trials and investigations have not revealed any evidence that Yanukovych or his law enforcement ministers and commanders ordered the massacre of the Maidan protesters.
There are various indications of stonewalling of the Maidan massacre investigations and the trials by the Maidan governments and far right organizations and the cover-up of much of the key evidence of the massacre.
The investigation denied presence of any snipers in the Maidancontrolled buildings in spite of the overwhelming evidence.
The Maidan massacre investigation and trial were stonewalled, charges against Berkut policemen and later two Omega members 53 were trumped up, and much of the evidence destroyed in order to cover-up involvement of Maidan leaders and snipers in this mass killing.
No one was charged with attempted murders of almost half of the wounded protesters on February 20.
Such revelations from the Maidan massacre trials and investigations corroborate findings of the previous academic studies that this massacre was a false flag mass killing with involvement of elements of Maidan leadership and the far right and that it included the massacre of the police.
The puzzling misrepresentation of the Maidan massacre, its investigation, and the trial by Western governments and the media requires further research concerning reasons for such misrepresentation.
The revelations from the trials and investigations which confirm that the Maidan massacre of the protesters and the police was a false flag operation which involved Maidan snipers and elements of the Maidan leadership have major implications for understanding not only this crucial case of political violence in Ukraine.
They have major implications for understanding the “Euromaidan” and the origins of the violent conflict in Ukraine and the conflicts between Russia and Ukraine and between Russia and the West.
The revelations from the Maidan massacre trials and investigations show that the narratives promoted by the Ukrainian and Western governments and with some notable exceptions the media that the Maidan protesters were massacred by government snipers and/or the Berkut police are false.
This massacre started an armed conflict in Ukraine that led to the Ukrainian government overthrow and escalated into the secession and annexation of Crimea by Russia, the civil war in Donbas, Russian military interventions in Crimea and Donbas, and major protracted conflicts between Ukraine and Russia and the West and Russia.
United States Hegemony, Proxy Wars, Terrorism and Humanitarian Catastrophes.
There was a Maidan protester playing his trumpet during the Maidan massacre.
He came under live ammunition fire from the snipers in the Maidan-controlled Hotel Ukraina.
The same far right activist under the same alias is also involved in running Facebook and other social media pages denouncing Wiktor Poliszczuk, a Polish Canadian researcher of the OUN and the UPA, and Anatolii Sharij, a popular Ukrainian blogger and opposition party leader living in exile in Spain.
