Pursuant to notice, we meet today to mark up two bipartisan resolutions.
Without objection, all members may have 5 days to submit statements for the record and any extraneous materials on today’s business that you want to include there.
As you were all notified yesterday, we intend to consider today’s measures en bloc.
House Resolution 348, supporting the right of the people of Ukraine to freely elect their government and determine their future.
IN THE HOUSE OF EEPKESENTATRiES July 7, 2015 Mr CiCILLINB (for tumself, Mr SiBES, Mr EnGEL, Mr KOYCE, Mr UErTCH, Mr Lowbnthal, Mr Bbekdan F, BoYn.E of Pennsylvania, Mr DesJakivVIS, Mr Israel.
SLAUGiiTBit, Ms, EiiANiiEL of Florida, Mr Maiuno, Mr Eiuble, Mr CONNOTJ.T, Mr MoGoveb.n, Mr Btibgess, Mr TCtnztnoeb, of Illinois, Mrs, Bllmbks of Xortli Carolina, Mr Di'NCAN of South Carolina, Mr Kokita, Mr PvBBD, Mr Bliimbnaueb, Mr Webbb of Texas, Mr Poe of Texas, Mr YOllO, Mr Mbbks, Ms.
Ixabtuh, and Mr Cabnet) submitted the following resolution; which was referred to the Committee on ITircign Affaire RESOLUTION Supporting the right of tlie people of Ukraine to freely eleet their government and determine their future.
Offered by Mr Cicilline of Rhode Island Strike the first clause of the preamble.
IN THE HOUSE OF KEPKESENTATH^S July 9, 2015 Mr Smith of Xew Jersey (for hiinself, Mr DeutCH, Mrs.
And after recognizing myself and the ranking member, I will be pleased to recognize any member seeking recognition to speak on either of these measures.
So first, I want to thank Representative Cicilline for introducing this resolution and for his commitment to the people of Ukraine.
In 2014, Mr Cicilline, along with Ranking Member Engel and committee members Poe and Lowenthal and Frankel and me, traveled to Ukraine.
We traveled to as far east as we could fly, to Dnipropetrovsk, which is the Russian-speaking part of Ukraine, and we heard the stories from the perspectives of the local Russian-speaking Ukranians about this conflict.
And what they told us was that Russia was trying to recruit every skinhead and malcontent and bring them there.
So those with a Muscovite accent, we are arresting them, we are holding them in the brig until the cessation of hostilities.
But they said what we are really concerned about is not these Russian interlopers, what we are worried about are the Russian forces, when they take the patches off, and Russian Army.
So what we need are anti-tank weapons, what we need is the ability to buy equipment that if they attack Dnipropetrovsk, which is on the border of Luhansk, if they attack us in the Donetsk region, then we will be able to defend.
And today, Russian aggression against Ukraine remains a daily reality along that border region.
Moscow continues to provide weapons and support to the separatists who control large areas of eastern Ukraine.
They feel they can deal with the separatists, but they feel that their problem is the regular Russian Army that is in that theater.
The so-called Minsk agreement lays out a series of steps to bring peace to the region, including holding local elections in Ukraine.
But they will not be held in those areas of eastern Ukraine that are controlled by Russian-led separatists because free and fair elections are not possible in Luhansk and Donetsk.
However, the elections will go forward in the rest of the country with independent observers to ensure they meet international standards, and this resolution strongly supports the right of the people of Ukraine to freely elect their government, urges the administration to expedite assistance for reforms to promote free and fair elections, and condemns efforts by outside forces, especially the Russian Government, from interfering in those elections.
And lastly, we turn to House Resolution 354, regarding the safety and security of Jewish communities in Europe.
The horrific loss of life that occurred in the Paris and Copenhagen attacks highlights the urgent need for European governments to better protect their Jewish communities.
This timely resolution urges those governments in Europe to consider several commonsense steps aimed at improving the safety of Jewish citizens there, such as establishing partnerships between law enforcement and Jewish community groups in order to improve security plans, and including training and the law enforcement response to anti-Semitic violence.
And I thank Congressman Chris Smith of New Jersey for authoring this important measure and for his long-time commitment to promoting religious freedom around the world.
I know we are short on time, so I will enter my full statement into the record and issue it to the press.
But I fully support these measures, and am particularly happy that our committee once again is advancing good bipartisan legislation, as we have done so often.
And I thank you for bringing H Res. before the committee for markup and for your leadership on human rights issues in general and on combating anti-Semitism in particular.
Mr Chairman, violent anti-Semitic attacks between 2013 and 2014 doubled, and in some European countries actually quadrupled.
H Res. focuses on essential actions needed to prevent, mitigate, and respond to deadly anti-Semitic attacks like those in Paris, Copenhagen, and Brussels.
There are excellent examples of this in the United States, the United Kingdom, and in France.
The resolution highlights the importance of European governments supporting several key assessments and adjusting their strategies and efforts to combat anti-Semitism accordingly.
It emphasizes the importance of European governments developing public awareness and suspicious activity campaigns like “if you see something, say something” initiatives, helping Jewish communities developing baseline safety standards, and integrating efforts to combat violent extremism and ones to combat anti-Semitism as appropriate.
Res. stresses relevant training for law enforcement, implementing declarations, decisions, and commitments related to anti-Semitism in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the OSCE, and ensuring European governments have mandated and resourced senior officials to lead their anti-Semitism efforts.
Finally, the resolution affirms support for the mandate of the United States Special Envoy to Monitor and Combat Anti-Semitism, a position that I actually authored the amendment to create some years 30 ago, and urges the Secretary of State to continue strong United States reporting on anti-Semitism.
Res. is a blueprint for actions that are critical for the safety and security of Jewish communities in Europe and for our government’s engagement with our European allies to combat antiSemitism.
The specific actions recommended here are based on consultations with leading security experts who work closely with European Jewish communities.
It is cosponsored by 84 Members of Congress, including 23 members of this committee.
All of my fellow co-chairs of the bipartisan Task Force on Combating anti-Semitism are original cosponsors, including Ranking Member Eliot Engel, Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, Ted Deutch, who are members of this committee, and Nita Lowey, Kay Granger, Peter Roskam, and Steve Israel.
Chairman Royce and Ranking Member Engel, for your strong support and cosponsorship of House Resolution 348, and thank you for scheduling a markup on both of these bills today.
House Res. signals strong congressional support for free elections in Ukraine.
I thank my many colleagues on the committee who have signed on as cosponsors as well.
The democratic and economic development of Ukraine in the face of Russian aggression remains one of the most vital efforts the United States could undertake to combat Russian intransigence and show our unwavering commitment to promoting democracy and human rights around the world.
The illegal and forceful occupation of Crimea and the ongoing Russian support for separatists in eastern Ukraine are an affront to international law and diplomacy.
The Minsk II agreement was an historic step toward potentially ending the violence and unrest in the country.
And it is now upon the governments of Ukraine, Russia, the United States, and our European allies as implementing partners to ensure its successful execution.
A vital part of that implementation will be to hold free and fair elections throughout Ukraine, including under the terms of the agreement eventually in the Donbas region controlled by Russianled separatists.
Ukraine has local elections scheduled for most of the country except some separatist-controlled areas for October 25.
This resolution demonstrates this Congress’s unwavering commitment to supporting the right of the people of Ukraine to freely elect their government and determine their future.
It condemns any Russian attempts to interfere in Ukraine’s elections in any way, including through intimidation, violence, or coercion.
During Ukraine’s last elections, these tactics were used to prevent Ukranians from voting in certain regions.
And any actions undermining these elections must be met with swift and certain international condemnation.
At this delicate juncture in Ukraine’s history, it is essential that the United States and our European allies continue to demonstrate steadfast support 31 for Ukranian territorial integrity, sovereignty, and the right of the Ukranian people to participate in a free and fair electoral process.
Again, I thank my colleagues for their support and urge them to support this resolution.
I want to commend you for bringing this legislation before the committee today.
Russian aggression continues to violate Ukraine’s political and economic sovereignty.
If stability and peace is ever to be reestablished in Ukraine, it is vital that the people of Ukraine have the freedom to choose their own representatives, as well as take the necessary steps to ensure that their own future, without the coercion and vicious tactics orchestrated by Putin, is possible.
As the shining example of freedom and democracy, America has a duty to support the Ukranians seeking constitutional reform and free and fair elections.
This measure recognizes those realities and reasserts our support for the Ukranian people to freely elect their own government.
And I want to thank you and the ranking member for adding H Res. to this markup.
This committee has spoken loudly about not only Ukraine, but about Crimea as an integral part of the Ukraine, and that we are not conceding.
And I am glad to say that the nonrecognition act on the Ukraine has in fact been incorporated into the defense authorization bill.
It is vital that we speak firmly and we back it up with sanctions and other measures so that Vladimir Putin never gets the wrong impression about our acquiescence in a violent military action that suWerted the sovereignty of another country.
And I think it is really important this committee continues to speak with one voice and as firmly as possible on a bipartisan basis.
So I thank Mr Cicilline in particular for his leadership on this resolution, and look forward to voting for it.
And thank you, Mr Chairman, and you, Mr Engel, the ranking member, for your leadership as well.
Well, I hate to be the skunk at the lawn party here, but let me just note that I do support the basic goal of this legislation, which is to reaffirm that we believe as Americans that the democratic process should be followed in Ukraine, and that we are upset, and we know the great challenge there that they have.
We want to end the conflict and upheaval that is going on that is 32 so detrimental to all of the people of Ukraine and destabilizing to Europe.
Unfortunately, we can’t seem to go on record doing that without again giving Russia a kick in the pants, and basically ignoring what started the destabilization of Ukraine in the first place.
Basically, we blame it, yes, Yanukovych was president, whereas he fled the country.
This whole episode that has destabilized Ukraine started when violence, instigated by internal Ukranian opposition, as well — and they were in coordination and consultation with other foreign powers, meaning our European friends — created violence, a violent situation that led to the destabilization of an elected government.
There was huge violence that was caused when he made a major policy decision.
Instead of letting the election take care of it, they had massive, not just demonstrations, but we are talking about massive violence.
And I know that there has been an effort to try to make, oh, no, that was just Yanukovych attacking the demonstrators.
We now have every evidence, I met with a group of Ukranians just a couple nights ago, clearly, what we have was violence against an elected government.
And Mr Smith was there to see that Yanukovych was elected in a fair election.
And instead of waiting for the next election, our European friends had to collude with forces inside of Ukraine to create a destabilization of an elected government.
Well, yes, when Yanukovych fled and the elected government was overthrown, the fact is the Russians did act, and I opposed that.
And yes, we need to call upon — what we have here is to make sure that we are on the side of free elections, and that we want to help the Ukranians.
But then we condemn the part of outside forces, specifically the Government of Russia, ignoring the fact that other governments have been involved in overthrowing an elected government.
Either we should leave that out or we should just say “attempts by outside forces” and leave out this little jab at Russia.
We are not going to make anything better by continuing to jab Russia rather than looking at ways we can cooperate to end the conflict in Ukraine.
Again, let’s reach out — that is what happened in the Minsk agreement, which the chairman already mentioned.
Let’s work with them to see how we implement the plan rather than kicking them in the pants.
Well, I am going to be opposing this, but I do think the actual goal of this, which is to try to say we are behind free elections and want Ukraine to come out of it, that certainly is a worthy goal.
It is going to actually achieve the opposite, because in Russia it will be 33 looked at as a slap in the face.
So with that said, I stand in opposition, and I stand in favor of the spirit of what you are trying to accomplish, but this will not achieve your goal and go in the opposite direction.
And first, I want to just say in terms of House Resolution 348, that I found our trip to Ukraine was very enlightening, and really highlighted the necessity for the free and fair elections in order for Ukraine to regain its civility.
As to House Resolution 354, and Mr Smith, I do thank you again for that, and I do want to make a few remarks.
Because I want to add my concern for the safety and security of Jewish communities in Europe.
The rise of anti-Semitic incidents throughout Europe in recent years is deeply troubling.
In the past 2 years, terrorists have murdered Jews in the capital cities of Belgium, Denmark, and France.
Jews and Jewish institutions, synagogues, and schools across Europe have suffered numerous violent attacks.
As a result of this threatening environment, according to polls done by the ADL and other reputable organizations, more than 40 percent of Jews in Belgium, France, and Hungary are considering emigration.
Journalists, scholars, and politicians are debating whether there can be a future for the Jewish community in Europe, where Jews are afraid to attend events in holy sites, and where again, according to ADL, 20 percent of European Jews have experienced at least one incident of anti-Semitic physical attack or harassment.
Fortunately, educated observers believe that today’s events in Europe are not analogous to the 1930s Germany.
Then, the hatred, the persecution and extermination of Jews was state-sponsored.
In contrast, today’s leaders across Europe are working to stem the tide of anti-Semitism, and key European leaders have spoken out against anti-Semitism and have taken concrete actions to fight it.
With that said, however, I agree with those who believe that this is a defining moment for Europe.
Our European partners’ and allies’ ability to confront anti-Semitism will ultimately impact the very essence of the character of their nations.
And as the French prime minister stated, if Jews flee in large numbers, the soul of the French Republic is at risk.
We must support European governments, law enforcement agencies, and other entities to bolster Jewish security and preparedness, tighten communications with Jewish communities, and combat violent extremism broadly with counterradicalization and education.
And ultimately, helping Europe stem the rising tide of anti-Semitism means helping European nations to fulfill the principles of democracy, human dignity, openness, and pluralism, and the noble principals upon which these nations were founded.
I appreciate the words of my friend from California, Mr Rohrabacher, but I see this completely different.
The Russian bear invaded Georgia, gobbled up one-third of the territory, and it is still in Georgia.
Still hungry for more land, it went into Crimea, took it, claimed it as its own, and then still on the move, the bear went into eastern Ukraine, where it is now.
And we all know that Russia now is in Syria, based on some faulty excuse.
This resolution says the Ukranians will decide what their government is going to be, not the Russians.
Contrary to what Putin said, the Napoleon of Siberia, Ukraine should decide about Ukraine, not him.
So I think it is a good thing that the United States, a country that believes in self-determination and democracy, support the Ukraine and the Ukranians in their quest for really not just elections, but to be rid of the invaders from Russia.
I think we ought to do more for Ukraine than the United States has done.
Besides sending them meals ready to eat, we ought to help them defend their own sovereignty against Russia, which is another issue.
America stands for democracy and self-determination even for Ukranians.
So I totally support it, I am glad I am a cosponsor, and I appreciate the chair and ranking member bringing this up before the committee for a vote.
I disagree with a portion of what Dana Rohrabacher had to say for reasons everybody else has already expressed.
He is right on the history, and that is a democratic elected government reneged on a giant promise, and instead of distributing campaign leaflets there was a regime-threatening presence of large numbers of people.
Woe be to our state and Federal Governments if 1 million people will demand extraconstitutional governmental changes each time politicians renege on a promise.
There is one part of the resolution that I think we can all agree on, and it may mean more if read in an American context.
We say we strongly support the right of the people of Ukraine to freely elect their government.
And at the same time, we have a Federal system here in which people are free to elect their own governor.
And that has served us well, and perhaps would serve as a model for the Ukraine.
And certainly when Americans say in a resolution “free to elect their own government,” most ordinary 35 Americans would think that that would include electing your own governor.
So I understand they are going to have their election and they have not agreed to permit their governors to be elected.
But there are certainly some in Kiev who think that the local governor should be appointed.
And I have urged our Ukranian friends, especially in a country with such regional differences, just as our country has regional differences.
I will reclaim my time because I want to talk about the anti-Semitism resolution.
We would have more credibility talking to the world about anti-Semitism if it wasn’t so prevalent on at least a few American campuses.
On some of our campuses, federally funded in large part, you are told that you are not qualified to serve in student government unless you agree that Israel should be abolished and the Middle East should be ethnically cleansed of Jews.
Now, we do have a civil rights law, and Title VI requires that those on campus not face anti-Semitism.
But for anti-Semitism to be fought, you need a definition of anti-Semitism.
When we criticize other countries for allowing anti-Semitic behavior or engaging in anti-Semitic behavior, that is the definition we use.
And I would hope that members of this committee would join me in writing to the United States Department of Education and saying it certainly undercuts our foreign policy when we tell other countries this is the definition of anti-Semitism, you should not allow — or you should protect Jews from this anti-Semitic behavior, if we can’t get the United States Department of Education to agree with the same definition.
For us to have any credibility in the world on this issue, the United States Department of Education needs to enforce the law.
Hearing no further requests for recognition, the question occurs — oh, Mr Trott.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and Ranking Member Engel, for bringing these two resolutions forward.
And I hope that Russia is irritated by this resolution, but I suspect they will be just largely amused.
And I think calling attention to the problem of Jewish safety and security is necessary.
And I just want to go on the record as also strongly supporting H Res.4.
Hearing no further requests, the question occurs on the items considered en bloc.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it, and the measures considered en bloc are agreed to.
And the staff is directed to make any technical and conforming changes.
Also, without objection, the Chair is authorized to seek House consideration of those measures under suspension of the rules.
I thank Ranking Member Engel and all of our committee members for their contributions and assistance to today’s markup.
Res.4, Expressing the sense of the House of Representatives regarding the safety and security of Jewish communities in Europe.
By Direction of the Chairman The Commitlec on Foreign Affairs seeks to make Us facilities accessible to persons with disahilities.
If you are in need of special accommodations, please call 202/225-5021 at least four business in Ktiivtvice ^ the event, whenever practicable.
Questions with regard to special accommadalions in general {including avcnlakilU}’ ofCommitlee malerials in alterna/ive formafs and assisHve lislening devices) wtzj’ he directed to the Committee.
Subject Veas Navs Present Not Votina: TIME SCHEDULED TO RECONA^ENE or TIME ADJOURNED 11:55 Doug Auderson, Creneral 40 House Committee on Foreign Affairs Fin.
I Committee Markup Present MEltBER X Edward R Royce, CA X Christopher H Smith, NJ Tleana Ros-Lehtmen, FL X Dana Rohrabacher, CA X Steve Chabot, OH Joe Wilson, SC Michael T McCaul, TX X Ted Poe, TX X Matt Salmon, AZ Darrell Tssa, CA Tom Marino, PA Jeff Duncan, SC X Mo Brooks.
CA Randy Weber, TX Scott Periy, PA Ron DeSantis, FL Mark Meadows, NC X TedYoho.FL X Curt Clawson.
FL Scott, DesJarlais, TN Reid Ribble, WI X Dave Trott, Ml Lee Zeldin, NY X Dan Donovan, NY Prese\t Member X Eliot L, Engel, NY X Brad Sherman, CA GregoiyW Meeks, NY Albio Sires.
NJ X Gerald E Connolly, VA Theodore E DeuLch, FL Brian Higgins, NY Karen Bass, CA William Keating, MA X David Cicilline, RT Alan Grayson, FL Ami Bera, CA Alan S Lowenlhd.
The items considered en bloc were agreed to by voice vote, and were ordered favorably reported by unanimous consent.
By unanimous consent, the Chair was authorized to seek House consideration of either of the measures agreed to under suspension of the rules.
It’s good, as always, to see our committee w'orking togetha’ to advance legislation and get it to the House floor.
Let me start with H Res.8, and let me thank Mr Cicillinc for drafting this measure.
Over the past year, we’ve spoken a lot about Ukraine in this committee.
We want to see a successful democratic transition. . . we want Ukraine’s territorial integrity to ber^tored... and w’e w'ant to deter Russia from further aggression.
Tliis measure again signals the support of the United Slates for the people of Ukraine to chart their own future.
We all welcome the news that the ceasefire in Ukraine finally seems to be holding.
First of all, while the upcoming elections are important, all of Ukraine’s citizens will not have their voices heard.
Only areas under Kyiv’s control will be casting ballots — and Russia has a history of involving itself in Uki-aine’s elections.
We’re hopeful that President Putin will abide by his commitment not to interfere with this vote.
And we should have no illusions that it will deter President Putin’s aggre.ssian.
So even as we reaffirm our support for Ukraine and hold out hope that that Minsk will keep the peace, we need to keep a watchful eye on Russia and he prepared to do more if this crisis flares up again.
Next, I’m glad that we’re taking up H.Res.4, and I’m proud to be a lead cosponsor of this measure.
With this resolution, we're expressing our concern about the safety of Europe’s Jewish communities. . . calling on governments to do more to get at the root causes of anti-Semitism. . . and encouraging stronger partnerships tetween governments and communities to prepare against violence and respond effectively if it does take place.
But as we all know, antiSemitism, that ancient haired, ha.s continued smoldering through the centuries.
Week after week, we hear reports of new anti-Semitic attacks... the vandalism of the Babi Yar Holocaust site in Kyiv... the targeting of the Great Synagogue in Copenhagen... and of course the unfathomable attack in Paris last January.
And we’d be foolish to dismiss this surge in anii-Semiiism as the work of a few violent, fringe, individuals.
In countries like Hungary and Greece, we see anii-Semillc elements starting to work their way into political parties and governing bodies.
It wasn’t even a century ago that we heard thi.s canary in the coal mine.
And you can draw a straight line from early indifference and inMiion to the darkest chapter in human history.
The lessons of the Holocaust are seared in our collective consciousness.
Those lessons are tellings to throw water on this fire before it bums out of control.
We need grewer vigilance by law enforcement when Jewish communities in Europe are under threat.
We also need greater leadership from officials by speaking out against anti-Semitism.
We need stronger partnerships with Jewish communities to help them develop their own safety responses, community policing techniques, and information-sharing with government agencies.
And we need to foster cultures that respect diversity and don’t ostracize minority groups.
This resolution encourages those efforts, and 1 know this committee will continue to focus on combating the scourge of anti-Semitism.
