Putin is preparing a large-scale invasion of Ukraine, but in Kiev, this threat is underestimated.
Kyiv will almost certainly not resume in 2018 control over the areas of the Donbas, which are now under control of Russia.
Russia handed over $ 1 billion to Yanukovych for rejection of association with the EU ex-deputy of the State Duma.
Ukraine's accession to NATO to be considered based on country's defense reform progress.
Yanukovych's son financed the formation of ""DNR"" and ""LNR"" ex-deputy of the State Duma.
The Russian Federation has placed a very powerful military potential in the occupied Crimean territory.
Russian President Vladimir Putin can organize a large-scale invasion of Ukraine.
He added that while the Russian army is not yet ready for the invasion.
In other areas, they, for example, build new lines to the old warehouses to be able to pull out all their old armaments.
The colonel assumes that the invasion may not occur, since Putin is very unpredictable.
The Russian Federation will continue its military, political and economic campaign of destabilization against Ukraine.
The report also says that the conflict in the Donbas will continue in its present form, the offensive of each of the parties is unlikely.
Russia can carry out a large-scale invasion of Ukraine both from Belarus and the sea through Odesa.
Of course, if you lose Kyiv, it will be another game, is not it?"" he said.
Russia is not opposed to a UN peacekeeping mission throughout the territory of the occupied Donbas and intends to abandon the conflict.
According to him, the process of coordinating the peacekeeping mission in the Donbas came at the stage of determining the technical details.
At the same time, he focuses on the number of peacekeepers, which may indicate their placement throughout the Donbas.
As the ""Apostrophe"" reported, the United States spokesman for Ukraine, Kurt Walker, believes that to date, the Russian Federation does not rule out the possibility of deploying a UN peacekeeping mission across the entire Donbass, including the Russian-Ukrainian border.
It is noted that compared to the budget request for 2018, the proposed amount of assistance to Ukraine's security has been increased by $50 million.
The final volumes of assistance to Ukraine will be known already after the completion of the entire process of passing the document, which is now at an early stage, ""the press service of the Ukrainian Embassy in the United States said.
As previously reported, John McCain, chair of the United States Senate Committee on Armed Forces , believes that providing Ukraine with anti-tank missile systems Javelin will contribute to creating stable security conditions in the region.
According to Ponomariov, his acquaintances from the bodies of the Russian government, in particular from the environment of Deputy Prime Minister Igor Shuvalov, said that the task was to financially interest representatives of the ""family"" of Yanukovych.
Thus, Yanukovych's cousins, through his son Alexander, were transferred $1 billion from the Kremlin as a result of bonds transactions. -Recall that in the Obolonsky district court of Kyiv hear the case about the state treason of former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych.
During the next year, Russian intelligence agencies and government agencies can strengthen subversive cybercrime against the US, Western countries, and directly against Ukraine.
Such a forecast was made in a report on Tuesday by Director of National Intelligence Den Coats, reports Censor.NET with reference to Ukrinform.
In addition, the United States expects that Russian intelligence services will continue to test the strength of the vital infrastructure of the United States and allies, and will increase the misunderstandings between the United States, NATO and other partners.
Coats said during a hearing at the Senate Committee, Russia will continue to use elections and other democratic processes in the United States and the West as an opportunity to undermine democracy.
This document is aimed at promoting active cooperation between Ukraine and the United States in the field of cybersecurity in the face of Russian hybrid aggression; provides assistance to Ukraine in improving the strategy of cybersecurity, in particular, strengthening the protection of computer networks of state authorities, reducing Ukraine's dependence on Russian information and communication technologies, and promoting Ukraine's participation in information exchange programs.
According to the director's sister, he hopes that he will return to Ukraine in the framework of the exchange of prisoners.
A very heavy call came out, although the connection lasted only three minutes,""Kaplan wrote.
The city of Labitnangi is located on the northern polar circle on the left bank of the river Ob for 2663 thousand kilometers from Kyiv and 3075 kilometers from Simferopol.
Ukraine's NATO membership will be considered after the country implements the defense reform.
As reported by Censor.NET citing Interfax-Ukraine, NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg told a press conference in Brussels on Wednesday.
And I welcome that Ukraine has so clearly stated that their focus now is on reform, and then based on the progress they're making on reform, then of course the issue of membership will be assessed based on the progress Ukraine is making,"" he said.
So we'll continue to strengthen our partnership, we'll continue to work with Ukraine,"" NATO chief said.
Because in this world in a language that is understandable to your former to the president, he was made ""to bring"" that ""we have shipped you money, and you did not fulfill your obligations, so let's do something useful"", told Ponomariov.
Yanukovych remains a president, the country does not go to the EU, does not go to NATO, remains in the Russian sphere of influence.
And they said that this was precisely the result of the actions of the president, which he himself shook with his own hands. situation"", said Ponomariov.
Recall Ponomariov said during a questioning in court that Yanukovych and his cousins received from Russia $1 billion for refusing to sign an agreement from the association with the European Union.
Mayor of Odesa Hennadii Trukhanov arrived at Boryspil airport from Warsaw this morning.
A journalist for Skhemy project Natalie Sedletska wrote on social media, Censor.NET reports.
By the way, last time I saw him in Davos, where he came to meet with investors.
To their credit, the organizers of Ukraine House Davos did not let him into their office,"" he wrote on social media.
Passenger aircraft An-148 in Moscow region was crashed due to mistakes of the crew during flight preparation and in a freelance situation.
A preliminary analysis of parametric information showed that during the entire flight that ended in an accident, the heating of all three receivers of full pressure on the AN-148 was in the off state.
Join a single team at this stage lasted about 10 seconds, then stopped.
After about 50 seconds, at an altitude of about 2000 meters, this one-time team was registered again, with this time the speed from the MVP3 was larger and continued to increase, while the speed from the MVP1 continued to decrease.
After the second appearance of the specified one-time command , the crew shut off the autopilot.
The speed reading from the MVP1 continued to fall and after 34 seconds after the autopilot off, they began to equal 0.
At the time of the collision with the ground, the pitch angle of the dive was about 30 degrees, in 4-5 seconds before the crash in the plane began to develop right bank, which reached 25 degrees"", said in the report of the commission of the Interstate Aviation Committee.
We remind that the aircraft of the ""Saratov Airlines"" An-148 crashed on February 11 in the Ramenskoye area of ​​Moscow Region after leaving Domodedovo to Orsk.
Batkivshchyna leader Yulia Tymoshenko resorted to statistical manipulation during an interview with one of the Ukrainian TV channels.
According to Tsensor.NET, a video recording on which Tymoshenko voices the wrong figures is published online.
The politician reported a substantial increase in the national debt and said that it had occurred for four years.
At the same time, Tymoshenko held a printed chart in her hands, in which such an increase took place for 10 years in the period from 2008 to 2018.
Russia concentrated on the occupied Crimean territory a very powerful military potential.
It informs Tsenzor.NET with reference to the League, it was declared NSDC Secretary Oleksandr Turchynov Hromadske in an interview, answering the question whether there is a risk that Russia could attack from the Crimea to Ukraine.
In the Crimean placed particular offensive powerful, strategic aircraft, missiles that can carry and use nuclear weapons.
He believes that Ukraine should be ready to repulse the occupier in all directions.
Therefore, we must be able and willing to fight back in all directions, from south to north,"" said Turchinov.
On January 24, 2018, military anti-diversion training of Russian invaders and artillery units of the Army Corps of the Black Sea Fleet took place at the Angarsk range in Crimea.
The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine officially announced on February 20, 2014, the beginning of the temporary occupation of the Crimea and Sevastopol by Russia.
Key international organizations, including the General Assembly of the United Nations, condemned the actions of Russia and called the annexation and occupation of Crimea illegal.
For holding Moscow so-called elections with the participation of Crimea in 2016, parliament of Ukraine recognized the State Duma of Russia illegitimate.
Men's and women's curling tournaments started in Phoenchan at the 2018 Winter Olympics.
According to the ""Apostrophe"", in the first round, the Russian team serving in the women's tournament, suffered a devastating defeat from the UK with a score of 3:10.
The game started with a good ending performed by the British who earned three points.
Then one point was taken by Russians, but in the next two gigs three more stones were lost.
After that, the Russians, not believing in their strength, recognized the victory of the rivals for three decades until the end of the match.
