The leader of the Ukrainian terror force in the Crimea by the Russian FSB was arrested , has a confession.
His Name is Yevgeny Panov, born in 1977 in the town of Dneprovka , Zaporojie Region, Ukraine.
He has admitted to so-called Anti-terrorist operations in Eastern Ukraine from August 2014 to August 2015, participated, in the war against the separatists of Donbass.
He was recruited by the Ukrainian security service in Kiev for acts of sabotage in the Crimea, he said.
During his confession, he submitted the names of five other accomplices.
The FSB has recorded the interrogation, and the Russian news channel Rossiya'24 has sent the Video where I saw it.
The group also Sambul Alexei , and a guy whose name I don't know, but the Codename Deshikh module.
To the question, ""what is the Mission you have been ordered to go to the Crimea to perform, ""said Panov, ""our task was targets for Sabotage reconnoiter.
What we know for now, Poroshenko government sanction has commanded exported Terror against civilian facilities in the Crimea.
So he is a war criminal, one of the was brought of Obama, Merkel and co. to Power and is supported.
The Russian Ministry of foreign Affairs presented on Friday to the head of the EU Delegation in Moscow, Vygaudas Usackas, detailed evidence about the attempt of the Ukrainian Ministry of defense, terrorist attacks and acts of sabotage in the Crimea.
The Russian Prime Minister Dimitry Medvedev said, he excludes a termination of diplomatic relations with the Ukraine, if there is no other Option.
But, if there is no other Option to the Situation to influence, then the President may so-make a decision, ""Medvedev said in response to Kiev's attempt terrorist attacks in the Crimea.
The Prime Minister said he considered the subversive act in the Crimea as a crime against the Russian state and its population.
The FSB interception of Ukrainian sabotage groups attempting to infiltrate Crimea raise tensions.
Anyone who has been following Ukraine related news over the last few days will be aware of reports of Russian troop movements in Crimea, of a shoot out there between the Russian security forces and alleged Ukrainian infiltrators which left several people dead, and of claims that Ukrainian sabotage groups had attempted to infiltrate the peninsula.
It reported separate incidents involving three Ukrainian sabotage groups connected to the Main Intelligence Directorate of Ukraine’s Defence Ministry, shoot outs between FSB operatives and the Russian military and the Ukrainian military across the border line, and the deaths of one FSB operative and of one Russian soldier caught up in the shoot outs.
Other reports speak of the death of at least two Ukrainian infiltrators, and of the capture of several others, which claims however the FSB report does not confirm.
The FSB report does however speak of twenty improvised explosive devices containing more than 40 kilograms of TNT equivalent, ammunition, fuses, antipersonnel and magnetic bombs, grenades and the Ukrainian armed forces’ standard special weapons being found in one of the locations involved in the incident.
The FSB report also says that several Ukrainian and Russian citizens belonging to an undercover spy ring operating inside Crimea have been arrested on charges of planning to help the saboteurs.
The FSB has named the ringleader as Yevgeny Panov, a resident of Ukraine’s Zaporozhye region born in 1977, who the FSB says is an employee of the Ukrainian Defence Ministry’s Main Intelligence Directorate.
Some Russian media reports have suggested that the intention was to create “false flag” incidents that would set Crimea’s Tatar and Russian communities against each other.
The reference to “critical infrastructure and life support facilities on the peninsula” does not however support this.
Rather it suggests an attempt to disrupt power supplies and possibly water treatment plants at the height of Crimea’s tourist season and on the eve of the elections.
The Ukrainians for their part deny all these allegations, claiming that the whole incident has been invented by the Russians.
The Western media, predictably enough, is following the Ukrainian line with wild speculations that the Russians have fabricated the whole incident in order to justify a Russian invasion of Ukraine during the Olympic Games.
Whilst the full truth of this incident will only become known over time – when or if people like Panov are put on trial – there is actually no reason to doubt that the Russian account is true.
The Russians are hardly likely to arrange the death of one of their own FSB operatives and of one of their soldiers in order to fabricate an incident like this, and the report of the capture of several of the saboteurs, and the confirmation of the arrest of the members of the spy ring which was created to support them, all but confirms that the Russian claims about this incident are true.
Indeed given that Ukrainian leaders frequently speak of Ukraine being at war with Russia it is not difficult to see why they might authorise a sabotage mission of this sort in order to disrupt elections which would confirm the extent of Crimea’s integration into Russia.
Presumably the Ukrainian plan was to claim that the attacks were the result of local anti-Russian resistance cells, thereby fostering the fiction that there is opposition within Crimea to its unification with Russia.
It has been a cause of serious embarrassment to the Ukrainian leadership and its Western backers that there has been no real evidence of such opposition up to now.
Two days ago I reported about a meeting Putin had with his security chiefs which appeared to have been hurriedly convened in a secret location.
I speculated that the meeting was held to discuss the situation in Aleppo.
Whilst Aleppo undoubtedly was discussed at this meeting as shown by the presence of Foreign Minister Lavrov and the Kremlin’s account of the meeting – which referred to Putin’s forthcoming meetings with foreign leaders, of whom the two most important were President Erdogan of Turkey and President Rouhani of Iran with whom the topic of Syria and Aleppo would certainly be discussed – the meeting between Putin and his security chiefs undoubtedly also discussed the situation in Crimea, and the reports of the Ukrainian sabotage mission there.
Putin in the joint press conference he held in Moscow following his meeting with Armenia’s President Sargsyan linked the incident to the attempted murder of Igor Plotnitsky, the leader of the Lugansk People’s Republic.
If true that would suggest that having despaired of a military victory the government in Kiev is now turning to assassination and sabotage tactics in order to keep the struggle with Russia going and to achieve its political goals.
Alternatively it could be that the Ukrainians have carried out these operations in preparation for the summer offensive in the Donbass that has been much talked about but which has yet to happen, though it is not clear how planting bombs in Crimea could aid a military offensive in the Donbass.
Yet another explanation is that the Ukrainians might be sensing a weakening in European support and might have launched the operation in order to heighten tensions and to rally support and to further undermine the Minsk II peace process.
Whatever the precise motivations behind this incident Putin has made it very clear that the Russians are taking it extremely seriously.
He has already said that there will no Normandy Four meeting with Merkel, Hollande and Poroshenko at the forthcoming G20 summit in China.
Moreover and in contrast to what happened following the trial of Savchenko, whose actions were carried out in the Donbass and therefore in territory the Russians continue to recognise as Ukrainian, I expect the Russians to be much slower to agree to prisoner exchanges of the Ukrainian operatives who were involved in this mission and who they accuse of carrying out or planning to carry out violent actions on Russian territory.
The Russian FSB averted terrorist acts in the Republic of Crimea that were being prepared by the Main Intelligence Directorate of the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine, and which targeted certain critical infrastructure and life support facilities on the peninsula.
The goal of the attacks was the destabilisation of the socio-political situation on the peninsula prior to the approaching elections to the federal and regional governmental institutions.
The search operations carried out during the night of 6/7 August 2016 in the vicinity of the city of Armyansk, Republic of Crimea, uncovered a group of saboteurs.
While attempting to detain the terrorists, an FSB operative was killed by enemy gunfire.
The follow-on measures on the territory of the Republic of Crimea eliminated a network of agents operated by the Main Intelligence Directorate of the Ukrainian Armed Forces.
Ukrainian and Russian citizens, engaged in the preparation of terrorist attacks, were arrested, and are now giving evidence.
One of the organisers is Yevgeniy Aleksandrovich Panov, born 1977, an inhabitant of the Zaporozhye Region of Ukraine, an operative of the Main Intelligence Directorate of Ukrainian MOD, who has also been arrested and is giving evidence.
During the night of August 8, 2016, Ukrainian MOD special operations units attempted two more infiltrations by saboteur units which were prevented by the armed units of the FSB and collaborating entities.
The infiltration effort was covered by heavy fire from the adjacent country, including by armored vehicles belonging to Ukrainian military.
Russia has warned Ukraine against efforts to revise the status of the Sea of Azov in violation of international law, urging Kiev to refrain from attempts to unilaterally establish new state borders.
Tensions climaxed on Sunday after Ukrainian ships entered Russian territorial waters.
On 25 November, a trio of Ukrainian ships crossed into temporarily off-limits Russian territorial waters, moving from the Black Sea to the Kerch Strait, thus violating Articles 19 and 21 of the United Nations Convention of Sea Law.
In a parallel development, another two Ukrainian vessels were heading “at full speed” from the port city of Berdyansk in the Sea of Azov towards the Kerch Strait, which the security service described as a zone where a “provocation,” organised by Kiev, was unfolding.
In a bid to halt the Ukrainian naval vessels’ attempts to pass through the Kerch Strait, Russia deployed its own naval assets, as well as combat aircraft, with Su-25 jets patrolling the area in the vicinity of the Crimean Bridge.
As the ships approached the Kerch Strait, FSB vessels went on to pursue the intruders, who failed to respond to demands to leave the area and proceeded to make “dangerous manoeuvres,” thus prompting the Russian side to open fire.
The three ships were eventually detained and escorted to the port of Kerch.
Reacting to the flagrant violation of key provisions of international law, the Russian Foreign Ministry accused Ukraine of an “unequivocal provocation” and aggression.
Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov also underscored the fact that the Russian border guards acted in compliance with international law to curb the foreign intrusion and protect the country’s territory from violators, who did not respond to any requests to withdraw from the area.
After calling on its allies and partners to provide military assistance to “deter the aggressor,” Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko signed a decree introducing martial law in the country that would be effective from November 26 to January 25, 2019.
Besides the unfortunate call to arms, Kiev encouraged its Western partners to step up sanctions on Russia.
Although Ukrainian ships violated international law by illegally entering Russia’s territorial waters, the West, as is wont, was quick to blame the escalation of the situation in the Kerch Strait on Moscow.
Tensions in the maritime region of the Sea of Azov mounted this year after Ukraine detained two Russian vessels heading to ports in Crimea, which Kiev – and the majority of Western nations – considers to be Ukrainian territory.
Describing the move as “maritime terrorism,” Russia increased patrols off the country’s Azov coast, which prompted Kiev to accuse Moscow of illegal searches.
Last month, the Ukrainian parliament passed a draft law enabling Kiev to expand maritime controls over an additional 12 nautical miles off its southern coast, ostensibly to curb smuggling in the Black Sea.
Most recently, Russia warned Ukraine against any attempts to alter the status of the Sea of Azov as inland waters shared by the two countries.
Such efforts would be deemed as a violation of international laws, Moscow added, urging Kiev to refrain from any steps to unilaterally establish a state border in the Sea of Azov which Russia does not recognise.
SIMFEROPOL, Ukraine -Ukraine's Crimean peninsula declared itself independent Monday after its residents voted overwhelmingly to secede and join Russia, while the United States and the European Union slapped sanctions against some of those who promoted the divisive referendum.
Ukraine's political turmoil has become Europe's most severe security crisis in years and tensions have been high since Russian troops seized control of Crimea two weeks ago.
Large numbers of Russian troops are also massed near the border with Russian-speaking eastern Ukraine, which has sharp political differences with the country's new government in Kiev.
The U.S., EU and Ukraine's new government do not recognize the referendum held Sunday in Crimea, saying it violates both Ukrainian and international norms.
Moscow, however, considers the vote legitimate and Russian President Putin was to address both houses of parliament Tuesday on the Crimean situation.
The Crimean referendum could also encourage rising pro-Russian sentiment in Ukraine's east and lead to further divisions in this nation of 46 million.
A delegation of Crimean lawmakers was traveling to Moscow on Monday for negotiations on how to proceed.
Russian lawmakers have suggested that formally annexing Crimea is almost certain with one saying it could happen within days.
Those living on the strategic Black Sea peninsula applauded the move, since it received over 97 percent backing from voters.
We came back home, Russia is our home,"" said Nikolay Drozdenko, a resident in Sevastopol, the key Crimean port where Russia leases a naval base from Ukraine.
The Crimean parliament declared that all Ukrainian state property on the peninsula will be nationalized and become the property of the Crimean Republic.
Lawmakers also asked the United Nations and other nations to recognize it and began work on setting up a central bank with $30 million in support from Russia.
The United States announced sanctions against seven Russian officials, while the EU's foreign ministers slapped travel bans and asset freezes against 21 officials from Russia and Ukraine following Crimea referendum.
The ministers did not immediately release the names and nationalities of those targeted by the sanctions.
While the diplomatic standoff between Moscow and the West -with Ukraine in the middle -heats up, CBS News correspondent Elizabeth Palmer reports that the Crimeans who voted to join Russia are now ever more convinced they're on their way.
As soon as the tally was in, the party on the streets in the Crimean capital of Simferopol started.
Palmer says Crimea's new prime minister said aloud what many in the crowd before him were feeling.
The Crimean government said 83 percent of voters cast ballots -most of them firmly convinced that a vote for Russia was a vote for a better life.
Moscow, meanwhile, called on Ukraine to become a federal state as a way of resolving the polarization between Ukraine's western regions which favor closer ties with the 28-nation EU and its eastern areas, which have long ties to Russia.
In a statement Monday, Russia's Foreign Ministry urged Ukraine's parliament to call a constitutional assembly that could draft a new constitution to make the country federal, handing more power to its regions.
The new government in Kiev emerged after pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych fled to Russia last month after three months of protests culminated in deadly clashes.
Ukraine's Foreign Minister Andriy Deshchytsya visited NATO headquarters in Brussels to request technical equipment to deal with the secession of Crimea and the Russian incursion there.
NATO said in a statement the alliance was determined to boost its cooperation with Ukraine, including ""increased ties with Ukraine's political and military leadership, strengthening efforts to build the capacity of the Ukrainian military"" with more joint training.
Deshchytsya said he also talked with NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen about sending monitors to Ukraine a move that would certainly inflame Russia.
