From the European point of view, the ball is firmly in the court of Russia.
It has turned into a semi-frozen conflict; the sanctions that were meant to be dynamic have become semi-permanent.
Well, we think the ball is in Europe’s court, because due to the completely unconstructive – I am choosing my words so as not to appear rude – position of the former members of the European Commission, the situation went as far as a coup.
However, Tymoshenko had too much of a public reputation as being a United States agent , for her to win; and, so, Petro Poroshenko won the ‘election’ instead.
It was an ‘election’ in all of the majority Ukrainian-speaking areas of Ukraine, but without allowing to vote the populations in many of the majority Russian-speaking regions, where the man whom Obama overthrew, Yanukovych, had won by over 75% of the votes, in the last democratic election in Ukraine, which was the Presidential election in 2010 — the final election in which Ukrainians in all parts of the country voted.
Although Poroshenko was anti-Russian, he wasn’t nearly as anti-Russian as was Tymoshenko.
Putin blamed the EU for the coup, though when the EU’s Foreign Minister, Catherine Ashton, learned, on February 26th of 2014, that this overthrow had been a coup instead of a democratic revolution, she expressed shock and disappointment but went right on carrying out the Obama Administration’s plan for the integration of the formerly Russia-allied Ukraine into the EU, and, ultimately, as was expected, into NATO, so that United States nuclear missiles will be able to be installed there, on Russia’s border, as close to Moscow as possible, for a blitz-attack against Russia, to conquer Russia.
Furthermore, in Nuland’s instruction to the Ambassador in Kiev, she said “F—k the EU”, because the EU aristocracies weren’t nearly as eager to conquer Russia as the United States aristocracy are; the EU aristocracies had wanted Vitaly Klitschko to head Ukraine; Klitschko wasn’t rabidly anti-Russian, like Tymoshenko and Yatsenyuk were.
There were riots backed by the United States – both financially, politically and in the media – and all of Europe.
They supported the unconstitutional seizure of power, a bloody one at that, with casualties, and took things as far as a war in southeastern Ukraine.
The current situation is the result of the unconstitutional armed seizure of power in Ukraine, and Europe is to blame, because it backed it.
As guarantors, the foreign ministers of Poland, France and Germany signed a document, an agreement between President Yanukovych and the opposition.
Well, we were confronted with this fact, accepted it and signed the Minsk agreements.
Everyone has long since realised that the current leadership of Ukraine is not in a position to comply with them.
Now that the situation in that country has hit rock bottom both in terms of the economy and domestic policy, and the police are using gas against protesters, expecting the President of Ukraine to take at least a small step towards implementing the Minsk agreements is an exercise in futility.
Therefore, we will keep the Normandy format in place as long as our colleagues like, and we will strive to implement these Minsk agreements that you mentioned.
There was no doubt that the United States State Department had run it, and, ultimately, evidence became public that Google and the United States State Department were already preparing the operation as early as in 2011.
It is not enough only to appeal to Russia; it is also necessary to influence Kiev’s position.
Now they have made a decision on the language, essentially prohibiting the use of ethnic minority languages in school.
He was a man with Nazi views, an anti-Semite who killed Jews during the war.
This is not being done by the Ukrainian people; this is being done at the prompting of the relevant ruling authorities.
I can see our partners’ interest, primarily our European partners’ interest in resolving this conflict.
Angela Merkel is doing a great deal, putting the time in, becoming deeply involved in these matters.
Both the former president of France and President Macron are also paying attention.
However, it is necessary to work not just technically and technologically but politically.
It is essential to exert some influence on the Kiev authorities, get them to do at least something.
I believe that it is becoming obvious and most importantly, it is becoming obvious to the overwhelming majority of Ukrainian citizens.
We like Ukraine and I really regard the Ukrainian people as a brotherly nation if not just one nation, part of the Russian nation.
Even though Russian nationalists do not like this and Ukrainian nationalists do not like this either, this is my position, my point of view.
Sooner or later, it will happen – reunification, not on an interstate level but in terms of restoring our relations.
Russia with Ukraine’s anti-nazis, instead of America with Ukraine’s pro-nazis.
On Ukraine and the conflict phase there, I was, uh, it was during my last years of government when this crisis emerged in Ukraine.
I and my close colleagues in my government and foreign policy and security issues convened, and we met.
I told them that Ukraine was part of the Soviet Union, and after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the emergence of the independent states, Ukraine was one of the closest countries to Russia, in ethnic relations and economic relations, and in cultural relations, and in terms of the value that Ukraine holds for Russia.
So my approach was one of sentiment and sensitivity, but, keeping the Russian sentiment in mind, keeping the Russian sensitivity in this region in mind.
This was implicitly the United States and NATO policy ever since 24 February 1990, but it became, since 2006, overtly the United States and NATO objective, called “Nuclear Primacy,” meaning the ability of the United States to win a nuclear conflict against Russia — to conquer Russia.
Especially our American partners do not hide that to a large extent they stood behind this, funded a radical opposition, brought to an unconstitutional way of changing power, although it could be done quite differently.
Former President Yanukovych signed all the requirements and was ready to hold early elections.
And when we are forced to emphasize this, we were compelled to protect the Russian-speaking population in the Donbass, were compelled to respond to the aspirations of people living in the Crimea, to return to the Russian Federation, and immediately began to untwist a new flywheel of anti-Russian policy and the imposition of sanctions.
But we are not sabotaging them, the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
On that occasion, because he was responding then to a question which had been raised by Rick Boucher, a former member of the United States Congress, and now a partner in a law firm, Putin had been more direct, by his saying, “We did not bring this to a coup in Ukraine.
In any case, Boucher, too, had no response recorded there, to Putin’s statement.
Vagueness in political speech is the norm; it’s seen everywhere; and wherever it is encountered, tactical reasons are commonly being exemplified.
President Yanukovych decided to postpone the signing and hold additional talks.
Not only by way of the infamous cakes, but through informational and political support and what not.
Mr Ulyukayev , a man of respect, speaks decent English, has absolutely market-driven brains, one of our top specialists in the economy, went for consultations.
Nothing but slogans. if we did not do what we did in Crimea, Crimea would have it much worse than Odessa where people were burned alive.
