House Resolution to send lethal arms to Ukraine also calls for a long-term strategy for the overthrow of Vladimir Putin.
Aside from the usual Congressional lust for war, so as to secure their billions in military industrial complex campaign donations , the key part of the House’s bill, calling for lethal aid to Ukraine, has nothing to do with Ukraine at all.
Whereas the United States and its allies need a long-term strategy to expose and challenge Vladimir Putin’s corruption and repression at home and his aggression abroad; Let that sink in for a second.
The United States Congress has put, in writing, their goal to formulate a “long term strategy” to challenge the democratically-elected President of Russia, Vladimir Putin.
House of Representatives has taken a big step toward re-igniting and expanding the bloody civil war.
Now titled H Res.2, the bill demands that President Obama send lethal military equipment to the U S.-backed government in Kiev and makes it clear that the weapons are to be used to take military action to return Crimea and parts of eastern Ukraine to Kiev’s rule.
Congress is giving Kiev the green light to begin a war with Russia, with the implicit guarantee of U S. backing.
S President Barack Obama, Russian President Viadimir Putin and Chinese President Xi Jinping.
MACHIXE OUNiSHOoT ^military GUN SHOW meet machine gun dealers, collectors and enthusiasts from all over the country.
It’s three days of machine gun shooting, dealer displays, shooting competitions and a spectacular Saturday Night Shoot.
The machine gunners are shooting at a wide variety of used appliances, old vehicles and barrels of fuel with pyrotechnic charges attached, painted orange for the shooters to zero in on.
Water Cooled Brownings, Mini-guns, AK-47s, MG-42s, Tommy Guns, M-16s, Vickers belt fed, Uzis, MP5s and others.
The Military Gun Show draws dealers from across the country who buy, sell and trade rifles, pistols, shotguns and machine guns.
They sell ammo, military surplus, hard to find gun parts and much more.
Admission is $ 15 per person per day and for children under 12 it’s $5 per day.
This means NO loaded Firearms of any kind may be carried on Knob Creek property.
All firearms must be declared and zip tied with magazines out at the admission gate.
Courtesy transports bring people and their merchandise to and from the parking lot as well as the gun show area and lower ranges.
Camping at Knob Creek Gun Range is offered on a first come first serve basis and is pro-rated from $50.00 per person setup on Thursday to $20.00 per person Saturday.
ZOG finding it harder to control perceptions MANY in the West have asked regional actors to move more strongly against the influence of the self-proclaimed Islamic State, and none have responded quite as efficiently as Iran.
But CIA Director John Brennan worries that one Iranian general, lauded by Iraqis, poses a significant threat to U S. counterterrorism efforts.
THE CZECHS were told not to throw tomatoes and eggs at a U S. military convoy rumbling all through Eastern Europe, the local media reported, citing the laws of the land.
Those in love with egg and tomato hurling may get up to three years if convicted.
JOINING spy agencies that watch your every move, now the Justice Department has “ordered” bank tellers across America to contact law enforcement if they suspect your cash withdrawal may have something to do with illicit activity.
No proof needed, or any sort of red flag indicator merely suspicion by the bank teller processing your transaction is now enough to have you investigated by authorities.
PRIOR to 9/11, the FBI had learned of a massive spy ring inside the United States run by the government of Israel.
TWO warships, the USS Iwo Jima and the USS Fort McHenry, are on standby in the Red Sea and ready to respond at any time following the anti-ZOG uprising in Yemen.
This is exactly the kind of chutzpah they tried in June 1967 with their USS Liberty gambit.
TWO MORE children were killed by Kiev’s shelling of the Donetsk region, the Defense Ministry there announces. 10-year-old girl died on March 23 as a result of artillery shelling in the Petrovsky region of the city of Donetsk, while in the Gorlovka area a 14-year-old boy became a victim of that shelling,” a local news agency quoted the DPR Defense Ministry as saying.
CALIFORNIA is heading into its fourth year of record-breaking drought with no liquid relief in sight.
High temperatures, little precipitation and historically low snow pack find the State with dwindling water reserves.
A Times op-ed recently, that California has only one year of water in its reservoirs.
WHEN a building to be demolished is among structures that must be preserved, the blasters collapse it straight down into its own footprint, a feat requiring such skill that only a handful of companies in the world will attempt it.
For a building to collapse in this fashion, all load bearing supports must fail at exactly the same moment.
The claim that it resulted from fire requires its heat to be equally distributed throughout a floor of the building providing equal heat for the same amount of time, so that all the load bearing members fail simultaneously.
State Department employee Daniel Rosen has just been arrested again on porn-related charges.
FREEDOM fighter Matt Hale’s federal public defender has asked for an extension of thirty days to prepare a supplemental brief and now has that much additional time so the hearing will be on May 1,2015.
PETER MALLEN Kent, England I recently received my third issue of your publication and like it very much.
Tim Wise grew up in a wealthy Nashville family and became involved with militant Marxism and criminal activity when he was young.
He has bragged about running a fake ID mill, “vandalizing government property,” committing theft, using drugs and selling stolen property.
Radical nut Wise writes about “White Privilege,” which is an extreme political ideology that demonizes all White people.
Wise says that White people have more money than Black people because Whites are oppressing Blacks.
He has made a fortune as a paid speaker at colleges and left-wing events.
However, Wise is known to become enraged when questioned about his own wealth.
To see the psychotic race hatred that he promotes on a daily basis, check out his Facebook page.
So, according to his own writings, he must be oppressing both Black and White people to obtain his wealth.
We strongly encourage conservatives to protest Wise’s speaking engagements.
Twice since 2013 there have been protests against those Tim Wise speaking engagements on college campuses in Indiana.
Both times, supporters of Tim Wise turned violent and someone was arrested and charged with a felony.
While the second was a packed auditorium, it was only because hundreds of students had been forced to attend by their professors at that university, but no one was compelled to be at the sparsely attended one.
The officer moves cautiously toward the back of the car and says, “Sir, do not move.
Ten minutes later another highway patrolman arrives, walks up to the window slowly and asks the man for his driver’s license and registration.
But he would whip hunger, fear and oppression, abstaining forever from Europe’s wars.
When politicians lie, the State bites off what only individuals can chew.
Olaf Childress Editorial faculty: Nancy Hitt, Christine Miller, Donald Sullivan, Valerie Protopapas and Ingrid Rimland Ziindel.
Mark Anderson, Bill Ebb, Lloyd Caperton, Chris DeHuff, Jason Gerhard, Bill Ivy, John Kaminski, John Peeples and Carolyn Yeager.
Payable in U S. dollars or other instruments readily convertible thereto.
Join this nonprofit newspaper and help de-program the brainwashed population.
Except for copyrighted articles, anyone may reprint or quote The First Freedom in whole or part; just give full credit and address.
We may carefully edit submitted manuscripts to fit space and style sheet without changing meaning; prefer email; publish only the writer’s name, city and State but need address and phone verification.
Signed articles by contributors do not necessarily represent The First Freedom’s views.
By Gail Jarvis abbevilleinstitute.org Ihe lack of interest in the film “Selma” by both the public and the film industry is a healthy sign.
It is an indication that the public is growing tired of this particular movie formula (often called the “Mississippi Burning Syndrome”); portrayals of racist, bigoted Southerners from fifty years ago.
This movie formula has been a powerful opinion-molding device, but political trends and social movements tend to go in cycles.
Although society never completely reverts back to the way it was, social trends gradually become old hat and lose their impetus.
As a social trend passes its cusp and nears the end of its cycle, its proponents are often caught unaware.
A review of the movie “Selma” recently appeared in The Brunswick News of Brunswick, Georgia.
To establish her credentials on race relations, the reviewer, Bethany Leggett, stated that as a result of a college internship, she spent one month in Alabama, visited Birmingham; toured the local Civil Rights Institute, and also visited the famous 16th Street Baptist Church.
So, unlike the general public, her admiration for the film was effusive.
And even the “historical errors” in “Selma” failed to diminish her high praise.
I’m sure that most of you have read about the interpretations of I960 events contained in contemporary school textbooks, so I don’t need to discuss that problem.
Leggett’s glib understanding of 1960s events has become all too common.
Congress instead acts as if one morning the Russians woke up and decided to invade Crimea and eastern Ukraine.
Whereas Russian aggression against Ukraine is but the most visible and recent manifestation of a revisionist Kremlin strategy to redraw international borders and impose its will on its neighbors, including NATO allies; Shamefully, the resolution pins the Oprah Winfrey’s cinematic version of a celebrated Martin Luther King event would be an important learning experience.
Winfrey’s “Selma” film an educational tool for students in the same way that “To Kill a Mockingbird” has become a teaching device.
Leada Gore, a journalist for The Birmingham News, states her indignation that Alabama allows citizens to celebrate Robert E Lee’s birthday on the same day as Martin Luther King’s birthday.
The fact that Alabama has celebrated General Lee’s birthday for over a hundred years before MLK day was even created is irrelevant to her.
Gore also claims that those who celebrate Lee on the actual anniversary of his birthday do so only to detract from the importance of MLK Day, which should be sacrosanct.
This forum addresses misconceptions and misunderstandings about the historical man.
He was a statesman, politician, philosopher, architect, meteorologist, farmer, philologist, paleontologist, biologist and inventor among other things.
Nonetheless, he is generally known to the public today only as the throughout a 2 8-day period.
Gore learned that her disparagement of Robert E Lee was not widely shared.
In a follow-up article, she resorted to a common journalistic gimmick by selecting and printing those responses that tended to make Robert E Lee supporters appear to be backwater hayseeds.
Quite a few journalists use this technique, but it indicates a lack of integrity.
Insatiable aggression We know from past experience that no matter how many Southern traditions are eliminated or how many Southern celebrations are forbidden, activists will never be satisfied.
Whereas the United States and its allies need a long-term strategy to expose and challenge Vladimir writer of the Declaration of Independence and an owner of slaves.
This conference will explore beyond the narrow perception of America’s third president.
The Thomas Jefferson Heritage Society has invited scholars of excellent reputation to explore the person behind those myths.
Topics to be discussed include Jefferson’s learning process, his conception of history, notion of the relation between mind and body, his importance as an architect, the influence on him of the Christian religion and the central role of morality in his philosophy.
The seminar will be held on Saturday, And, of course, they will be supported by gullible journalists.
Many of us long for a journalist with original rather than merely indoctrinated opinions.
And it would certainly be refreshing to come across a journalist who had achieved enough maturity to understand that there are two sides to every story.
Leggett belong to that aggregation of young journalists bom after 1975.
So they have been exposed to establishment-sanctioned views since their birth.
The Selma March and other notable civil rights events occurred before they were bom, so their perceptions of those events come from media, movies and TV portrayals.
These portrayals are essentially presented in the versions that best accommodate the Left’s political strategies.
People are tired of It The failure of “Selma” is not the only healthy sign I’ve come across.
Reports indicate that these two newspapers are re-assessing their political philosophies in an attempt to recapture their lost readership.
For their survival, they will have to allow more moderate, middle-of-the-road opinions.
As a CPA/ financial consultant, he helped his clients cope with the detrimental effects of misguided governmental intrusiveness.
This influenced his writing as did years of witnessing how versions of news and history were distorted for political reasons.
Not a single Member of Congress took the Floor to oppose this dangerous Resolution, passage of which should make it clear that the political leadership of the U S. will accept nothing short of war with Russia.
The program will begin at 8 :30 AM, with our morning welcome, conviviality and refreshments for all participants; and will include periodic breaks with a 12:00 Noon lunch hour for dining and fellowship at several popular local restaurants within a few minutes’ walk of the Jefferson Scholars Foundation facility.
A public question-andanswer discussion will be held by each of the speakers.
By Philip Giraldi ^ ^ unz.com iVlarch 2015 was a month that should live in infamy.
The month started out with the revolting spectacle of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu addressing a joint session of Congress for the third time, having been invited by the Speaker of the House without the courtesy of seeking any input from the White House or State Department.
National Review was quick to declare Bibi “leader of the free world,” surely one of the most ridiculous claims ever made by a once respectable magazine that has increasingly become a reliable mouthpiece for the Israel Lobby.
It was all part of a carefully orchestrated deliberate affront to President Barack Obama, who, like it or not, is responsible for the conduct of foreign affairs.
It also challenged the White House’s role in dealing with visiting heads of State and government as a matter of both protocol and common sense, one of the traditional duties of the Chief Executive.
Netanyahu characteristically lied about the threat posed by Iran and was greeted by fifty rounds of applause for his lucidly expressed insights into why the United States should again be prepared to go to war on Israel’s behalf Five days later 47 Republican United States Senators signed a letter allegedly written by Senator Tom Cotton of Arkansas and then sent it to the Iranian government directly, warning that any agreement over that country’s nuclear program reached with President Barack Obama will likely be overturned by the Congress.
You bet they were as they both had the same objective to end talks with Iran and commit the United States to a more aggressive confrontation with the Mullahs, as Israel has been demanding.
The invitation and the letter were both unprecedented, far exceeding previous stunts by the ubiquitous GOP “maverick” Senator John McCain cavorting with terrorists in Syria or appearing in Tbilisi or at Maidan Square in Ukraine to instigate either a new war or a change of government.
McCain’s hubris, as well as that of other peripatetic Congressmen prowling the world looking for an audience, was on display “over there” where he had no real authority and no one would listen to him anyway but the current incarnation of Republican leadership was and is, unfortunately, doing its damage over here.
Beware, children at play The visit and letter were together an assault on how American democracy is supposed to work.
The breach of discipline is extremely dangerous, because undermining our diplomatic efforts, at this moment, brings us another step closer to a very costly and perilous war with Iran.
Other remedies The most significant damage is to the separation of powers under the Constitution of the United States.
One might argue reasonably that executive authority has increased dramatically in Washington since 9/11 and should be rolled back by the legislature and judiciary.
But the GOP is not addressing the issues that it should be confronting like war powers, immigration.
It is instead seeking to challenge Article 2 of the Constitution, which specifies that the executive is the lead agency in dealing with foreign governments.
The House of Representatives can choose to defund presidential programs and the Senate can refuse to “consenf’ to treaties that the executive has entered into, but the actual work of diplomacy and protecting Americans overseas is the responsibility of the president.
The presidential prerogative was accepted by the Founding Fathers and George Washington, in his first address to Congress, made clear that while the legislative branch had responsibility for funding both diplomacy and an army, it was up to the executive branch to carry out policy in both areas.
The last indictment submitted under the Act was in 1803, which means that legal experts might well consider it to be unenforceable due to the judicial doctrine of desuetude, or lack of use, but the law is still on the books and one might reasonably argue that both the Netanyahu invitation and the Senate letter to the Iranian government would be considered felonious violations.
Leaving aside the damage that would be done to America’s reputation by repudiating an agreement hammered out not only with Iran but also with five other countries, there is a common thread running through the attempt by the Congress to assert control over some aspects of foreign policy and it is, of course, Israel.
The Netanyahu visit was planned by the Israeli Ambassador in Washington Ron Dermer in collusion with Speaker of the House John Boehner.
Netanyahu was also banking on his speech to shore up his credentials as tough-talking guarantor of Israeli national security to include having Washington in his pocket.
And the letter to Iran’s appearance five days after the speech certainly hints at collusion and possibly more than that.
It suggests that nearly half of the United States Senate, having received its marching orders from Netanyahu, was prepared to go forth and tighten the screws on Iran.
Hideously unconstitutional The letter, which undercuts the authority of the American president before an international audience, is undeniably a threat intended to derail negotiations.
The letter’s alleged author, 37-year-old freshman Senator Cotton, had been in office all of 62 days when the document was sent directly to the government in Tehran on March 8th.
He had started circulating the draft for signatures the day after Netanyahu spoke, suggesting that it was already prepared and not a spontaneous The Nationalist Times Subscribe to America’s best patriotic newspaper.
The Nationalist Times tackles immigration, politics, economics, race, privacy issues, the rapidly growing high-tech Police State and Washington, D.C.’s rush to totalitarianism, and all the latest doings of the New World Order subversives, and we do it from a perspective that infuriates liberals and neo-cons and delights patriots.
Readers of The First Freedom may subscribe to The Nationalist Times for the special introductory offer of just $29 for one year, or $55 for two years.
EDITOR’S NOTE “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix h” is an oft-heard excuse for doing nothing.
Here Mr Giraldi defines our faithful machine in the District of Corruption aptly, but that doesn’t help if those hired to run the thing won’t follow its maintenance book, the Constitution.
Better wisdom advises, “If a servant ain’t worth his salt, don’t keep him.” act.
In 2014 he told voters that ISIS was working with Mexican drug cartels to stage attacks in Arkansas and while a Congressman he sought to imprison the entire families of those suspected of violating Iran sanctions, to include the grandchildren of the convicted.
Whether it is genuine, opportunistic or just a quid pro quo is difficult to say.
In January he tried to strengthen sanctions against Iran and he stated his belief that the talks over the nuclear program should be abandoned.
It has been observed that most of the defenders of his letter are also leading components of the Israel Lobby, but there is more to it than that.
In his Senatorial campaign last year Cotton received $960,250 from Bill Kristol’s Emergency Committee for Israel plus $165,000 from Paul Singer’s Elliott Management hedge fund.
Both Kristol and Singer have been active in opposing Iran talks and it should be noted also that neither lives in Arkansas.
There have also been suggestions that Cotton did not in fact write the letter.
Rosenberg believes that it was produced by that organization, which appears probable as 46 Senators would have been unlikely to sign on to a letter produced by a new and untested Senator otherwise.
Some others look to Kristol, who regards Cotton as a protege much as he once nurtured the unforgettable Sarah Palin.
Rosenberg explains “nothing happens on Capitol Hill related to Israel unless and until Howard Kohr wants it to happen.
Treachery More than 165,000 Americans have signed a petition calling Cotton’s letter treasonous.
Behind that outrage we have a speech, a letter and the usual banal tale of corruption, opportunism and money.
Interestingly, the Cotton letter hit the news cycle on the very day that Benjamin Netanyahu and Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman were in the news in Israel.
Netanyahu announced that there would be “no withdrawals” from the Israeli occupied West Bank and no “concessions” to the Palestinians.
So much for the billions of dollars given to Israel and the irreparable damage to American interests.
All successive administrations in Washington have succeeded in doing is empowering fanatics like Lieberman while the American people have gained nothing.
This so-called ‘union’ is pressing to rename a campus building after a cop-killing Black female, who murdered a New Jersey State Trooper in 1973 and then fled to Cuba.
Assata Shakur, formerly known as Joanne Chesimard, is a former Black Panther and the first woman on the FBI’s ‘Most Wanted’ terrorists.
Pattern My friend noted that for about 25 years similar groups across the country, most especially in the South, have been pressing, usually with success, to rename buildings, bridges, streets, parks and all manner of other things that have anything to do with the Confederacy or Confederate Veterans.
Lee/Jackson Day will soon be only a fond memory in Charlottesville, Virginia, thanks to the efforts of some “community organizers” in that fair city.
Stalwarts accept none of it A few valiant Confederate heritage groups have protested much of this, but they are small and don’t get much help or support from other patriotic groups.
Years ago, I recall a flap over Confederate flags in a cemetery where Confederate soldiers were buried and the Sons of Union Veterans spoke up and supported the Confederates.
Now there is even a move to remove U S. flags at certain “progressive” campuses around the country and veterans groups are all up in arms over it.
But they weren’t too keen on supporting the Confederate groups in a similar situation.
Years ago, probably about twenty now, some of us said that when these Marxist groups had finished mangling the Confederate flag they would proceed to go after the U S. flag.
This is all the result of a century of propaganda against the South first, and then all of America next, by “progressive” politicians, college professors and even some “useful idiof ’ preachers.
There is an agenda behind it all and until Southern folks begin to wake up and realize that and to realize they have to help each other combat this sort of thing, it will continue until all your parks, streets, schools, and whatever else, have undergone name changes and are then named after Marxists and socialists who have been responsible for tearing down the country, beginning with the South.
About now some good Christian folks will speak up and say “Hey, don’t worry about this, the Lord is in control,” and He is, no doubt of that.
He might want to use YOU to exercise some of that control in these situations and you ain’t having any.
It is said slavery is all we are fighting for, and if we give it up we give up all.
Even if this were true, which we deny, slavery is not all our enemies are fighting for.
James W King ^ ^ shnv.blogspot.com Ihe South and the Confederate States of America have been harshly discriminated against and positive historical facts and figures have intentionally been suppressed.
Dishonest Northern historians have unfairly caused Southern and Confederate history and its heroes, monuments, memorials and flags to be relegated to a less important role than deserved in American history and to be viewed in a negative perspective by much of the American public.
If slavery was all the Southern States wanted they could have kept it without a war or firing a shot.
Constitution in March 1861 that would have made slavery permanently legal in America if they would rejoin the union.
The South refused and the Constitution of the Confederate States of America banned the international slave trade.
Most educated Southerners were in favor of gradual orderly emancipation which would have prevented segregation and Jim Crow laws which were based on Northern Black codes.
The words of Confederate General Patrick R Cleburne, who was killed at the battle of Franklin Tennessee on November 30, 1864, are becoming true.
Farm Raised “You Catch” Catfish Confederate Shirts, Caps Belt Buckles All 6 flags Knives • Ammo • Bumper Stickers • Beverages • Tobacco Building erected in 1853 Lloyd Caperton @ Facebook-CapeCSAl@aol.com Treasurer, Alabama League of the South values represented by the Confederate flag of subjugation before it is too late.
Political correctness and Socialist Marxist Revisionism are attacking everything Southern and Confederate on National, State, and local levels all across America.
The Confederate flag represents honor, faith, courage, dignity, integrity, chivalry, Christian values, respect for womanhood, strong family ties, patriotism, self-reliance, limited constitutional federal government.
It symbolizes the noble spirit of the Southern people, the rich heritage, the traditions of the South and the dynamic and vigorous Southern culture.
Liberals have falsely indoctrinated many Black Americans to believe it represents racism, bigotry and is a painful reminder of slavery.
But White Christian Southerners who fly the Confederate Battle Flag are not the enemy of responsible Black Americans who are working to better themselves.
The Confederate flag is the last flag to represent the concept of local control of ones’ life in America.
The Confederate flag is an internationally recognized symbol of resistance to tyranny.
That is why it was flying over the Berlin Wall when it was being torn down in 1989 and has been flown by numerous countries or provinces seeking independence.
It reminds knowledgeable Americans that government is to be held accountable for its actions, and if those actions are viewed as not being in the best interest of the people, there is a price to be paid for it.
This fact has not been lost upon the Socialist, Communist, liberal left and that is why they spend inordinate amounts of money and energy trying to suppress this powerful symbol of freedom.
The Confederate battle flag is a Christian symbol and that is why proponents of Secular Humanism (belief that there is no God and man, science and government can solve all problems) oppose it.
The flag also represents the valor and sacrifice of our Southern ancestors in their quest to gain independence and recognition as a sovereign Nation.
Confederate soldiers displayed tremendous bravery in the face of overwhelming odds and blatant tyranny and aggression on behalf of the Yankee government that invaded the Southern homeland.
It was, is, and will continue to be the flag of the region Southerners call home, the Southland.
Jared Taylor and Sam Dickson, Esquire, who are regulars at the CofCC Conferences, were there to represent true America.
Other foreign speakers came from France, Britain, Scotland, Italy, Finland, Greece, Bulgaria, Ukraine and Germany.
On March 22, I addressed the Russian International Conservative Forum, held in Saint Petersburg.
Its purpose was to provide a forum for politicians and thinkers united in their support of National traditions and in opposition to globalism.
There was a strong sentiment throughout the meeting of support for Russian sovereignty and European National independence in the face of pressure from the United States.
As Yury Luybomirsky of the Russian National Cultural Center explained at the beginning of the meeting, the goal of all the participants was “to preserve National identity and culture,” and that independence from outside pressure and influence was essential for that purpose.
Demonstrators protested outside the conference site, and the meeting had to end early because of a telephoned bomb threat.
These parties have been tarred with the extremist labels, but are all dedicated to preserving European and National traditions.
Russia was represented by such groups as the Russian Imperial Movement, New Russia, and the editor of Nationalist magazine Russian Observer.
There was also a contingent of Cossacks, dressed in traditional military uniforms.
Foreign “aid” “There is a CIA (Central Intelligence Agency) presence there [in Ecuador’s opposition] which has a goal of weakening the government,” Correa told the TeleSUR television network on March 21.
The CIA aims to drag Ecuador into President of the Republic of Ecuador Rafael Correa chaos by influencing the opposition ahead of the upcoming elections, Correa added.
The U S. spying agency and Ecuador’s right-wing opposition were likely involved in recent nationwide protests in the country, Correa noted.
Ecuadorians staged protest rallies on March 19 in about a dozen cities, including the capital, Quito.
The protesters called for political change as well as reforms in labor and land policies.
This is while Correa’s administration enjoys public support after raising living standards for the lower classes.
The country’s GDP per capita rose from $3,572 in 2007 to $6,002 in 2013.
Correa has also succeeded in reducing both the poverty and unemployment rates in Ecuador since he assumed power in 2007.
Caught en flagrante Released WikiLeaks cables, however, have revealed Washington’s efforts to interfere in Ecuador’s internal affairs as well as its spying agencies’ covert operations to bring Correa down.
In 1963, the U S. orchestrated a coup d’etat by the military junta in Ecuador to topple the leftist government of Carlos Julio Arosemena Monroy after he expressed opposition to the U S. government.
A. senior Iranian official says the Islamic Republic is ready to dispatch a medical team to Yemen to treat those wounded in recent deadly bomb attacks in the Yemeni capital, Sana’a.
Early on March 21, Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister for Arab and African Affairs Hossein Amir-Abdollahian condemned the terrorist bomb attacks that hit two mosques packed with worshippers Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister for Arab and African Affairs Hossein Amir-Abdollahian in Sana’a, saying that Tehran is ready to treat the wounded as soon as possible.
Three bomb attacks were carried out at two mosques in Sana’a the previous Friday.
Iran’s Foreign Ministry Spokeswoman Marzieh Afkham also denounced the bombings, saying that at a time when Yemen needs stability and peace “more than ever,” its enemies intend to achieve their vicious objectives by creating insecurity and instability through such terrorist acts.
CIA’S “ISIL’ The blasts came against the backdrop of intense gun battles between supporters and opponents of fugitive President Abd Rabbuh Mansour Hadi in the southern port city of Aden.
More than a dozen people died in the fighting, which also forced the closure of the Aden International Airport.
Rehired Hadi, along with members of Prime Minister Khaled Bahah’s cabinet, stepped down in late January, but the parliament did not approve the president’s resignation.
The president fled his home in Sana’a on February 21 after weeks under effective house arrest and went to Aden, Yemen’s second largest city, where he officially withdrew his resignation and highlighted his intention to resume duties.
This came after the Houthi fighters took control of Sana’a in September 2014.
Armed men inspect the damage following a bomb explosion at the Badr mosque in southern Sana’a, Yemen Iran ready to dispatch medical team to Sana’a presstv.ir Fired Ukrainian governor would ‘‘take over” power plant rt.com LJkrainian oligarch Igor Kolomoysky has allegedly threatened to send volunteer battalions from eastern Ukraine to Kiev to seize a leading energy firm and power plant.
The ex-governor’s gamble comes after one of the companies was shut for non-payment.
The audio record of a conversation in which a man sounding like Kolomoysky, the former Dnepropetrovsk governor fired by President Petro Poroshenko recently, is heard threatening the head of Naftogaz, as posted by Ukrainian joumalist-turned-MP Sergey Leshchenko on his Facebook page.
We can transfer people to Kiev from the ATO area,” he adds, referring to the Kiev government’s so-called “anti-terrorist operation” in eastern Ukraine.
It was not immediately clear when the alleged conversation had taken place.
Last month, Poroshenko signed a decree Igor Kolomoysky firing Kolomoysky as Dnepropetrovsk governor.
It was a kick in the teeth to a country that has gone through the Maidan.
And Kolomoysky’s dismissal is the weakest punishment that he could bear,” Leshchenko wrote on his Facebook page.
Earlier media had speculated about the threats posed by the oligarch to Kiev after Kolomoysky reportedly talked about the possibility of separatist uprisings in Dnepropetrovsk.
The conflict involving Kolomoysky, who is worth $1. billion according to Forbes, broke as the Ukrainian parliament passed a law that the State can manage any company in which it has a majority share.
Kolomoysky’s companies own about 43 percent of Ukrnafta, the country’s biggest oil company.
According to previous legislation, the State needed sixty percent ownership to exercise active control over a part-private company, which meant that Kolomoysky could block any government decision within the company, including withholding dividends from the State and preventing quorums at board meetings.
He also reportedly threatened to “bring 2,000 volunteer fighters to Kiev” before being persuaded to stand down.
The next day, fighters of the Dnepr-1 battalion, funded by Kolomoysky, took control of Ukrnafta’s central Kiev offices.
Over the past year, Kolomoysky has reportedly financed volunteer battalions waging war against the eastern Ukrainian militias.
The head of the Ukraine’s Security Service, the SBU, demanded that Kolomoysky be prosecuted for seizing Ukrnafta.
Outlawry On March 23, SBU chief Valentyn Nalyvaychenko said that representatives of the Dnepropetrovsk regional administration may have been involved in gang activity, a number of kidnappings and killings in the area, including the recent murder of an SBU officer in Volnovakha near Donetsk.
Problems with it may simply bury the entire financial system of Ukraine.
It is a system-based bank,” the co-chairman of the Kiev Center for Energy Strategies, Dmitry Marunych, told RIA Novosti news agency.
He is now trying to play on the same trends that the Donetsk and Lugansk People’s republics used a year ago to build their own State,” Bezpalko told RIA Novosti.
Color this one White hungarianambiance.com foreign controlled NGOs are looking for attention in Hungary as elsewhere.
Demonstrators closed both lanes of the bridge, and as a result, the police had to divert traffic to the Elisabeth bridge.
Public Transit Company BKK gave public notice that due to the demonstration both the Chain Bridge and the tunnel had been closed to traffic.
These foreign agents are desperate and quite enraged at not being able to launch their color revolution here due to the fact that the Hungarian people don’t buy their lies.
Rather than trying to temper this outrageous behavior, Obama and his eronies, ineluding outgoing Attorney General Erie Holder, have given their none-too-subtle nod of approval by assoeiating with greedy raee-peddlers like A1 Sharpton.
Spearheading a grievanee industry that’s based upon an overt hatred of Whites dating baek hundreds of years, Sharpton and eompany have beeome fabulously wealthy as their Blaek followers spiral toward destruetion.
When eoupled with multi-generational government welfare, a violent dependeney state has been ereated within the Blaek eommunity that threatens to tear Ameriea apart at the seams.
America’s Racial Powder Keg examines this phenomenon without the eonstraints of politieal eorreetness like no mainstream book has the eourage to do.
NEW BOOK EMERGES Via this book, the issue of raee will never again be seen through the same rose-eolored glasses.
Here’s a book that diseusses the taboo topie of raee relations in a way no other author or publisher ever eould.
Order from AFP, 16000 Trade Zone Avenue, Unit 406, Upper Marlboro, MD 20774-8789 or call 1-888-699-6397 toll free to charge.
Order the book online at www.americanfreepress.net. 1-888-699-6397 toll free Mon.-Thu.-5 Online at www.americanfreepress.net.
OF NATIOVAtlST TIKMIC.irr HISTORV ■ a sample packet of three recent issues of AMERICAN FREE PRESS ■ and two sample issues of THE BARNES REVIEW Revisionist history magazine.
AFP is besides The First Freedom one of the last remaining independent voices of truth countering the New World Order propaganda of the controlled mainstream media.
And THE BARNES REVIEW is THE ONLY politically INCORRECT {i.e., historically accurate) history magazine published in the United States today.
Just mention “The First Freedom Special” when ordering by phone or mail.
Call toll free at I-888-699-NEWS or send your order to the above address.
This understanding was sealed in what is known as the Balfour Declaration, Pftralcn Ctfflca, HovMhbW' ISW* PW Lord Botlieohlld^ 1 niurch pldflLQwt In to oa benaif of HU Mn.j«ety'a aov*mn«nt» th« followlns aociBra-tion of Bynt>«hy with Jowish Zionist eaplrotlons vihlch Has bosti submltUd to, ana approwad by, tha Cablnat.
I Should ba grateful If you would bring this dooloratlon to the knowledge of tha ztonlat 7ederatlon. named after the United Kingdom’s Foreign Secretary, Arthur James Balfour.
According to the Zionists, a separate homeland for Jews was necessary to prevent persecution of Jews and to fulfill their misinterpreted Bible prophecy.
All of this occurred before the so-called “Holocaust” industry took root.
However, the placement of a Jewish nation in Palestine, we believe, was foolhardy and current events tend to support this.
Ironically, and unknown to most of the modern world, prior to the establishment of Israel in 1948, there already was another Jewish homeland.
Birobidzhan Synagogue About Birobidzhan Birobidzhan is located strategically between Russia and China, two nations that it shares good relations with it.
The population is dwindling due to migration to Israel, but that could be reversed with greater economic aid and marketing.
The RNPA would support diverting U S. aid that presently goes to Israel, sending it instead to Birobidzhan.
Jewish culture is abundantly displayed, as the photo above demonstrates and with the Jewish menorah a center piece in the city’s fountain.
Although started as the Soviet Union’s answer to Zionism and the misbegotten Balfour Declaration, it may very well provide an answer to the dilemma in the Middle East.
Room for legal settlements Birobidzhan is roughly 34,000 square miles in area, compared to Israel which is only 7,951. square miles.
Looking at photos of Birobidzhan one is struck by its neat and clean appearance.
Located on the Trans-Siberian railroad, its station house is the neat example.
One gets the feeling that Birobidzhan, not Israel or Miami, would be the perfect retirement option for elderly Jews.
Birobidzhan has 14 public schools and all are required to teach Yiddish.
Young Jews are taught at an early age Jewish songs, dance and traditions.
To those Jews who insist that all they want is their own nation, Birobidzhan is the logical choice.
A menorah dominating the main square in Birobidzhan Martin Luther on the Jews By Lt.
Colonel Donald Sullivan ^ aloe910@aol.com 1 am presently reading a very old book written by Martin Luther (not to be confused with MLK) in 1542, just four years before his death.
Above all else, he was a believer in the Word of God and had the guts to tell the Pope so in no uncertain terms.
Anti-schemetism But he also wrote this little book I’m reading entitled On the Jews and Their Lies, in which he holds nothing back.
They have no reason to act this way, since we show them every kindness.
They live among us, enjoy our shield and protection, they use our country and our highways, our markers and streets.
Meanwhile our princes and rulers sit there and snore with mouths hanging open and permit the Jews to take, steal, and rob from their open money bags and treasures whatever they want.
That is, they let the Jews, by means of their usury, skin and fleece them and their subjects and make them beggars with their own money.
For the Jews, who are exiles, should really have nothing, and whatever they have must surely be our property.
They do not work, and they do not earn anything from us, nor do we give or present it to them, and yet they are in possession of our money and goods and are our masters in our own country and in their exile.
A thief is condemned to hang for the theft of ten florins, and if he robs anyone on the highway, he forfeits his head.
But when a Jew steals and robs ten tons of gold through his usury, he is more highly esteemed than God himself” Pastor Luther’s writings are no different from those of Mr Henry Ford, a man who has always had my respect and admiration.
These articles were first written in the 1920s and are featured monthly in this newspaper.
A study of either is guaranteed to open one’s eyes immediately to this lethal threat or eternally offend him because of his ignorance and lack of any sense of selfBirobidzhan o Here*s more on that capital city of the Jewish autonomous oblast. mssiatrek.org Birobidzhan is an administrative center of the Jewish autonomous oblast, a station on the Trans-Siberian railway located 75 kilometers from the border of China.
Birobidzhan was named after the two biggest rivers in the Jewish autonomous oblast Bira and Bidzhan.
This city received its name from the Evenky people’s language, as the space preservation.
Literally all our politicians, the modem day “princes and mlers,” are of the latter ilk.
I find it humorous that Martin Luther would not survive publicly today because of his “anti-Semitism,” that is, his truthtelling.
One can only wonder if the “Lutherans” would be offended to learn of the wisdom of Martin Luther and then wipe his name forever from their temples while begging the modern State of Israel for forgiveness.
If this word gets out, I suspect also that the Jews will label it a “forgery” and send it the way of the Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion and The Merchant of Venice. between these rivers Bira and Bidzhan was thus called.
Birobidzhan’s history The settlement was founded near station Tikhonkaya and became the workers’ settlement in 1928.
In May 1928, the decree was adopted according to which the committee on the use of land was responsible for inhabiting free lands in the Amur region.
Settling of this region became especially important for the USSR after the SovietChinese conflict in 1929 and occupation of Manchuria by the Japanese in 1931.
Communist Russia’s angie During the late 1920s and early 1930s, the USSR government wanted to improve relations with the West and its Birobidzhan project could influence Jewish and proJewish public opinion in Europe and America.
The prospect of having Jews inhabit the Far East was also calculated to bring in financial aid from rich Jews living abroad.
Founded Jewish settlements connected the Trans-Siberian railway with the river Amur valley.
But due to hard living conditions and severe weather this process got nowhere.
At first a considerable number of Jewish settlers arrived in 1928-1933, but over half of them later left the region.
On October 10th, 1931, the settlement Tikhonkaya was renamed Birobidzhan.
In 1934, when the Jewish autonomous oblast was formed, Birobidzhan became its administrative center.
Birobidzhan was a distributing railway center where goods for all of the region were brought.
Birobidzhan transportation The Trans-Siberian railway and federal highway M58 “Amur” run through the city.
The stations Birobidzhan I (where the train station is located), Birobidzhan II and Birobidzhan III form a triangular railway line to Leninsk on the border with China joining that country and the Trans-Siberian railway.
High crime rate Unfortunately the city is known in Russia as the place with the highest rate of drug-related crimes.
Birobidzhan, being not a large city, is a key point of transportation for drugs from the Far East of Russia and China to western Russia and Eastern Europe, because the only highway and railway pass through this city.
Also the climate of the region is rather favorable to growing narcotic plants.
The area has the highest unemployment level in the Far East, about 10% in 2012.
That’s why a lot of people (local and foreigners) are tempted to earn “easy” money hereabouts by growing, producing and transporting drugs.
They also use the drugs, hence this city’s high crime rate. 39 civilians dead in Saudi air strikes on Yemen presstv.ir ilearly 40 civilians have lost their lives as neighboring Saudi Arabia [ pushes ahead with its air strikes against the Houthi Ansarullah movement in Yemen, health officials say.
The authorities, speaking on condition of anonymity, told AFP on March 27 that twelve of the 39 victims were killed when Saudi warplanes struck residential areas close to al-Samaa military base, north of the capital city of Sana’a.
The military base is used by army units believed to be loyal to Mohammad bin Salman bin Abdulaziz A1 Saud received fugitive Yemeni president Yemen’s Houthi Ansarullah fighters inspect the damage at the scene of Saudi air strikes near the airport in the capital, Sana’a, on March 26.
The military aggression against Yemen came as fugitive president Abd Rabbuh Mansur Hadi arrived in the Saudi capital, Riyadh, on Thursday night.
Riyadh said it had launched the strikes to defend the “legitimate government” of Hadi upon his request.
Saudi air strikes against the impoverished Arab country have drawn condemnation from many countries, including Iran, Iraq and Russia, as well as the Lebanese resistance movement, Hezbollah.
And this blatant invasion of Yemen’s sovereignty by the Saudi government comes against a backdrop of total silence on the part of international bodies, especially the United Nations.
The world body has so far failed to show any reaction whatsoever to violation of the sovereignty of one of its members by Riyadh.
Let’s saturate the neighborhoods and pubiic events in your town where those peopie who can handie the truth gather. former Republican Guard Commander Brigadier General Ahmed Ali Abdullah Saleh.
Three air strikes also targeted the presidential compound in southern Sana’a in the wee hours of that day, witnesses said.
Eight people were wounded when an anti-aircraft missile slammed into a market in central Sana’a that day.
One of the injured is in a critical condition, a security official said.
Tribal sources also said overnight airborne assaults struck a military installation in the oil-producing central province of Marib, which is used by an army brigade loyal to Saleh.
On March 26, Saudi fighter jets bombed an army camp located in the southern outskirts of Sana’a, inflicting “dozens” of casualties at the camp.
More threats Press TV’s correspondent in the Yemeni capital, said on March 27 that Saudi Arabia had reportedly given a three-day ultimatum to Yemen’s Houthi Ansarullah fighters to withdraw from all political and security institutions and key military bases in the country, and leave the capital, otherwise they will face intensified attacks.
He noted that according to Ansarullah leader Abdul-Malik al-Houthi’s speech on March 26, two fronts would be established in the country, a defensive front to preserve security in the capital, and an offensive front to counter the Saudi strikes.
On March 21, a provocative Dragoon Ride 1,100 show-of-force U S. convoy began moving through six Eastern European countries en route to their Vilseck, Germany, home base.
They were to continue through April 1, along the way positioning U S. heavy weapons close to Russia’s borders.
S Army European commander General Ben Hodges is involved in Kiev’s war on Donbass.
So do his Pentagon superiors, the White House, Congress and media scoundrels claiming otherwise.
Obama’s Dragoon Ride and Atlantic Resolve show-of-force may be a prelude for direct confrontation with Russia ahead.
Washington’s so-called European Reassurance Initiative and related efforts support its NATO allies and partners.
The Pentagon established six new front line command centers in Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Romania all former Soviet republics or Warsaw Pact countries.
RT International asked State Department press office director Jeff Rathke to explain Washington’s hypocritical double standard.
He lied claiming no U S. criticism exists, ignoring frequent anti-Russian comments expressed by department spokeswoman Jen Psaki.
Last month, Washington pressured Vietnam to prevent Russian aircraft from refueling on its territory.
In February, U S. surveillance aircraft provocatively flew over disputed South China Sea islands.
No third world country this Challenging Russia heads toward direct confrontation.
Then Washington willfully sabotaging multiple Russian spearheaded ceasefire initiatives assures continued conflict.
The price of imperial arrogance is resumed full-scale war at Obama’s discretion perhaps heading toward setting the entire conflict ablaze.
Preventing it requires Western European leaders breaking with Washington on Ukraine policy allying with Russia for regional peace and security.
On March 19, European Council President Martin Schulz called diplomacy “the only viable solution” to resolving Ukraine’s conflict.
Kiev’s puppets take orders from Washington, which wants war, not peace.
He reneged on granting Donbass autonomous self-rule status, and is maintaining an economic blockade.
Lavrov called for more Normandy format four-party talks to try preventing what increasingly looks likely.
On March 19, Russia submitted a draft Security Council resolution for the full implementation of Minsk terms agreed on.
The Donetsk People’s Republic Defense Ministry reported 34 shellings in one recent 24 hours.
Listen to cutting-edge discussions with distinguished guests on the Progressive Radio News Hour on the Progressive Radio Network.
From the State Department, she generates wars and from op-ed pages he demands Congress buy more weapons.
There’s a payoff, too, as grateful military contractors kick in money to think tanks where other Kagans work.
This extraordinary husband-and-wife duo makes quite a one-two punch for the Military-Industrial Complex, an insideoutside team that creates the need for more military spending, applies political pressure to ensure higher appropriations and watches as thankful weapons manufacturers lavish grants on like-minded hawkish Washington think tanks.
Not only does the broader community of Prominent neocon intellectual Robert Kagan neoconservatives stand to benefit but so do other members of the Kagan clan, including Robert’s brother Frederick at the American Enterprise Institute and his wife Kimberly, who runs her own shop called the Institute for the Study of War.
But leadership occasionally means telling people what they don’t want to hear.
Yet, if it weren’t for Nuland’s efforts as Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs, the Ukraine crisis might not exist.
A neocon holdover who advised Vice President Dick Cheney, Nuland gained promotions under former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and received backing, too, from current Secretary of State John Kerry.
Confirmed to her present job in September 2013, Nuland soon undertook an extraordinary effort to promote “regime change” in Ukraine.
She personally urged on business leaders and political activists to challenge elected President Viktor Yanukovych.
UnAmerican activities Working with other key neocons, including National Endowment for Democracy President Carl Gershman and Senator John McCain, Nuland made clear that the United States would back a “regime change” against Yanukovych, which grew more likely as mercenaries poured into Kiev from western Ukraine.
Nuland treated her proposed new lineup of Ukrainian officials as if she were trading baseball cards, casting aside some while valuing others.
Ukraine’s “regime change” The coup against Yanukovych played out on February 22, 2014, as the militias and other violent extremists overran government buildings forcing the president and other officials to flee for their lives.
Nuland’s State Department quickly declared the new regime “legitimate” and Yatsenyuk took over as prime minister.
Russian President Vladimir Putin, who had been presiding over the Winter Olympics at Sochi, was caught off guard by the coup next door and held a crisis session to determine how to protect ethnic Russians and the Russian naval base in Crimea, leading to Crimea’s secession from Ukraine and annexation by Russia a year ago.
Though there was no evidence that Putin had instigated the Ukraine crisis and indeed all the evidence indicated the opposite the State Department peddled a propaganda theme to the credulous mainstream U S. news media about Putin having somehow orchestrated the situation in Ukraine so he could begin invading Europe.
As the new Kiev government launched a brutal “anti-terrorism operation” to subdue an uprising among the large ethnic Russian populations of eastern and southern Ukraine, Nuland and other American neocons pushed for economic sanctions against Russia and demanded arms for the coup regime.
Amid the barrage of “information warfare” aimed at both the U S. and world publics, a new Cold War took shape.
Though Nuland wouldn’t comment specifically on her husband’s attack on Obama, she indicated that she held similar views.
Sinking a peace deai And, whenever peace threatens to break out in Ukraine, Nuland jumps in to make sure that the interests of war are protected.
In February, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Francois Hollande hammered out a plan for a ceasefire and a political settlement, known as Minsk-2, prompting Nuland to engage in more behind-the-scenes maneuvering to sabotage the deal.
In another overheard conversation in Munich, Germany Nuland mocked the peace agreement as “Merkel’s Moscow thing,” according to the German newspaper Bild, citing unnamed sources, likely from the German government which may have bugged the conference room in the luxurious Bayerischer Hof hotel and then leaked the details.
According to the Bild story, Nuland also laid out a strategy for countering Merkel’s diplomacy by using strident language to frame the Ukraine crisis.
Nuland sounded determined to sink the Merkel-Hollande peace initiative even though it was arranged by two major U S. allies and was blessed by President Obama.
And, last month, the deal seemed indeed to have been blown apart by Nuland’s hand-picked Prime Minister Yatsenyuk, who inserted a poison pill into the legislation to implement the Minsk-2 political settlement.
The Ukrainian parliament in Kiev added a clause that, in effect, requires the rebels to first surrender and let the Ukrainian government organize elections before a federalized structure is determined.
Minsk-2 had called for dialogue with the representatives of these rebellious eastern territories en route to elections and the establishment of broad autonomy for the region.
Instead, reflecting Nuland’s hardline position, Kiev refused to talk with rebel leaders and insisted on establishing control over these territories before the process can move forward.
If the legislation stands, the result will almost surely be a resumption of war between military forces backed by nuclear-armed Russia and the United States, a very dangerous development for the world.
Not only will the Ukrainian civil war resume but so will the Cold War between Washington and Moscow with lots of money to be made by the Military-Industrial Complex.
On Friday, March 20, Nuland’s husband, Robert Kagan, drove home that latter point in the neocon Washington Post.
Palantir supplied software to U S. military intelligence in Afghanistan.
Change Since its founding in 2007, ISW has focused mostly on wars in the Middle East, especially Iraq and Afghanistan, including closely cooperating with General David Petraeus when he commanded U S. forces in those countries.
In other words, the Family Kagan has almost a self-perpetuating, circular business model working the inside corridors of government power to stimulate wars while simultaneously influencing the public debate through think-tank reports and op-ed columns in favor of more military spending and then collecting grants and other funding from thankful military contractors.
The only thing that makes the NulandKagan operation special perhaps is that the whole process is all in the family.
Investigative reporter Robert Parry broke many of the Iran-Contra stories for The Associated Press and Newsweek in the 1980s.
Russia blames Kiev for heavy weapons deployment presstv.ir iVloscow has accused Kiev of violating a recent ceasefire deal with pro-Russia forces following reports of the deployment of heavy weapons in eastern Ukraine.
The claims of Ukrainian authorities that all of its heavy weapons have been withdrawn are once again proving to be false,” the ministry said.
OSCE mission This comes as Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko says his government has withdrawn its heavy artillery from the line of contact in eastern Ukraine.
On March 22, Russia’s Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov also said that Kiev was attempting to sideline the mission of the OSCE, which is tasked with monitoring the implementation of the truce, by falsely claiming that it is fulfilling its duty.
The OSCE has “significantly improved the quality of its reports,” the Russian official said.
He slammed a request by Ukraine for an international peacekeeping force to be deployed in the east, arguing that such a unilateral move undermines the Minsk truce deal.
Lavrov emphasized that the deployment of such a force can only take place if the pro-Russia forces in eastern Ukraine also back the move.
Ukraine’s warring sides reached a deal, dubbed Minsk II, at a summit attended by the leaders of Russia, France, and Germany in the Belarusian capital city of Minsk on February 11 and 12.
The agreement introduced measures such as a ceasefire, which took effect on February 15, the pullout of heavy weapons and constitutional reforms in Ukraine by the end of the year.
War on self-government The two mainly Russian-speaking regions of Donetsk and Lugansk have been hit by deadly clashes between pro-Russia forces and the Ukrainian army since Kiev launched military operations in April last year to crush pro-Russia protests there.
Around 1. million people have also been forced from their homes over the past months as a result of the turmoil.
Peacekeeping for both sides Ukrainian soldiers man a post on a front line near the small eastern city of Kurakhove on March 11, 2015.
Foul carrots, crooked sticks Nuland noted that “despite some publicly-stated concerns, those countries have supported sanctions” in the European Union Council.
The United States, the European Union and their allies blame Russia for fueling the internal conflict in Ukraine and have imposed a series of sanctions against Russia targeting its defense, banking, and energy sectors.
Russia has repeatedly denied the allegations and responded with her own export bans.
Some European Nations including Greece, Hungary and Cyprus have opposed further sanctions, and Spain has recently stated its opposition as well.
Egypt’s deposed Islamist president, Mohamed Morsi, waves from inside the defendant’s cage during his trial at the police academy in Cairo on January 8, 2015.
An Egyptian court has forcibly retired 31 judges for having shown sympathy toward their country’s legitimately-elected President who now sits behind bars. presstv.ir n March 14, the Disciplinary Council of the Cairo Court of Appeal sent thirtyone Egyptian judges into compulsory retirement for having signed a statement in support of Mohamed Morsi during the 2013 anti-coup sit-ins, saying that engaging in political activities breaches Egypt’s judicial regulations.
The court, however, acquitted 25 other judges accused of the same charge.
This is while those judges who support the 2013 military coup now in charge have simultaneously faced no restrictions by the country’s judiciary in expressing their opinions.
Rights groups have severely criticized the government of President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi for launching a heavy-handed crackdown on journalists and stifling freedom of speech in the Arab country.
Rights groups say this crackdown on the supporters of Morsi, Egypt’s first democratically-elected president, has left over 1,400 people dead and 22,000 arrested, while hundreds have been sentenced to death in mass trials.
Morsi was ousted in July 2013 in a military coup led by Sisi who was then the army commander.
Foul-mouthed huntress Victoria Nuland EDITOR’S NOTE Plutarch’s Parallel Lives compares the great Romans against their Greek counterparts.
We present an analogy here between today’s Ukrainian and Egyptian coups, both of them backed by that coup occupying the District of Corruption.
Students riot In French Canadian Quebec presstv.ir demonstration against austerity policies in Quebec City in eastern Canada has led to confrontation with the police, who used teargas to disperse the protesters.
This protest took place outside the National Assembly building on March 26.
Police had already arrested dozens of anti-austerity protesters during a student demonstration in Quebec City on March 24, when hundreds had taken to the city’s downtown.
The students were marching against government cuts which they said would negatively impact public-sector workers.
No permit Police called the move illegal since the protesters had not provided their itinerary from the outset.
The protest, which had been organized by the anti-capitalist Revolutionary Student Movement, led to “two mass arrests,” according to local law enforcement.
Tens of thousands of students have gone on strike in the city, as well as in the cities of Chicoutimi and Montreal.
The Tuesday, March 24, demonstrators in Montreal also saw police firing tear gas and reportedly ready to use rubber bullets and sound bombs.
Continual unrest Students have been protesting across Canada’s province of Quebec ever since February 2012 in a bid to mount pressure against the provincial government to drop a plan to increase tuition fees.
S military troops to the region, though reportedly none had experience in public health and no one had produced rigorous laboratory proof of a single person dying from something called Ebola virus.
Wars over blood diamonds and colonial genocidal tribal wars have left a devastated, mal-nourished population in its wake.
Further investigation uncovered the Pentagon was developing an Ebola vaccine with Monsanto and suspicion was that the 3,000 U S. troops were sent to force the population to become human guinea pigs for the untested substances.
Today, four years after, the country is anarchy pure with roving lawless bands killing and looting.
S Government, have teamed up with “Mr Vaccinate All Africans” Bill Gates, a eugenics protege and intimate of David Rockefeller.
They are colluding to contaminate the incredibly rich and productive soils of Africa with GMO, GMO from a company where Gates is a major stockholder.
State Department and USAID, the ostensible Agency for International Development which is intimately tied to the agenda of the CIA and Pentagon’s AFRICOM, together with Monsanto, to push unwanted GMO crops, especially Monsanto GMO maize, on African countries.
Haidee Swanby from the African Center for Biosafety who authored the report stated, “The U S., the world’s top producer of GM crops, is seeking new markets for American GM crops in Africa.
According to Swanby, USAID has two projects in Africa which “help” various African governments draw up national biosafety laws as such consumer protection is lacking in all but seven African countries.
However, USAID in collusion with Monsanto, world’s largest GMO purveyor, drafts laws that permit insufficiently tested GMO seeds such as Monsanto GMO maize, to be considered “biosafe,” claiming GMO is the solution to African hunger, a brazen lie as no GMO plant on the market today has been modified to increase harvest yield.
It puts the “precautionary principle” as primary If you have not sufficiently proven safety of GMO and other bio-engineered crops, protection of human health is primary, not free trade.
Once the Protocol came into force, Washington began to lobby African governments and institutions (among others) to accept GMO crops with minimal safety assessment, hoping their lack of institutional depth would allow them to be either fooled or corrupted.
The USAID is assisting Regional Economic Communities in Africa to develop policies aimed not at ensuring biosafety, but at limiting regulation, which they consider to be a barrier to regional trade in GMO food and crops.
The Swanby report documents how the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation works hand-in-glove with USAID by funding organizations such as the African Agriculture Technology Foundation whose aim is to promote introduction of GMO crops into Africa.
Gates also works closely with the Rockefeller and Gates Foundations in their Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa, which pushes GMO crops as the wonder advance in biological science.
If harvest failure, declining crop yields and mandatory use of highly toxic Roundup weed killer from Monsanto which has been proven to kill cells in human embryos can be called a biological wonder, we should perhaps see it through the eyes of eugenics advocates like Bill Gates and David Rockefeller who have dreamed of biochemical population reduction for decades.
President, through the USAID, in an alliance with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and Monsanto to spread death and destruction of natural agriculture in Africa.
Their dark secret is that they are wittingly trying to kill off the darker-skinned peoples of the African Continent.
State Department as Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, and her responsibility for the Rwandan Genocide of more than one million Tutsis in 1994 under Bill Clinton.
Zionism is Communism By Senator Jack Tenney, once head of California Un-American Activities Committee.
S TV exposed as social engineering tool in Korea By Tony Cartalucci journal-neo.org When Wired published its article, “The Plot to Free North Korea with Smuggled Episodes of ‘Friends,’” it probably hoped that its impressionable, politically ignorant audience would not pick up on the underlying facts and their implications, and simply see a “cute” anecdote poking fun at the besieged East Asian country while inflating their own sense of unwarranted cultural superiority.
State Department’s National Endowment for Democracy , a de facto “department of regime change” backed by Wall Street’s Fortune 500, solely for the interests of Wall Street’s Fortune 500.
Wired Americans Readers of Wired’s latest, long-winded spin on U S.-backed sedition abroad also most likely missed the fact that, if TV shows from America are considered a tool for social engineering in North Korea, they are most likely being used as a tool of social engineering in the United States as well.
The degradation of American culture, the family, and weakening of local communities, versus the growing centralized dominance of corporatefinancier monopolies and their increasingly draconian police and surveillance state is a direct result of this.
Kang likens the USB sticks to the red pill from The Matrix: a mind-altering treatment that has the power to shatter a world of illusions.
They realize that this isn’t the enemy; it’s what they want for themselves.
Indeed, convincing a population to be self-absorbed moral and social degenerates is “mind-altering,” however it has little or nothing to do with the pursuit of freedom.
Local communities that are incapable of organizing themselves, because individuals themselves are incapable of building families, reduces the potential of competitors rising up and challenging the status quo established by Wall Street and Washington.
Instructed reactions More importantly, it encourages servile dependency on a particular type of consumerist paradigm perfected and exclusively dominated by Western interests that best feeds the sort of self-absorbed behavior endlessly promoted across Western media.
Instead, they are working to corral North Koreans out of one cage and into another.
Some might argue this “other cage” is more comfortable, but it is still a cage nonetheless.
It is not done for any altruistic purpose, but simply to enroll millions more from yet another region of the planet into Wall Street’s global-spanning, unsustainable, exploitative consumerist paradigm one which strangles the environment, society and individuals.
S corporate-financier interests on other people through tricks when possible and by force when necessary.
Wired’s article, like many others it has written to spin what is essentially colonialism 2.0, is meant to give readers a sense of moral superiority over the West’s many perceived enemies.
State Department’s role in this particular propaganda campaign illustrates that not only are people being manipulated, they are manipulated through an extraordinarily dishonest campaign.
No less misleading When offering “freedom” to others, truth and transparency are essential.
The ill-informed or misinformed cannot make truly honest decisions about their future.
State Department a fact never mentioned by Kang and the NKSC is just as deceptive.
Russian S-300 missiles capable of targeting near space enter service rt.com IN^ear space targets can now be hit by the Russian army’s mobile tactical air defense S-300 and S-400 systems, as a much anticipated long-range missile enters service.
It is designed to engage hard targets such as nuclear warheads, rather than satellites.
This missile’s specialization is not soft targets like low Earth orbit satellites with easily intercepted predetermined orbits.
The 40N6 missile is capable of exo-atmospheric interception of IRBM warheads in their terminal phase, leave alone any aircraft target within the missile range’s perimeter.
As for securely intercepting warheads of the ICBMs (intercontinental ballistic missile), this task is going to be delegated to the upcoming S-500 Prometheus air space defense systems that are scheduled to enter service next year.
Reportedly, the final customizing of the 40N6 missile has been going on since 2008, which is explained as an extremely challenging assigned task to guarantee the declared target kill altitude at maximum range.
The media reported that the 40N6 missile passed final State quality tests in January 2015.
A source in Russia’s Defense Ministry told Tass news agency that the new missile is going to be supplied “primarily to the Western Command,” the regions of Russia bordering NATO member States.
The 40N6 missile is a genuine breakthrough for Russia’s national airspace defense, as it significantly alters the operational capability of missile systems already in service.
Arsenal Russia possesses around 2,000 systems of various modifications of the S-300 Favorite and first-rate S-400 Triumph.
Just one S-400 Triumph battery can simultaneously attack 36 airborne targets with 72 missiles where the target’s maximum speed is 4. kilometers per second.
Shielded Well integrated with thousands of other air defense systems scattered throughout the country, they ensure deeply echeloned air defense of all vital military, industrial and administrative installations.
All of Russia’s S-300 systems have been upgraded to the latest versions as production of this type of air defense system has been suspended in favor of manufacturing the S-400.
Now, with the 40N6 missile available, S-300 complexes are getting space defense quality.
The 40N6 is also a common missile for combat army and site protection air defense.
S version of sea-based Standard Missile 3 Block lA-IB, which began service in April 2014 after several years of hit and miss testing.
In 2012, RT reported the naval version of the S-400 and possibly the S-500 also being developed.
Deployable where needed Unlike the sea-based SM-3, these S-300 and S-400 systems are fully mobile and may be positioned at virtually any place where a tank-based propelling system might take them.
Glaring incompatibility This was especially unfathomable in regards to Germany, a fellow Christian Nation.
The Soviet Union was a dictatorship under Stalin, the U S. a representative democracy that had elected Roosevelt to serve as its president.
That uniting bond was the Jews, Communism being a Jewish ideology adhered to by Stalin and his Jewish supporters, even as Roosevelt was surrounded by Jewish advisors.
That this alliance would break up after the war and result in bitter enmity producing the Cold War was obvious.
But even throughout that postwar period Jews were allowed to do business with the arch enemy of the United States, the Soviet Union.
Years ago I saw a picture of his elderly wife in Time magazine, beautifully gowned and dripping with jewels.
I especially remember a huge diamond necklace and assumed it came from the treasure trove of the Czars, at one time perhaps having graced the neck of a Czarina.
The motto of the Jews has always been “business is business,” unhindered by any loyalty to the Nations in which they live.
It seems that Armand Hammer was amply The First Freedom isn’t for everybody.
Miracle Let me put in a good word for the Cold War; it was that confrontation which saved Germany and the Germans from having been wiped off this earth, as suggested by the Jew Theodor Kaufman in his booklet Germany Must Perish.
All of Germany’s territory was meant to be parceled out among its neighbors and every German male sterilized.
But the Soviet Union and the United States, once bosom buddies when aiming to destroy Germany, after the war having turned deadly antagonists, each side now wanted its part of Germany to help contain and fight the other.
Gorby was also about to release Rudolf Hess, Hitler’s second in command, held throughout his long prison sentence incommunicado.
If freed he could have talked, so the English silenced him, murdered Hess in his cell.
Unfortunately, an alcoholic named Boris Yeltsin usurped power from Gorby and, as a willing Jewish stooge, killed off Russia’s legislative Duma in 1996, which merited a few lines in the American news media.
He allowed the Jewish oligarchs to ravish and plunder Russia to their hearts contents, leading to the Russian people’s complete China’s mega hungarianambience.com Ihe China International Payment System is due to kick off this year, bringing the yuan a step closer to becoming a global trading currency, as the new system will make payment transfers just as easy as in dollars and euros.
The launch is expected in September or October, depending on how tests go, a source told Reuters.
Another person with direct knowledge of the matter said the goal is to start the first phase before December, Reuters reported.
Sovereignty recovered Putin became to his country what Adolf Hitler had stood for in Germany; he took Russia back from the Jewish oligarchs and created prosperity; his approval ratings are in the 80th percentile.
No longer in thrall of Communism, a revitalized Russia under Putin is recovering its Christian roots.
Our Jewish-controlled media do not like this Russia one bit, and agitate not only for sanctions but war “in order to support” the Ukraine.
In the early thirties there had been no calls for sanctions by the West when the Soviet Union collectivized the Ukrainian farmers, plundered their grain and seed corn creating that mass starvation known locally as the Holodomor.
Mediacracy’s vendetta Putin and Russia are now relentlessly maligned in the Western media.
I have my own ideas as to why, and it has nothing to REUTERS/PETAR KUJUNDZIC other international payment systems, which will make transactions more fluid and rapid.
The super-network will consolidate and replace the existing multiple clearing houses that process yuan payments, and rival majors like Visa and MasterCard.
The move should help bump the yuan’s presence on the international stage, as the payment system will make it faster and do with Russia’s taking back the Crimean peninsula and adjacent territories, mostly populated by Russians to begin with who have voted for rejoining their mother country.
It was Putin, a true Russian patriot, who slowly but cleverly took his country back from the Jews.
It is for this reason alone that Putin and, with him, his country are in the dog house.
If the Jews and their Jewish media manage to push us into an armed confrontation with Russia, using the Ukraine as a pretext, it will be the end of our world.
USrael has nuclear weapons at the ready in Germany under its exclusive control, as no German is allowed into that arsenal.
If war comes with Russia, Putin and his people would be stupid to remain like sitting ducks waiting for the firing of those bombs.
They do not give a hoot about the American people. easier to carry out cross-border transactions using the Chinese currency.
It’s the fifth most-used currency in international payments, according to the SWIFT network.
In December 2014, about 2.17 percent of payments were made in yuan, up from 0.63 percent in 2013.
For a while China has been exploring methods to cut dependence on the dollar and other hard currencies in international trade, hoping to settle more deals in yuan.
China, the world’s second biggest economy, grew by 7. percent in 2014, but has trimmed its 2015 forecast to seven percent, the lowest growth rate in the last 25 years.
After a certain Federal informer in a little town in Missouri came up missing, it was presumed by the authorities that he had been abducted.
By John Peeples firstfreedom.net t should be noted that the Federals were claiming Confederate military forces had captured their informer.
The Southern hostages held by those Yankees, however, had no connection with said troops.
Both pro-Southern and pro-Northem citizens made pleas on behalf of the innocent men.
That order had the highest backing from all levels of the Federal government.
At 1:00 PM on 18 October 1862, the ten men were loaded on wagons, seated on newly-made coffins and taken to the fairgrounds where the hideous act was carried out.
For, after all, this was not the first time such an act had taken place.
No help could be expected from the Yankee high command because General Merrill nearby had ordered the execution of ten Southerners himself.
No, the time had come for this group of men to pay the supreme price for believing in States’ Rights and their Southern homeland.
On reaching the fairgrounds, the men were placed in a row and seated on their coffins.
Some few feet away stood thirty Federal soldiers, and behind them another thirty in reserve.
The only problem was, with such a fusillade no more than three of those hostages were killed instantly.
Not to be outdone, the reserves took their time when moving in to shoot each of those survivors at point-blank range with pistols until they all stopped moaning.
The hostage untouched by that first volley sat there on his coffin watching as they moved with each shot down the line closer to his eternity.
Not only in the South, but also in London and even in the North, decent people made loud objections against that barbaric act.
Twice during Lincoln’s cabinet meetings the issue was brought up about how to put the best face on this atrocity.
McNeil was promoted to the rank of Brigadier General of the United States Volunteers after carrying out such a barbarous action while in charge of those “loyal” Missouri troops.
And pinning that star on him was, of course, none other than the all-loving and tender-hearted Abraham Lincoln.
In 1863, General Thomas Ewing sent to prison as many wives, mothers and sisters of William Clarke Quantrill’s Confederate partisan band as his troops could round up.
Ewing had been warned that the building was in danger of collapse, and the guerrillas believed it had been deliberately sabotaged.
In retaliation Quantrill and his men sacked and burned Lawrence, Kansas.
Ewing then issued an order forcing all persons in four counties of western Missouri living more than one mile from a military base to leave the State.
The ensuing arson was so thorough that stone chimneys could be seen for hundreds of miles.
A desolated country, women, men and children, some almost naked, many on foot and others in wagons left Missouri.
When guerrillas attacked, the Union confiscated property in the area and sold it at auction.
Suspects sat in prison where, confined in crowded and insufficiently-ventilated quarters, by 1864 the mortality rate among them reached fifty percent.
The charges against civilian prisoners in many cases were of trivial character.
After suffering repeated battlefield defeats in the Shenandoah Valley at the hands of General “Stonewall” Jackson, Federal General John Pope responded by commanding his troops to essentially begin waging war on the civilian population of Virginia.
Anyone who took such an oath and was later suspected of being “disloyal” would be shot, and his property seized.
By the end of 1862, there was a large upsurge in “authorized foraging,” as the Master War Criminal Abraham Lincoln Federal government called such pillaging and plundering of civilian property in the South.
Lincoln wanted Southern civilians to suffer, which required him to abandon international law and the U S. military’s own code as he began waging total war, a total war waged against Southern citizens, noncombatants, mostly women, children and old men.
Lincoln’s entire battle plan from the very beginning was to wage war on civilians as well as the Confederate States Army.
His overall strategy, devised by Union General Winfield Scott, was called “the Anaconda Plan,” since it would strangle the South’s economy by attempting to blockade all the coastal ports and waterways including the Mississippi River.
Any naval blockade is necessarily a war on the country’s civilian population as well as its armed forces.
So severe was the blockade of Southern ports that even drugs and medicines were on the list of items that Lincoln decreed could not be permitted to enter the Southern States.
Navy succeeded in this endeavor, many civilians suffered and perished for lack of such essentials.
War criminals Further evidence that waging war on civilians was not just the result of a few out-of-control soldiers but the deliberate policy of the Lincoln administration is the fact that his most trusted generals.
Grant, Sherman and Sheridan, had excelled at those practices for years.
He wanted it conducted as official policy of the Union Army, approved by the President and the General-in-Chief and executed by a high-ranking officer.
Sherman would wage that war against helpless civilians, women, children and the elderly, many of them at the time already barely getting enough to eat.
He would burn some Southerners out of their homes and subject the rest of them to slow starvation by destroying all the animals and crops that his men hadn’t consumed.
We note also that the co-author of the Communist Manifesto and co-founder of modern-day Communism, Friedrich Engels, also held this opinion of Sherman.
Senator John Sherman, were all for a strong and indivisible centralized government.
Crimes were committed on both sides, yet the Confederates’ offenses came to but a fraction of the Federal Army’s.
General Robert E Lee invaded the North, but forbade any forays against civilians.
In the autumn of 1862 Sherman and his army were attempting to bring Memphis, Tennessee, under Federal control but their Mississippi River troop transports and gunboats were being fired upon by snipers.
Frustrated by his inability to hunt down and subdue the Confederate soldiers.
Walcutt, to burn the entire town but leave one house standing to mark the place where a town once existed.
His troops also beat to death a young man who was a guerrilla suspect, but whose family turned out to be Unionist.
His loving wife responded by expressing her sincerest wishes that the war would be a war “of extermination and that all would be driven like the swine into the sea.
Thus the satanic beast out from the pits of hell implemented his total warfare by sword, fire and starvation.
Sherman’s fame was yet to become forever associated with his “March to the Sea” campaign all through Georgia and the Carolinas, but he had already developed his methods in Mississippi, Alabama and southern Tennessee.
It was in these States that he began directing his operations not only against the Confederate Army, but also the civilian population.
Similar bombardments occurred in other Southern towns and cities under his orders.
With Jackson all but demolished, Sherman’s army of looters entered and proceeded to Sherman’s looters sack whatever remained, dragging into the streets and destroying pianos and articles of furniture, seizing whatever appeared to be of value.
Those articles they could not carry they vandalized, thrust their bayonets into pictures, broke mirrors, knocked out windows and even removed doors from their hinges.
Under his watchful eye those looters sacked farms, plantations and slave cabins.
By comparison, its combined efforts against the Islamic State would amount to $6. million.
If you read the document, it refers to “Russian aggression,” that’s a direct quote, “destabilizing Europe” and it uses the term “revanchist” now.
So to suggest this is a little off the edge, it’s much more than an exaggeration.
One of them is that the U S. pays about 70 percent of NATO’s costs at this point and they want to scale that down and so they are trying to get the NATO members to scale their contributions up to 2 percent of their budgets.
The British have already announced that they have no intention of doing that.
So part of this scare tactic is to get NATO countries to come up with some more money.
But I think the verbiage is really getting out of control, I mean you now have U S. paratroopers training the Ukrainian national guard, in Poland you have U S. special forces, in Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia... von Clausewitz once said that the realm of war is uncertainty (“War is the realm of uncertainty”) and I see it moving in that direction and it’s a little scary.
S gestures that have banned Russian citizens from entering the United States.
S stooges unwelcome It is not known how many politicians are affected by the ban, but most likely Former Hungarian Prime Minister Gordon Bajnai is among them suggests Russian newspaper Izvestia.
According to Russian press reports, the majority of those blacklisted are European politicians known for their anti-Russian phobias.
No fewer than 60 U S. and 13 Canadian senior government and parliamentary politicians or government officials are also blacklisted.
Izvestia reported that at least sixteen Hungarian citizens are also affected by the ban.
These are politicians, public officials, public figures who “hold openly antiRussian views, among them a former Hungarian prime minister” [most probably Gordon Bajnai], wrote the paper.
President Barack Obama’s deputy national security advisor Caroline Atkinson and two more presidential advisors.
Also on the list are Republican Senator John McCain and the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Robert Menendez.
The Russian Foreign Ministry declined to name those individuals affected by the ban; it did not rule out that more politicians will be added to the list if the U S. and the European Union introduce new punitive measures against Russian citizens.
States introduced punitive measures against Russian citizens last year after Crimea voted in a democratically held referendum to rejoin Russia.
Update Index.hu has suggested that instead of Bajnai, Former Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsany could be the one affected by the Russian government’s travel ban.
The latter while prime minister kept very good relations with Putin, but later betrayed the Russian president just like his own country and today has become one of the most vocal anti-Putin critics in Europe, openly denouncing the Russian president for not allowing Western multinational corporations to loot and pillage his country and make Russia a vassal State.
It is no secret that Gyurcsany is one of the most ardent promoters of foreign interests in Hungary.
He and his fringe party are one hundred percent behind the creation of the United States of Europe and the elimination of European Nation States.
During his term in power, Gyurcsany has already deserved the title of being the first Hungarian prime minister of the post-1956 era who ordered police to shoot peaceful protesters during the 2006 unrest.
Apparently, Gyurcsany will apply for a Russian visa, so we may soon learn whether he is the one affected by the travel ban. that in that statement about all the things the Russians are doing and that we are going to have fair and balanced reporting.
And Fox News is probably the most editorial of all of the American outlets.
Again I think the reason is that for all of the talk about the Islamic State I do not think the U S. considers the Zionism is Communism By Senator Jack Tenney, once head of California Un-American Activities Committee.
I don’t think that they see them as a real threat to American security.
I think they are in competition with a number of countries in the world, Russia and China being the two most prominent.
This is not about destabilizing Europe, the revanchism, Russian aggression any more than it is about the Chinese aggression in East Asia.
What it’s about is the U S. wants to remain the big dog on the block and the competition for that right now is Russia and China.
And both of those countries have established alternate poles of power and finance in the world Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the BRICS countries etc.
And the U S. doesn’t like this, it doesn’t like this new Chinese bank which is formed up, doesn’t like it the bank which the Russians have put together for Central Asia.
The danger is if you talk in a certain way you may convince a number of people that that’s the way things really are, and that’s the danger of uncertainty and where mistakes can lead to some very bad things.
More armchair warriors Jmt about 100% of the Ziocons pushing cowardly murders by unmanned air attack like this have never seen a day in uniform. presstv.ir A.t least nine people have lost their lives in a suspected U S. drone strike in Afghanistan’s eastern province of Nangarhar.
Two intelligence officials in Pakistan, speaking only on condition of anonymity, said Tuesday’s air raid [March 24] targeted militants in the Nazyan area of Nangarhar near Pakistan’s Khyber Agency.
S The assailants were reportedly from a terrorist group that has recently pledged allegiance to pro-Taliban militants in Pakistan.
MQ-9 Reaper drone firing a Hellfire missile A spokesman for the Nangarhar governor, Ahmad Zia Abdulazai, said he was only aware of a Monday air strike that killed two suspected militants.
Since 2004, the U S. has been carrying out drone strikes in Afghanistan and several other Muslim countries, such as Yemen, Pakistan, Afghanistan and Somalia despite international criticism.
While Washington claims the targets of the drone attacks are al-Qaeda militants, local officials and witnesses have on many occasions maintained that civilians have been the victims of the attacks over the past few years.
U S. officials rarely inform their respective governments about drone attacks that often target civilians.
Uruguay won’t accept more Gitmo inmates Tower of Guantanamo Bay prison in Cuba El Salvador is the only other Latin American country that has granted Guantanamo Bay prisoners asylum, granting sanctuary to two in 2012.
The Guantanamo Bay prison at the U S. naval base in Cuba was set up in January 2002 to keep terror suspects captured during the so-called U S. war on terror.
War of terror presstv.ir LJruguayan Foreign Minister Rodolfo Nin Novoa says his country will stop granting asylum to inmates from the Guantanamo Bay prison in Cuba.
Nin Novoa explained Uruguay has faced “cultural and infrastructure” problems in dealing with refugees.
This comes after cases of domestic violence incidents involving refugees was reported by local media in Uruguay.
Nin Novoa also said Uruguay’s decision on accepting new refugees will be put on hold until the end of the year.
S military prison for 12 years over their alleged links with the al-Qaeda terrorist group but had never been charged.
Mujica, who was himself a prisoner once during the former military rule in the country, gave the Guantanamo prisoners asylum in the South American State on “humanitarian” grounds, saying the six had fallen victim to an “atrocious” kidnapping.
An inmate in the yard at the Guantanamo Bay prison in Cuba However, Obama faces difficulties closing the prison due to resistance from Republican lawmakers in Congress.
But this writer noted in the 1920s already that everything they called for was happening.
By Henry Ford The Dearborn Independent 1 January 1922 can hardly be an accident that antagonism directed against the Jews is to be found pretty much everywhere in the world where Jews and non-Jews are associated.
And as the Jews are the common element of the situation it would seem probable, on the face of it, that the cause will be found in them rather than in the widely varying groups which feel this antagonism. Jesse H Holmes, in The American Hebrew This is a candid address to the Jews of the United States.
Without subterfuge, without flattery, wholly without fear of all that they may threaten or can do, this attempt is made to set before them the Jewish Question as their question, theirs to acknowledge, theirs to consider, theirs to solve.
This paper has merely become the vehicle of unwelcome facts which have finally thrust themselves up for final disposal in this country.
Damning this paper, compelling cheap city politicians to interfere with its sale, indulging in ribald humor concerning it, will not affect the facts at all.
The present policy of Jewish leaders is to do neither, but to indulge in antics which go a long way toward illustrating what this paper has said.
What The Dearborn Independent says is true, and tens of thousands of Jews know it is true.
No representative Jew has ever approached us with a denial of the truth of what has been stated in this paper.
This objection has been seriously and courteously made by a number of Jews who have conferred with The Dearborn Independent on this series of articles, and has been as seriously and courteously considered.
Second, that being Jews these men constitute a problem for the Jews themselves.
Third, it is time for some one to call attention to the necessity of cleaning up on that problem.
See coupon on page 24 toward the same conditions which have menaced their race in Europe, and The Dearborn Independent would count no labor lost that would rouse the Jews to a sense of the responsibility which rests on them to solve the Jewish Question in this country, possibly the only country where it can be solved.
The purpose of this series of articles is to let in the light to show the Jews generally that the stench had become too great, and to show the rest of the people where the stench arose.
The list of charges for the Jews of the United States to consider as affecting the distinguished members of their race is very serious.
Well-known profile It is true that there is a distinct “Jewish idea” in business and professional life which has eaten away the traditional principles of honor on which Anglo-Saxon life was erected.
Here and there a Jew in business or professional life makes a breakaway from trickery, deception, dishonesty and exploitation of the gullible public, and achieves success with honor, but that Jew also knows that the majority of his brethren in the same line practice different methods.
It is true that behind the amazing degeneracy of the modern stage and motion picture is a solid wall of Jewish ownership and control.
This ownership and control must bear the responsibility for the rapid and dangerous deterioration which has come since such ownership and control was achieved.
It is true that behind all the shoddy and make-believe and adulteration in the staples of life is the Jewish idea of profits, “making the ephah small and the shekel great,” and that the initiators of American business into these shady practices were Jewish.
It is idle to retort that apt pupils have been found among non-Jews; the point is that before Jewish influence began to be felt in American business, sound quality and a fair price were the rule.
It is the Jews’ ceaseless boast that wherever they go they change business, but not for the better.
It is true that beneath all the network of trivializing influences in literature, art, politics, economics, fashion and sport is Jewish influence controlled by Jewish groups.
Their Orientalism has served as a subtle poison to dry up the sound serum of Anglo-Saxon morality on which this country thrived in its formative years.
Case closed These charges and many more have all been made in detail with evidence submitted, and need not be repeated here.
The present purpose is simply to get the problem squarely before the Jews of the United States.
These charges are true, they cannot be disproved, Jewish leaders have not attempted to disprove them.
This question is best answered by three typical replies made by Jews during the course of the present series.
There is a principle, seldom expressed among the Jews, but always acted on, that Jews should not have public attention called to them except by themselves or their chosen spokesmen.
This is unfortunate, because any establishment of the Jews as an accepted and trusted part of the general citizenry must include their being known as such.
In this country the Jew should not only welcome the widest knowledge (unless he has something he fears to have known) but should himself undertake the exposure of those things which will eventually bring a shadow on the name of his race.
When exposure could no longer be suppressed, the Jewish attitude has always been one of defense, regardless of the merits of the case.
Now, that principle may do for other countries, but not for the United States.
If the Jew is wise, he ought speedily to take warning that in this country the old line of action will not succeed.
If Jews continue to show a disposition to defend the malefactors of their race against the just expostulations of the rest of the people, they must not be surprised if the public begins to view them as all one crowd an inner nation set against the outer nation.
It admits that there are two ideas in conflict in the United States, what it unfairly terms the “Puritanic” idea, opposed by what it calls the Jewish Universal idea.
This view would command respect if it represented a superior morality in conflict with a lesser morality, if it represented a higher civilization against a lower civilization.
The Jewish idea has a tremendous infiltrating force and a serious degenerative power.
It eats the substance out of the civilization which it attacks, destroys its moral virility, throws down its reverence, saps its respect for authority, casts a shadow on every basic principle.
Moral gravitation being, like physical gravitation, downward, it is not difficult to seduce human nature to lower levels, but it is a massive task to lift it to higher levels of morality and reverence and sober justice.
The campaign in the United States is a campaign for the breakdown of the ideas that now obtain, not a lifting of them to a higher degree of nobility.
If it were an attempt to substitute the austerity of the Mosaic law the law given to Moses, not the ordinances decreed by Moses for the half-hearted Christian idealism of the day, even that would be a task in which all right-hearted men could join.
But Moses condemns the modern Jews more severely than anyone else could.
They have built their international power upon the exact opposite of the Mosaic law.
Moses was given a law of human society which would have saved civilization its greatest tragedies.
Moses has a social program, obedience to which for one day would completely wreck the Jewish international power.
Moses is their judge, and when the Law is established Moses will be their destroyer.
Where they err Let the Jews think seriously what is this idea which they set up to follow.
Let them think forward and visualize the effect if this idea should become regnant.
It will not become regnant here; there are safeguards here which the true Israelite will understand; but it is as certain as day that the idea will in the end destroy, utterly destroy, all who trust in it.
Many Jews will recognize this sentiment as their own, but they will be readier to express it to a non-Jew than to a Jew.
Yet there is need of prophets in Judah today, men who will rise among the people and tell them plainly.
Here and there a literary man attempts to speak, but Jewish “art” has so accustomed the Jews to make-believe that the writing is looked upon as a performance, nothing more.
No one with a sense for such things and there are believers still left in Judah will doubt that the times are ripe for a great change respecting the Jews.
So strong is the feeling among the remnant of believing Jews that it is interpreted as forewarnings of the Messianic period.
Among the Judaized Christian sects, other interpretations are given to the times, most of which are used to support political Zionism which represents the materialism and unbelief of present-day Judaism and which will undoubtedly fail as a national restorative and as a political program.
But however misinterpretative these sectarian and Jewish conclusions may be, they indicate a sense of imminent change.
A greater change is indicated than migration to Palestine would be for that would not mean any change at all in the world, and certainly no change for the better in the fortunes of the Jews.
Christians misguided Christians, one must say who see God’s alleged will of universal Jewish dominion fulfilled by means of the Jews’ defiance and despite of the Law given to Moses, ought to re-examine their ground for so strange and immoral a conclusion.
The break-up of this civilization, this age of civilization, will occur because of the collapse of this system by which the Jew has obtained his hold on the nations.
The system that gives him his hold is doomed, is passing, and the fallacy of Jewish tribal destiny to rule the world will pass with it.
Change With this change already on the threshold, prophets should be expected to arise in Judah to recall their people to the Law whose previous denial meant their overthrow.
Our confidence is that a sufficient number of Jews will see the truth and act upon it.
Solidity no matter what The second is in dispute, but is by no means beyond consideration, especially by Jews.
In these matters the Jews are much wiser than the so-called Christians.
The “law of the stranger” permits several important things which the “law of the brother” prohibits.
This is one of the influences which has helped to solidify Jewry against the rest of the world.
Suppose it should be shown that Judah, the “driven” part of Israel, has been blindly attacking the “led” part of Israel.
If these things should once take hold of the intensified consciousness of Judah, as facts, there would be such a change in human society in general, such a change in the Jewish situation in particular, as would make a return to Palestine a mere summer excursion in comparison.
They are seeking a reason (the thoughtful among them) for the sense of unfitness which they feel when they adopt the traditional attitude of enmity toward the “others,” the “others” in this case being the Anglo-Saxon peoples.
The reason for this sense of impropriety is that here, in this land, the Jew will have to change his attitude of antagonism and dwell in peace as in a land prepared for him.
Not as lord of it, by any means, but as a grateful wanderer at last come home.
Not as a ruler, but as adding his bit to the righteousness, prosperity and peace of the people.
Let the Jew get back his Mosaic religion it is the most perfect social system ever devised and directly contrary to the practical modem Jew’s idea of things.
Let the Jew keep as long as he pleases his idea that he is racially different.
The suggestion of intermarriage is a cmde one and always indicates a lack of grasp of the Jewish Question.
They are not objectionable in any way; the slightest regard for them can only hold them as romantic.
Let him shed his false program of breaking down Christendom by the infiltration of Orientalism into business, art, entertainment and the professions.
Let him abolish the false ideal that it is an honor to Jewry to save a guilty Jew from the common law, and a disgrace to Jewry to see a guilty Jew punished by the common law.
Let him draw up notice on all the Jews of the United States who by hook or crook are sowing vile seed in society, that the Jewish community charges itself with their misbehavior and will use methods well known to Jews to bring that misbehavior to an end.
Let the Jew end forever the disgrace of an anti-defamation committee which grows frantic over innocent remarks on the part of “Gentiles,” and is absolutely indifferent to the misdeeds of thousands of Jews who do more damage to the Jewish name than all the “Gentile” critics and newspapers could do in twenty years.
A good deal of bad temper exists among them, no doubt, and it will be hard for them to admit that anything The Dearborn Independent may contend for is right, but the idea here expressed, when divorced from this paper, does command respect from many Jews.
Human nature being what it is, they will hate to start at all if it will seem that the present agitation has compelled them.
Suppose they offer a warning word, however unwelcome, and a light, however undesired, which it would be most unwise for Jews to ignore.
Suppose these articles were conceived in a spirit far different than the average proJewish spouter is competent to understand.
Suppose the set time has now come for the Jews to quit their attitude of attacking everyone who shows them the truth, and to profit by this report of the poor figure they cut in American life today.
Hypocrisy The enemies of the Jews are those who defend them for the pay of hire or praise or votes.
The enemies of the Jews are those who bespeak them fair to their faces and express quite different thoughts behind their backs.
The writer of this personally knows that two of the principal “Gentile” defenders of the Jews, men who have shouted and ranted through the Press on the Jews’ behalf, are men who privately hold and express thoughts about the Jews which are sheer hatred and enmity and fear.
The enemies of the Jews are those who encourage them to take an attitude that they cannot hold in America not as affecting their personal liberty at all, but their social attitude and the Public Right.
These are the enemies of the Jews, and yet these are the ones whom Judah counts his friends.
They are hired friends, false friends, incapable of realizing for a moment what this whole Question means.
Judah’s friends today are those who will speak the surgical truth to him, braving his fury in the knowledge that the future will justify the word.
Judah’s leaders have betrayed him in this country they do not know they have crossed the Jordan.
The Jews have read it, and they have not found hatred, they have not found abuse and calumny, they have not found ignorance and malice; they have found statements of fact calmly set forth, not to arouse hatred among the non-Jews, but to arouse a sense of social responsibility among the Jews.
The emergence of the Jewish Question is a part of the culmination of destiny that has come upon us, not for harm but for good.
The Jews must uncover their eyes and unstop their ears, and they will see the beginning of the end of their travail, and they will hear that to which they have been too long heedless.
The justification of a discussion of the Jewish Question is the good of the Jews, and the greatest present obstacle to that good is the Jews themselves.
Chinese court xinhuanet.com A. commonwealth organization has demanded an industrial polluter in Shandong province receive hefty penalties when filing the country’s first environmental lawsuit under a new law that came into effect on January 1.
On March 25, the Intermediate People’s Court in Dezhou City, east China’s Shandong Province, confirmed it accepted the lawsuit lodged by the All-China Environment Federation.
In it, the federation demands 30 million yuan (4. million U S. dollars) compensation for damages from air pollution discharged by the Zhenhua Co.
The case arose after Zhenhua, which produces glass, neglected warnings by environmental watchdogs that they were emitting excess sulfur and dust.
The company was placed on a blacklist by the Ministry of Environmental Protection in October last year after failing to treat the emission.
Experts from the federation received several strong complaints from residents isn’t for everybody.
But you know someone who needs it. accepts first environmentai iawsuit living near the company’s plant, which regularly discharges foul-smelling yellow smoke.
The litigation is a new attempt to check headstrong violators like Zhenhua,” said Ma Yong, a litigation director with the federation.
It is the first case after amendments to the environmental protection law were enacted by China’s National legislature in April 2014.
The new environmental law must be a powerful, effective tool to control pollution instead of being “as soft as cotton candy,” Premier Li Keqiang said while speaking at a press conference following the annual national legislative session which took place last month.
Fu Qiang, a lawyer with the Shandong Pengfei Law Firm, said big industrial polluters are often protected by the local government, which makes pollution control difficult.
Non-governmental organizations will play a bigger role in representing public interests for environmental cases in the future.
The federation’s involvement has also triggered more government efforts.
The Dezhou municipal government urged Zhengzhou Company to immediately overhaul emission treatment facilities to meet pollution control requirements before the end of the month.
China to invest $15bn in Ukraine housing rt.com \^hina is going to provide Ukraine with $ 15 billion in loans over fifteen years to support construction of affordable housing, said Ukraine’s Ministry of Regional Development.
The project is aimed at meeting the country’s public housing policy, forming a social housing fund, building affordable homes and improving the infrastructure.
Ukraine will implement a pilot $1 billion project to build affordable housing using Citic as the general contractor.
Opening for big money Earlier in March the head of Ukraine’s Ministry of Regional Development Gennady Zubko said the country was in talks with China about attracting investment to implement a program of renting real estate with an option of further acquisition.
Always a catch somewhere Financial arrangements with China traditionally require the fulfillment of a number of conditions, such as involving a workforce and technology from China.
In spring 2011 Ukraine and the ExportImport Bank of China signed an agreement to build a high-speed railway line between Kiev and Borispol International Airport, as well as the $2 billion of infrastructure projects in the Kiev region.
Petersburg, later called Leningrad) and, from March 1918 on, Moscow, and the consequent effects on the vast tracts of Russia.
First, here is a summary of illustrative quotations from Solzhenitsyn taken from his classic and massive The GULAG Archipelago'} “The river that flowed in the years 1937-38 was neither the only one, nor even the main one perhaps only one of the three large rivers that brought the dark stinking pipes of our prison channels almost to bursting.
The members of the Federation of Constituents [advocates of a democratic constitution] and the network of “soldier universities” were immediately included.
The same applied to railroad men who refused an oath swearing armed defense of Soviet authority, telegraphers unsympathetic toward their new masters and insubordinate trade unionists.
I, 38. all of man’s history it represented a unique kind of repressive organ one single authority entrusted with spying on citizens, with arresting them, with conducting investigations of them, with directing their prosecution, furnishing their judges and carrying out sentences upon them.
On September 5, 1918 the major decree setting in motion the Red Terror followed, with instructions for mass shootings and erecting concentration camps under the direct authority of the Cheka.
The Cheka also continued rounding up Mensheviks (the anti-terrorist communists], and other members of smaller parties on nocturnal excursions.
People were also shot recklessly on the basis of arbitrary lists particularly academics, artists, authors and engineers.
With the regulation on forced food collection of January 1919, the farmers were also targeted.
Later, in the 1930s, the mass “collectivization of agriculture” in Ukraine led to the death by starvation of about 6 million humans.
In order to grasp the full and monstrous truth and comprehend it down to the bedrock, one would have to be dragged through many lives in many camps camps in which the first phase alone could not be survived without special favors from someone, since the camps were devised for your extermination.
EDITOR’S NOTE This article originally appeared in the September/October 2008 Barnes Review as the first-time ever English review of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn’s banned book.
When ordering Victor Thorn’s new study , mention “The First Freedom Special” for two sample issues of The Barnes Review revisionist history magazine.
Constant fear, because there was no security for anyone’s life, dwelling or property; “2.
And anyone who spoke publicly against them was seized in the same instant;^ “7.
Jewish involvement in Commnnism no “German invention” The basis for the postwar condemnation of National Socialism was the accusation that it acted out of Germanic “race pride” and aggressively strove to conquer ‘'Lebensraum'' in the east.
Further, Germany was accused of spreading the “falsehood” worldwide that Bolshevism was identical to “international Jewry,” which supposedly financed and supported it for many decades.
The supposed truth, we are told, is that the world-encompassing goals of the Bolsheviks and the reign of terror they spread were recognizably a “Russian” phenomenon.
He goes into both its international connections, and into the involvement of Russian Jews in the revolutionary events of 1917-18, and he studies the totality of Soviet history , with all its consequences, which clearly were directed against the Russian and other Soviet-incorporated ethnicities.
In the following overview we have striven to reduce the multiplicity of names LEON TROTSKY Leon Trotsky became People’s Commissar for the Army and Fleet, chairman of the ^‘Revolutionary War Council of the Republic,” a member of the Central Committee and of the Politburo.
He mercilessly liquidated “lackeys of imperialism and the bourgeoisie,” “counterrevolutionaries,” “suspect persons,” “previous-attitude people,” members and clergy of the Orthodox Church and all workers and farmers who did not unconditionally submit to Bolshevism.
Trotsky nearly always surrounded himself with fellow Jews as his closest co-workers.
He established in August 1918 the first concentration camps, and even had women and children locked up and if necessary shot to deter defections to the White forces or to terrify strikers.
Levi B Kamenev (nee Rosenfeld) was a trusted friend of Lenin and from 1913-14 he was editor of Pravda.
After Lenin’s death in 1924 he formed the Soviet leadership troika with Stalin and Zinoviev, but in 1925-26 his attempt, along with Zinoviev and Trotsky, to limit Stalin’s arbitrary power led to the loss of all his offices.
Karl Radek (born Sobelsohn) was from 1919 to 1923 a Central Committee member and one of the most important leaders of the Comintern.
He appeared as its envoy in 1919 at the founding congress of the KPD in Berlin in a Soviet Russian uniform.
He disappointed the CPSU in 1923 by the failure of his financing of communist revolution and agitation in Germany.
In 1929 he was recalled from his Siberian banishment to be editor of Pravda.
In 1936 he was arrested again and in 1937 condemned to 10 years hard labor.
Jacob M Sverdlov, was co-chairman of the All-Russian Executive Committee, alongside Trotsky and Ephraim Sklyansky.
Joint founder of the Red Army, he functioned as the first head of the Soviet state, demanded “pitiless mass terror against the enemies of the revolution” and ordered the extermination of the czar and his family.
Grigory Yevseyevich Zinoviev , from 1903 on was a close collaborator of Lenin.
In 1917 he became chairman of the Petrograd Soviet and in 1919 became a member of the Politburo of the Bolshevik party.
From 1919 to 1926 he was chairman of the Communist Internationale to whose guidance as the “General Staff of the World Revolution” all communist parties were to submit themselves.
He was arrested in 1935 and, after a sensational show trial in 1936, was shot for involvement in a conspiracy to assassinate Stalin. and functions in the Soviet power system that Solzhenitsyn lists to the most significant ones.
Solzhenitsyn begins rightly with the obligations and religious roots of Jewry as scattered across the world in the Diaspora.
From these derive obligations for a bordersuperseding cooperation that is not only Zionist (benefiting the concept of a Jewish “State of Israel”) but much more.
This worldwide, religiously and racially motivated requirement of loyalty, which crystallized during World War I on the East Coast of the U S. among high-level personages of international Jewry, also exerted itself upon all Jews living around the world.
With this basic attitude, and supported by terrorist organizations, Ben Gurion justified the proclamation of the state of Israel on May 14, 1948.
Therefore the Red revolution of 1917 was a convergence of not one but two internationally minded worldviews, whose bearers certified to each other the one on the basis of “class warfare,” the other on the basis of an allegedly “chosen” religious faith that everything they did was always legal and could not be measured by any other American Free Press is the weekly newspaper out of Washington, DC, that rose from its ashes when they shut down The Spotlight.
Subscribe to this also-truthful tabloid, 52 issues crammed into 47 weeks of the year plus six free issues of Whole Body Health for $59.
There are pages of this history which one does not open without trembling.
U Ibid., 21 14 Johannes Rogalla von Bieberstein, Jildischer Bolshewismus Mythos und Realitdt [“Jewish BolshevismMyth and Reality”], Dresden, 2002,136.
The Russian sees him on top of the czars’ city of Moscow and at the top of the metropolis on the Neva [St.
Petersburg] and as head of the Red Army (Leon Trotsky), the perfect mechanisms for our self destruction.
Simeon M Nachimson commanded Lenin’s Praetorian Guard, a Latvian Rifle Regiment.
Latvia, a country plagued by organized crime, was also home to many Bolsheviks.
Stalin rewarded him with poison in 1938. Ed.], Solzhenitsyn says, “Russian people are now confronted by a Jew both as their judge and hangman.
One example is the city of Sverdlovsk, the former Yekaterinburg, the main industrial city of the Urals, named after Jacob M Sverdlov, the first Soviet president, chairman of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee and the person responsible for the murder of the imperial family.
Ventura County, California, District Attorney Gregory D Totten announced on March 20 that Thomas Young of Birmingham, Alabama, had been sentenced on that day for the July 30, 1980, murder of the 15-year-old girl shown at right.
Had his day in court Superior Court Judge Jeffrey Bennett sentenced Young to life in prison without the possibility of parole after a jury found him guilty on February 26, 2015, of first-degree murder during the commission of rape.
That murder took place in the daytime when Young entered the home of teenager Stacy Knappenberger through a back door, brutally raping and killing her.
Young’s identity as the murderer remained unknown for the next 30 years, until DNA he left at the crime scene was matched to a DNA sample taken from him by law enforcement in 2008, when he was arrested for molesting his 16year-old granddaughter in Illinois.
Young was subsequently located in Alabama by the Ventura j County Cold Case Task Force and arrested for the murder on September 6, 2012.
He was then extradited to Ventura, California, where a jury subsequently found him guilty of the murder in the commission of rape on February 26, 2015.
CLEMENS, MI An 18-year-old man has been arraigned for the stabbing murder of Alexander Burkart and another 18-year-old man is still being sought after.
Deandre Arnold of Mount Clemens was video arraigned on felony murder charges in 4IB District Court in Clinton Township.
Magistrate Dan Goulette ordered he be held without bond in the Macomb County Jail.
Arnold’s alleged accomplice, Jayvon Tarice Cates, 18-years-old, was still on the run and being sought after by authorities.
The Macomb County Prosecutor’s Office has issued an arrest warrant for his arrest.
On Saturday, February 21st, 2015, at around 8:20 PM Alexander William Burkart, 22 years old, from Mt.
Murderers Deandre Lee Arnold, left; Jayvon Tarice Cates, below When authorities arrived on scene, they found that Burkhart had been stabbed in the chest.
He was transported to McLaren Hospital where he was pronounced dead from his injuries.
Macomb County Sheriff Anthony Wickersham declined to specify what motivated the attack, but did state that robbery was not the factor.
However, some type of altercation did happen involving the three men that resulted in Alex Burkart being stabbed to death.
Sheriff, you’re not permitted to say the word, though delivering pizzas into certain areas is more dangerous than dodging bullets in a war zone as you well know.
Louis, you will recall, isn’t all that far removed from Ferguson the city which has recently begun resembling its White flight counterpart — Selma. conservative-headlines.com Uelmar Loop in Saint Louis, Missouri, has been rocked by violence.
On Saturday, March 21, first came the notorious #BlackLivesMatter protesters blocking traffic, screaming at all White motorists and chanting their Black power slogans.
And it’s not yet summer At least fifteen people were arrested, described as teenagers and young adults.
Attacked on public railway Racial hate crime spree A black thug punched this White victim in the face for no reason other than unprovoked hate. newnation.org This White was assaulted in a St.
Louis, Missouri, light rail train on March 23 after refusing to talk about the shooting of Michael Brown.
The victim, 43, who declined to identify himself for the media, was commuting home when a young Black man in his twenties, wearing a red t-shirt and cap, walked up to him and asked to use the victim’s cell phone.
The video of the attack shows the suspect pummeling the victim, punching him multiple times in the head while he tries to cover himself with his hands and forearms.
A security guard who witnessed the attack as the train pulled in to a station alerted police.
Three Black male perpetrators were captured in the act on surveillance cameras.
Police believe that those same perpetrators had already committed a violent armed robbery against a group of White male and female victims earlier in the night.
See coupon on page 24 The third worthless and cowardly criminal Black teen who murdered this White dog-walker has turned himself in to Philadelphia police. newnation.org The third suspect accused in the murder of a man walking his dog in Overbrook, Pennsylvania, on Thursday night, March 19, turned himself in the next day.
He is 15 years old, and the next week police said he would be charged with murder and robbery.
Police had issued the warrant for his arrest earlier after arresting another suspect accused of being involved with that same shooting. 15-year-old Brandon Smith was arrested and charged with murder, robbery and related charges connected with the shooting.
A 14-year-old male is also expected to face lesser charges for his involvement in the shooting.
Authorities say they were able to track down the duo after identifying them from surveillance video taken near the scene of the crime Two 19th district officers had spotted three males fitting the suspects’ descriptions, pursued, apprehended and took them in for IS questioning.
The shooting had occurred just before 9:00 PM on 1 Thursday night in the 6400 block of Woodcrest Avenue.
Police say that 51-year-old James Patrick Stuhlman was shot once in the chest, and died within minutes of arriving at Penn Presbyterian Hospital.
Dim-witted and dangerous Attempting to rob a bank, this Black man shot its White employee three times. newnation.org A. bank employee was shot three times during an attempted robbery just after 8 AM March 18 at BancorpSouth on Main Street in Humbolt, Tennessee.
According to the Gibson County Sheriff, the suspect was waiting for the victim, who is a bank employee, in a garage at her home.
The suspect grabbed the victim, later identified as Janice Frisbee, and forced her into the bank at gunpoint.
Police caught the suspect down the street from the bank and took him into custody.
The FBI stated that the female victim was kidnapped by suspect Dominic Shaun Williams, 39, of California.
The female victim, who was shot three times, couldn’t open the bank vault.
Jacarandas, blue tinged trees Laughing children, all say please Smiling nannies loud and chatting Queens Club cricket, Rhodesia batting Braais and picnics, Maleme Dam Tanganda tea and Colcom Ham Greeting friends to talk and talk Hillside was safe to walk Snakes and mossies, flying ants Schoolboy rugby, winning chants Swimming parties, sleep in nights Christmas Carols by candle light Honest Police, able and willing Downing rolls ten for a shilling Sunday car trips, Matopos caves OM’s and Busters Saturday raves Week-end trips to Vic Falls Dancing and Ballet in Curtain Calls Beautiful gardens.
Centenary Park Window shopping just after dark Burger and Hot-dogs, Eskimo Ices Aromas from cafes of curry and spices Snow white tackies, Bata shoes Charity fetes, tombola and booze Clear blue skies or heavy rain Wish I could live it all over again Memories fade, so much to tell OH Yes, I remember it well James Sturges Nigerian children watching soldiers in the town of Damasak children aged 11 and younger were taken by the Takfiri militants as they fled the area.
Turnaround With the help of soldiers from Chad and Niger, Nigerian forces liberated the town earlier last month.
Officials in Borno State say the terrorists have been known to place young abducted children in schools under their supervision while males between the ages of 16 and 25 are trained and used to carry out the group’s heinous crimes.
In mid-March, 70 decomposing bodies, many decapitated, were found under a bridge outside the town.
The Takfiri group, which has been wreaking havoc in Nigeria for the past six years, recently pledged allegiance to the ‘TSIL” terrorists operating in Iraq and Syria.
Nigerian troops with the help of military forces from neighboring Chad, Cameroon and Niger have started a joint operation targeting the militant group.
They say they have made major progress against the terrorists in the past weeks, recapturing many towns held by the terrorists, bringing closer the end of the militants’ deadly campaign in the region.
The militancy has claimed the lives of more than 13,000 people in Nigeria.
Some 1. million Nigerians have been displaced as well, with many of them escaping into neighboring Cameroon, Chad and Niger.
Everybody knows LBJ’s “Great Society” has proven a colossal fraud from the start.
Blacks refuse to act like Whites when among their own and the same goes for most Whites when given a chance to stop roleplaying the reconstructed prole. conservative-headlines.com Ihe Hufflngton Post has published a pro-racial segregation article.
Huffington Post, of all things, a leftwing internet media site, indeed published an article defending Blacks-only events on college campuses.
However, this article demands the right for Blacks to have segregated events that exclude White people, even White journalists.
The article says that Black students need “safe spaces” where they can bad mouth White people without the “judgment and intrusion” of the White man.
This is exactly the kind of in-your-face hypocrisy that the Hufflngton Post has become famous for.
Among many other Jewish media reports on Lenin from the beginning of the 1990s^^ there was The London Jewish Chronicle article of February 25, 1992.
In addition, he favorably contrasted the Jews as revolutionaries with Russians.
The Soviet minister of foreign affairs Maxim Litvinov presided over the Moscow People’s Commissariat of the Exterior froml930 to 1939 before he went on to represent the USSR between 1941 and 1943 as its ambassador to Washington; he was sent there by Stalin as his special advocate of a pact against Germany.
Already, before Litvinov, back in the 1920s, “the Soviet trade mission in Berlin was 98% Jewish, according to Maxim Gorky, the writer celebrated by the communists as the founder of ‘socialist realism,”’ Solzhenitsyn tells us.
A similar situation prevailed in the other Western capitals where the Soviets gradually opened agencies.
Jewish authors tend to conceal the shameful acts of Jewish communist executioners; however, on the other hand, they occasionally refer with pride to the high positions some members of their “tribe” enjoyed under the Bolsheviks.
For example, M Zarubeznyi, author of the 1925 Yearbook of the People s Commissariat for Foreign Affairs, has a special list in his publication.
The Jewish Encyclopedia provides a long list of 28 Juden in der Sovietunion, op. cit., 221.
DEDICATED KILLER As Stalin’s brother-in-law and closest collaborator, Lazar Kaganovich was one of the most powerful and dangerous men in the world, an executioner with the blood of 20 million people on his hands.
He also organized the gruesome persecution of his own ethnic group in Stalin’s kingdom.
Kaganovich was responsible for the death of an entire generation of intellectuals and the personal signer of execution orders for 36,000 people.
Kaganovich also ordered the wholesale destruction of Christian monuments and churches, including the shocking demolition in downtown Moscow of the Cathedral of Christ the Savior in 1931.
It was replaced by a giant public swimming pool, but was gloriously rebuilt at a cost of over $100 million by the Russian people and reconsecrated in August 2000.
In 1957 he was removed from all his positions after a failed coup attempt against Nikita Khrushchev.
Robert (“With Jews we lose”) Ransdell is the one holding a “Pants Up” sign.
By Steve Goode dailystormer.com o n March 21st, myriads of our people around the world got out into the streets with banners, flyers, stickers, posters and megaphones alerting the general public to White Genocide, the deliberate destruction of our identity.
White people across many majority White countries have been subject to genocidal conditions by a loose collection of small but powerful groups which control a monopoly over the media and politics.
For example, Marin county California in 2011 was decided to be “too White” by the U S. government.
In all my years on this Earth, I have never heard of a place being described as “too Black,” “too Asian,” “too Brown” or “too mixed” by its own government.
This is not just confined to the United States if s quite as common in Canada, Australia, New Zealand and our European native homelands.
So what we have now are these White countries opened up to millions of nonWhite, third-world immigrants, despite massive opposition from the majority of our populations.
Opening the borders of a rich country will flood it with third-world immigrants, just as opening a bank vault to one and all will lure in bank robbers.
Direct intent Those anti-Whites opened our borders fully aware that we’d reach the situation that we are in now this trend towards a White minority.
Today’s third Saturday activism is a message to all anti-Whites that we’re not putting up with these genocidal conditions any longer.
Times are changing, and ordinary White folk are realizing just how much they’ve been conned and lied to, more importantly, that we have been targeted for destruction.
Capitalism destroying earth’s ability to support life By Paul Craig Roberts paulcraigroberts.org I admire David Ray Griffin for his wideranging intelligence, his research skills and for his courage.
He gave us ten books on 9/11, and anyone who has read half of one of them knows that the official story is a lie.
His book has just been published by Clarity Press, a publisher that seeks out truth-telling authors.
Readers often ask me to write about global warming, chemtrails, vaccines and other subjects beyond my competence.
However, I can see that Griffin has made a huge investment in researching climate change.
His evaluation of the evidence is that humans have about three decades to get C02 emissions under control, and he sees hope in the agreement between Obama and Chinese president Xi Jinping that was announced on November 11, 2014.
Griffin argues that instead of rushing to its destruction like lemmings, the human race must accept the moral challenge of abolishing the fossil-fuel economy.
He makes the case that clean energy permits most of modern society’s way of life to continue without the threat posed by ever rising emissions.
Nuclear energy is not among clean energy sources just look at the ongoing radiation pollution from Fukushima.
Clearly the climate is changing, whether caused by C02 emissions or some other cause.
Every day brings more reports of perils associated with climate change.
On one hand our food is polluted with herbicides and on the other hand by antibiotics.
And Subscribe to The First Freedom a rebel newspaper The “mainstream” media aren’t allowed to venture where we go then we have hormones and pesticides.
The World Health Organization has found that the glyphosate in Monsanto’s Roundup, a herbicide widely sprayed on GMO food crops, is a likely cause of cancer in humans and animals.
Glyphosate, which is also believed to be exterminating honey bees and Monarch butterflies, is now present in 75 percent of air and rain samples.
Secretary of Agriculture about extensive findings by independent scientists that glyphosate has serious adverse effects on animal life and on animal and human fertility and on the ability of soil to produce nutrition in food crops.
The scientist pointed out that the U S. government’s clearance of glyphosate rested entirely on the industry’s own studies of its safety and that these “studies” are not substantiated by independent scientists.
He pointed out that not only are the studies done by scientists employed by Monsanto, but also many agricultural science university faculties are dependent on research funds from the chemical industry and thereby do not have an independent voice.
Martha Rosenberg writing in CounterPunch reports that 70 percent of all antibiotics are fed to livestock because it produces weight gain and saves money on feed costs.
Ninety-three percent of doctors are concerned about the meat industry’s use of antibiotics, and independent scientists have conclusive evidence that the growing resistance of bacteria to antibiotics is due to the use of antibiotics as animal feed.
The Food and Drug Administration, severely weakened by Republicans, cannot stand up to Big Meat.
Congress responded to the campaign donations, not to the health and safety of the American people.
The Animal Health Institute consists of the drug companies who make profits selling 70 percent of their production to meat, egg, and milk producers.
The members of the “health” institute are Abbott, Bayer Healthcare, Elanco/Lilly, Merck, Boehringer, Ingelheim Vetmedica, Novartis, etc.
As the drug companies have more or less stopped the development of new antibiotics, the protection antibiotics provide against infections is rapidly fading.
During a time of severe drought in the western U S., when California is reportedly left with one year’s supply of water, the fossil-fuel fracking industry is polluting the remaining surface and ground water.
All of these activities use of antibiotics as animal feed, use of GMO herbicides, fracking are profitable but they impose huge external costs on the environment and on third parties who are not participants in the profits gleaned by externalizing the costs of production.
By Richard Harwood The most controversial and “expensive” little English language publication printed in modern times; millions of words have condemned and praised this booklet.
More millions of dollars have been spent on both sides in litigation as the result of the two major Ziindel Holocaust Trials.
Capitalists make money by exploiting labor and externalizing the costs of wastes produced during the productive process by imposing those wastes on the environment.
It is the short-term time horizon of production organized by selfish private interests focused on quarterly profits that is destroying the livability of the earth.
Almost every economist on earth will rise up in opposition to that true statement, because they are brainwashed in the neoliberal ideology that masquerades as economic science, yet in fact is nothing but an apology for capitalist exploitation of labor and the earth.
I happened to be one of Ronald Coase’s graduate students the year he published his famous article on “The Problem of Social Cosf ’ for which, together with his article, “The Theory of the Firm,” he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics.
In theory, externalities can be internalized into the process of production so that the producer bears all the costs if all inputs and waste products are subject to property rights.
They remain “common property” and thus are dumping grounds for waste disposal.
Governments, despite pressure from corporations, have realized that pollution is a problem, and governments have imposed some regulation.
The regulation raises some costs to corporations, but the regulation is insufficient to halt very much of the extemalization of the cost of production.
In economic terms, this is the crisis that David Ray Griffin presents to us.
BULLETIN Robert “With Jews we lose” Ransdell was to have a jury trial on March 11, 2015, in Burlington, Kentucky, but it didn’t happen.
He had requested and obtained a jury trial in spite of the negative attitude shown him during his pretrial hearing.
Judicial delays are just one way in which they try to wear down the accused.
Robert was arrested doing a peaceful protest against the MLK celebration in his hometown of Florence, Kentucky.
We need to support Robert and find him a pro-bono lawyer to assist in his trial.
His experiences prove Israel is no democracy but a Marxist Police State. pages, $8 ppd.
This weekly newspaper offers an introductory rate of 16 issues for $17.76.
Join history sleuth German-bom author Christine Miller as she exposes Zionist contradictions in their own words against themselves.
Your signed letter with phone number and address is welcome, but will be edited as necessary to fit available space.
Sir Standish G Crauford, 16 page booklet covers migrations from the Holy Land to England in ancient times.
These articles first appeared in the periodical published by the Ford Motor Company, The Dearborn Independent.
FREE DVD catalog on global conspiracy, legal sovereignty, reduce taxes and avoid taxes, land patent, allodial title, etc.
After many years of mismanagement and inattention, members are fighting back to save Dr.
Pierce’s brother, Sanders Pierce, and the alliance’s top street activist Michael Weaver along with many others.
SALTY SID of Silver Spring sends seven separate sensational scandal spreadsheets for seven dollars.
Sid’s super-sized subscription set includes The First Freedom, Impact, Citizens Informer, The Nationalist Times, CofCC Newsletter, Heritage & Destiny and bonus essays by patriots.
Scriptures For America, POB 766, LaPorte CO 80535. 24 hrs daily internet streaming @ www.scripturesforamerica.org HERITAGE AND DESTINY is a 24 page bimonthly patriotic magazine printed in England.
Four “rebels” murdered in cold blood for each invader killed by the angry citizenry.
Get yours by contacting TFF roving reporter Nancy Hitt, hunleyhitt@gmail.com.
It’s my understanding that a mere six mega-corporations fashion and approve virtually all the establishment-generated information being fed to us daily, both electronically and in print.
Thank heaven that, to date, we still have available a plethora of alternative news sources, most notably via the internet.
I suggest that Americans had best turn off their TVs and start paying more attention to these alternative voices, before the monopoly controllers succeed in regulating them off the airwaves, and they are gone forever.
Far from being mere hired readers of prescripted, pre-approved text, the broadcast hosts you’ll hear are volunteers.
They don’t try to tell listeners what to think; only challenge and encourage them TO think -, dare to think for themselves.
CAROL ASHER Kamiah, ID SAW IT COMING I wish to inform you how much I enjoy The First Freedom, especially those parts where at least one newspaper discusses what actually started the so-called Civil War.
EVERETTE POUNCEY Hattiesburg, MS NO SOCIALIST Thank you dearly for your most valued and necessary publication.
I am a White Christian Constitutionalist Nationalist, and as such am fundamentally opposed to Jooz Socialism, National Socialist or any other of the dozen or so types.
Our country is down the tubes because people seek pleasure instead of information that requires some form of action; call it sloth.
In Russia they did nothing that would have stopped the Communist takeover.
KINSLEY McDOWER Chicago, IL RAISING THE STANDARD Nurturing a good show of character is always a goal for activist visionaries and leaders.
I see many in here who decide on a change for the better, developing a will to be worthy Americans of our forefathers’ principles.
Believe me, I’ve been proud of many, and continue to find more in my wake.
The accomplishments of these men in here are fortified in pure energy, even in blood sometimes.
The First Freedom is an inspiration; its worldview is the best I have read anywhere.
I’m 26 years old and a true hard-head believer in my rights, faith and kinfolk.
In fighting this latest denial of your newspaper to this Florida State prison, we fear not retaliation, because we bear the marks of that already.
TYLER McGINN V32298 H2145S Santa Rosa Correctional Institution 5850 E Milton Rd, Milton, FL 32583 The first Freedom can only publish the truth, not get it past a few prison mail room clerks and wardens who feel like many media munchkins that their views are the only ^‘news” anyone needs.
BARNUM AND BAILEY Of all the disgusting sights we saw during Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu’s recent visit to the USA, surely the worst was the Republican leadership presenting that Zionist warmonger with a bust of Winston Churchill, presumably to replace the one that President Obama tossed out back in 2009.
By doing so, Speaker John Boehner and his cronies sent a clear message that the Republican leadership supports the New World Order and is willing to provide millions of military-age Americans to fight in Netanyahu’s planned war with Iran.
Boehner, Lindsay Graham and John McCain do not speak for rank-and-file Republicans, who remain conservative, devoted to our country’s Constitution and whose first loyalty is to the United States of America, not the warmongering State of Israel.
JOSEPH TRAINOR Attleboro, MA CALLING GREG KAY In my travels across this nation and locally, I have noticed an alarming trend of Indians from India taking over gas stations convenient stores, motels, etc.
Years ago I ran into a man whose story was that he had been in Florida where he met and had a discussion with one of these Indians, thereby learning that our government had set that immigrant up.
I would like to see some First Freedom contributor do an investigation concerning this issue.
Perhaps Gregory Kay with his expertise would jump on it and find out if it’s true, what I’ve just mentioned.
JACK McNEELY Armstrong, IL TO HEALTH Thanks for all you do in trying to save what’s left of the CSA and any other States that wish to join us.
DAVID YOUNG Kirksville, MO EXCERPTS FROM A LETTER Dear Chief McDermond, It has come to my attention that you and two of your officers unconstitutionally violated Robert Ransdell’s civil rights when you had him arrested, handcuffed and jailed solely due to his protest against MLK Day.
Ransdell’s only “offense” was the content of his placards, one of which read, “Happy Marchin’ Lootin’ killin’ Day,” another that had his White victims of Black murders collage.
If there’s any justice left in these Jewnighted States you will be charged, tried and convicted for having deprived him of his rights under color of law.
Vol.-179 pages ineluding Genesis ehapter one, Noah’s fiood & Khazar Empire.
Illuminati, Freemasonry, Secret Societies, Judaism, World War II, Holocaust, Kennedy assassination.
Mixed race offspring have lower IQ, goes against nature and Biblical law.
Every food item featuring a “K” or “U” imprint has paid a tax to a Rabbi.
JOHN CARLEY Buffalo, MO He’s pretty sharp on the law himself, only its arbitrary enforcement being his problem and ours.
JUST OBEY THE LAW On November 14, 2014, I watched on TV a most disturbing and illogical speech by Barack Hussein Obama, Jr., giving us his evil plan to turn the United States into a third world country, an illegal immigration policy which was in reality plain amnesty.
He gave an unconstitutional executive order, bypassing Congress and telling the world that anybody can come to America illegally, you’re ah welcome.
Illegal aliens receive more benefits from us taxpayers than do Americans.
For once in his life, Obama spoke the truth when remarking that “Undocumented immigrants in the country are as American as Malia and Sasha,” his daughters.
Obama and his Injustice Department refuse to protect and defend our borders.
RAYDIVELY Baden, PA That Kenyan in the Whore House is but a symptom of our real affliction, the Defamation League of B’nad B’rith that put him in there to anger and detract us from themselves.
He and they wink back and forth, B O. knowing they can lose him anytime, they pretending he’s their enemy.
Resolution In a rapidly-developing information age when no agenda remains long hidden but must compete openly, everyone senses the Satanic presence’s siren allurements both left and right wherever he turns.
Let’s be sufficiently resolved to look always ahead, however, in seeking that shining light of possibilities beyond, and bear victoriously through today’s enemy-occupied narrows, past these assumed dangers on either side, assured by faith and logic that such forces exist only as shadows of their omnipotent opposite whose guidance we strive toward now more than ever.
We shouldn’t expect the No Child Left Behind student to come right out and openly admit where that leaves his whole class.
Our longest journey continues with another step, the realization that Whites form a separate breed illegible to those Chosenites mistakenly thinking to read its noble mind.
History has catalogued the Aryan races into subfolders Greeks to Icelanders and European Americans, but Jewish Supremacists view us as a single block, the only ones standing in the way of their New World Order.
All the other Nations, they think, would be no problem once Whitey were disarmed and brought low.
For lack of knowledge We do not wish to rule the world, just our own appetites.
Until informing them why they mustn’t hate all Americans (we’ve no control over what’s transpiring in our names, international finance having grabbed that agenda long ago), this won’t change.
To state our case before an awakening world, a well-armed and rising American free South must elbow off center stage the Zionist-controlled mediacracy’s ridiculous munchkins.
For such types have parodied Aryan nobility with dubious propaganda since the days of Don Quixote, and lately sink to the shameful subterranean remains of Sodom and Gomorrah.
The answer does exist, a most certain measure having turned things around many times and, given sufficient resolve, will do so again.
These cowardly moneychangers eternally lusting for powers not by way of merit but deceit, booted from every country in Europe once the populace and aristocracy had suffered them long enough, will go packing just like their Gypsy cousins out of our lives and sights again.
At work always again will be nature’s law, no vengeance-seeking on our part, as Whites are normally not quick to anger, fear, hate or regret when crimes draw punishments and virtues rewards.
Let “God’s Chosen” bend their knees, pray for guidance, seek admittance among the ranks of civilized Nations and beg forgiveness first for their long-propagated impostures.
As the tides forever turn, not laterally where nature disallows more gain than we deserve but usually whence they came, in accord with that law a deep-cycling well pump gives us healing waters, refreshment for the journey ahead.
You may count on the fact that what created, destroyed and rebuilt Rome over many a century is the same justice deciding all cases today.
We must yell the news abroad, publish facts that a cartoon world misses, display placards, occupy street corners passing out literature, put messages up on billboards along the interstates, convene workshops, challenge the brainwashed to debate us and redirect many a lost, homeless cousin.
The enemy has browbeaten most of our people to the point where they’ve no idea what has happened, neither how nor why.
Let’s stop cringing for fear of the Jew, have a little fun and insert some truth back into today’s vacuum.
Enigma The Jews, both a scourge and stimulant unto the world, at present overlording such narrow passes as other races must transit in order to trade indigenous products, ideas and useful actions among themselves, will keep raising the toll for passage until it’s no longer bearable, as that passion is in their blood and they don’t know when to slack off Thus, ever again, whether by design or miscalculation, the economies collapse.
The Jew himself, by increasingly desperate salvos of propaganda attempting to sabotage our progress while giving every other ethnicity a free pass, confirms his uneasiness that it will happen.
The necessary quarantine Thereupon let’s invite emissaries from all legitimate States, on condition that no Jews be allowed, to convene at Versailles or some other venue except the Jewnighted Nations, perhaps even Jekyll Island, for the purpose of establishing measures that will guard the liberated passes from repeatedly falling to the likes of such infected robber barons as characteristically contaminate our world by, from those critical positions, spreading their Chosenitis abroad.
We must eventually argue “racism” as a universal desideratum, though the general public won’t hear about its considerable merits until after we’ve commandeered the information, physical goods and services exchanges.
With the White man’s institutions free of Jewish/Marxist/Communist subversion, we may once more discriminate, and make our convincing case that “racism” is but a malicious Jewish misnomer for the honest pride one takes in himself and his people, needing no apology.
Healthy intolerance Though recovering exclusive territories and institutions stolen from us under LBJ’s 1960s Jewish Great Society decrees must temporarily inconvenience the minorities having moved in where they didn’t belong, we’ve no further designs upon those other races and will within reasonable limits help them relocate to their own spaces.
For the Nations of this world cannot be “integrated” under a single, manmade law; nature won’t have it.
Still, we insect-like intellects naming ourselves human beings might agree upon certain principles such as not comparing apples with oranges but only against their own kind.
An elephant, so much greater, gets no back grunt from a gazelle when trumpeting himself supreme in the size department, but big Jumbo would never challenge little Fleetfoot to a three-mile dash.
Incomparable All plant and animal life types adapt or perish, growing thereby over the millennia ever more harmonious with what Darwin discovered was nature’s indisputable law.
The average Zulu voodooist would be wise to attempt no doctorate in the White man’s sciences, and yet not even an exceptional African American should imagine himself fit to outperform that pureblood at what the latter does best.
Most Aryans will optimally continue the faith, procreate and compete exclusively among their own kind, since that inherited storehouse of heretofore-discovered lore can serve no other human race to greater advantage than the one having brought it thus far.
A regular paycheck for doing nothing more than occupying space keeps useful idiots burning down only where they’re shunted to by temporarily-safe paymasters staging such riots and those munchkins instigating them from inside their gated ghettoes.
Once the Federal Reserve’s Jewish Ponzi scheme has run its course, with parasitic victims who haven’t any idea why food stamps should no longer be cash wandering the streets hungry and unaware that Whitey is also destitute, that day will bring an emergency the ZOG can’t capitalize on.
If things deteriorate much farther, then relatively few of our people, reminded by the cyclical nature of seasons and events, will carry the torch forward knowing there is nothing new under the sun.
Even during recorded history we recall a convalescent period known as the Dark Ages, surely not the first such era.
Somewhere in a cavern or mountaintop monastery, devout scribes are prayerfully at work preserving enough of what we accomplish today, assured that what they’re doing will prime the wells to surge again in a distant future.
That won’t prove possible, but the effort can bring huge rewards to those who attempt it.
Deprograming the brainwashed masses, bringing however many we might convince back to reality, requires getting in between them and the TV, shoving truths into their faces, questioning false premises like a Socrates or Columbo by boring in on where each answer must lead.
Well instructed, our people will realize they can’t communicate to best advantage among their own while others of a different blood are present.
For we’re only fully at ease with Whites like ourselves, and such clarity of discernment, Jewish propaganda notwithstanding, isn’t hate.
Anybody who can’t see ZOG-enforced integration of the public schools as a disaster for every race attending wouldn’t care to challenge us in the I.Q. department.
And yet we Aryans are not the “White supremacists” a Jewish Apartheid Nation would have us be.
Again, the “racism” they rant against while practicing (simply racial pride) remains everywhere commendable.
While both Jews and sensible American Whites have this same idea about living separately as ethnic Nations, the former alone are conniving to rule all others and the world.
As for ourselves, it’s precisely because of Jewish penetration into public institutions that outsiders fear, loathe and hate us, whereas were it not for Zionist scheming in our names all foreign peoples would realize we’ve no ambitions to rule or influence them otherwise than possibly by example alone.
This is not to commend anything we do as worthy of imitation by non-Aryans; we’re no angels.
Hypocrisy is cheap, its rarity or prevalence depending on who governs the money and information channels.
The Indians lost their lands by valuing an intruder’s trinkets, whisky and promises while underestimating his cunning.
While whoever has charge of the information and finance passes can cause his munchkins to create the appearance of absolute power, it’s not a done deal until all volunteer for ZOG-assigned roles.
We may prove more helpful to every Nation worldwide at this hour by freeing ourselves from under that trespasser s yoke.
Turning the other fist We are seeking to convince the Jew that he doesn’t want to rule the world or revert for a time to gladiatorial extravaganzas out of Hollywood nor offer bread and circuses while Communism runs its course another time where there would be no contention between inspired ideas such as happens only when free men struggle with each next problem because that would bring more stultification to the top than even among its mongrelized slaves.
Admit the fact, Jews; the obverse face of a One World Government is yet again your same old snake oil.
The real barbarism involves an invasion of privacy, bending another’s will against his normal inclination into some inimical direction.
It’s the condition of war between two or more Nations, as compared with a contest or legal proceeding when members within a single society agree on the rules for a peaceful settlement.
Our job, then, is to inform and reassure the first category that they can count on us.
