It refers also to some more recent, A NEW FORM OF WARFARE 26 important examples of the information campaign IMPORTANCE OF MEDIA ANALYSIS 30 relating to events such as the MH17 air tragedy.
LESSONS LEARNED 32 LIST OF ANNEXES 34 Over the years, Russia has been drawing lessons from different Allied operations and has worked on adapting its military planning to the realities of a modern conflict.
It tested these lessons in the recent August 2008 war with Georgia1 which marked the first use of cyber warfare and information operations in conjunction with a conventional military operation.
Russia has also shown a willingness to modernize Soviet-era tools and adapt them to today’s complex information environment.
Critically, it has been willing to afford informationbased activities primacy in operations, using more conventional military forces in a supporting role.
Russia’s information campaign has to be analysed in the context of the strategic narrative of the Russian government, reflected in policy documents like the Foreign Policy Review of 2007 and the State Security Review of 2009, and supported by legislative initiatives like the Federal Law on the Russian Federation’s State Policy on Compatriots Living Abroad.
The notion of compatriots deserves particular attention as it allows Russia to legitimize the state’s duty to defend its compatriots abroad from any kind of threat to their rights or physical well-being.
The report identifies that Russia’s information The Russian government’s long-developed control campaign was central to Russia’s operations in Ukraine. over the mass media has been an important factor The information campaign and related military action in the effective implementation of the information by Russia corresponds to the characteristics of a new campaign against Ukraine.
Russia’s narrative was form of warfare where the lines between peace and instrumentalized with the help of concurrent war, foreign military force and local self-defence groups messaging.
For example, the main Russian TV are blurred and the main battle space has moved channels were actively involved in framing opinions from physical ground to the hearts and minds of the about the situation in Ukraine from the very populations in question.
Control is exerted directly a test-case for Russia in trying out this new form of by the Presidential Administration, including also warfare where hybrid, asymmetric warfare, combining government-controlled internet ‘trolling’ which is an intensive information campaign, cyber warfare and a growing, under-researched phenomenon used the use of highly trained Special Operation Forces, to support the Russian government’s narrative2. play a key role.
This control over the media has made it difficult for democratic states with free media to compete with The crisis in Ukraine has provided valuable lessons for the forceful, synchronized messaging of the Russian the Ukrainian government, the countries neighbouring government.
The characteristics of the new a pseudo-nation who are unable to administer their form of warfare which were implemented in Crimea own country and sustain their statehood; referring to were outlined by General Valery Gerasimov, Chief the Great Patriotic War thus bringing out the hatred of the Russian General Staff, nearly a year before of Nazism and relating it to the Euromaidan protesters the crisis in Ukraine.
Analysis of the Ukraine conflict who are labelled as nationalists, Nazis and fascists suggests that NATO and the EU must adapt to posing a threat to the ethnically Russian part of the new reality where information superiority, as opposed to military power, is becoming increasingly 2 The findings of research conducted by the NATO StratCom COE in important. cooperation with the Centre for East European Policy Studies provide facts supporting this statement.
Investigating and disproving the false and the might and collapse of the USSR. information, different versions of events and even conspiracy theories rapidly disseminated by Russia • Crisis in Ukraine is a result of Russia’s long term requires a lot of time, effort and resources on the strategy.
Learning from the Russian information part of international organisations like NATO, the campaign in Ukraine, it is clear that early detection Ukrainian government, independent media, experts and analysis of those elements within the Russian and even ordinary citizens. narrative signalling potential aggressive behaviour is critical.
The report also demonstrates that Russia’s • Disinformation campaigns erode over time. state policy documents contain such indications.
The evolution of the crisis in Ukraine beyond Crimea demonstrates that disinformation • The role of Compatriots Abroad is critical and campaigns erode over time as more and more should be considered carefully in the future.
The factual evidence is revealed to negate lies and security implications for countries neighbouring falsification.
The kind of strategy that Russia has employed in Ukraine is likely to work best in areas where there are larger communities of Russia’s Compatriots Abroad.
They are the targets of Russia’s information campaign and potentially may be ready to provide local support in cases of Russian aggression.
The Ukraine and Georgian cases demonstrate that such information campaigns, backed by military means, are easier to carry out in territories bordering Russia – in particular, in those countries which are not members of NATO and therefore not party to the Washington Treaty.
Russia has demonstrated that understanding audiences and what motivates them is critical to operational success that is enduring.
Although Russia’s information campaign has been successful in influencing its audiences (the Russian population and compatriots abroad), it also bears a degree of counter-productivity as it has radicalized and alienated other audiences – 5 afford information-based activities primacy in INTRODUCTION operations, using more conventional military forces in a supporting role.
This report examines the information aspect of President Vladimir Putin’s accession to power Russia’s strategy against Ukraine.
In achieving in 1999 marks the beginning of a period that its political and military objectives, Russia might be characterised as the “recovery of lost has proven adept at using asymmetric and pride” by Russia after the collapse of the USSR. information activities to achieve its goals.
Russian leadership has chosen to increase the Over the years, Russia has been drawing lessons country’s influence and regain its former might from different Allied operations and worked on is closely associated with the establishment of a adapting its military planning to the realities strong power vertical enabling Russia’s political of a modern conflict.
Russia has also shown a leadership to ensure that its strategic decisions willingness to modernize Soviet-era tools and are followed without question.
This has been adapt them to today’s complex information backed up by systematic, long-term investment in environment.
Critically, it has been willing to the development of Special Forces, investment in 3 For a reference on “active measures”, see Annex 1.
President Putin has stated that the West ambitions embracing the achievements of Peter has crossed the line in relation to Ukraine.
I , glorifying Joseph Stalin6 and promoting the idea of the Slavic Civilization.
President Putin, in his speech following annexation of Crimea, says about the West “They are constantly trying to sweep us into a corner because we have Although the origins of the power vertical can be an independent position, because we maintain it traced to the early 1990s, it is mostly associated and because we call things like they are and do with President Putin’s presidential approach not engage in hypocrisy.
But there is a limit to and his establishment of a vertical chain of everything.
Ukraine choosing the European of successive governments of the Russian vector would seriously undermine the concept of Federation, reflected in official policy documents the “Slavic World” and the idea of Ancient Rus and consequently made operational through 8 as the source of the natural cospecific actions on the ground.
The report focuses existence of Russia and Ukraine. on the information-campaign component.
The wish to control Ukraine and make it According to the Russian perception of the world, inseparable from Russia extends to President Russia, Ukraine and Belarus are the three pillars Putin’s vision of setting up a Eurasian Union of the Slavic Orthodox civilisation, having shared that would replace the Commonwealth of values, culture and history, and – importantly Independent States.
The this project which resonates with the idea that, in ability to keep the two Slavic countries of Ukraine order for the „Heartland” to exist safely, and Belarus under Russia’s direct sphere of it needs to control the “inner crescent” known 6 A recent example was President Putin’s affirmation expressed during the D-Day memorial in Normandy that, should the people of also as the “Rimland” (Ukraine, along with the Volgograd want to change the name of their city back to Stalingrad, their rest of Eastern Europe)9.
The city adopted the name Stalingrad in 1925 to honour Soviet leader Josef Stalin.
The term Ancient Rus is used to refer to the first East-Slavic state 7 Lucy Ash of the BBC World Service gives a good overview of how in the Middle Ages , often referred to as Kivean President Putin’s politics are inspired by history.
NATO StratCom COE in cooperation with the the Centre for East European 9 Reflected in the article “The Geographical Pivot of History” by Policy Studies also affirms this reasoning.
Halford John Mackinder . 7 suggests that Russia’s information campaign is campaign (national policy documents and mediaoriented not only towards regaining influence control mechanisms), analyses the narratives over post-Soviet territories like Ukraine, but also and strategic frames used by Russia (starting towards creating a multi-polar world.
However, Ukraine, alleged abuse of the human rights of despite rather promising negotiations and previously Russian citizens and Russian speakers in Crimea, expressed commitment to sign the agreement, the labelling of the Euromaidan12 as a coup executed President Yanukovich declined to sign it at the by Nationalists, neo-Nazis, Russophobes and antilast minute.
Ukraine’s refusal to sign the Agreement Semites, and NATO posing a threat by potentially was perceived by the EU as a critical turning point for Ukraine to fall fully under Russia’s economic and placing its navy “right there in this city of Russian political influence.
National policy documents which help “set the The creation of the “Russian World” is therefore scene” seen as a “unique element of human civilization”, supporting the idea of uniting compatriots The strategic narrative Russia used for its information abroad, maintaining their strong links with the campaign against Ukraine is encompassed in the Homeland, encouraging their loyalty to Russia, its Russian Foreign Policy Review of 200713 and the Russian government and policies, thus enabling them to State Security Strategy of 200914.
The remaining two sections on The same ideas have been largely reflected also in the “Consular Work” and “Cooperation in Culture Foreign Policy Concept of 2013.15 and Science” contain elements supporting the execution of the Compatriots’ Policy.
As far back as communication but is the dominant language for Russia’s National Security Concept of 2000, it was acquiring information from TV, the internet and other emphasized that “There is an increasing threat to media.
For example, part of the Armenian community national security in the information sphere.
The in the Samtskhe-Javakheti region of Georgia widely striving of a number of countries to dominate the consumes Russian media because of its lack of the Georgian language.
Russian as the language of communication and treated native languages as less important and Creating a common Russian information sphere purposefully enforced teaching at schools or universities in Russian instead of the native tongue.
In 2009, Russia adopted a new State Security Other methods were also used to support the Strategy which resonates with the Foreign Russification of Ukrainians, Belarussians, Kazakhs Policy Review of 2007 and, to a certain extent, and other ethnic groups, including the largeinfluenced the crisis in Ukraine.
Culture which talks of one common information sphere which includes Russia, the Commonwealth “The information sphere harbours threats to of Independent States and neighbouring regions.
Russia’s security” This common information sphere of Russianspeaking communities is maintained and Objectives that were defined in the Russian enhanced by applying the Compatriots’ Policy Foreign Policy Review of 2007 namely “Russia’s which is viewed as a way of exerting soft power main task is to create effective information on neighbouring countries.
It is important to campaigns everywhere we detect real challenges note that this policy serves as an efficient tool for to Russia’s interests, by maintaining a wide public geopolitical influence in the post-Soviet sphere, consensus about the direction of Russia’s Foreign helping Russia attain specific foreign and security Policy” have been reaffirmed in the Foreign Policy policy goals.
One cannot underestimate the role of the mass media in executing Russia’s foreign NATO is a threat policy goals.
However, the main point of this philosophy towards is that the “Russian World” must be united by NATO, and likewise the imperfect nature of legal different means.
This concept is also actively instruments and mechanisms, create an everpromoted via Russian mass media channels.
The Latvian and Lithuanian experience in that Ukraine’s closer integration with NATO (or the context of the crisis in Ukraine shows that it is the EU, for that matter) structures contradicts complicated to tackle hostile Russian propaganda Russia’s strategic security interests and must channels and offer alternative, quality sources be prevented.
This is a means for the Russian of information for the local Russian-speaking government to justify pressure on or even open populations. hostility to Ukraine’s choice of Euro-Atlantic integration.
Instrumentalizing and sustaining narratives through controlled media The idea of the “Russian World” The other important factor in the effective The concept of the “Russian World” allows implementation of the information campaign Russia to utilize its compatriots as a channel against Ukraine has been the Russian government’s of communication with Russian-speaking powerful control over the mass media.
As the communities, making them multipliers of desired NATO StratCom COE’s research shows, Russian information, attitudes and behaviour.
Messages support distribution functions by locally engaging such as “brother nations”, common history, the NGOs and other actors.
The “Russian World” Orthodox religion and common culture have promotes the idea been used to encourage the inhabitants of East of different civilizations – namely, the Russianand South Ukraine to think about a joint future speaking Orthodox civilization in opposition to destiny with Russia.
They have used a wide developed and maintained for many years to range of tools to influence public opinion prepare the ground for the actions we witnessed about important events such as the signing in Ukraine.
One could argue that Russian of the Association Agreement with the EU, strategic policy documents are derived from the Euromaidan protests and the subsequent the afore-mentioned narratives and that, at the change of power in Kyiv, and the Russian same time, it is the task of these documents to annexation of Crimea.
The focus has been on instrumentalize and sustain these narratives. self-reinforcement, as the result of the masterful The Russian government’s powerful control understanding of different audiences.
Such methods of communication political technologists play a broader role, serving have notably strengthened the execution of as political meta programmers, system designers, the main task of the Russian news reports – to decision-makers, and political controllers all in radicalize political opposition and to discredit one, applying whatever technology they can to the the West . construction of politics as a whole.
It is obvious that a common and robust editorial The role of the Presidential Administration in policy was constructed, supporting the actions controlling the media of the Russian government, and deployed across multiple media outlets which leads to the premise The Russian Presidential Administration exercises that it was centrally derived. coordinated control over media advertising budgets and editorial content21 whilst maintaining an illusion Deliberate falsification as a method of media freedom by letting a small number of minor independent media outlets operate.
Those Whilst reporting on Ukraine events, journalists Russian media outlets conforming to the Kremlin’s of the Russian state controlled media have propaganda line were officially recognized by methodically manipulated video and photo President Putin following the annexation of Crimea. materials in order to produce material visually On 22 April 2014, President Putin signed an executive supporting the prevailing narrative.
A Molotov cocktail was thrown in the window of Black Sea TV, the Strict media control was exercised not only within only channel covering the whole Crimea region, Russia, but also in Crimea.
Shortly after the while the webpage of the channel suffered from appearance of armed groups in Crimean towns, a DDoS attack. the unfolding events demonstrated the special Overall, broadcasts of Ukrainian TV stations role of the Russian TV channels.
On 6 March 2014, were replaced by seven Russian TV channels. ten days before the Crimean referendum, armed The self-proclaimed Minister for Regional men broke into the building of the Simferopol Information, Dmitriy Polonskiy, explained the Radio and TV Broadcasting Station.
They were substituted by Russian have a right to defend the inhabitants of Crimea TV channels – Inter was replaced by NTV, the from the increase of violence, lies and the false 14 information flowing from their TV screens”23.
It should also be noted that the videos state-controlled message also helped turn Crimea’s broadcast by TV channels also get published on inhabitants against Ukrainian and foreign media social media, thus amplifying their effect. crews.
Aksyonov, the pro-Russian leader, was shown on television describing Western media as working Applying the lessons learned for spy services to foment revolution.
Influence of Russian TV in Ukraine Before Russia got to implement its information campaign against Ukraine, it learned lessons from Although a popularity review of various TV its own mistakes during previous years.
The first channels in Ukraine shows that the Ukrainian Chechnya war , the second Chechnya national channels hold the highest ratings24, it war , the sinking of the Kursk submarine does not automatically mean that Russian TV has in 2000, the Beslan hostage crisis in 2004 and the a less important role to play in Ukraine, especially Georgia-Russia war of 2008 were some of the among the Russian-speaking part of the population important events which formed the Russian power residing in East Ukraine.
Television is the dominant elite’s understanding of how information campaigns news medium in Ukraine.
Almost all Ukrainians should be organised. watch TV for news at least weekly, including 95.7% of Crimeans.
Russia 24, In the context of Ukraine events, Russian TV worked NTV, ORT , and RTR as well in two dimensions.
The internal dimension was as the Russian social media giant VKontakte.
This oriented towards the Russian domestic audience marks an important change since the 2012 survey, to facilitate “political-military upbringing” (as when the top five news sources for Crimeans were specified in Russia’s State Security Strategy) and all Ukrainian TV stations. to ensure information support to Russia’s foreign policy.
The external dimension of Russian TV relates The events in Crimea and the Eastern regions of to the mobilization of compatriots abroad and Ukraine have demonstrated that even a small information support to Russian state policies (for number of people who receive wide military and example, during the Crimea operation). informative support can pose a significant threat to the security and stability of a state.
In Russian power elite has ensured systematic Russia’s information campaign against Ukraine, control of narratives27.
Narrative control can only the unfinished narrative is based on the fact that be successful as a part of an influence operation “fascism has not been extinguished” and the which requires serious advance planning.
Stepan Bandera any information campaign for that matter), there was a Ukrainian political activist must be good coordination among the actors and a leader of the Ukrainian nationalist movement involved.
Russia’s Foreign Policy Review of 2007 in Western Ukraine which fought for Ukrainian recommends coordinating not only the work independence from the USSR in the 1930s and of state agencies but also private businesses early 1940s.
In their fight against the Soviets, the and non-government organisations for the movement saw a possible ally in the Nazis.
It is implementation of information campaigns. believed that the Soviet authorities ordered the KGB to kill Bandera in 1959.
Bandera has become a symbol for those fighting for the Ukrainian national 27 For a reference on narrative control, see Annex 6. cause and a “bogeyman” Nazi collaborator for 16 the official Moscow view, which refers to Ukrainian became very handy for the Russian elite as a way to nationalists as banderovtsi.
The Bandera notion draw a virtual line of cultural differences between was used by the Russian government in the context the West and the Orthodox civilization of the East. of Euromaidan in an attempt to denigrate the idea The concept of the clash of civilizations and the of the Euromaidan as an expression of nationalism dialogue between civilizations appeared often in and neo-Nazism, simultaneously causing fears in the speeches of the Russian power elite and its particular audiences of the potential abuse of the collaborating experts in the period 2004-2007. rights of non-Ukrainians.
The culmination of this discourse is the speech by President Putin delivered in 2007 at the Munich Cultivating anxiety and fear Security Conference where he criticized the USA for maintaining a unipolar world order.
The Orthodox Analysis of the Russian narrative leads to the civilization would look incomplete without Ukraine. conclusion that the Russian media has systematically Kremlin-affiliated political scientist Vyacheslav cultivated a feeling of fear and anxiety in the Nikonov (head of the Russian World Foundation ethnically Russian and non-Ukrainian populations and member of the Russian State Duma) reminded of Ukraine.
During the initial phase of the conflict, viewers about the concept of Ukraine and Russia as the whole of Ukrainian society was encouraged to the centre of a common civilization on the National feel insecure about its future and to fear Ukraine’s Interest TV programme.
Closer association with the EU supported by the Russian Orthodox Church.
This would mean less economic cooperation with Russia narrative is complemented by the anti-European and the Kremlin repeatedly hinted that the EU was narrative which attempts to either distort European trying to lead Ukraine into a self-seeking values (for example, identifying tolerance of sexual deal instead of genuinely planning to help advance diversity as a sign of decadence) or threatens Ukraine’s economy.
In the context of front of news reports thus emphasising the possible forming the Eurasian Economic Union, the concept physical threat (Eastern Ukraine will be attacked, of Eurasianism is experiencing a re-birth.
It also helped consolidate the Eurasian Union also wants to see Ukraine as the support of the Russian Federation’s population an integral part.
The most prominent promoter of for the government’s policy towards Ukraine and Eurasianism is Aleksandr Dugin who has adapted Euromaidan. the classical ideas of Eurasianism to contemporary realities.
According to the Eurasianists, narratives brought out by Russian propaganda, it Ukraine is a “battlefield of titans” where good and is important to take into account that this process evil struggle for influence.
The theory of the clash initiative is viewed as a means for the Transatlanticists of civilizations proposed by Samuel Huntington to steal Ukraine from Eurasia.
Eurasianism is a political Although Russian politicians often use the term movement in Russia.
It started among the Russian “brother nations”, in the practice of Russian foreign emigrant community in 1920s.
Eurasianists argue that policy this brotherhood means a strict hierarchy Russia has a unique identity and should thus embark on a development course apart from the West.
Inherent where the rights of Ukrainians to self-determination in Eurasianist thinking are notions of benevolent are ignored.
In the Russian state-controlled media, imperialism, Orthodox messianic qualities and a one can often encounter demeaning remarks about belief that a “third way” of economic development is Ukrainian statehood and its wish to integrate with possible – a path between capitalism and communism. the West.
Even entertainment programmes portray In addition, there is a vital geographical component to Eurasianism, dictating that Russia should control Ukrainians as an inferior nation who speak a the Eurasian Heartland, including Central Asia and the quaint Russian dialect.
Along with other Russian about the ancient roots of the Slavic language propagandists, Aleksandr Dugin speaks about preserved in modern Ukrainian and historic facts the unity of Eastern Slavs.
He refers to belorusi about the origin of the Ancient Rus state with Kyiv and Ukrainians as malorusi (“Little at its centre.
Thus, Russian propaganda continues to Russians”), and Russians as velyikorusi (“Great cultivate an inferiority complex among Ukrainians Russians”). , when Ukrainian was associated with rural, peasants’ A similarly patronizing, “paternal” attitude towards language and Russian branded as Ukraine can be observed in the speeches of Russian the language of culture and intelligence. politicians and political commentators.
The nations which live on the territory years, the 9 May Victory Day celebrations have of the historic Russian land must feel that they taken a central role in the ideology of the Russian belong to a common civilization and perceive the state.
These in producing different programmes and reports on are the words of Russian Orthodox Patriarch Kirill this topic which they broadcast well in advance at the opening of the 3rd Assembly of the Russian of the commemorations.
He also suggested using financial support for the production of feature films the term “countries of the Russian World” implying on historic events.
These films support old myths those countries which have historically been part of glorifying Russia and help create new ones.
Kirill specified that the common usage of the context, the inhabitants of Western Ukraine are Russian language, common culture and historical portrayed as Bandera-followers who, unfortunately, memory unites these countries.
Similarly to the Orthodox civilization, also in constructing its narrative, going back to the the Russian World cannot be considered a serious Peter the Great, with historical emphasis on Project without the inclusion of Ukraine. the Great Patriotic War to ignite the pathos 18 associated with Nazi elements.
The application different national interests, the EU is still facing some of a “war mentality” is not coincidental as it is historic ghosts, including Eastern Europe’s sense of related to living memory and genuine issues betrayal following the 1945 Yalta Conference.
The appeal of this leaves plenty of narrative lines to utilize in to Russian-speaking populations’ affections has the attempt to split the West.
Russia’s narrative been made through the fabrication of information, also attempts to break up the transatlantic link historical narrative feeding into certain cultural and position the USA in opposition to Europe.
The pre-dispositions and then inciting certain actions. narrative where the USA and the EU are discredited This has eased the task of labelling Euromaidan and weakened appeals to the BRIC28 group and activists as Nazis, Fascists and anti-Semites as well other emerging economies.
The Russian by “real people”. strategy implies instrumentalizing law as a means of legitimizing all its actions.
The attempt to divide the to the idea of Russian civilization with its own West by the Russian legal norms and interpretation of international narrative deserves particular attention.
The aspect of legitimacy is very important in focuses on making the West impotent and risksupporting the Russian narrative.
It helps Russia to averse when encountering the dishonest Russian appeal to its internal audience, to its compatriots narrative.
It was important for Russia it is on imports of Russian gas, and by reminding to instigate “legal” self-determination in Crimea Germans of recent history.
In his public speech and also to encourage similar self-determination following the annexation of Crimea, President referendums in East Ukraine, thus putting a veil Putin said “I believe that the Europeans, first and of “legitimacy” on the annexation of Crimea.
It foremost, the Germans, will also understand me”. was also very important that the self-proclaimed He is playing on the difference in views between leadership of Crimea New Europe and Old Europe, going on formally requested Russia’s help, intervention or to remind European leaders about uncomfortable even annexation.
This provided “legal” grounds for historical facts and appealing to a strange logic, the protection of compatriots and the protection claiming that since Russia fully supported the of human rights, in accordance with the Russian reunification of East and West Germany, Germany Foreign Policy Review of 2007 and the Russian State should now support Russia in its reunification Security Strategy of 2009.
President Putin is well aware of the quickly made legal arrangements to provide for the different interests EU countries have when it comes easy and quick incorporation of Crimea into the to cooperation with Russia, including economic Russian Federation. interests, and also the difficulty the European states 28 BRIC refers to Brazil, Russia, India and China which are considered have in finding a firm common position.
In his This was seen by Russia as a good enough reason address of 18 March 2014, following the Crimea to proclaim the Ukrainian authorities as illegitimate Referendum, President Putin listed a whole and the Parliament’s vote to remove Yanukovich spectrum of “legitimate” reasons for what had from power as an attempted coup d’état.
The policy on the protection of “passportisation”). compatriots may also provide sufficiently legitimate reasons for Russia to intervene on Ukrainian Through its information campaign, Russia is trying territory should any proof of humanitarian crisis to prove that its intent is to support the will of the be identified.
This firm conviction is based on truth supposedly made to Russia in 1990, that the and justice and was passed on from generation to Alliance would not expand into Eastern and Central generation.
Europe, build military infrastructure near Russia’s borders or permanently deploy troops there.
Journalists documented acts of violence by Berkut towards Euromaidan protesters, Communication Themes Constructing Perception including attempt to forcefully disperse Euromaidan in the early hours of 30 November.
Following the annexation of Crimea, its Berkut unit was incorporated Narratives are supported by utilising so-called into the forces of the Russian Interior Ministry. thematic communication frames.
The thematic frames are a way of associating a particular • Euromaidan is a US/EU satellite and its impression or opinion with an object or subject. supporters are traitors; The characteristics of thematic frames are their • the West is “evil” as it doesn’t want to/can’t save close relationships within a particular context and Ukraine from economic problems, is influencing interpretation.
The creation of • Russia is familiar to Ukraine but Western thematic frames is related to the human desire to democracies are strangers; simplify the outside world and to easily distinguish • The common history of Russia and Ukraine, the friends from foes.
Unfortunately, thematic framing Orthodox religion as a uniting element. can also be used to manipulate audiences.
MEDIA Russian-controlled internet trolling Social media has become a popular tool for information campaigns and other online activities The Russian governing elite cultivates a large number such as information collection for intelligence of bloggers and trolls in the social media through purposes, propaganda, disinformation, deception, the Presidential Administration in order to spread as well as recruitment and fundraising for particular information supporting Russia’s narrative and to activities.
For example, there have reports experiencing increased activity by probeen attempts to block access to pro-Ukrainian Kremlin trolls, most of them registered in February sources and to request information from the social 2014.
There were the cases of firing the editor “troll farm” in September 2013.
Trolling also involves maintaining Internet, they have not been completely successful multiple Facebook and Twitter accounts, gaining new in fighting individuals, independent organisations followers, participating in discussions. or media outlets in Russia which continue providing alternative opinion.
Likewise, the increased Pro-Russian accounts have been increasingly visible control has not saved Russia from the mistakes of on social networks since late February 2014 as the individuals who have crisis in Ukraine escalated with the occupation of published information which reveals Russia’s direct Crimea.
One particular campaign – “Polite People” – involvement in the crisis in Ukraine31.
Last but not promoted the invasion with pictures of Russian troops least, the social media is a particular phenomenon posing alongside young girls, mothers with children, 30 More information on some of the particular cases can be found the elderly, and pets.
For a further reference on controlled trolling, see Annex 7. 22 own messages or simply abuse.
Social media has Rozovskiy’s profile picture is a photo of a North also been used for the recruitment of pro-Russian Caucasus dentist used in the advertising brochure fighters to be sent to East Ukraine (for example, on of the Ust Dzhegmiska Dental Clinic.
My name is An internet troll is a person who foments discord online Igor Rosovskiy.
I live in the city of Odessa. by starting arguments or upsetting people, by posting I have worked as an emergency physician for 15 years. inflammatory, extraneous, or off-topic messages in Yesterday, as you know, there was a terrible tragedy in our city, an online community with the deliberate intent of some people killed other people.
They killed them in a brutal provoking readers into an emotional response or of way by burning them alive, not in a drunken stupor, not to otherwise disrupting normal on-topic discussion. get their grandmother’s inheritance, but because they share Trolls often use fake or anonymous profiles.
First they brutally beat their trolls who act on behalf of a grouping, organisation, victims, then burned them alive.
As a doctor, I rushed to help or a state usually maintain multiple fake profiles and those whom I could save, but the fighters stopped me.
They follow specific guidelines for trolling. didn’t let me go to the wounded.
One rudely pushed me, promising that I and other Jews would suffer a similar fate.
I saw a young man I could have saved if I could have taken Social media used for deception him to the hospital, but my attempts at persuasion were met with a blow to the face and lost glasses.
In fifteen years There are several prominent cases which provide I have seen much, but yesterday I wanted to cry, not from examples of deliberate falsification of information, the blows and humiliation, but from my helplessness in being usage of false identities and spreading of rumours unable to do anything.
In my city, such things did not happen even during the worst times of Nazi occupation.
The “Doctor from Odessa” fabrication The strangled pregnant woman in the Odessa trade union building.
RFE/RL reported on this case of a troll using a false Facebook account following the tragic fire in the The photo of a pregnant woman supposedly trade union building in Odessa.
The Facebook strangled by pro-Ukrainian extremists on the post was supposedly created by medical doctor Igor site of the tragedy in Odessa was being widely Rozovskiy, who tried to enter the burning building to circulated in the social media until KyivPost render aid, but pro-Ukrainian extremists allegedly published an investigation into the matter denied him entry and abused him. proving its falsification.
A hospital doctor commented on post was promptly translated into English, German, the photo saying that it was clearly an elderly and Bulgarian.
The doctor called higher of Twitter in Eastern Europe the NATO StratCom medical authorities, who confirmed there was no COE has analysed the prevailing sentiments on pregnant woman among the dead. this platform about the situation in Ukraine for the period 15 April to 15 July 2014.
It must was purported to be an eyewitness account of a be admitted that statistics on the country of origin 3-year-old boy having been tortured and crucified were based on information provided by Twitter users by the Ukrainian military in a public square in in their accounts, which does not necessary reflect Slovyansk.
Furthermore, a considerable Pyshnyak claimed to have witnessed the atrocity proportion of Twitter users do not specify their country of origin, hence tweets could be placed by along with the rest of inhabitants of Slovyansk who anyone who can communicate in Russian. were forcefully brought to the central square by Ukrainian military personnel to witness the public The pilot research demonstrated that, although execution.
At the time, she was speaking with the number of neutral sentiment tweets is Channel One from a refugee camp in Russia’s Rostov quite high, tweets show increasing polarisation region.
The video was widely disseminated on between pro-Ukraine and pro-Russia Twitter social media and was quickly followed by counterusers.
The emotional tension in the Twitter information from investigative journalists (including environment increased, especially after the Russia’s independent TV Dozhd) challenging the tragic events in Odessa37 and as military action report or proving it to be false.
Yevgeny Feldman of the Novaya Gazeta newspaper went to the scene of the purported incident to ask Of all the tweets analysed, 12.2% were identified residents whether they had witnessed or heard of as aggressive.
In the nine-minute video posted provocative comments tended to increase over on YouTube, local Slovyansk residents consistently the period of the analysis, mostly dominated denied knowledge of any such incident. by pro-Russian stances.
The followers of support and hence have larger influence on these accounts use this information in further Twitter.
Of Ukrainian public figures, the only ones references and this allows the selective with notable positive appraisal are A Yatsenyuk distribution of anti-Ukraine information.
Of foreign political figures, the important to note that the Twitter accounts of only notable ones have been B Obama and J. public figures – TV anchors, actors, journalists, Kerry, while the presence of European politicians opposition leaders – can also be very influential, is hardly noticeable. having high numbers of followers and being used to spread information and opinions.
Analysis has led to the conclusion that a number 2) The Russian Twitter information environment of fake accounts have been created by a group shows more homogenous opinions and is of users, each of them having an insignificant dominated by supporters of President Putin’s amount of followers, but all spreading the same policy which can be partially explained by the message.
It has also identified the networks of Russian state’s ability to limit the activity of Twitter users with rather high Twitter influence the opposition and independent media.
The who re-tweet and comment on each other’s opinions originating from Ukraine show more tweets in order to increase visibility.
One division into supporters of Ukrainian territorial such group is formed by anti-Ukrainian users integrity and supporters of the separatists; who are 3) The influence of pro-Russian state possibly creating a fictional discussion in order to institutions, non-government organisations produce more tweets. and particular public figures is much stronger than the that of equivalent pro-Ukrainian The pilot research has identified a correlation parties. among the ideological base, use of traditional 4) Exceptions are representatives of the media and a developed network of Twitter users.
Euromaidan movement whose tweets have The successful coordination between these three noticeable influence in terms of re-tweets and elements is the key factor to gaining influence in followers; the Twitter environment.
More in-depth analysis 5) Pro-Russian Twitter users more often use is needed to identify and analyse how these active forms of tweeting – sharing opinions, coordination mechanisms are created and how commenting, calling for action, using they work in social media. propaganda, getting involved in discussions. from a combination of the words “Russian” and “fascist”. 25 in Crimea.
The Russian force was dominating the A NEW FORM OF information field as well as the situation on the ground WARFARE by having check-points everywhere, demonstrating new equipment and strength in numbers.
The whole operation was implemented at great speed, using the During the crisis in Ukraine, we have witnessed momentum of local support boosted by an intensive the application of a new type of warfare where information campaign, and the government change dominance in the information field and hybrid, in Kyiv combined with the lack of willingness to asymmetric warfare are the key elements. respond to Russia’s provocations with military action.
Crimea as a test case Information campaign – central to the new form of warfare The strategy and tactics that were employed in Ukraine represent an implementation of the ideas Russia’s information campaign has played a very developed by Russian military analysts and outlined important role in preparing the ground for the by General Valery Gerasimov, the Chief of Russia’s Crimea operation and further action in East Ukraine.
It proved that by resources to the required level to be able to compete applying the elements of the new type of warfare, with other countries in the information field (for victory can be ensured without open military conflict example – RT TV channel, formerly known as Russia and deployment of large amounts of hard military Today); and abusing the lack of clear definitions and power to the conflict area. restrictions on international peacetime information Characteristics of the new form of warfare influencing activities.
The called “polite men”) on the ground who acted in fear of potential threat lead to escalated military accordance with the strategy to minimize bloodshed action by increasing numbers of Russian troops and apply strategic communication intent.
These versions of events illustrate this deception tactic is the recent Malaysia flooded the information space, including the English Airlines flight MH17 tragedy.
Suspicion on who downed the aircraft recent opinion poll by the Levada Centre42 shows, fell on pro-Russian separatists as some evidence 82% of Russians blame Ukrainian forces for downing emerged immediately after the incident.
Citing the selfIn addition, less than 20 minutes after the crash, proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic press service as Igor Girkin , leader of the Donbass their source, RIA informed that “eyewitnesses reported separatists, was reported to have posted on that the Malaysian jet was attacked by a Ukrainian fighter social media network VKontakte, taking credit for plane, after which the plane broke into two sections in mid-air and crashed on the territory of the Donetsk downing a Ukrainian military aircraft.
The Russian mass media reacted quickly by putting out several versions of what had happened, blaming the Ukrainian side as well as speculating on Psychological pressure a United States conspiracy against Russia.
The Moscow Times published an article on the subject called “’Putin’s The war in Crimea was never announced.
By the end of the next day, they had already surrounded the key government buildings in Crimean self-defence units,e. local civilians.
The the city centre, had blockaded Ukrainian border troops ability to mobilize and effectively use civilians was at Balaklava Bay and Belbek airport near Sebastopol, crucial to achieving Russia’s goals in Crimea and and established checkpoints on roads across the Crimea. later on in East Ukraine.
Although mercenaries were Journalists’ interest in the origins of the armed men widely used for the formation of self-defence groups was high and they even got some of them talking on camera.
Their guns were the same as those to draw on the support and active involvement used by the Russian army, their trucks had Russian of certain groups within society susceptible to number plates and they spoke Russian without accent, Russian propaganda, including former members of admitting that they had arrived from Russia and held Russian citizenship.
By mid-March, most of the Ukrainian law-enforcement or military bodies (both local to government and military installations had either been Ukraine and from Russia and the former USSR where seized or blockaded with little resistance from the Russian-speaking information channels are widely Ukrainian side.
Foreign Minister Lavrov denied any relationship between these non-uniformed, armed men and the Russian army.
Although a month after the annexation of Crimea, The role of the Special Operations Forces President Putin admitted that Russian forces had indeed been deployed to Crimea to support local self-defence The Crimea operation showed that the nature of groups, it already didn’t matter.
The Chechnya and Georgia, there has been a noticeable Russian troops improvement in their performance as well as exerted psychological pressure on the Ukrainian army equipment.
In Crimea, they conducted subversive by besieging military posts, holding Ukrainian soldiers actions in a silent and speedy manner, supporting hostage without proper access to information, the propaganda-driven partition of the community and relying on directions from the fragile interim and the disruption of central government in a wellgovernment in Kyiv.
The SPETSNAZ also excelled in was exerted by the short-notice military exercises by their cooperation with the local pro-Russian population Russian armed forces near the Ukrainian border and to smuggle arms, create separatist formations and their combat-readiness checks. conduct a sophisticated Information Operations campaign.
Argita Daudze personally approached several of the men in unmarked uniforms and received verbal The use of armed civilians in the conflict was achieved confirmation that they were Russian soldiers from the base in Sevastopol.
Ukrainian journalists also did many on-thespot interviews with the by forming self-defence groups in Crimea to support unmarked armed men, receiving confirmation that they were Russian Russian troops in military action.
The operations were conducted using this laid out a comfortable environment for taking irregular forces in support of the separatist movement, over the territory. insurgency and also conventional military force.
The so-called Cyber Berkut was an The cyber domain as part of the new form of warfare important player in the cyber war during the crisis in Ukraine.
It is worth discussing what happened in the cyber domain as part of the utilisation of asymmetric or This voluntary anonymous group appeared after the indirect methods to complement actions in the dissolution of the infamous Berkut security force in Ukraine at the end of February.
The targets of the group information battle field or military actions on the are not only the Ukrainian government but also foreign ground.
Hence it was Cyber Berkut stated that the crisis in Ukraine was the largest cyberwho published the phone discussion between Ms.
Such actions as the 44 NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence and NATO itself.
The Cyber Berkut has an leak of the recorded phone conversations between opponent – the Cyber Hundred which is US State Department official Victoria Nuland and the a pro-Ukrainian group whose main task was to fight the US ambassador to Ukraine and EU foreign affairs chief information war to protect the interests of Euromaidan.
The group declared that it would fight against the Additionally, the provision of confusing information is current government of Ukraine which – as they an example of reflexive control. stated, matching the Russian narrative – glorified neo-fascism and nationalism.
The attack on the NATO In preparing to take over Crimea, Russia had Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence by managed to hit almost all Ukrainian government Cyber Berkut is particularly interesting.
This also Ukrainian government members with the purpose supports the wider Russian narrative that the West of disrupting communication between government and NATO are plotting against Russia and developing agencies.
Numerous cyber-attacks against Ukrainian various capabilities like the Centres of Excellence to military groups have also been reported, meant to attack and harm Russia. discredit their actions and create tensions between cooperation partners.
Ukrainian company Ukrtelecom What plays to the Russian advantage is the fact that announced that unmarked gunmen had penetrated there are few international legal constraints that its infrastructure facilities causing the collapse of all regulate information interventions, information communication.
IMPORTANCE OF MEDIA The large-scale disinformation spread by Russia ANALYSIS worsened the situation and resulted in an overload of conflicting information for local populations and the Ukrainian government itself.
Russia’s consistent Russia’s success in reaching out to the population efforts to portray the new Ukrainian government as of East Ukraine has proved a need for a clear “far-right Nazi” to the inhabitants of Eastern Ukraine Ukrainian government policy on the country’s East, resulted in increased distrust and alienation from the including strategic communication to reach out to its central government. population.
Significant work needs to be undertaken by the international community to boost the Ukrainian Advantages of comprehensive Target Audience government’s capacity in this regard.
The ability to Analysis conduct proper audience analysis is key to designing any information campaign.
The Ukrainian case clearly demonstrates the advantages of comprehensive TAA skills and The new government in Kyiv facing Russian aggression capabilities.
The new government in Ukraine faced a very difficult The UK StratCom community defines Target Audience task, in a time of crisis, to operate with speed, Analysis as the process of profiling an audience decisiveness and high level of professionalism whilst to understand what motivates it & assess under what circumstances it will exhibit a specific behaviour.
In its facing economic pressure, the flow of new staff into most detailed form TAA is a multi-source, scientifically government structures (including disorganised lawverified, diagnostic methodology undertaken in-country enforcement bodies), a new majority in Parliament and in the host language used to identify specific and the state being headed by an acting president with motivations for behaviour.
Apart from facing external aggression, deduced from methodically gathered data and tested against a scientifically derived hypothesis. the government had to prepare for a Presidential election and demonstrate willingness to implement urgent reforms.
Knowledge of people’s beliefs and the ability to predict their actions has been critical to the success Ukraine’s government, fearing Russian military of Russia’s information campaign on the one hand invasion from the South-East where Russia had and Ukraine’s failure on the other.
Russia was able stationed large numbers of troops on the border, thus to get the support for its actions within the Russianexerting significant psychological pressure, did not speaking population in Ukraine because it knew order armed resistance in Crimea.
However, the failure its target audience, was able to predict its likely to withdraw Ukrainian military equipment and issue behaviour and use the right channels to trigger it. troops with clear orders gave Russian troops in Crimea the upper hand to exert psychological pressure.
East Ukrainians’ wish for stability It was very difficult for the unprepared Ukrainian The deployment of a specialist assessment team government to counter the well-prepared Russian identified the need for a comprehensive TAA which operation in Crimea in an effective manner.
It was not was conducted in parts of the East Ukraine in June possible to control the situation on the peninsula or, 30 2014.45 As it is so often the case, the TAA revealed Kyiv government and certainly keeping well away counter-intuitive facts.
The TAA the TAA indicated that the Ukrainian government indicated that whilst the central government’s should challenge the successfully accrued credibility was low, this did not universally translate to legitimacy of the separatists and where pro-Moscow, separatist support.
The TAA, which was possible attempt to overstretch their ability to focused not on people’s attitudes or perceptions but govern.
Overall, the TAA revealed that the Kyiv instead upon actual behaviours, identified many government’s ability to influence the population different groupings of interests.
One of the common was weak and conventional communication strands across all groups was a desire for stability campaigns were unlikely to succeed.
Much more and peace, irrespective of political orientation. personal engagement would be better – personFinancial stability and job security were important to-person contacts would prove more effective behavioural motivators.
Informal power structures and allow audiences to engage in discussion of – business networks – were rated as being highly their fears and aspirations. influential because they related directly to job security.
Afghanistan veterans, pensioners, miners, public servants and senior factory workers.
In their view, military action by the Ukrainian government does not facilitate stability.
Locally attuned information campaigns may bring results One of the difficulties in communicating with the country’s East is the fact that Ukrainian TV has low credibility and a very limited audience.
If the new Ukrainian government wanted to reach out to local populations in the East, their campaigns would have to be very heavily attuned to local issues.
A country-wide, one-size-fitsall campaign (which is what would probably have been commissioned) would have had no traction with the profiled groups.
The TAA further revealed that influence efforts could be enhanced by communicating locally in a style which emphasized preservation of local stability avoiding all suggestion of the centrality of the 45 The TAA was undertaken in eastern Ukraine by a contracted incountry project involving research teams deployed in the field.
Analysis of the crisis in Ukraine has shown that the Russian military has The crisis in Ukraine has provided valuable lessons been systematically developed over the past 10 for the Ukrainian government, the countries years and become able to skilfully employ 21stneighbouring Russia (who became home to larger century tactics that combine intense information Russian-speaking communities during the Soviet campaigns, cyber warfare and the use of highly era), and NATO and the EU as organisations. trained Special Operations Forces.
Russia has responded to the new information challenge General conclusions with a high degree of professionalism and imagination.
Russian professionalism has to be Information is a powerful tool of influence. acknowledged even if we condemn the uses to Analysis of the Ukraine conflict suggests that which it is being applied.
In terms of messaging, NATO and the EU must adapt to the new reality Russia has demonstrated initiative, strict message where information superiority, in relation discipline, multi-level complexity and vertical to military power, is becoming increasingly coherence.
Russia has demonstrated that in the is the role of Special Operations Forces and current and continually evolving information information.
Traditionally, Special Forces in the environment, power and control can easily be West avoid publicity, consistent with their covert gained by manipulating information to affect operational posture.
Russians have incorporated not only financial markets, business practices information into what their Special Operations and public policy, but also influence societal Forces do.
The Allies should consider how well perceptions, attitudes and behaviours.
While their Special Operations Forces participate in information itself has tremendous value, how information offensives. it is presented transforms it into an important strategic tool.
The calculated use, and misuse, of Russia’s narrative is reflected in its key state information has the potential to shape personal policy documents.
Analysis of the most popular values to influence societal norms and also Russian TV channels proved that the narrative behaviours. used in the information campaign against Ukraine is supported by key Russian state policy The information campaign was central to documents.
Taking over Crimea alternative narratives in preparations to counter without any military confrontation demonstrated Russian propaganda in the future.
Russia’s that the concept of well-constructed influence neighbouring countries with larger Russianoperations is a very essential part of Russian speaking communities should particularly focus operational planning and that Russian military on ways and means to balance Russia’s narratives forces have a strategic communications mind-set targeted at Russia’s compatriots abroad. applied down to the tactical level.
Information and communications played the central role in Russia’s narrative is largely based on historical the Russian operations, the military component memory.
It is this appeal to human emotion, this This is particularly applicable to the countries hope, and perhaps even this promise of renewed which are not members of NATO and therefore pride and glory that has made the Russian not parties to the Washington Treaty. narrative so compelling to its people.
Audience analysis is critical to operational Crisis in Ukraine is a result of Russia’s long term success.
Learning from the Russian information understanding audiences and what motivates campaign in Ukraine, it is clear that early detection them is critical to operational success that is and analysis of elements within the Russian enduring – an important lesson for the Alliance narrative which signal potentially aggressive and one for which the basic tenets of StratCom behaviour are critical.
Russia’s state policy can provide solutions if properly resourced, documents contain indications which should be integrated into all responses – words and actions further analysed so as to develop potential future alike – and implemented consistently. scenarios of Russia’s actions and Allied responses to those.
It is also obvious that, prior to taking There is “another side of the coin” to Russia’s aggressive action on the ground, the Russian information campaign.
Although Russia’s government works intensively with the public information campaign has been successful in information space to prepare public opinion for influencing its audiences, it also bears a degree the steps to be taken.
Similar activities in the of counter-productivity as it has radicalized and information space also took place before the 2nd alienated other audiences – West Ukraine and Chechen War and the 2008 war with Georgia.
It remains to be seen whether The role of Compatriots Abroad is critical and Russia has gained a long-term enemy on the part should be considered carefully for the future.
It can be assumed with a security implications for countries neighbouring degree of certainty that as a result of the current Russia are particularly serious.
The kind of conflict, the Kyiv government will completely strategy that Russia has employed in Ukraine discard the idea of participating in the Eurasian is likely to work best in areas which have larger Economic Union or other Russian political, communities of Russia’s Compatriots Abroad who economic or even cultural projects. are targets of Russia’s information campaigns and potentially may be ready to provide local Deception is used by Russia as a tactic to 33 distract and delay.
Whereas the Alliance is bound by the requirement to speak and act So-called “active measures” was a term referring with transparency and truth, there is no such to deceptive operations conducted in support requirement compelling Russia to do the same. of Soviet foreign policy.
The were available to support or participate in these evolution of the crisis in Ukraine beyond Crimea campaigns.
How One and showed him to be on active duty within rebel-controlled areas inside the Interagency Group Made a Major Difference” by Ukrainian border.
Detailed information on this and other cases can be found F Schoen and Ch.
The concept is close in meaning to the propaganda in Latvia and Lithuania concept of psychological influence.
Reflexive control implies interference with the decisionOn 21 March 2014, the Lithuanian Radio making process by using a means of conveying and Television Commission restricted the reto a partner or an opponent specially prepared broadcasting of Russian TV channel NTV-Mir information to incline him to voluntarily make within Lithuania for a period of three months.
On the predetermined decision desired by the the eve of Lithuanian Independence Day, NTVinitiator of the action.
Mir broadcast a programme claiming that during the “Ukrainian nationalist coup d’état”, the same The advancement of reflexive control as a strategic scenario used by the “Lithuanian separatists” in tool applicable in international politics goes in 1991 was applied.
The Commission found that line with the Russian belief that the emerging the programme disseminated false information in global information space can be exploited to alter order to discredit Lithuanian statehood and the the global balance of power. restoration of independence.
The Commission also restricted the re-transmissions of the RTR Planeta It can be argued that Russia’s information TV channel. campaign against Ukraine, well aligned with the On 8 April 2014, the Latvian National Electronic actions on the ground, was a manifestation of Mass Media Council restricted the rereflexive control.
Similarities can be drawn with broadcasting of Russian TV channel Rossiya RTR in Russian actions prior to and during the war with Latvia for a period of three months.
As part of reflexive control, released by the Council reads that “NEMMC Russia applied continuous, mounting pressure believes a number of Russian television channels on the Georgian government and population, controlled by the Russian government have been at the same time conducting close analysis of distributing misleading and hateful information the psychological profile of the President to be in regard to Latvia for a long time.
This is viewed able to provoke the Government into the desired as targeted information aggression within Latvia’s decisions and actions. information space.
Latvian law prohibits mass media from and its inability to reach out to the inhabitants disseminating false information, invoking hatred, of Crimea and the Eastern regions.
This calling for acts of war or causing military conflict. complemented the Russian effort to discredit the Ukrainian government as part of its reflexive The restriction of these channels also lead to the control plan. conclusion that current EU legislation does not 35 enable individual member states to protect their owns controlling shareholdings in First Channel information space from similar types of aggression and STS TV, as well as majority shareholdings and illegal activity should the broadcaster be in NTV, Ren-TV, Fifth Channel, also Izvestia and registered in another country.
In addition to this, Kovalchuk owns the Video International company which produces These events were accompanied by a debate on advertising for the leading Russian TV channels. the need to establish a joint Russian-language Another acquaintance of President Putin – Arkady channel in the Baltic States as an alternative to Rotenberg – influences the operations of First the channels being re-broadcast from Russia.
Channel – he owns a company Krasnij Kvadrat, However, financial constraints have prevented which produces TV programmes for it.
One of the this idea from moving forward at this time. mechanisms of media control is allocating the Recently, current and former media leaders in advertising budgets of the major state-owned the Baltics and Finland have sent a joint letter companies to the media.
According to the for the placement of articles, which are never authors, individual countries lack the resources identified as advertising. to establish and maintain such channels.
Media control in Russia (incl. reference the support of Vyacheslav Volodin, First Deputy to trolling) Chief of Staff of the Presidential Administration of Russia.
V Volodin takes part in the creation of press Every week, the Presidential Administration materials for certain media campaigns.
Synchronized deputy of all three channels attends these dissemination of propaganda materials (in meetings.
Alexei Gromov, Deputy Chief of Staff Russian – vbros) to the media usually happens via of the Presidential Administration of Russia the large newspapers – Komsomolskaya Pravda usually attends these meetings on behalf of and Izvestija – and in loyal internet portals, for the Presidential Administration.
If propaganda campaigns the administration is represented by staff from require a larger scale, TV channel news and domestic policy administration.
Loyal communicates with TV channel management by political scientists play a key role in information telephone, sometimes asking them to remove campaigns organized by the Russian authorities. one or another story from broadcasts.
This They “correctly” interpret political events in Russia means that we can consider Gromov to be one and abroad.
The political scientists and political of Russia’s leading controllers of TV channel commentators who regularly communicate with content.
Control over every single message in the Presidential Administration include Sergey the media is also ensured by an associate of Markov, Dmitry Orlov, Vyacheslav Nikonov, President Putin – Yuri Kovalchuk.
Significantly, the necessity for using this of the Presidential Administration and the State method was described in Russia’s foreign policy Duma were not synchronized.
From this we can conclude that army did not have sufficient resources to conduct the leading Russian TV channels – First Channel, information operations either internally or in Rossija and NTV, when reflecting events in Russia state or independent media.
News, Chechens were quite active through their own or analytical guidelines and editorial content are the major Russian media.
Lessons President Putin learned from freedom fighters to a wide audience. the two Chechen wars, the Kursk tragedy, and the Georgia war The second Chechen war, which started in 1999 after bombings of residential targets in Russia After the collapse of the USSR, Chechnya took (the Chechen rebels never claimed responsibility bold steps towards national self-determination for this), was radically different in terms of state which was unacceptable to Moscow.
In 2000, Vladimir Putin became democracies would also have rather supported President and started the centralization of power a peaceful solution to the conflict through in Russia.
President Putin improved relations political dialogue than separation of the Republic between the Presidential Administration, the of Ichkeria from the Russian Federation.
This helped with the first Chechen war revealed that Russia failed to implementation of the information component implement communication that would help gain during the military operations.
President mass support from a wide range of audiences Putin’s former roles in the KGB and FSB (Federal within the country and beyond.
Security Service of the Russian Federation, in Russian Федера́ льная слу́ жба безопа́ сности In the first half of the 1990s, Russia had Росси́ йской Федера́ ции) influenced the overall independent media, including the NTV TV attitude of state institutions on the utilisation channel, which actively criticized the Kremlin’s of information tools in the implementation of policy in Chechnya.
This approach parts of Russian society, Chechen activities were was based on the concept that anything and perceived sympathetically, as a continuation of everything could be controlled by the elite.
Some the collapse of the USSR and the fight for selfof the tools that help to achieve this are the determination by nations enslaved by the USSR. so-called political technologies, which include During Boris Yeltsin’s presidency, the Kremlin public relations, propaganda and misinformation. did not have a particularly good relationship President Putin and his allies placed a lot of with the armed forces and security services. attention on the control of economic and media Despite the resolution of the political crisis of resources.
Control over Gazprom’s finances was 1993, cooperation between the Presidential practiced by inserting “our people” in leading Administration and the State Duma was positions within the company.
The implementation of effective of media control started with the takeover of information campaigns was not possible in such the largest TV channels, placing them under circumstances.
Communication by and decisions the direct or indirect charge of the Presidential 37 Administration, through media owners who are opportunities to express their views.
Initially, control of the leading TV channels prevented President Putin’s motivation to gain control over Chechen militants from addressing wide Russian the major TV channels was linked to his election and foreign audiences.
In 1999, when President Putin became two Chechen wars did not see a change in the Prime Minister, there were around ten media location or practice of war, their narratives and holdings.
Some of the most influential media thematic frameworks were significantly different affecting elections were Vladimir Gusinsky’s and this affected the international position of the NTV, Boris Berezovsky’s TV6 and Yuri Luzhkov’s two parties involved.
Mayor of Moscow Yuri Luzhkov was turned from an opponent of President Putin’s into an In 2000, the international and domestic reaction ally through the process of party consolidation, to the sinking of the Kursk submarine and giving him an opportunity to become one of the the authorities’ failure to act, substantially leading politicians in the United Russia party. undermined President Putin’s reputation.
Russian media magnate V Gusinsky was forced President Putin’s indecision about postponing to sell his media channels, including NTV, to his vacation and making a public announcement Gazprom.
B Berezovsky was forced to emigrate. created outrage in the victims’ families.
In the In this way, the Kremlin neutralized its three days before divers finally reached the submarine, main opponents in the presentation of the war Russian state representatives changed the in Chechnya and other events.
In addition, S message on the causes of the accident and the Jastrzembski, a specialist in spin-doctoring, was condition of the crew several times. appointed presidential adviser and attempted to control anything that appeared in the Russian The war with Georgia in 2008 showed that media about the war in Chechnya.
After the 2001 Russia had taken into account previous military terrorist attacks in the USA, Russia made good operations and was willing to participate in use of the opportunity and began to explain to information warfare.
To fight for freedom, but “terrorist attacks” by radical be able to describe this military operation as Islamists with one aim – to destabilize Russia. “protective”, Russia needed there to be more The “Federal group” (Russian – federaljnaya Russian citizens in South Ossetia.
In war in South Ossetia, explained that a solution the second Chechen war, unlike the first, many had to be found for a “humanitarian crisis” that more special OMON police units were involved, had been caused by the invasion of the Georgian not regular army soldiers.
The audience was misled by stories about protests by committees of mothers of young civil casualties whose numbers were growing soldiers which had resonated through the public every hour.
The Kremlin not only made its organizations did not confirm the numbers of message clearer, but also limited the Chechens’ casualties that had been previously reported 38 by the Russian media.
Narratives are controlled through the democracies, the Russian activities were not creation of myths and manipulation of the current considered justified, the Kremlin demonstrated elements of identity.
This is a detail also common to all the post-Soviet countries that NATO and in the use of propaganda, which is created in other international organizations will not be able line with one or several elements of the target to keep Russia from acting in its own interests. group’s identity.
In the framework of narrative control, it is possible to “insert” a particular All these examples show that Kremlin officials political or military leader, the government of have changed their opinion about the importance some country, or the country itself in a positive of the information component in politics and in or negative context.
Narrative The differences in the media coverage of the two control means control over the process of Chechen wars were connected to the changes in interpreting information.
If an authoritarian effective narratives and frames, and the exclusion state practices narrative control long enough, of the Chechens from the communication the proportion of its society that does not think process.
This demonstrates the nature of the critically perceives information in a hyperbolic Russian state’s control over communication – form and uses a specific interpretation even if any media competitors will be neutralized by any this does not correspond to real events. means possible.
Controlled internet trolling Annex 6: Narrative Control Although the Internet environment in Russia is much To understand the narratives and thematic more open than that of TV, the state administration communication frames in the context of the is also trying to influence processes in the World Ukraine crisis, it is important to consider narrative Wide Web.
A narrative can be considered an oral Insider points out, the Domestic Policy Department or written story setting out the author’s ideas of the Presidential Administration controls the work about an object, person or process in a specific of so-called trolls and bloggers, who have three order.
Narratives usually materials; offer a clear distinction between the good and 2) creation of fake accounts on social networks the bad.
If individual narratives are a way in and distributing the ordered information on which a person communicates their personal these accounts; experience, collective narratives are based on 3) sending out of spam messages, persecution collective experience and values and one of their of opponents on the Internet.
Thus involved in the organization of these activities; collective narratives are always seen as a resource one of the most important could be the director for political communication, which has to be of the Konkord holding Evgeny Prihozhin, who 39 is personally acquainted with President Putin.
Prihozin has his own propaganda offices in Ukraine, for example, the Kharkiv news agency.
