In both political and acaKEYWORDS demic discourses, Ukraine is often characterized as a country Ukraine’s East-West divide; split between Western and Eastern regional and societal parts Euromaidan Revolution; belonging to some wider geopolitical and cultural entities.
Ukraine as a “failed state”; Moreover, the recent upheavals in the life of the country – Russian military aggression; Euromaidan Revolution, illegal annexation of Crimea and Crimea; Donbas Russian-Ukrainian war in Donbas – have actualized the allegations about Ukraine as a feeble state structure on the brink of disintegration and collapse.
The ﬁndings in this study challenge both of these claims and it is argued that Ukraine is not a deeply divided or failed state.
In practice, the East-West political polarization line is not clearly deﬁned, but to the extent that it does surface in the political and electoral contests, this line has been moving from west to east since the early 1990s.
The shifting of the polarization line implies that political and cultural identities in Ukraine are not ﬁxed and, at the same time, reﬂects a strengthening cohesion of Ukraine’s political and cultural space.
These ﬁndings are conﬁrmed by the improved and everincreasing convergence of Ukrainian society following the Euromaidan and Russian military aggression.
Judging by the Russian leadership’s subsequent actions and statements, these ideas have been at the core of Russia’s recent military aggression against Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In this speech Putin referred to the entire Southern and Eastern part of Ukraine as the “territory of the historic South of Russia”, arbitrary incorporated by the Soviet authorities into the Ukrainian Soviet Republic.
It is not surprising, therefore, that these ideas eventually culminated in the military incursion and active steps aimed at dismembering the country.
Putin’s orders to occupy and annex Crimea as well as instigate and fuel the conﬂict in Donbas by arming, staﬃng and supervising the Russian proxies have led to thousands of victims among combatants and civilians .1 Putin’s perception of Ukraine was not invented by the current Russian leadership however.
Nowadays, these ideas are retranslated, among other means, through the writings of illiberal but inﬂuential Russian intellectuals.
In a chapter of the book with the telling name “Geopolitical decomposition of Ukraine,” Dugin maintained that Ukraine was an artiﬁcial formation, composed by some Russian and Western cultural strata.
Since the politically polarizing 1994 presidential election (and particularly the Orange Revolution in 2004), this idea has been widely circulating in Western political and scholarly discourses.
According to Huntington, the historical dominance of the cultural and religious entities in the respective parts of this “cleft country” determined two opposing political identities today, undermining contemporary Ukrainian state from within.
Dugin’s and Huntington’s accounts of the Ukrainian divide cannot diﬀer more in their contexts, methodology and scientiﬁc relevance.
However, what these interpretations share in common are the assertions that directly correlate with the allegations voiced by Putin of contemporary Ukraine that is split between Eastern and Western cultural and political entities making it a feeble state structure with a signiﬁcant risk of disintegration.
Such a stereotypic view of Ukraine has not been conﬁned to the works of the Kremlin’s propagandists at home and abroad; neither has it become history in Western writing on Ukraine.
The Huntington-type account of Ukraine, evoking the two claims, continues capturing the imagination of many analysts and scholars.
It attempts to demonstrate that each of these ideas has signiﬁcant problems when they are applied to present-day Ukraine.
The analysis in this paper starts from identifying a politically meaningful division line that can potentially have the qualities and consequences for Ukraine mentioned above.
The consistency of accounts akin to Huntington and Dugin requires that an objective cultural and regional fault line, splitting Ukraine into some Eastern and Western parts, is suﬃciently entrenched and stable.
Additionally, the line’s salience should be signiﬁcant to the extent that it reduces the potential of the Ukrainian political society to a grossly ineﬃcient or even failed state.
To this end, the analysis in the ﬁrst part of the paper will consider the spatial representation of political polarization in independent Ukraine’s electoral geography, where the dividing line along the East-West axis should be easy to spot.
More speciﬁcally, it will focus on the patterns of regional distribution of support for the political forces categorized as mainly pro-Western or pro-Russian.
Then, in the second part of the article, the study proceeds to assessing the quality of the societal cohesion in contemporary Ukraine.
In the latter case, the acute political crisis and subsequent external military aggression would likely put such a state on the verge of disintegration and collapse.
It will be argued that in Ukraine these challenges failed to trigger an outcome even remotely resembling the condition of a failed state.
Together with the anticipated ﬁndings in the other sections of the paper, this shall question the allegation about an artiﬁcial and fragile structure of the Ukrainian political community altogether.
Ukraine’s shifting “East–West” polarization line The ﬁrst national poll, which saw a two-side political polarization of the country along the East-West axis, was the very ﬁrst election conducted in independent Ukraine.
In the presidential election of 1 December 1991 the former highranking Communist apparatchik Leonid Kravchuk faced Viacheslav Chornovil as his main rival.
The latter was a key ﬁgure of the Soviet-era dissident movement, who represented the center-right national-democratic camp of the evolving Ukrainian political spectrum.
This political faction was the key anti-Soviet force that propelled Ukraine to national sovereignty.
Yet, the national democrats suﬀered a crushing defeat in the ﬁrst round of the vote.
In this way, Galicia was the only region apart from the capital, Kyiv, where he failed to win.
Nevertheless, soon political projects, that with some reservations could be regarded as pro-European, began gaining in popular support.
This time the political and electoral dividing line moved eastwards quite considerably.
This election turned into a tight race between the incumbent Kravchuk and Leonid Kuchma, a center-leaning former “red director” and a native of the industrial East.
In this election, Kravchuk positioned himself as a guarantor of independent Ukrainian statehood and was closely associated with the prodemocratic part of the political elite, which was also keen on keeping distance from Russia.
Kravchuk was a clear winner in the West and large parts of the Center, while Kuchma dominated all Eastern and Southern regions.
The regional polarization of the vote was most acutely felt between the most Western part and the most Eastern and Southern regions of Ukraine.
The period that followed was characterized by a quite mixed picture with no clear-cut East-West line appearing out of the spatial representation of the political struggle.
This situation, perhaps, was partly due to a confusion of Kuchma’s electorate, brought about by a radical reverse of his initial proRussian and anti-reform rhetoric following his election to the oﬃce.
However, a more important factor was a major restructuring of the political landscape of Ukraine taking place at that time.
This was mainly connected with a generational change in the leadership of the center-right and centrist camps and the reshuﬄing of their respective projects, as well as with a gradual decline of a once inﬂuential non-reformed left.
The two-side regional polarization began to resurface in the early 2000s and eventually fully materialized during the presidential elections of 2004.
The sharp polarization of the regional votes during this election was all the more signiﬁcant because it developed into a political duel between a pro-Russian and a resolutely pro-Western candidate and was accompanied by an acute political crisis.
This crisis, which came to be known as Orange Revolution, was provoked by vote rigging by the pro-Russian candidate, Viktor Yanukovych.
The Orange Revolution involved a massive and peaceful civic action of the supporters of the main opposition candidate, Viktor Yushchenko, and was resolved by a rerun of the second round of the election that he won.
During these events, Ukraine appeared bitterly divided between the West and Center, on the one hand, and the East and South, on the other hand.
In the rerun second round of the presidential election, Yushchenko received 89% of votes in the West and 76% in the Center.
Nonetheless, he lost both the East and South to his rival, securing just 17% and 25% of the votes there, respectively.
On aggregate, this distribution of votes brought victory to Yushchenko.
In terms of both the absolute ﬁgures and their regional distribution, this election also marked a further consolidation of the pro-European electorate in Ukraine as well as conﬁrmed the shifting of the polarization line from west to east compared to the 1994 election results.
In 1994, Kuchma won the east and center while a decade later Yushchenko won the west and the center.
Almost an identical regional cleavage reappeared in the subsequent elections.
The results of the parliamentary election of 2006 (as well as pre-term 2007 election) followed a very similar pattern, both in terms of balance of power between the two rival camps and regional concentration of their support.
In the presidential election, held in January– February 2010, Yuliia Tymoshenko confronted her old rival, Yanukovych.
The vote divided the country into two parts along the same line registered in the previous elections once again.
In the decisive second round of the election, the majority of voters in all Western and Central regions preferred Tymoshenko, while the East and South traditionally supported Yanukovych.
Nevertheless, despite the 2008 global ﬁnancial crisis hurting Tymoshenko’s electoral chances, Yanukovych only won 10 of Ukraine’s regions and only just over 3% more votes.
However, the early presidential and parliamentary elections, that took place in 2014, marked a notable change in the previous pattern of Ukraine’s electoral geography.
The results of the elections revealed that the pro-European forces expanded the geography of their political support to include Eastern and Southern oblasts for the ﬁrst time.
The pre-term parliamentary election in October the same year predictably produced a more mixed picture while at the same time conﬁrmed the new pattern of a shifting dividing line further to the East and South.
Their considerable regional gains happened following the victory of the Euromaidan protest and a hasty escape of Yanukovych, who was a key political representative of the East.
In addition, as a result of Russian occupation of Crimea and parts of Donbas, the Southern and Eastern constituencies contracted, losing a substantial share of voters.
Yet, the favorable political context alone does not explain an apparent erosion of the former East-West line.
Furthermore, the rationale of the claim about a sharply divided Ukraine encounters another serious inconsistency in the case of the country’s political and electoral geography.
Over the last 27 years, the noted East–West fault line was not only moving but at times simply undetectable.
The analyses of Ukraine’s political and social divisions showed that a number of Ukrainian national polls never displayed the kind of stereotypic twofold polarization.
Such circumstances would have been unimaginable in a hopelessly divided society – especially in the case of direct and competitive presidential elections.
Both of these elections took place at certain focal moments when the course of the country’s development at least for the next 5 years was decided.
And yet, the returns of these elections did not reveal a distribution of political preferences along an East-West fault line.
In 1999 this was a clash between incumbent Kuchma and his bitter critics representing mainly the left-wing opposition.
Notwithstanding the high political tension, generated by the political contest, it did not follow the familiar regional polarization pattern.
The winning presidential incumbent secured a fairly balanced regional support of his candidacy, on aggregate beating his Communist rival in both West and East in the second round.
The 2014 presidential election stands out in this context in particular.
This election took place in May 2014, in the turbulent post-Euromaidan political milieu aggravated by Russia’s annexation of Crimea and its support for the bloody conﬂict in Donbas.
It is noteworthy that while held in such extreme political and martial conditions the election did not bring about domestic confrontation or provoke tensions between diﬀerent parts of the country.
Such electoral success was facilitated by an abrupt regime change and the political repercussions brought about by Russian military aggression.
Nevertheless, it is also obvious that Poroshenko’s strong performance in 2014 would have been impossible without Ukrainian society’s capacity to put aside any diﬀerences and unite in the face of foreign and domestic threats.
The outcomes of the 2019 presidential and parliamentary elections support the argument about the highly ambiguous East-West line yet from another perspective.
Pluralism in post-2014 Eastern Ukraine means a growing divide between the two Donbas and the other six Russian-speaking oblasts in Eastern and Southern Ukraine.
Donbas and Dnipro again have diﬀerent election results as they experienced prior to 2014.
Likewise, the pre-term parliamentary election in July of the same year resulted in a remarkable triumph of Zelenskyy’s party.
No candidate or political party representing a pro-Russian stance could enter the second round of presidential elections let alone win the elections.
However, these elections did not follow the East-West pattern of the political contest for a diﬀerent reason.
While supporting Ukraine’s integration into EuroAtlantic structures and to some extent accepting Poroshenko’s line on the Russian aggression, Zelenskyy and his team evidently succeeded in redirecting the political discourse away from the traditional ideological framework.
The impressive support that they obtained from Ukrainian society, in fact, may point to declining intensity of the divisive issues associated with the East–West polarization.
Speaking in general, the identiﬁed patterns of political and electoral polarization in Ukraine since its independence do not conﬁrm a deep-rooted split of the country between some clearly discernible structural parts.
On such occasions, the dividing line running across the territory of the country was ﬂexible and mainly moving Eastwards and hence changing its conﬁguration over time.
The identiﬁcation of this trend does not mean that the political polarization line will necessarily continue shifting in the same direction or that this line will never resurface in that or another form in the future.
The disappearance of the East-West political axis during the recent elections may well represent a temporary trend facilitated by the foreign attack and existing domestic political framing alike.
However, on the one hand, these ﬁndings do seem to undermine the claim about an artiﬁcial or desperately fragmented Ukrainian societal landscape.
The vague and moving “fault line” simply does not ﬁt the idea of a deep split between some incongruent parts of the country.
On the other hand, the mere fact that several crucial national polls (1999 and 2014 presidential elections, as well as the recent 2019 presidential and parliamentary elections) did not exhibit the stereotypic East-vs-West polarization questions this claim yet more.
The next part of the article will further operationalize the dynamics of the political and cultural landscape of Ukraine and consider the issue of evolution of national unity and cohesion following the Euromaidan and foreign military aggression.
Nation-building, Euromaidan and Russian aggression Despite its regional and cultural diﬀerences, Ukraine has never represented a fragmented political, social or cultural entity, which could be classiﬁed as artiﬁcial.
Ever since, however, a growing enhancement of the cohesion of its society showed a marked trend over the entire post-independence period – a development that is often overlooked in the writing on Ukraine’s regionalism and cultural cleavages.
It can be maintained that after more than a quarter of a century Ukraine has gone through a major and largely successful nation-building process, where the dramatic events of 2013–2014 played their special role.
The regional and cultural diﬀerences, rooted in divergent historic experiences of the country’s parts, complicated the process of forging a civic nation.
Diﬀerences among regional political cultures, above all consisting in varying degrees of internalization of Soviet structures, values, and myths, were of an even greater importance in this regard.
Shaping of such an identity in the broader context of democratization of the nation’s political culture was a hard task.
It depended on the development of a strong allegiance to the evolving national community on the part of its citizens as well as socialization of new national myths and civic values.
This was a protracted process perhaps also requiring a generation change.
The acquisition of independence and construction of a Ukrainian nation-state coincided with an all-embracing systemic transformation.
Under such conditions, the government and society alike were more preoccupied with introducing to and adopting to the new institutions and even more so at a time of sheer economic survival.
Extreme economic hardships and continuous political and social tensions that the country underwent during that period of time were hardly helpful for facilitating the integration of its political and cultural space, let alone boosting of Ukraine’s national pride.
Consequently, the nation-building was overshadowed by the other constituents of the postcommunist transformation which was taking place rather unnoticed.
Another considerable disadvantage for Ukraine in this regard concerned its political elites, who were in a position to direct and assist the democratization and nation-building processes.
These elites were often reluctant to push for profound change mainly due to their tactical or rent-seeking motivations.
To a greater or lesser extent, this also pertained to the state’s leadership – quite regardless of their origin and speciﬁc values and interests which they allegedly promoted.
Kravchuk was born in the West; Kuchma and Yanukovych represented the East; Yushchenko came from the North-east, while Poroshenko – was born in the South.
The process of nation-building involved a good deal of competition of national and political as well as cultural identities and values , which eventually resulted in developing of a more cohesive Ukrainian political community.
The evolving Ukrainian political and cultural structures were gradually winning the competition over the legacy of the former regimes.
This concerned the structures inherited from Soviet times in the ﬁrst place.
The more that Ukraine was moving away over time from its Soviet past, the more the values and identities Ukraine inherited from this epoch were losing their grip on Ukrainian society.
Also, in the past, the region of Galicia was integrated into the Central-European political and social environment.
This region enjoyed relatively better conditions for developing both Ukrainian national consciousness and pro-democratic cultural patterns.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s Galicia, together with the capital city of Kyiv, served as a power base for the anti-Communist and pro-independence Ukrainian movement.
Ever since, Galicia was a stronghold of the pro-European and pro-democratic, but also conservative and nationalistic, political forces.
The multifaceted political subculture of the region constituted a rather incongruous blend.
In this way, the shifting East-West polarization line reﬂected the cultural and ideological proliferation in the form of spatial dynamics of the political and electoral contest.
In the early 1990s, political polarization involved a good deal of ideological competition between the political forces mainly associated with Western Ukraine and Kyiv, on the one hand, and the rest of the country, on the other hand.
The situation started to change since then, eventually leading to the evolution of a more vibrant and cohesive civic society.
This trend has been reﬂected in the changes in the public opinion on some controversial political and ideological issues stemming from the country’s complex history and culture.
Attitudes toward such topics as the Soviet past, World War II and oﬃcial language policy have traditionally had a tangible regional dimension in Ukraine.
Previously, positions condemning the Soviet regime and discarding its heritage, support for rehabilitating Ukrainian nationalist resistance groups or demanding full support for the development of the Ukrainian language were primarily associated with the political elites and general public of Western Ukraine.
Such questions for the most part continue to divide the Ukrainian society today.
Nevertheless, over time attitudes to them have turned out to be less divisive, with their appeal gradually spreading from West to East.
Thus, recognition of the Holodomor as a genocide against the Ukrainian people has become a by far dominant position in the whole of Ukraine.
In contrast, the question of granting the Russian language an oﬃcial status has remained one of the most divisive in Ukraine.
Even the question of recognition of the combatant status of the OUN-UPA has demonstrated positive dynamics for years.
The registered shifting of the political and ideological polarization line was also linked to the changes in the ethnic and linguistic structures of Ukrainian society.
Now, especially after the occupation of parts of Ukrainian territory since 2014, as many as 92% of people declare their ethnic Ukrainian identity.
In fact, in contrast to a wide-spread belief, Ukraine is relatively mono-ethnic compared to many other European nations.
Claims about Ukraine as a cleft polity have been most eﬀectively questioned by the dramatic events of 2013–2014 and since.
The Euromaidan and, above all, ongoing Russian military aggression and annexation of Crimea put the unity and sustainability of the entire Ukrainian political society to a severe test.
Moreover, it can be argued that the country has emerged from the acute political crisis and the military attack on its sovereignty and territorial integrity considerably more consolidated.
A clear sign of the strengthening vibrancy of Ukrainian political community has been its consolidating civil society.
It was the latest in a row of powerful popular actions that had broken out at critical moments of Ukraine’s development.
The Euromaidan Revolution remained a contentious issue for people living in Eastern and Southern Ukraine.
Nonetheless, a by-oblast analysis of the attitudes toward the Euromaidan shortly after its culmination and the ﬂight of Yanukovych from Kyiv exposed a tangible reconﬁguration of public opinion taking place in these parts of the country.
At the same time, the Euromaidan spread to other regions inciting protests and civic activism outside the Kyiv Maidan.
The process of the demolishing of Vladimir Lenin monuments and other communist leaders, which had been initiated in Kyiv in December 2013, followed a similar pattern.
The participation of the South and East in the revolutionary developments did not occurred either during the Revolution on Granite in 1990 or the Orange Revolution in 2004.
The former was a sitting protest of students against an ailing Soviet regime, while the popular backing for the Orange Revolution was largely limited to the Western and Central regions.
Later, the energy of the vigorous and enduring civic protest was redirected toward other urgent problems confronted by the country.
Following the annexation of Crimea and the Russian-Ukrainian war in Donbas, numerous civic projects and undertakings were initiated throughout Ukraine.
In the ﬁrst place, this concerned the moral and human resources the country was able to put up to eﬀectively confront the Russian adversary despite the disastrous condition of the Ukrainian military in the early stage of the war.
The Ukrainian army ﬁghting in the Donbas was comprised of soldiers from all parts of the country.
The origins of the deceased are fairly evenly distributed among the Western, Central, Eastern and Southern regions.
Outside the city of Dnipro, there is a large military cemetery festooned with Ukrainian national and red and black nationalist ﬂags (the latter only seen in Eastern Ukraine since 2014) which has become a place of pilgrimage for Ukrainian patriots.
Kuzio points out that “Putin’s military aggression is creating large numbers of military plots in cemeteries throughout eastern and southern Ukraine alongside other graves of Ukrainian soldiers who have died in earlier wars.
Because of the high degree of correlation between the usage of the Russian language and the Eastern and Southern regions of residence in contemporary Ukraine this characteristic is also indicative of the broad regional base of support for the Ukrainian army.
Such active involvement of the Russian-speakers equally relates to the units entirely comprising of volunteer ﬁghters, such as a controversial Azov Regiment of the national guard, known for the ultra-right views of its commanders and rank and ﬁle.
These data on the Ukrainian troops ﬁghting in Donbas conﬁrm the argument of this article about a substantial degree of national cohesion and loyalty of diﬀerent regional communities and cultural groups in the present-day Ukraine.
The patriotic allegiance of the residents of the Eastern and Southern regions to the Ukrainian state was one of the decisive factors, which helped Ukraine withstand the Russian pressure in 2014 and since.
Eventually, the military conﬂict was localized to the Eastern regions of the Donbas.
Russian military aggression, on the contrary, became a factor facilitating the uniﬁcation of Ukrainian political society.
In the wake of Russia’s military invasions in 2014–2015 loyalty to the Ukrainian state overwhelmingly prevailed among its citizens in all parts of the country.
In August 2015 support for Ukrainian independence reached its highest peak since 1991.
For years the controversy surrounding the question of following either a pro-Western or pro-Russian course was considered to be an essential representation of the societal divide in Ukraine.
The idea of the pro-Russian East contesting the proEuropean West was regarded as a fundamental feature of the country.
At least since 2014, however, this stereotypic picture of Ukraine has become misleading.
The choice of integrating into key Western political and security organizations has become a dominant standpoint in Ukrainian society.
This concerns a tangible increase of popular support for joining Euro-Atlantic structures and the European Union in particular.
The levels of support for the pro-Russian and pro-CIS trajectory, on the contrary, have plummeted and now receive meager backings.
In the Eastern and Southern parts of the country, the support for the Western vector has been traditionally lower than in the rest of the country.
A similar countrywide trend has recently developed regarding the issue of integrating into international security structures.
A direct result of the Russian aggression has been plummeting support for the idea of joining the Russiadominated security union.
This reﬂects an emerged broad consensus on the impossibility of cooperating with Ukraine’s Russian neighbor on security issues.
These changes have failed to erase the regional attitudinal diﬀerences in the area of foreign orientations altogether.
However, the collapse of the Russian-oriented foreign and security vector in the once traditionally pro-Russian Southern and Eastern regions has been a salient shift of considerable importance.
The East and South may have not become as proEuropean and pro-NATO as the rest of Ukraine, but they have deﬁnitely ceased to be plainly pro-Russian.
This is a major development for Ukraine’s societal cohesion and domestic politics, which will also have far-reaching geopolitical consequences.
In view of the discussion and data presented above, it can be concluded that the claim about Ukraine as an example of a cleft country and failed state is an exaggeration.
This assertion does not match the reality “on the ground,” when the eﬀects of the recent dramatic developments in Ukraine, in fact, testify to the opposite.
It should be obvious that no failed state can withstand a military attack on its sovereignty and integrity by a powerful international actor such as Russia.
At the same time, this conclusion does not deny the fact that Ukrainian society is not free of regional diversity, which has become a target of political manipulation and eventually made this military attack on Ukraine possible.
However, potentially the most signiﬁcant consequence of the Russian military aggression in Ukraine will be the growth of national unity and solidarity.
Conclusion The analysis in this article has focused on an often-cited “East–West” political and cultural polarization of Ukraine in the context of the problem of national integration of its political community.
A group of Western scholars and commentators have focused on the idea of Ukraine’s fragile and regionally divided state since the mid-1990s and continue to do so.
It is surprisingly similar to the views of Russian writers and politicians who also believe that Ukraine is a bitterly divided, artiﬁcial and even failed state.
The ﬁndings in this article suggest that none of the two claims is factually correct.
It has been demonstrated that Ukraine’s East-West cleavage is not as clear-cut and entrenched as is commonly assumed.
The East-West axis of political polarization, surfacing in Ukraine’s political and electoral geography, is unstable and has no ﬁrm boundaries.
Several crucial Ukrainian elections do not ﬁt this stereotype of a West versus East cleavage.
Since the acquisition of independence, Ukraine has experienced a steady improvement of its societal cohesion displayed by the increased cultural and ideological integration of its political and social space.
Euromaidan, annexation of Crimea and the Russian-Ukrainian war in Donbas.
In the case of the Russian military aggression, the Ukrainian political community has shown a noteworthy solidarity and perseverance, refuting the “failed state” allegation as evidently invalid.
An ever-increasing unity and integration of the Ukrainian political space since March 2014 has been manifested by a strong deﬁance against Russian military aggression, particularly by Russian-speaking Ukrainians, and prevailing public support for Ukraine’s independence as well as growing endorsement of the pro-Western trajectory of the country.
In either case, it refers to a condition of fundamental institutional disorganization and societal disloyalty with a possibility of ultimately state collapse.
A study by Oxana Shevel implies that Ukraine’s case of societal diﬀerences, inherited from the Soviet past, is not unique but quite comparable with other (including also Western) nation-states.
In Transformatsii Suspil’nykh Nastroiv V Umovakh Protydii Ahresii Rosii Na Donbasi, edited by O.Haran’, 8–39.
Osnovni Zasady ta Shlyakhy Formuvannya Spilnoyii Identychnosti Hromadyan Ukrayiny.
Hromads’ka dumka pro sytuatsiiu na Donbasi ta shliakhy vidnovlennia suverenitetu Ukrainy nad okupovanymy terytoriiamy, October 11.
Pro kil’kist’ ta sklad naselennia Ukrainy za pidsumkamy Vseukrains’koho perepysu naselennia 2001 roku.
