This cohort gave rise to a new professional species—activist historians—who are different from so called memorians or propagandists, who work in service of authorities.
Likbez historians tried to use their power to influence and promote their activist agenda not only in the realm of memory and history but also in reformation of state institutions.
I argue that for Likbez historians, securitization of the past is the main strategy employed for producing historical knowledge.
Historians’ work is a part of postcolonizing process observed in Ukrainian society since the Maidan protests.
In line with the increased attention to agency in memory studies, this article demonstrates that historians have a much more nuanced relation to power than straightforward opposition or co-option.
Still, the role of it in an ongoing military conflict, in which history is so intensely misused, is an understudied problem.
In the article, I approach a particular cohort of historians who organized the group “Likbez.
From the very beginning of the Ukrainian-Russian conflict, these historians regarded their profession as a tool in warfare and positioned themselves as civic activists who strived to influence the situation.
I scrutinize the role these historians played when the whole society underwent dramatic and turbulent transformations.
These are crucial questions to ask about the role of historians during war.
While scholars in some disciplines encourage their students to be involved in societal life and even to become activists, historians rarely do so.
On the contrary, history implicitly discourages professional activism as it arguably derails a scholar from ideals of objectivism.
Despite the proclaimed ideals of neutrality and rejection of normativity, it is not seldom that historians become involved in the political and societal life of the country where they live or whose history they study.
Historians influenced by historical culture not only reproduce the ideas ruling in the society but also have the potential to bring up changes to the society.
Some groups of historians, such as the Subaltern Studies Group or British History Workshop, have explicit activist agendas aimed at giving voice to those who are not in the position to be seen and heard.
Scholars who deal with postcolonial countries, or with countries where open discussion of the past is suppressed, often produce texts which can play crucial roles in political and social shifts.
That is why it is not seldom that such texts are censored or even banned.
For instance, Benedict Anderson’s works on Indonesia were banned, and he was not allowed to enter the country for about 30 years.
These examples demonstrate that it is indeed not seldom that historians play an important societal role, willingly or not.
Most often, though, they play this role as individuals, not as a collective.
What is special with the group of historians I study is the fact that they act as a group in the context of military conflict.
These individuals purposefully united their professional skills and thinking minds for achieving common aims.
The goals they had and the ways they wanted to achieve them are discussed in the sections below.
Historical Front was started in spring 2014 when the conflict in Eastern Ukraine began.
In this regard, Likbez was one of many civic initiatives organized by professionals with the aim to counteract the Russian information offensive.
Around the same time, StopFake was organized by former graduates of Kyiv Mohyla School of Journalists, and Information Resistance was formed by former intelligence and military professionals to fight Russian propaganda.
During the first weeks of the protests, some IT workers formed Cyber Hundred, and some translators organized Voices of Ukraine, providing their professional services for Euromaidan purposes.
Although the protests finished, civil societies formed by professionals continued to provide services to keep the state functioning.
It is worth studying professionally driven activism where professional skills are the main resource and tool in activist agendas.
As the question of journalists facing the challenges of professionalism and patriotism in Ukraine was already tackled , the question of historians facing the similar challenges remains mainly understudied.
Iryna Vushko’s article about Likbez concentrated mainly on the analysis of the content of their ten-volume, popular history project.
In my study, I concentrate on the motivations, strategies, and results of historians’ works.
The broader focus on Likbez as a product of unique combination of time, place, and actors can also illuminate the particular context in which this project evolved from 2014 to 2018.
The Likbez historians saw their role as activists through the possibilities given by their profession.
They believed that by doing what they are trained to do—writing history—they could change the country and even contribute to its security.
I argue that since the beginning of the Russian-Ukrainian conflict in Eastern Ukraine, Likbez historians presented history as a matter of security.
They explicitly wrote their historical texts in response to narratives disseminated by Russian media, and they saw themselves and their profession as weapons in the propaganda war.
In this way, historical narratives were framed as issues of national security.
In the beginning, securitization of history provided the main explanatory framework that was used to counteract Russian propaganda in short articles disseminated online.
Later, securitization laid a theoretical and ideological basis for popular history writing disseminated through multiple volumes.
In the course of their engagement as activists, the Likbez historians strengthened their own positions as scholars.
Their new role as public intellectuals helped them to claim back the status of intelligentsia that had been in decline since the 1990s.
In this way, historians built up a peculiar type of relationship to political power.
As it will be shown, Likbez activities were acknowledged and symbolically rewarded by the state.
Within four years, they published an enormous scope of literature, popularized their works by giving lectures throughout the country, and became regular guests on television shows.
The case of Likbez also elucidates a more general situation in Ukraine after Euromaidan.
The popularity of Likbez books and lectures indicates that a large part of Ukrainian society underwent a process of self-articulation in which Likbez histories provided ad hoc narratives.
I start with the introduction of the theory, where I draw on the theory of securitization and argue that history was used as a matter of security by historians who saw themselves as active participants in the information war.
I also use the concept of postcolonizing process to understand the context in which the historians’ activities evolved from 2014 to 2018.
I also present the background of intellectual life in post-1991 Ukraine, without which it is difficult to understand in what situation the scholars in Ukraine work.
Then, based on interviews with Likbez historians and analysis of the books published within the project, I discuss strategies used when writing history and analyze the main features of the produced narratives.
I finish the article by reflecting on the role of historians as activists during war.
From Securitization to Postcolonizing Empowerment I draw on the theories of securitization as elaborated by the Copenhagen School of Security Studies.
According to Buzan , securitization refers to the process of making a certain issue into a matter of security through a securitizing speech act.
Political scientist Maria Mälksöö effectively demonstrated how the securitization of the past took place in Estonia and Poland.
There, the politics of memory were framed as a matter of security, calling for recognition of the right of these countries to tell their own story of the past differently from the Soviet and Russian versions.
Media scholar Mykola Makhortykh showed how memories of revolutions and wars were employed for the social construction of security issues during the Euromaidan and at the beginning of the military conflict.
In spring 2014, when the fears and anxieties of losing independence and sovereignty proved real, when a part of the Ukrainian territory was annexed by Russia and the armed conflict began in Eastern Ukraine, the securitization of the past intensified.
The case of Likbez shows how a securitization of the past is realized on the level of activities of professional historians.
The securitizing approach is evident not only in the histories Likbez produces but also in the motivations of historians.
In this way, history was analogous with weapons and historians with soldiers.
How this particular popular history narratives are written is one of the main questions of this article.
To understand how the Likbez activities evolved from 2014–2018, as well as how they were received by the public, I use the concept of postcolonizing process as elaborated by historian John Cash.
Cash considered the postcolonizing process as distancing from the friend-enemy ideology.
A similar situation was seen in Ukraine and the Baltic states after 1991, when the ontological insecurity was high, although there were no grounded reasons for this.
Paradoxically, when Ukrainian sovereignty was under threat in 2014 during the beginning of the war in Eastern Ukraine, the historians I analyze started to move from history writing influenced by fears to history writing influenced by hopes.
As I argue below, in these popular history narratives new futures are imagined where the enemies of today can be partners of tomorrow.
Most historians of Likbez work at the Institute of History in the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences.
Historians as well as other scholars in Ukraine found themselves in quite a deplorable situation after 1991, especially if one compares it with the status they had in the Soviet Union where historians were regarded highly in the hierarchy of scholars.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, a lack of funding and of understanding how science should function in market conditions resulted in a loss of high status of scholars.
The books of diaspora historians were brought to Ukraine and used as the basis for new historical narratives.
By the time that the new generation of historians—who later became organizers of the Likbez project—started their work in the Institute, the adherents of several distinctive approaches to history found their place under the roof of the Soviet-bred Institute of History.
To a certain degree, by working on the Likbez project, a young generation of historians built up a new institution separate from the Academy of Sciences while continuing their official work in the academy and history department at different universities.
This form of organization, which can be regarded as a network of professionals, is more fitted to the changing and dynamic times than the old-style academy.
Likbez has a fluid and porous structure that easily absorbs new members who often have only a situational affiliation to Likbez with a purpose to work for some concrete task.
Moreover, Likbez historians face challenges of market oriented publishing, collective writing, and work with media and mass public.
Informally, though, the group of historians that would form the core of Likbez met during the Euromaidan protests in December 2013.
In 2013, most of them worked at the Institute of History or history departments in the capital’s universities.
They gathered on Maidan Nezalezhnosti in Kyiv to join thousands of other protestors who demanded the resignation of the government.
The violent dispersal of students by the police that happened in the morning of November 30, 2013, marked a point of no return not only to the average protestor but also to the historians in question.
It became clear for this group that gathered “to protect their children” that it was up to them to bring the change to the society where politicians cannot bring this change.
Then, in December 2013, these historians felt that they became the subjects of history, and this sense empowered them to further actions.
The historians understood that history mattered not only for professional historians but also for people who wanted to know more about the past.
More importantly, these historians realized how little they could propose in terms of published books accessible for a wider readership.
Historians on Maidan saw themselves as citizens who came to the main square of the capital when their country was amid turmoil, and at the same time they saw themselves as professionals who could use their profession for civic purposes.
They live in the same country and in the same world; they worry about the same problems as their compatriots.
But historians have access to information which is highly interesting and needed by a broader public.
That is why we are eager to share this knowledge and help our community to stand up and carry on through these hardships.
In this way, by rhetorically putting himself in the ranges of their readers, Halushko presents historians both as citizens and as intellectual elites who possess knowledge that can be shared.
The emphasis on the hard time that the readers and historians live through adds to better understanding of the importance of history for the present challenges.
At the same time, underlining their professional role as bearers of much needed knowledge in turbulent times, the author places historians in the prestigious position of national educators that bring enlightenment to the masses.
Previously, he was a driving force in a smaller publishing project popularizing Ukrainian history written in Russian.
More importantly, these ideas were now shared by other colleagues who were eager to do something in the spirit of Euromaidan after the protests ended.
The project was conceptualized as a tool for debunking these myths and changing the views on history that were perceived by Likbez as incorrect.
Likbez historians provided narratives for those who were already looking for the narratives they wanted to hear, not necessarily for those that could change their minds.
One can also speak about the language bias of the historians who associated language with inclination to believe in a certain ideology.
In reality, the interest in material was dictated not so much by a language spoken but by the interest in a specific kind of narrative.
After reading the books produced by Likbez, I concluded that the main approach to history in writing these books is the demonstration of the fluidity of history and political processes that indicates that no country in the present can claim its exclusive right on certain territories.
Coupled with the securitization strategy, such an approach simultaneously addresses the problem of the present conflict and develops a new way for professionals to write popular history narratives.
All Likbez books were published by Kharkiv based publisher Klub Simeinoho Dozvillia.
The publisher printed 8,000 to 21,000 copies for each volume of History without Censorship, a significant number for the Ukrainian publishing market.
In doing so, by working on Likbez the scholars not only contributed to development of the project but also strengthened their status as intellectuals in the society.
In 2016, Likbez began work with Kyiv’s Museum of History, where historians held weekly lectures.
Between 2015 and 2018, historians also gave lectures in other towns throughout Ukraine.
Historians presented the main aim of their activities as the enlightenment of the people and dissemination of historical knowledge that was perceived to be important for winning the ongoing war.
Our task is to overcome the historical illiteracy so that there will be no people who are uneducated in history.
Here the scholar explicitly refers to the Soviet newspeak “likbez”—the politics of liquidation of illiteracy launched in the 1920s—which gave the name to the project.
The public is seen as bearers of incorrect history disseminated by the Soviet myths.
This incorrect history needs correction in the eyes of Likbez historians.
Indeed, the Likbez histories, when read by professional historians, may seem simplified and lacking theoretical and conceptual discussion.
It is obvious that aiming at the broad public, the authors try to find a balance between scholarly writing and mass readership.
Oksana Yurkova , the historian from the Institute of History of the Academy of Science who has worked for the project from the very beginning, reflected that all these books, although popular in form, are first of all scholarly works because they undergo a strict scholarly review process by professional colleagues.
However, Likbez books do not follow traditional academic standards as they are written for mass readership.
Thus, traditional academic writing references are absent in the Likbez series, although most of the books provide a list of recommended literature.
The themes which are tackled and the writing styles of the authors might differ in the same book.
Their profession becomes the empowering tool that allows them to take positions and act.
Main ideology which can be deciphered in all Likbez histories is the primacy of Ukrainian statehood and sovereignty.
Historians think how the past can help protect sovereignty in the present.
In this way, historians turn to the view on history as magistra vitae, searching for the examples that could motivate and encourage present generations.
In this regard, the needs of the present come before the analytical striving in writing activist popular history narratives, and the past is framed as a matter of security.
Through securitization of the past, historians defend their narratives as something that can guarantee victory in the ongoing war.
Below I will discuss these features in more details and show how they work for the purposes of securitization and popularization of history as well as how they reflect the postcolonizing process.
The Present Moment as the Main Vantage Point The founder of modern Ukrainian historiography, Mykhailo Hrushevskyi , published his history of Ukraine-Rus’ in ten volumes.
Likbez published their series History without Censorship also in ten volumes.
The Likbez historians try to inscribe Ukrainian history into the larger European and world history.
Their histories are shaped by the needs of present moment and should be read from the presentist perspective.
We all realize the fact that history of Ukraine was created not in the past, but it happens in the present during extremely nervous and hard years of 2014–2015.
As it happened, the independent state, which was created in 1991, has finished its period of “looking for its Self” and found itself facing the challenges that pose the question to its own vitality We realized that we are ready for these challenges.
Because it was not yesterday that Ukraine had been born, its people have been living on these lands for thousands of years.
They were changing their name and their state belonging, but they have not changed its essence and desire for independent life.
The Likbez historians do not provide the readers with explicit theoretical frames discussing postcolonial or anti-colonial perspectives, but my thorough reading of their books let me see their project as a realization of a postcolonial perspective.
Whereas the main imperative of the anti-colonial perspective was to emphasize that Ukraine is a primordial nation , the main imperative in postcolonizing history writing is to emphasize that the Ukrainian nation is constantly changing.
Yet, in contrast to the past conceptualization of these threats, Likbez historians try to convince their readers that dynamics and change are a driving force of history.
Thus, no threat can last forever and enemies of today can be partners in the future.
Representations of the Soviet past by Likbez historians demonstrate this approach most vividly.
Unsurprisingly, three volumes of History without Censorship are devoted exclusively to the Soviet period.
Special attention is paid to the period of 1917–1921, which shows that historians look at this period as the crucial moment of history in which Ukraine had a chance either to take the Soviet path proposed by Bolsheviks or to build the independent nation.
The main idea common to these books is that the Soviet past is gone and now Ukraine has a chance to get rid of the Soviet ghosts.
It is important to emphasize that the Soviet past is presented not as something alien to Ukrainian history.
Ukraine during the years of Soviet rule is presented as an agent of its own fate.
But in the part of the territory of Ukrainian People’s republic appeared a Ukrainian Socialist Republic.
Thus, we see a complex evaluation of the Soviet past where the subjectivity of Ukraine is emphasized.
The main problem for Likbez historians is not, though, the past but the present.
They regard the people who believe in the advantages of the Soviet regime as the main public to whom they address their history.
As Pavlov stressed, “these people may support Ukrainian statehood, they are patriots, but they believe in Soviet myths.
Hence, the main logics behind the volumes about the Soviet past are to show the disadvantages of the communist regime even if supported by many Ukrainians.
Noteworthy, Likbez historians did not speak a lot about such obvious threats as Russian military or the separatists backed by Russia.
There is no distinction between Ukrainian and Russian speakers in this regard.
This argumentation about Soviet mentality resembles Mykola Riabchuk’s works on Ukraine, where he sees the Ukrainian population as divided between the majority of creoles who internalized the colonial visions of themselves and a minority of indigenous population who are opposing the colonial rule.
Soviet past is approached as a construction block in a long history of state and nation building.
This middle way can be seen as a step from anti-colonial history writing to the postcolonizing process, where Ukraine is presented as a subject owning its history, including history of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.
Ukrainians, Crimean Tatars, Bulgarians and Hungarians, Poles, and Russians—these people all form contemporary Ukraine.
We cannot ignore thousands of years of our history because this is our reliable basement as a nation of the 21st century for building our common home.
Nevertheless, in this multiethnic construct there are nations who draw more attention than others, namely, Crimean Tatars and Russians.
Reading books, one can conclude that there is a certain discovery of Crimean Tatars in Ukrainian history.
This trend is not only characteristic of this concrete history project.
In general, in Ukraine after the annexation of Crimea there is a vivid interest in underlining the strong bond between Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars (Charron 2019; Zubkovych 2019) that serves for securitization of Ukrainian national borders, which were violated by Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
Crimean Tatars are the only aside of Ukrainians’ people of the contemporary Ukraine which had their own state history here.
Today their ancestors in the Crimea which is annexed by Russia are simultaneously Tatar and Ukrainian.
The security crisis of today defines the way the history of Crimean Tatars is presented by the historians.
Regarding the presentation of Russians, Likbez historians try to find a new and nuanced approach.
Thus, historians emphasize that history changes and vectors of Ukrainian development change as well.
There is nothing predestined in history, including relations between nations.
In the same vein, the authors do not present the current war with Russia as having resulted from the eternal animosity between Russians and Ukrainians.
They rather stress that the present war is a phase in the development of an ever-changing history.
Russia in the Likbez paradigm is presented as the continuation of the improper Sovietness.
Ukraine, on the contrary, is presented as a country having a chance to get rid of the Soviet burden.
Time and again we see how important the Soviet past is in the works of Likbez.
This is essentially the main Other against which the popular history narrative is written.
This is exactly the realm where the postcolonizing process takes place.
Likbez historians position Ukraine in the continuum where it goes its own way, distinct from the one proposed by former colonial powers.
In this construct, Russia is not presented as an eternal enemy but as the neighbor with whom Ukraine has conflictual relations now, but this situation can change provided the change of the political regime in Russia.
At the same time, these books must be of high scholarly standard, written by professional historians, not amateurs.
The original idea of Likbez to debunk myths is reflected throughout the works of Likbez historians.
This approach perfectly serves the entertaining purpose that in its turn helps make the project popular.
Noteworthy, it is not only myths from the Soviet past or current day Russia that Likbez historians debunked; Ukrainian historical myths are debunked as well.
To these myths belong stories based on traditional primordial imagination, which became quite popular in the 1990s, that traced Ukrainian nationhood from prehistoric times.
At the beginning we tried to respond to many propagandistic anti-Ukrainian historical myths and did it quite successfully.
Then we realized that some Ukrainian historical myths also are harmful, as they blur the line between reality and alluring fantasy.
That is why we believe that information about Ukrainian past based on facts and not on fantasies or ideological premises will help contemporary Ukrainians better understand their own views on the past events and form their own standpoint about the past, present, and future.
By debunking Soviet and Ukrainian primordial myths, Likbez historians try to formulate a more nuanced approach to history, and simultaneously their emphasis on myth busting serves an entertainment purpose; hence, it also serves popularizing purposes.
We should bear in mind that in striving to popularize history, Likbez historians faced an important challenge of the contemporary world—market.
The fact that Likbez books are published by a commercial publisher, whose main aim is to gain profit, puts some pressures on historians that they are not used to.
These pressures were realized through demands to use certain covers, simplify language, or include illustrations which the authors initially did not like.
Scholars admitted that sometimes the final product was not quite the same as expected but also that they should listen to the publisher’s suggestions as they know the market better.
It should be added that Likbez books are not the only popular history books available in Ukraine, which is why they compete with other projects who have similar purposes and strategies.
In the end, the published books come as result of negotiations and compromises made by historians who are not only citizens, historians, and activists but also players at the commercial book market.
Writing their books in a collective can be also seen as a historians’ response to market demands as well as their willingness to adhere to academic standards.
Such a form of publication is quicker, and at the same time coauthors share collective responsibility for their texts.
Sometimes they write a series of chapters together, and sometimes each author writes his or her chapter individually and serves as a peer-reviewer for colleagues’ chapters.
In this way, both academic standards and market requirements for fast publishing are met.
The vast number of books published in a short period of time by the same cohort of authors and the high professional quality of these books proves the effectiveness of such a strategy.
Considering the popularity of Likbez books , one can assume that the popular history narratives presented in these books is the kind of history the public wants to read.
The least popular among the readers is the volume about the Second World War.
Remarkably, this is the volume that aims to debunk the most vital of the Soviet myths, and at the same time this is the volume that raises the most questions and critical remarks.
The Second World War as a Bone of Contention The book on the Second World War, From Reichstag to Ivo Jima, finishes the History without Censorship series.
The latter term refers to the Soviet depiction of Ukrainian nationalist groups who were fighting against Soviets during and after the war.
In the Soviet Union, non-Russian nationalists who fought against Soviets were constructed as Nazi-collaborators.
The distorted picture of Ukraine in the years of the Second World War also arrested the popular imaginary abroad.
As Hausmann and Penter argued, in the German public sphere Ukraine is often presented through the Russian propaganda view as a Nazi collaborator while the Ukrainian victims are largely ignored.
The UINP and Likbez want to fight against these narratives produced by Russian propaganda, but they are doing it in a counterproductive way.
By glorifying Ukrainian nationalists and silencing their wrongdoings during the Holocaust, the UINP and the historians who adhere to the Institute’s ideological agenda strengthen the views disseminated by Russian propaganda.
The Ukrainian-Polish massacre in 1943–44 is presented by Likbez in line with the conceptualization of Ukrainian historian Volodymyr Viatrovych , who sees the conflict as a Polish-Ukrainian war in which Ukrainians are presented almost exclusively as supporters of the nationalist movement under Bandera’s leadership.
Viatrovych can be called the most politically engaged memorian as he held the position of the director of the UINP from 2014 to 2019.
He authored some of the chapters in the Likbez volume on the Second World War, where the OUN members are presented exclusively as fighters for Ukrainian independence.
The collaboration with Nazis and participation in Holocaust are ascribed only to the Melnykites faction of the OUN while the Bandera faction is presented as the heroic anti-Bolshevik movement for liberation.
In the volumes on the Second World War, Ukraine is presented exclusively as a victim; the evaluation of history is made mainly from the vantage point of Western Ukraine while highlighting the anti-Soviet moods of the public.
The volume on history of the Second World War is written not from the point of the subject undergoing the postcolonizing process but from the point of the subject that is tormented by anticolonial resentments.
Perhaps admitting to the cul-de-sac they reached by this volume, Likbez historians did not develop this topic further in their volumes, giving it to the elaboration of the UINP for whom it continued to be the most fruitful turf for producing memory politics.
The unpopularity of this volume among the readers might gesture to the public fatigue with the topic of war, as the war is not something which takes place only on the pages of history books.
The war became reality that directly touches the lives of many in Ukraine today.
Concluding Remarks This article aimed to analyze what happens to history writing when it is written by activist historians in the context of an ongoing military conflict.
In line with the increased attention to agency in memory studies, this article demonstrates that historians have much more nuanced relation to power than opposition or co-option.
The case with Likbez shows that historians in times of troubles made history into a matter of national security and presented themselves as actors of the ongoing war.
In turbulent times, historians started looking for new theoretical frames and ways of popularizing historical knowledge.
Instead of continuing an anti-colonial trend of history writing and blaming the former imperial powers for all Ukrainian problems, the Likbez historians implemented a postcolonial approach and tried to represent Ukraine as an independent actor in an ever-changing flow of history, in which the enemies of today could become partners in the future.
This turn can be compared to the approaches in history writing applied by the Baltic States.
While in the Baltic case EU membership gave a feeling of safety, in which no return to the sphere of influence of a former imperial power was fathomable , in the Ukrainian case the war in the east of the country was seen by historians as a point of no return into the sphere of Russia’s influence.
Paradoxically, the country’s vulnerable position during turbulent times gave hope for Ukraine’s subjectivity, at least on the part of Likbez historians.
Throughout the article, I argued that securitization became the main strategy employed in popular history writing by Likbez historians.
In their works they present historical knowledge as an element of national security.
This history narrative has a strong empowering potential for a society that looks for meaning in a suddenly shattered world.
Activist historians provide narratives that fill in cracks opened by this shattering.
Their histories rearticulate the past violence and injustices in a new way that emphasizes change and fluctuation.
This is reflected in a shift from brother-brother ideology to neighbor-neighbor ideology, even if these neighbors are currently at war.
This shift is reflected not only in history writing but also in popular culture and can be symbolically marked by the poem of Anastasia Dmytruk, “We Will Never Be Brothers” , which became viral on social media in early spring 2014 when Crimea was annexed by Russia.
These are the moods that Likbez project meets when popularizing new historical narratives.
From the very beginning of its existence, the work of Likbez historians was directed not only to reforming, rewriting, or reevaluating the history but also to bringing tangible change to the society.
Some of Likbez historians even succeeded in working on reformation of state institutions, including the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
For instance, Kyrylo Halushko has worked with the Public Council on National Unity at the presidential office since 2015, where he was consulting on questions related to history and history education.
In 2018, Vasyl Pavlov, was officially employed as a leading expert in questions of patriotic education by the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
It should be stressed that it was first in the realm of history writing, which began as one of the Likbez initiatives, that the historian together with his colleagues developed strategies for reformation of military education, which later were implemented by the Ukrainian Army.
There was not direct demand from the side of the state, and historians had to work hard to be heard by state officials.
As result, securitization of history transcended discursive practices and penetrated the field of politics.
Likbez scholars underlined that their books are popular among soldiers.
Soldiers and teachers at military universities are among the main consumers of Likbez histories.
Such merging of civil actions, political interest, and historians’ initiatives demonstrate that historians and society put high stakes on history in the present.
Moreover, the past is presented as a crucial element for building the future.
The analysis of Likbez histories and activities demonstrates that these activist-historians differ from both memorians and propagandists, who act in service of authorities and frequently try to influence and discipline the power according to their civic and professional agendas.
The article discussed the books and the historians’ activities between 2014 and 2018.
This time frame is a distinctive period in the development of the Likbez project.
In spring 2019, Ukrainian people voted for the new president, Volodymyr Zelenskyi.
It is too early at the time of writing this article to draw any conclusions in respect of new trends in the politics of history, but one can see some contours of these changes.
In light of more tangible changes in respect to the volunteer movement on the part of new government, Halushko, the leader of Likbez, declared that he was leaving the Public Council on National Unity at the presidential office .10 In this regard, the future will show how historical activism will transform in Ukraine under the changed circumstances.
From nation branding to information war,” financed by the Foundation for Baltic and East European Studies.
The author is grateful for the Prisma Ukraїna three-month research fellowship at the Forum for Transregional Studies in Berlin that made it possible to finalise this article.
Notes 1 The military conflict in Ukraine—which is also defined in academic writings by the euphemism “Ukrainian crisis”—started in eastern Ukraine in summer 2014 following the Russian annexation of Crimea in spring of the same year.
The conflict involves Ukrainian government forces, on the one hand, and local separatist groups and Russian military, on the other.
When we speak about a public historian, we speak rather about professionals engaged in heritage, preservation, and oral history, less about history writing that pursues the aim to change the political and societal order.
Anti-Semitism in Poland after Auschwitz, first in English and then in Polish , which also raised a wave of criticism and discussion in Poland.
However, in Parliament they were presented in one package, which made the discussion of their relevance very complicated.
The Law on the Commemoration of the Victory over Nazism in the Second World War 1939–1945; The Law on Condemnation of the Communist and National-Socialist Totalitarian Regimes in Ukraine and Ban on Propaganda of their Symbols; The Law on the Status and Commemoration of the Memory of the Fighters for the Independence of Ukraine in the 20th century; and the Law on Granting Access to the Archive of the Repressive Institutions of the Communist Totalitarian Regime 1918–1991.
His main aim was to draw experts of the topics of history and consult Tempora Publishing House on history books worth translating and publishing in Ukraine.
Although it was not the aim of this article to compare these projects, it is worth mentioning that Likbez books are closest to the academic standards.
Perspectives on the Intersections of Politics, Activism and the Historical Profession, edited by Stefan Berger, 1–31.
Hybrid Media Practices and Narratives of Conflict, edited by Mervi Pantti, 3–18.
In “Ukrainian – Crimean-Tatar Socio-Cultural Encounters,” edited by Kratochvil Alexander.
Anti-Semitism in Poland after Auschwitz; An Essay in Historical Interpretation.
Voienna istoria Ukraiiny vid davnyny do siohodennia, edited by Kyrylo Halushko, 3–4.
Pradavnia Ukraiina, Rus’ i pohodzhennia ukraiinysiv, edited by Kyrylo Halushko, 3–4.
Russland, die Ukraine und der Krieg in Donbas, edited by Manfred Sapper and Volker Weichsel.
Past Continuous, Present Perfect, Future…” In A Laboratory of Transnational History: Ukraine and Recent Ukrainian Historiography, edited by Georgiy Kasianov and Philipp Ther, 7–24.
Ukraina och informationskriget – journalistik mellan ideal och självcensur.
Ukraiina ta ukraiintsi u Druhii svitovii viini, edited by Yana Prymachenko, 5– 12.
Geschichtskultur heute, edited by Jörn Rüsen, Theo Grütter, and Klaus Füßmann, 3–26.
Peremoha cherez porazky; Ukraiina u viinah i revolutsiiah 1914–1921 rokiv.
In Viina i mif edited by Oleksandr Zinchenko, Volodymyr Viatrovych, Maksym Maiorov, 1–11.
Senior Researcher at the Institute of History of Ukraine of National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine and a Likbez leader.
Senior Researcher at the Department of the History of Ukraine in 1920s–30s, Institute of the History of Ukraine, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, and a Likbez member.
Leading researcher at the Institute of History of Ukraine, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, and a Likbez member.
Zlety i padinnia kozats’koii derzhavy 1648–1783 [Princes and Hetmans of All Rus.
Ukraiina u viinah i revolutsiiah 1914—1921 rokiv (To the Battle for Freedom.
Voienna istoria Ukraiiny vid davnyny do siohodennia [Ukraine the Battlefield.
Pradavnia Ukraiina, Rus’ i pohodzhennia ukraiinysiv [Shadows of Recollected Ancestors.
Ukraiina pid skipetramy Romanovyh i Habsburhiv [In Claws of DoubleHeaded Eagles.
Iluzii ta katastrofy “komunistychnoho raiiu” 1917–1938 rokiv [Soviet Ukraine.
Ukraiina ta ukraiintsi u Druhii svitovii viini [From Reichstag to Ivo Jima.
