The government that followed pledged to embrace pro-Western reforms, and an energized civil society supported its efforts.
Within weeks, the new government was forced to confront Russian armed interventions in southern and eastern Ukraine.
These culminated in Russia’s occupation of Ukraine’s Crimea region in March 2014 and a protracted conflict in eastern Ukraine, where observers consider that the Russian government has fostered and supported pro-Russian separatists.
Even while waging a defensive conflict, Ukraine’s government under President Petro Poroshenko has professed a commitment to economic reform, Western integration, and democratic norms.
Many observers believe the Poroshenko government has made impressive strides in its reform agenda.
Others consider that Ukraine’s reforms remain fragile and that the government has progressed slowly in certain areas.
International donors and domestic civil society organizations continue to encourage the Ukrainian government to implement necessary measures, including with regard to fighting corruption.
After an economic decline in 2014-2015, some signs of financial and economic stabilization have emerged, due in part to international assistance including a multibillion dollar International Monetary Fund loan package.
Observers caution, however, that economic growth depends on continuation of critical reforms.
The United States has long supported Ukraine’s pro-Western orientation and reform efforts.
It supports the restoration of Ukraine’s territorial integrity, including with respect to Crimea, as well as implementation of the Minsk agreements that would establish a cease-fire and conflict settlement in eastern Ukraine.
In 2014, the United States, in coordination with the European Union and others, imposed sanctions on Russia for its actions in Ukraine.
The United States is a leading contributor of foreign assistance to Ukraine, including over $300 million a year since FY2015 in nonmilitary, nonhumanitarian assistance.
The United States also provides substantial military assistance to Ukraine, including via a newly established Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative that provides “appropriate security assistance and intelligence support” to help Ukraine defend against aggression and support its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
President Donald Trump and Ukrainian President Poroshenko have met twice, in June and September 2017.
The Administration requested relatively substantial economic and military assistance to Ukraine for FY2018.
Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations, elevating the United States role in the conflict settlement process.
Secretary Tillerson has stated repeatedly that Ukraine-related sanctions on Russia will remain in place “until Moscow reverses the actions that triggered” them.
The United States Congress has actively participated in efforts to address the Ukraine conflict since its onset.
Many Members have condemned Russia’s annexation of Crimea and support for separatists in eastern Ukraine and pushed to impose and retain sanctions against Russia for its actions.
Congress has also supported substantial economic and security assistance for Ukraine.
Kyiv Historically, Ukrainians trace their lineage to Population: 44 million the medieval Kievan Rus, an early Orthodox Ethnicity: Ukrainian: 78%; Russian: 17%; Crimean Christian state that Russians also consider to Tatar: 0.5% be a core part of their heritage.
In over a quarter-century of independence, Ukraine has had periodic swings toward greater and lesser democracy.
Throughout this time, many observers have considered Ukraine’s government to be a “hybrid” regime with both democratic and nondemocratic elements.
In Ukraine, these events came to be known as the Revolution of Dignity.
The Revolution of Dignity In February 2014, protests over the Ukrainian government’s decision to postpone an association agreement with the EU culminated in violence, the collapse of then-President Viktor Yanukovych’s government, and Yanukovych’s departure to Russia.
Before leaving Ukraine, Yanukovych had agreed to a deal with the opposition that was to lead to an early presidential election.
Afterward, however, Yanukovych departed for eastern Ukraine amid signs of government defections, and Ukraine’s parliament voted to remove Yanukovych from office.
Many observers considered Yanukovych to be a corrupt and authoritarian president, who preferred to preserve power with Russia’s economic and political assistance rather than pursue Western-oriented reforms.
Yanukovych also appeared reluctant to fulfill a key demand of the EU, the release from prison of Yulia Tymoshenko, a former prime minister whom he defeated in the 2010 presidential election.
She was freed from prison in February 2014, the day before Yanukovych was removed from office.
Background and United States Policy The government that replaced Yanukovych in 2014 pledged to embrace pro-Western reforms, and an energized civil society supported its efforts.
Within weeks, however, the new government had to confront Russian armed interventions in southern and eastern Ukraine.
As a result, the Ukrainian government’s readiness to implement reforms had to be balanced with the need to move to a war footing with an underdeveloped military and to grapple with the economic consequences of conflict.
Ukraine’s post-Euromaidan government took shape after presidential and parliamentary elections in May and October 2014, respectively.
Ukraine has a mixed system of governance in which the president shares power with a prime minister nominated by parliament.
The winner of the presidential election was Petro Poroshenko , a former official, businessman, and supporter of the Euromaidan protests, who received 55% of the vote.
As a candidate, Poroshenko pledged to move Ukraine closer to the West, fight corruption, and address the conflict that had emerged in the eastern part of the country.
After Yanukovych was elected president in 2010, he revoked the amendments and strengthened the presidency.
As part of his agreement with the opposition in February 2014, Yanukovych agreed to restore the 2004 reforms.
Although the agreement was never implemented, the new Ukrainian government retained these reforms.
Background and United States Policy parliament , elected equally through party lists and single-mandate races.
The main victors were the Petro Poroshenko Bloc (21.8% of the vote and 31% of single-mandate seats) and the People’s Front , led by Arseniy Yatsenyuk, a former government official turned protest leader, who became prime minister.
This coalition gave the incoming government a clear majority in parliament.
Due to various disagreements, however, the latter three parties left the coalition by early 2016, leaving the Poroshenko Bloc, the People’s Front, and a handful of independent deputies with a slim majority.
In April 2016, an increasingly unpopular Yatsenyuk was replaced as prime minister by parliamentary chairman Volodymyr Groysman , a former mayor and Poroshenko’s ally.
Far-right nationalist groups, which Russian officials and media often sought to characterize as key drivers of the Euromaidan, won a handful of seats.
Many observers believe the Poroshenko/Groysman government has made impressive strides in its reform agenda.
Others consider that Ukraine’s reforms remain fragile and that the government has progressed too slowly in certain areas.
Some observers expressed concern that new reforms did not go far enough or could be coupled with other measures that may limit their effectiveness.
Some observers also have noted that a particular challenge to reform efforts stems from the influence of so-called “oligarchs,” many of whom became wealthy in Ukraine’s free-wheeling economic environment prior to 2014, particularly in areas like energy, metals, and mining.
What Went Wrong and How to Fix It (Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics, April 2015), 8.
Some observers consider these reforms fragile and subject to ongoing challenges.
Combating corruption has been a major focus of Ukrainian reform since 2014.
The first two constitute the law enforcement arm of Ukraine’s anti-corruption efforts.
The third institution, the NACP, develops and implements anti-corruption policy, with a focus on prevention.
Some observers consider the primary achievement of the NACP to be the creation of a public electronic system for mandatory asset and income disclosures of government officials.
The Ukrainian government has also initiated reforms related to the police, public procurement, civil service, beneficial ownership, and energy tariffs that are intended, among other things, to help combat corruption.
In October 2017, President Poroshenko agreed to establish a special Anti-Corruption Court.
Still, observers consider that corruption remains high in Ukraine and that many government officials still resist anti-corruption measures.
In public opinion polls, respondents rank corruption as one of the country’s most important issues.
New laws have helped initiate a process to restructure municipalities and other localities, empowering them with greater authority, areas of responsibility, and increased budgets.
The process of restructuring is, for now, optional; by the end of 2016, reportedly around one-quarter of the anticipated newly established local government units had formed.
A plan to constitutionally reform local government, which would also have addressed the status of separatist regions in eastern Ukraine, stalled in 2015 after protests against granting the separatist regions special status turned violent.
In addition to a broad restructuring of the judiciary, reforms have centered on increasing the independence of the judicial branch while reducing the scope for judicial corruption.
After some delay, reforms were also initiated in the Prosecutor General’s Office, including diminishing past powers of surveillance, establishing a system of inspector generals, and recertifying local prosecutors and office personnel.
Kateryna Boguslavska, “Full Disclosure: Tackling Public Corruption in Ukraine,” Chatham House, November 30, 2016; U.S.-Ukraine Business Council , “Ukraine – Macroeconomic Situation – October 2016,” November 12, 2016; Oleksandr Sushko and Olena Prysyatko, “Ukraine,” Nations in Transit 2017, Freedom House; Hrant Kostanyan, “Ukraine’s Unimplemented Anti-Corruption Reform,” CEPS, February 10, 2017; Maxim Eristavi, “Ukraine Is in the Middle of a Counterrevolution Again.
Background and United States Policy In opinion polls, Ukrainian respondents express relatively low levels of support for the country’s political leaders.
In a June-July 2017 poll, 15%-17% of respondents expressed approval of the government.
Among likely voters, eight parties from across the political spectrum had between 4% and 12% support.
Russia-Ukraine Conflict Many observers consider that of all the post-Soviet states, Ukraine has been the most difficult for Russians to accept as fully independent.
Many Russians traditionally have considered much of Ukraine to be a historical province of Russia and Ukrainians to be their close ethnic brethren.
Most Ukrainians can speak Russian, whether as a secondary or primary language.
Ethnic Russians are estimated to make up 15%-20% of the population, mostly concentrated in the south and east , where ties to Russia are stronger.
In Soviet times, eastern Ukraine became home to a heavy industrial sector that retained close economic ties to Russia after independence.
Even before 2014, however, the Russia-Ukraine relationship suffered turbulence, with disputes over Ukraine’s ties to NATO and the EU, the status of Russia’s Crimea-based Black Sea Fleet, and the transit of Russian natural gas via Ukraine to Europe.
Under ex-president Yanukovych, such disputes were largely papered over.
By the end of 2013, Yanukovych appeared to make a decisive move toward Russia, postponing the conclusion of an Association Agreement that would establish closer political and economic ties with the EU and agreeing instead to substantial financial assistance from Moscow.
This decision provoked the Euromaidan protests and, ultimately, Yanukovych’s removal from power.
Crimea Ukraine’s conflict with Russia arose soon after Yanukovych fled to Russia in February 2014.
Moscow covertly deployed forces to Crimea and, after what many observers consider to have been an illegal referendum on secession in March 2014, declared that it was incorporating the region directly into the Russian Federation.
In explaining these actions, Russian government officials characterized the change in power in Kyiv as a Western-backed “coup” that, among other things, could threaten the security of the Russian population in Crimea, eject Russia’s Black Sea Fleet from the region, and potentially even bring Ukraine into NATO, something that Moscow firmly opposed.
Russia has since significantly increased its military presence in Crimea.
Observers estimate that up to 30,000 Russian troops are stationed in the region.
Observers have noted that the bridge, scheduled to open by the end of 2018, includes a single passage for ships to traverse and could limit access to and from ports in eastern Ukraine.
The Ukrainian government is seeking to uphold its maritime rights in international arbitration under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Much of the international community does not recognize Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
In December 2016, the General Assembly voted 70 to 26, with 77 countries abstaining, for a resolution that “condemn the temporary occupation” of Crimea and reaffirmed nonrecognition of its annexation.
Moscow officially denies Russia’s involvement in the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
Most observers agree, however, that the Russian government has unofficially deployed troops to fight, helped recruit other “volunteers,” and supplied Donbas separatists with weapons and equipment.
Dialogue on modalities of local elections in Germany, Russia, and Ukraine, together with accordance with Ukrainian legislation and the future separatist representatives in eastern Ukraine, status of certain districts in Donetsk and Luhansk. negotiated a cease-fire agreement, the Minsk 5.
However, the protocol failed to end and punishment of persons involved in the conflict. fighting or prompt a political resolution to the 6.
The parties met again in February people based on a principle of “all for all.” 2015 and reached a more detailed cease-fire 7.
Safe delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need, based on an international mechanism. agreement known as Minsk-2.
Restoration of full social and economic links with affected areas. heavy weapons and foreign troops and 9.
Restoration of full Ukrainian control over its border fighters, and full Ukrainian control over its with Russia alongside the conflict zone, beginning from border with Russia, among other provisions the first day after local elections and ending after the . introduction of a new constitution and permanent legislation on the special status of districts in Donetsk To date, most observers perceive that little has and Luhansk. been achieved in implementing the provisions 10.
Withdrawal of all foreign armed groups, weapons, of Minsk-2, despite the commitments made by and mercenaries from Ukrainian territory and all sides.
Although the conflict’s intensity has disarmament of all illegal groups. subsided, the fighting continues.
Constitutional reform in Ukraine, including August 2017, OHCHR estimated that the decentralization and permanent legislation on the special status of districts in Donetsk and Luhansk. conflict had led to at least 10,225 combat and civilian fatalities.
Local elections in districts of Donetsk and Luhansk, to be agreed upon with representatives of those Ukrainian government also reported 1.6 districts and held according to OSCE standards. million internally displaced persons .18 13.
Specifically, energy companies in the separatist regions owned by Ukrainian oligarch Rinat Akhmetov recognized Ukrainian authority and paid taxes.
After some Ukrainians launched an unofficial blockade against this trade in January 2017, however, separatist officials reportedly took control of the energy companies.
In response, the Ukrainian government officially suspended cargo traffic in March 2017, until the separatists return control to their proper owners.
Background and United States Policy with GDP declining by almost 15% in 2009.
After some growth, the economy stagnated in 20122013 and then declined with the outbreak of conflict in 2014.
Observers caution, however, that Ukraine’s continued economic growth depends on continuation of critical reforms.
Both the IMF and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development , which says it is Ukraine’s largest international investor, have called on Ukraine to combat “rampant” and “widespread” corruption.
Both also have noted the importance of privatizing state-owned enterprises and allowing land sales, on which a moratorium has been imposed since 2001.
The World Bank estimates that the percentage of Ukrainians living in moderate poverty rose from 15% in 2014 to 22% in 2015.
The official unemployment rate for the first three quarters of 2016 was around 10%.25 Ukraine’s overall merchandise trade has declined since 2013.
Further restrictions followed in 2014-2015, and Russia suspended its own free trade agreement with Ukraine in January 2016.
Excluding exports from occupied Crimea and separatist territories in eastern Ukraine, the total value of Ukraine’s merchandise exports declined 15% in 2014, 29% in 2015, and 5% in 2016.
Its main exports included iron and steel, cereals, fats and oils, electrical machinery, and ores.
After declines in 2013-2014, Ukraine’s foreign direct investment began to recover in 20152016.
According to official statistics, total FDI in 2016 amounted to $4. billion.
In 2016, Russia was reportedly the main source of FDI , followed by Cyprus and the United Kingdom .28 Energy According to many observers, Ukraine’s energy sector is critical to the success of its economic reforms.
Although Ukraine has significant energy resources, the sector has performed below its potential and has traditionally operated in an environment of low domestic energy prices, subsidies, and high consumption.
Ukraine has traditionally depended on Russia for its natural gas supplies.
Many observers argue that Russia has used price hikes, debt repayments, and energy cutoffs as leverage in various disputes with Ukrainian governments.
Since 2015, however, Ukraine has reduced its dependence on Russian gas imports.
By 2015, just 37% of Ukraine’s natural gas imports came from Russia , and in 2016, Ukraine halted Russian gas imports entirely.
In addition to reducing its gas consumption, Ukraine managed this reduction in Russian imports by importing gas from Slovakia, as well as from Poland and Hungary.
Although observers have commended Ukraine for initial energy reforms, concerns have arisen among key stakeholders that energy reforms slowed in 2017.
Four of five members of the supervisory board of Ukraine’s state-owned gas company, Naftogaz, resigned in 2017, citing delays in further reform and government interference in Naftogaz operations.
In September 2017, the EBRD, which provides loans to Naftogaz to purchase gas, said that further reforms will be necessary to conclude a new loan agreement in 2018.33 In recent years, Russia has sought to reduce the amount of its gas that flows through Ukraine to Europe by working with various countries to build pipelines that bypass Ukraine.
Background and United States Policy Sea, around 40%-50% of Russian natural gas destined for Europe still transits Ukraine.
This transit reportedly earns Ukraine around $2 billion or more a year.
Currently, Russia is seeking to construct a parallel pipeline, Nord Stream 2, with the financial support of several European energy companies.
If the project moves forward, Ukrainian gas officials say that Nord Stream 2 will reduce Russian gas transit through Ukraine even further and potentially eliminate it entirely.
Some observers say this would not only lead to a loss of revenue for Ukraine but also increase its vulnerability to Russia, since Moscow’s dependence on Ukraine for gas transit would no longer be a constraining factor in its policies toward Ukraine.
U.S.-Ukraine Relations The United States has long supported Ukraine’s pro-Western orientation and reform efforts.
The United States firmly supports Ukraine’s territorial integrity, including with respect to Crimea, as well as implementation of the Minsk agreements to resolve the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
President Trump and President Poroshenko have met twice, in June and September 2017.
According to the White House, the meetings focused on resolving the conflict in eastern Ukraine, implementing reforms, and promoting economic growth.
Ambassador to NATO Kurt Volker to the newly established position of United States Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations.
On several occasions, Secretary Tillerson has stated that Ukraine-related sanctions on Russia will remain in place “until Moscow reverses the actions that triggered” them.
Background and United States Policy The United States is Ukraine’s 10th-largest trading partner, with $1. billion in total merchandise trade in 2016.
Exports to Ukraine in 2016 totaled $1. billion (down from around $2 billion annually in the three years before the conflict); imports from Ukraine totaled $578 million in 2016 .41 In July 2017, President Trump and President Poroshenko agreed on the sale of United States coal to Ukraine to help replace now-halted supplies of coal from separatist territories in eastern Ukraine; shipments of coal began the following month.
The United States has been a leading contributor of foreign assistance to Ukraine.
Nonmilitary, nonhumanitarian assistance in FY2014 amounted to around $80 million and rose to around $315 million in FY2015.43 In FY2016, nonmilitary, nonhumanitarian assistance totaled $575 million, around half of which was the subsidy cost of a $1 billion sovereign loan guarantee, the third the United States government had extended to Ukraine since 2014.44 For FY2017, the Senate Appropriations Committee recommended $323 million in such assistance (S.Rept.4-290 to S. 3117), although FY2017 foreign aid allocations by country are not yet available.
The Trump Administration’s FY2018 request for Ukraine was $201 million in nonmilitary, nonhumanitarian assistance.
The House Appropriations Committee has recommended allocating $313 million in such assistance , and the Senate Appropriations Committee has recommended $323 million .45 In addition, the United States provides humanitarian assistance to Ukraine in cooperation with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other countries to assist internally displaced persons and other victims of conflict.
In July 2016, the State Department noted that humanitarian assistance provided to Ukraine since 2014 totaled more than $135 million.
H.R. 3362 was incorporated into H.R. 3354, which the House passed in September 2017.
Background and United States Policy included a new Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative to provide “appropriate security assistance and intelligence support” to help Ukraine defend against further aggression and support Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Congress first appropriated $250 million for this initiative in FY2016 and appropriated an additional $150 million in FY2017.
In Kyiv in August 2017, United States Secretary of Defense James Mattis said that the United States was “actively reviewing” the question of lethal assistance.
The United States has also supported Ukraine in the area of cybersecurity.
United States interagency teams visited Ukraine in 2016 regarding December 2015 cyberattacks against Ukrainian power companies.
In July 2016, the Department of State reported its intention to obligate $2. million to be used by the Department of Energy for energy resiliency planning and cybersecurity programs in Ukraine.
The United States and Ukraine held an inaugural Bilateral Cybersecurity Dialogue in Kyiv in September 2017.54 Congress and the Russia-Ukraine Conflict The United States Congress has actively participated in efforts to address the Ukraine conflict since its outbreak.
Many Members have condemned Russia’s annexation of Crimea and support for separatists in eastern Ukraine and pushed to impose sanctions against Russia for its actions.
Congress has also provided considerable economic and security assistance to Ukraine.
The act required or authorized a variety of expanded sanctions (see “Ukraine-Related Sanctions” below), authorized increased nonmilitary and military assistance to Ukraine, and authorized an expansion of RFE/RL and VOA broadcasting throughout the post-Soviet states, giving priority to Ukraine, Georgia, and Moldova.
Since FY2016, much of this assistance has been provided through the Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative.
Congress ultimately appropriated $150 million in FY2017 for the initiative.
For FY2018, the House has supported a presidential request for another $150 million ; Senate action is pending.
This act codifies sanctions on Russia provided for in existing Ukraine-related and cyber-related executive orders, strengthens additional sanctions, and requires or recommends several new sanctions.
Background and United States Policy any potential presidential move to ease or lift sanctions.
President Obama, in issuing decisions to impose economic sanctions on Russia, declared that Russia’s activities in Ukraine threatened the peace, security, stability, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of its neighbor and constituted a threat to U.S. national security.
Rennack, Kenneth Katzman, and Cory Welt; and CRS In Focus IF10614, EU Sanctions on Russia Related to the Ukraine Conflict, by Kristin Archick, Dianne E Rennack, and Cory Welt.
Background and United States Policy In issuing the orders, President Obama identified individuals and entities subject to economic restrictions for having undermined the stability of Ukraine, misappropriated its state assets, annexed Crimea to Russia, used illicit armed force in Ukraine, or conducted business, trade, or investment in occupied Crimea.
Among those designated are Ukrainian individuals and entities, including former government officials and de facto authorities in Crimea and the Donbas.
In addition, the Ukraine Freedom Support Act of 2014 , as amended by P.L. 11544, requires sanctions that were previously discretionary on foreign persons who make “a significant investment” in deepwater, Arctic offshore, or shale oil projects in Russia, and on foreign financial institutions that fund such projects or engage in transactions for any person subject to Ukraine-related sanctions.
The act also requires sanctions against Russian state-run arms exporter Rosoboronexport, Russian entities that transfer weapons to Ukraine and other specified states, and foreign financial institutions that engage in related transactions.
The EU has imposed similar, though not identical, sanctions (or restrictive measures in EU parlance) that require the unanimous agreement of all 28 EU member states.
Most EU sanctions are imposed for a defined period of time, usually six months or a year, after which they require renewal to remain in place.
A number of other states, including Australia, Canada, Japan, Norway, and Switzerland, have also imposed Ukraine-related sanctions on Russia.
The AA requires Ukraine to adopt EU legislation and standards in various areas and gradually exposes Ukrainian firms to competition from EU imports while providing access to EU markets.
The European Parliament and the Ukrainian parliament ratified the AA in September 2014 but postponed implementation of the DCFTA until 2016.
In April 2016, voters in the Netherlands rejected the AA, forcing the Dutch government to delay ratification, which all EU members had to complete for the AA to fully come into effect.
After negotiations with the EU to clarify certain terms, the Dutch parliament approved the agreement, and in July 2017 the EU formally approved the AA.64 The EU also granted Ukrainian citizens visa-free travel starting in June 2017.
In addition, the EU has provided substantial economic assistance to Ukraine since 2014.
This includes €3. billion in macro-financial assistance loans, over 80% of which has been disbursed.
Assistance also includes €5. billion in financing from the European Investment Bank and the EBRD.65 NATO and Ukraine also have a strong history of partnership.
At the April 2008 NATO summit in Bucharest, NATO members agreed that Ukraine and Georgia would eventually become NATO members, although the statement did not specify a timeline or road map for membership.
In 2010, under ex-president Yanukovych, Ukraine adopted a “non-bloc” status, rejecting aspirations of NATO membership, but still invited NATO to launch a Defense Education Enhancement Programme in 2012.
After the onset of conflict in 2014, Ukraine’s parliament rejected its “non-bloc” status; in June 2017, it voted to make cooperation with NATO a foreign policy priority.
Background and United States Policy Although most observers do not expect Ukraine to come closer to NATO membership in the near future, NATO and Ukraine remain partners.
In addition, NATO established six Trust Funds of two to three years’ duration to support Ukraine.
Among other things, NATO remains limited by differences among allies on whether to provide more substantive military support, such as intelligence capabilities or weapons systems.
Outlook Almost four years after Ukraine’s Euromaidan protests and onset of conflict with Russia, Ukraine continues to face a number of internal and external challenges.
