Though the State Department initially approved the sale in December and Pentagon gave its blessing in March, Trump himself was reluctant to arm Ukraine given the potential effect on the United States relationship with Russia.
The burning question is whether anyone in the Trump administration suggested this course of action to Ukraine.
Ukraine, of course, is free to pursue whatever policies it deems necessary to defend itself from encroachments by Russia.
But to use arms sales to interfere with the Mueller investigation would represent obstruction of justice on a truly epic scale.
To be sure, Ukraine already had plenty of motivation to help the Trump administration.
If Ukraine shuttered the investigations to curry Trump’s favor, it was only one of several efforts designed to garner American support.
Concerned that Trump’s affection for Vladimir Putin would translate into anti-Ukraine policies, Ukraine has gone out of its way to butter up Trump since he took office.
Ukraine has promised United States construction firms contracts for future infrastructure projects in Donbass, brokered a $80 million coal deal with the U.S., signed a $1 billion deal with GE Transportation for new locomotives, and hired former Republican National Committee chairman Haley Barbour to help Ukraine lobby the Trump administration.
But even if this has nothing to do with the Mueller investigation, the sale of Javelin missiles to Ukraine reflects both poor judgment on the part of the Trump administration and a longstanding neglect of the potential negative consequences of American arms sales.
More broadly, the dangers generated by United States arms sales go well beyond Ukraine.
Ukraine is just one of many risky customers to whom the United States has sold advanced weapons over the past fifteen years.
In pursuit of short-term foreign policy influence and economic gains, the United States has turned a blind eye to what happens after the deals are done.
Among the list of questionable clients are countries like Saudi Arabia, which has used American weapons in its disastrous intervention in Yemen; Iraq, whose army managed to provide the Islamic State with three army divisions’ worth of American tanks, armored vehicles, and infantry weapons; and Nigeria, whose human rights record, internal conflicts, and overall state fragility call into serious question whether it will use its latest purchase of Super Tucano attack aircraft in a responsible manner.
Time will tell if the smoke surrounding the sale of Javelin missiles to Ukraine stems from collusion to obstruct the Mueller investigation or simply misguided foreign policy making.
Either way, arming Ukraine reflects a reckless approach to the use of arms sales that the Trump administration seems all too eager to embrace.
Nearly three years ago, Ukraine’s Kremlin-backed president fled the country’s capital amidst massive anti-government protests.
The series of events to follow would alter the geopolitical landscape of post-Soviet Eurasia, destabilize security within the wider region and pose a major challenge for U.S.-Russia relations.
Following an unrecognized referendum in eastern Ukraine, Russia proceeded in its annexation of the Crimean peninsula in a brazen act transgressing the notion of Westphalian sovereignty.
The United States and the European Union responded by imposing sanctions on Russia, with debatable efficacy, while two ceasefire agreements have failed to end a protracted and bloody conflict on the ground.
Against this backdrop, the Trump administration has indicated a willingness to lift Russian sanctions in order to improve bilateral relations—a move which would be unpopular in Congress.
Simultaneously, there is continued insistence from the United States and Europe that Russia must return control of the Crimea to Ukraine—a stipulation which Russia refuses to consider.
The Ukraine Crisis and the Ruinous Contest for Post-Soviet Eurasia will first examine how U.S.-Russian relations arrived at such a precarious point in the first place.
The book’s authors, Timothy J Colton and Samuel Charap , argue that a series of grave strategic miscalculations, resulting from years of zero-sum behavior on the parts of both Russia and the United States, have destabilized the post-Soviet Eurasian sphere to the detriment of the West, Russia and the countries caught in the midst.
With regional and international security now deteriorated and all parties worse off, Colton and Charap conclude that all governments must commit to patient negotiation aimed at finding mutually acceptable alternatives, rather than policies aimed at securing one-sided advantages.
Rumors are flying in Washington that Donald Trump is seriously considering an executive order which would lift at least some of the current United States sanctions on Russia.
As with everything else the new president has ordered this week, details are sparse.
But if the executive order would indeed lift sanctions unilaterally, with no attempt at negotiation, Trump won’t be sending a message of strength, but one of weakness.
In fact, I’ve written extensively about the flaws of the sanctions regime on Russia, and even argued that they should be lifted before they calcify into a permanent impediment to improving relations with Russia.
Nor is there good reason to believe that the sanctions will induce policy change in future.
The underlying logic behind sanctions is to cause enough economic pain to the target state that leaders are compelled to change their policies.
But though the Russian economy is in a terrible state, most of that damage was caused by falling oil prices, not by sanctions.
Vladimir Putin was even willing to hurt his own people further by initiating countersanctions against European agricultural products, a move which served to substantially increase food prices for ordinary Russian citizens.
These conclusions are unfortunately supported by a substantial body of academic literature, which overwhelmingly finds that sanctions are rarely successful on issues of ‘high salience,’ such as questions of war and peace.
Sanctions may be a useful tool for signaling to other states that their behavior is unacceptable, but when linked to unrealistic goals, they place policy makers in a difficult situation.
Lifting them may be seen as a sign of weakness, yet there is little to be gained from leaving them in place.
The path of least resistance can therefore end in situations like the half-century Cuban Embargo.
All of this suggests that policymakers should be a lot more cautious about implementing sanctions in the first place, as it may place them in a difficult situation further down the road.
Though the impact of Russian disinformation on the outcome of the presidential election remains unclear, an investigation is ongoing into whether advisors to the Trump campaign had contacts with Moscow.
Donald Trump’s willingness to seek a better relationship with Russia is a solid policy choice, but unilateral concessions of this sort will only serve to intensify the idea that he is somehow beholden to Moscow.
Ultimately, understanding the flaws of sanctions cannot explain how to resolve this dilemma.
There is no good solution for today’s U.S.-Russian relations, just a series of poor choices.
Russian leaders may not be willing to abandon Crimea or make other high profile concessions in exchange for the lifting of sanctions.
But the sanctions are causing some economic damage, enough that Russian leaders do want them lifted.
A process of negotiation which proposes to lift most of the sanctions in exchange for concessions in other policy areas – implementation of the Russian portions of the Minsk Agreement, Russian concessions on ending the Syrian civil war, or a variety of other issues – is a way for the Trump administration to end the sanctions regime without making a unilateral concession.
For the man who wrote the Art of the Deal, this would surely be a better solution.
Since then the Western allies have imposed economic sanctions, but to little effect.
No one believes Crimea, Russian until six decades ago, is going back to Ukraine.
Yet the European Union called on other countries to join its ineffective boycott.
They aren’t going to declare economic war on a faraway nation which has done nothing against them.
Although Washington, with less commerce at stake, remains among the most fervent advocates of sanctions, Europe is divided over the issue.
Opposition has emerged to routine renewal in July of restrictions on Russia’s banking, energy, and military industries.
Sanctions supporters insist that Russia more fully comply with the Minsk peace process and end support for the separatist campaign in Ukraine’s east.
On Friday, European Union envoys agreed to extend sanctions on Russia, continuing the restrictions placed on Russian businesses and citizens following Russia’s 2014 invasion of Crimea and aggression in Eastern Ukraine.
The sanctions prevent some of Russia’s largest companies from raising capital in the West, restrict the export of technology and technical services for unconventional oil and gas drilling, and freeze the assets and travel of Russian elites.
The ruble’s exchange rate has tracked global oil prices more closely than any new sanctions, and many of the actions taken by the Russian government, including the slashing of the state budget, are similar to those it took when oil prices fell during the 2008 financial crisis.
By restricting access to international financing during a recession, the sanctions have compounded the fall in oil prices, requiring Moscow to slash spending on health care, infrastructure, and government salaries, which has created economic hardship for ordinary Russians.
The crash of the ruble, meanwhile, has not only destroyed savings but also increased the monthly payments of those who hold mortgages denominated in foreign currencies.
The brunt is being borne by Europe, where the European Commission has estimated that the sanctions cut growth by 0. percent of GDP in 2015.
According to the Austrian Institute of Economic Research, continuing the sanctions on Russia could cost over 90 billion euros in export revenue and more than two million jobs over the next few years.
The sanctions are proving especially painful for countries with strong trade ties to Russia.
Germany, Russia’s largest European partner, stands to lose almost 400,000 jobs.
Ultimately, as I argue in the article, the success of sanctions can be judged by a variety of standards.
This is a blow for those – myself included – who seek restrained policy options to resolve the crisis in Ukraine.
Yet given the costs to United States businesses, it’s probably time for policymakers to consider whether continuing sanctions on Russia is really the best option, or whether there are more effective diplomatic or economic policy tools we can use instead.
You can read the whole article, with more data and policy recommendations, over at Foreign Affairs.
To calculate those inflation rates, I use dynamic purchasing power parity theory.
I computed the 92% rate by using black-market exchange rate data that the Johns Hopkins-Cato Institute Troubled Currencies Project has collected over the past year.
On an annualized basis, this amounts to an inflation rate of 93% – almost exactly the same number I obtained when applying the scientific PPP methodology.
As evidence of the Alice in Wonderland nature of Ukraine’s current state of affairs, President Petro Poroshenko penned an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal on June 11.
He is apparently unaware of the harsh realities facing the citizens of his country.
He is also apparently unaware that his finance minister, Natalie Jaresko, whom he praises to high heaven, was recently in Washington, D.C., where she used a new Ukrainian law as cover to threaten a sovereign debt default.
The reportage on these threats appeared in London’s Financial Times on June 11, the same day the Wall Street Journal published President Poroshenko’s op-ed.
Venezuela has the dubious honor of registering the world’s highest inflation rate.
Since February 24th, the hryvnia has strengthened on the black market from 33.78 per United States dollar to 26. per United States dollar.
