Except where otherwise noted, references in this report do not include areas controlled by Russian-backed separatist forces in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine or Russian-occupied Crimea.
The country held presidential and legislative elections in 2014; international and domestic observers considered both elections free and fair.
Conflictand Occupation-related Abuses: Russian-backed separatists in Donbas engaged in abductions, torture, and unlawful detention, employed child soldiers, stifled dissent, and restricted humanitarian aid.
To a lesser extent, there were also reports of some of these practices by government forces.
In Crimea, Russian occupation authorities systematically targeted perceived dissidents for abuse and politically motivated prosecution.
The country suffered from impunity for corruption and deficiencies in the administration of justice.
The Prosecutor General’s Office and the judicial system proved largely unable to convict perpetrators of past or current major corruption.
Russia’s occupation of Crimea and aggression in eastern Ukraine resulted in 1. million IDPs who faced continuing difficulties obtaining legal documents, education, pensions, and access to financial institutions and health care.
During the year the government suspended all social payments for IDPs, pending verification of their presence in government-controlled territory, ostensibly to combat fraudulent payments.
There also were limitations on workers’ right to strike, and failure to enforce effectively labor laws and occupational safety and health standards for the workplace.
The perpetrators of the 2014 Euromaidan shootings in Kyiv and riots in Odesa have not been held to account.
Investigations into alleged human rights abuses related to Russia’s occupation of Crimea and the continuing aggression in the Donbas region remained incomplete due to lack of government control in those territories and the refusal of Russia and Russian-backed separatists to investigate abuse allegations.
Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and other Unlawful or Politically Motivated Killings There were several reports that the government or its agents committed arbitrary or unlawful killings.
According to media reports, police in Kryve Ozero allegedly beat a man to death on August 24, after responding to a domestic violence call.
In response, the chief of the National Police disbanded a police station where the killing occurred.
On October 2, the detained officers were released on bail; the pretrial investigation continues.
There were reports of politically motivated killings by nongovernment actors.
On July 20, a car bomb in Kyiv killed Belarusian-born journalist, Pavel Sheremet, as he drove in a car belonging to his partner, Olena Prytula.
Sheremet, a Russian citizen, worked for Ukrainska Pravda newspaper and Vesti radio station, where he had been critical of Ukrainian, Russian, and Belarusian authorities.
Authorities released a video of two individuals placing the device under the car.
As of year’s end, the investigation remained open and authorities had made no arrests.
On March 9, Yuriy Hrabovsky, a lawyer representing a detained Russian special forces soldier, Aleksandr Aleksandrov, disappeared in Odesa.
The killing remained under investigation at year’s end, and authorities had made no arrests.
Human rights groups were critical of the low number of convictions despite considerable evidence.
Human rights groups also criticized prosecutors for focusing on lowranking officials while taking little action to investigate government leaders believed to have been involved.
Law enforcement agencies also continued their investigation into the events in Odesa in 2014 in which 48 persons died, including six government supporters and 42 persons who supported more autonomy for regions.
A Council of Europe report in 2015 found the government’s investigation lacked independence and that the Prosecutor General’s Office and the Ministry of Internal Affairs failed to conduct a thorough, coordinated investigation.
On January 15, a group of civil society activists and Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 4 journalists released a statement expressing their lack of confidence in the investigation by the Prosecutor General’s Office and the Ministry of Internal Affairs, accusing the authorities of sabotaging the investigation to prevent the perpetrators from being brought to justice.
On May 4, Odesa police chief, Petro Lutsiuk, was fired from his position, and the Prosecutor General’s Office later charged him with abuse of authority in connection with the events at the trade union building.
Disappearance There were multiple reports of politically motivated disappearances, particularly in relation to the conflict between the government and combined Russian and separatist forces in the Donbas region and by Russian occupation authorities in Crimea . c.
While courts cannot legally use as evidence in court proceedings confessions and statements under duress made to police by persons in custody, there were reports that police and other law enforcement officials abused and, at times, tortured persons in custody to obtain confessions.
In the Donbas region, there were reports that government and progovernment forces engaged in military operations at times committed human rights abuses, including torture.
There were reports that Russian-backed separatist forces in the self-proclaimed “people’s republics” of Donetsk and Luhansk systematically committed numerous abuses, including torture, to maintain control or for personal financial gain.
In a July joint report, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch highlighted allegations of the use of torture at SBU detention sites, including beatings, starvation, and electric shocks.
In its March report, the UN Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine , under the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 5 gave an undated account of a “profederalism” activist who was allegedly tortured and pressured to sign a confession at an SBU facility in Odesa.
The government asserted that such “profederalist” messaging was used by Russia to weaken Ukraine’s central government.
The man reported that during interrogation the SBU suffocated him with a plastic bag and beat him.
Afterwards, the SBU brought the man to the lobby of the SBU building to witness that authorities had also arrested his son.
His son was then brought to a neighboring cell, where the father could hear his son scream as he was abused.
For example, on August 23, 15 staff members of the Chernihiv pretrial detention facility reportedly beat 25-year-old Viktor Kravchenko.
After the beating, facility staff placed him in a disciplinary cell and denied his request for medical help.
On August 4, the country’s human rights ombudsman sent a letter to the Prosecutor General’s Office and the Ministry of Defense expressing concern about military hazing following the suicide of Vlad Khaisuk, a young soldier serving in a unit stationed in Stanytsia Luhanska.
After Khaisuk’s suicide, his parents found videos on Khaisuk’s smartphone of him being hazed and humiliated by other soldiers.
The Luhansk Department of the Military Prosecutor’s Office investigated and found no signs of military hazing.
At year’s end, however, police in Stanytsia Luhanska were investigating the accident as a homicide.
In its September report, the HRMMU noted that it “continued to document cases of sexual violence, amounting to torture, of conflict-related detainees, both men and women.
In one example, the HRMMU described a case in March where unidentified members of the security services detained a man, took him to an abandoned building, and interrogated him about the positions of armed groups.
When he could not provide information, the perpetrators chained him to a metal cage, took a ramrod, and inserted it into the man’s urethra, causing him severe pain.
During the first nine months of the year, the Prosecutor General’s Office forwarded for prosecution 35 cases specifically alleging torture or degrading treatment involving law enforcement officers.
Authorities imposed disciplinary actions against 20 officers and fired 10.
The Ukrainian Helsinki Human Rights Union maintained that life sentences amounted to slow executions of prisoners because of the poor conditions of their imprisonment.
Authorities generally held adults and juveniles in separate facilities, although there were reports that juveniles and adults were not separated in some pretrial detention facilities.
Conditions in police temporary detention facilities and State Penitentiary Service pretrial detention facilities were harsher than in lowand medium-security prisons.
Despite a reduction in the number of inmates, overcrowding remained a problem in pretrial detention facilities.
Inmates complained to the Ombudsman’s Office about illegal actions of the administration, including systematic beatings, forced and unpaid labor, and lack of medical care.
The monitoring team found that a convicted person kept in one of the disciplinary cells tried to commit suicide, which he claimed was due to fear of physical violence by the prison administration.
The local prosecutor’s office launched an investigation into the actions of the correctional facility administration.
For example, on June 6, an inmate of the Shepetivka correctional facility in Khmelnytskyi Oblast died of a traumatic brain injury inflicted by his fellow inmates.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 7 According to the Association of Independent Monitors and the Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office, authorities failed to protect the lives and human rights of prisoners in areas close to the zone of operation against combined Russian and separatist forces in eastern Ukraine adequately and failed to evacuate staff and inmates in a timely fashion.
As of September 1, under the auspices of the Ombudsman’s Office, 17 prisoners incarcerated in territories seized by Russianbacked separatist forces were transferred to penal facilities on governmentcontrolled territory.
The condition of prison facilities and places of unofficial detention in areas held by Russian-backed separatist forces was very poor.
In most cases the places of detention were not suitable for even short-term detention.
There were reports of shortages of food, water, heat, sanitation, and proper medical care.
According to October press reports citing information from the Eastern Human Rights Group, abuse of prisoners was widespread in areas not controlled by the government.
Prior to the conflict, more than 5,000 prisoners were held in the part of Luhansk Oblast under the control of Russian-backed separatists.
The groups reported systemic abuses, such as torture, starvation, denial of medical care, and solitary confinement, as well as the extensive use of prisoners as slave labor to produce goods that, when sold, provided a direct source of personal income to Russianbacked separatist leaders.
In areas controlled by Russian-backed separatist forces, authorities lacked central record keeping, leading to difficulties for prisoners and arbitrarily held detainees.
Human rights groups reported instances in which authorities confiscated prisoners’ identification cards and failed to return them upon their release.
Prisoners released by Russian-backed separatists often had no identification.
As of October 1, the ombudsman’s office received 1,114 complaints from prisoners and their relatives throughout the country.
The most common complaints were regarding a lack of Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 8 appropriate living and sanitary conditions; cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment; public humiliation; limited communication with family members and relatives; unjustified punishment; denial of the right to legal consultation; and denial of the right to submit a complaint about actions of the administration.
Rights groups reported that legal norms did not always provide for confidentiality of complaints.
The government generally permitted independent monitoring of prisons and detention centers by international and local human rights groups.
On May 25, the UN Subcommittee on the Prevention of Torture suspended its visit to the country after being denied access to places in several parts of the country where it suspected the SBU was illegally depriving individuals of their liberty.
On September 5, the SPT resumed its visit and was granted access to the facilities.
During the year the Ombudsperson’s Office together with representatives of civil society conducted monitoring visits to penitentiary facilities in 15 oblasts. d.
One of those detained, Viktor Ashykhin, was kidnapped from his hometown of Ukrainsk in 2014 and released in July.
The SBU is responsible for all state security, nonmilitary intelligence, and counterintelligence matters.
Civilian authorities generally had control over law enforcement agencies but rarely took action to punish abuses committed by security forces.
Impunity for abuses by law enforcement remained a significant problem frequently highlighted by the HRMMU in its reports and by other human rights groups.
In its September report, the HRMMU attributed the problem to “pressure on the judiciary, inability and unwillingness of the Office of the Prosecutor General and Office of the Military Prosecutor to investigate” abuses.
The HRMMU also noted that authorities were unwilling to investigate allegations of torture, particularly when victims were detained on grounds related to national security or were seen as proseparatist.
Additionally, human rights groups criticized the lack of progress in investigations of alleged crimes in areas retaken by Ukraine from Russian-backed separatists, resulting in continuing impunity for these crimes.
In particular, investigations of alleged crimes committed by Russian-backed separatist forces in Slovyansk and Kramatorsk in 2014 appeared stalled.
Human rights groups believed that many of the local law enforcement personnel in both cities collaborated with Russianbacked separatists when they controlled these cities.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 10 Under the law members of the Verkhovna Rada have authority to conduct investigations and public hearings into law enforcement problems.
The human rights ombudsman may also initiate investigations into abuses by security forces.
The attackers pushed protesters from the square using fire extinguishers and tear gas and destroyed their camp.
According to witnesses, police watched and did nothing to prevent the clashes.
Authorities kept suspects under house arrest and occasionally held them incommunicado, in some instances for several weeks.
According to the Ministry of Justice, 60,500 persons received free legal aid.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 11 The law provides for bail, but many defendants could not pay the required amounts.
Prosecutors must prove the restrictions are the minimum needed to ensure that suspects will appear at hearings and not interfere with criminal proceedings.
In its September report, the HRMMU reported that the SBU apprehended a married couple in Odesa and reportedly held the couple incommunicado at an SBU compound for 20 hours before recording their detention.
SBU also reportedly subjected them to threats, sleep deprivation, interrogation without a lawyer present, and denied requests for legal counsel.
The HRMMU expressed concern over mass arrests in government-controlled portions of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts.
These oblasts are subject to the Law on Combatting Terrorism, which allows authorities to make arrests with a lower standard of proof than allowed under the criminal procedure code, leading in some cases to arbitrary arrest.
Under the law citizens have the right to challenge an arrest in court or by appeal to a prosecutor to obtain prompt release in cases of unlawful detention.
Denial of Fair Public Trial While the constitution provides for an independent judiciary and the Verkhovna Rada passed a judicial reform package in June, courts were inefficient and remained vulnerable to political pressure and corruption.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 12 On June 2, parliament adopted amendments to the constitution regarding the judiciary.
The amendments give new powers to the High Council of Justice, stipulate that the majority of High Council members must be judges, and authorize the High Council to make decisions on the election, dismissal, transfer, promotion, and immunity of judges.
Parliament and the president no longer have decisive roles in these processes, which limit potential interference with the judiciary.
For example, the president retains the right to decide on the transfer of judges for two years.
On September 30, the Law on Judiciary and Status of Judges came into effect, facilitating the implementation of the above constitutional amendments.
The law introduces a three-tier system of courts, with the Supreme Court as the highest judicial body, holding the authority to rescind lower courts’ judgments.
The law provides for wider civil society engagement in the selection and assessment of judges through a new consultative body called the Public Integrity Council.
The law allows anyone to initiate disciplinary proceedings against a judge before the High Council of Justice and imposes anticorruption measures on judges.
As of October 1, the Prosecutor General’s Office had brought 16 criminal cases against judges to court.
Judges continued to complain about weak separation of powers between the executive and judicial branches of government.
Other factors impeded the right to a fair trial, such as lengthy court proceedings, particularly in administrative courts, inadequate funding, and the inability of courts to enforce rulings.
For example, on January 26 in Kharkiv, an unoccupied car belonging to lawyer Oleksandr Shadrin exploded.
Shadrin had been working on a number of high-profile cases involving “proseparatist” defendants.
On January 29, the Ukrainian Bar Association issued an open letter of concern about the incident involving Shadrin’s car as well as other cases in which the safety of attorneys was threatened.
In a similar incident on February 2 in Kyiv, an unoccupied car belonging to another lawyer, Andriy Fedur, exploded.
Fedur had been defending the accused murderers of journalists Oles Buzyna and Heorgiy Gongadze.
The law also allows defendants access to government-held evidence, to confront witnesses against them, to present witnesses and evidence, and the right to appeal.
The law applies to all defendants regardless of ethnicity, gender, or age.
Human rights groups reported that officials occasionally monitored meetings between defense attorneys and their clients.
Political Prisoners and Detainees On May 12, an Ivano-Frankivsk court sentenced blogger Ruslan Kotsaba to threeand-a-half years in prison, on charges that he had impeded the work of the armed forces with his calls to ignore the military draft.
Authorities arrested Kotsaba in 2015, and human rights groups deemed him a political prisoner.
On July 24, an appeals court overturned the conviction, freeing Kotsaba after 18 months in detention.
Individuals may appeal to the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 14 human rights ombudsman at any time and to the European Court of Human Rights after exhausting domestic legal remedies. f.
In practice, however, law enforcement agencies sometimes conducted searches without a proper warrant.
On October 28, the newspaper Ukrainska Pravda published an open appeal to the president and heads of the SBU, the National Police, and the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
The newspaper demanded to know why, how, and on whose authority the surveillance had taken place.
The official SBU response said that national security legislation prohibited the disclosure of information sought by Ukrainska Pravda. g.
Abuses in Internal Conflicts Russia controls the level of violence in eastern Ukraine, intensifying the conflict when it suits its political interests, while largely ignoring the September 2014 ceasefire and subsequent attempts to reestablish the ceasefire agreed to by all sides.
Russia has continued to arm, train, lead, and fight alongside separatists, and Russian-backed separatists have methodically obstructed and threatened international monitors throughout the conflict, who do not have the access necessary to record systematically ceasefire violations or abuses committed by separatist authorities or combined Russian-separatist forces.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 15 International organizations and NGOs, including AI, HRW, and the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights issued periodic reports of human rights abuses committed in the Donbas region by combined Russianseparatist and by government forces.
As of August 17, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe fielded 1,102 persons supporting a special monitoring mission, which issued daily reports on the situation and conditions in most major cities.
As of September 15, the HRMMU reported that fighting had killed at least 9,578 persons, including civilians, government armed forces, and members of armed groups.
Additionally, more than three million residents have left areas of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts controlled by Russian-backed separatists since the start of the conflict.
As of November 15, the Ministry of Social Policy had registered 1.7 million IDPs, although civil society groups believed the actual number to be lower.
According to UNHCR there were approximately 1. million Ukrainian refugees in other countries, including approximately one million in the Russian Federation.
Media and human rights groups continued to report widespread human rights abuses in areas held by Russian-backed separatist forces.
The HRMMU noted a “collapse of law and order” in such areas as well as “serious human rights abuses,” including killings and torture.
For example, on August 24, in the government-controlled area of Donetsk Oblast, a woman in the village of Zolote-4 died while lying in bed, when Russian-backed separatist forces fired on the village.
The HRMMU, the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, and human rights groups did not report any extrajudicial killings by government forces during the year in connection with the conflict.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 16 There were no reports by the HRMMU or human rights organizations of extrajudicial killings of civilians by combined Russian-separatist forces during the year, although the press reported several instances.
The HRMMU identified unreported cases of extrajudicial killings from previous years that authorities had not yet investigated.
According to press reports, on July 20, three drunken members of the Russianbacked separatist “7th separate motorized rifle brigade” robbed, then shot and killed a resident of the village of Komsomolsk, Luhansk Oblast.
Russian-backed separatist authorities reportedly dismissed the men from their positions to conceal their involvement in the killing.
On February 17, a video appeared on the internet showing a Russian fighter codenamed “Olkhon” whipping Donbas resident, Alexei Frumkin, with an electrical cord while Frumkin was tied to a post.
The combined Russian and separatist battalion that released the video claimed that “Olkhon” killed Frumkin immediately after the video was shot.
According to press reports, Frumkin had supported Russian-backed separatists but had vanished in the autumn of 2014, and his fate had been unknown until the video was released.
Dozens of individuals were subjected to summary executions and killings, or died of torture and ill-treatment in custody.
Human rights groups criticized the government for not keeping an effective database of missing persons.
Russian-backed separatists had no such system and no effective means of investigating missing persons cases.
According to human rights groups, approximately 1,000 bodies in government-controlled cemeteries and morgues, both military and civilian, remained unidentified as a result of fighting, mostly from 2014.
According to the HRMMU, government authorities lacked coordination among law enforcement bodies in determining the whereabouts of missing persons and the identification of remains.
Government forces, Russian-backed-separatist forces, and criminal elements engaged in abductions.
The HRMMU noted a pattern of arbitrary and Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 17 incommunicado detention by government law enforcement bodies (mainly by the SBU) and by military and paramilitary units, first and foremost by the former volunteer battalions now formally incorporated into the security services.
On July 21, HRW and AI released a report, You Don’t Exist, which documented nine alleged cases of enforced disappearances by the SBU at alleged secret detention facilities in Kharkiv, Kramatorsk, Izyum, and Mariupol.
The report highlighted the case of Konstantin Beskorovayni, a local official from the town of Konstantinovka, Donetsk Oblast.
Beskorovayni was allegedly subjected to enforced disappearance by the SBU, beaten and threatened during an interrogation, and held incommunicado for 15 months at an SBU facility in Kharkiv before being released on February 24 on the condition that he not speak about his detention.
During his detention SBU officials repeatedly denied to Beskorovayni’s family and human rights organizations that he was in SBU custody.
On August 28, HRW and AI released a statement in which they said that, since their initial report in July, 13 individuals had been released from the SBU facility in Kharkiv.
The NGOs believed that at least five persons remained confined at the site.
They noted that, once individuals had been released, local police simply closed their “missing persons” cases without further investigation.
Human rights groups reported that Russian-backed separatists routinely kidnapped persons for political purposes, to settle vendettas, or for ransom.
The HRMMU also documented an increase in disappearances at checkpoints controlled by Russian-backed separatist forces.
For example, on May 27, a former armed group member went missing in Novoluhanske, while travelling from government-controlled territory, where he had been detained by government forces.
His mother later found that Russianbacked separatists had detained him at a checkpoint, transported him to Horlivka, and later transferred him to “police custody” in Donetsk.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 18 On January 27, Russian-backed separatists abducted religious historian and president of the Center for Religious Studies and International Spiritual Relations, Ihor Kozlovsky, allegedly in retaliation for his pro-Ukrainian postings on social media.
According to Kozlovsky’s wife, the abductors confiscated keys to his apartment, which they then searched twice, removing equipment, documents, and a valuable collection of antique objects.
According to local media, as of late November, Kozlovsky was being held in one of the separatists’ informal detention centers in Donetsk.
Russian-backed separatists also abducted journalists attempting to cover the conflict.
On March 3, they released abducted pro-Ukrainian journalist, Maria Varfolomeyeva, in a prisoner exchange after 14 months of captivity in Luhansk.
The politically motivated trial in Russia of Nadiya Savchenko, a military pilot and member of the Verkhovna Rada abducted from eastern Ukraine in 2014, ended in March with a guilty verdict and a 22-year prison sentence.
Government and Russian-backed separatist forces reportedly abused and tortured civilians and soldiers in detention facilities.
The HRMMU received reports that government forces committed human rights violations, allegedly including forced deprivation of liberty and torture.
In its September report, the HRMMU noted that in the three-month reporting period reflected in the report, approximately 70 percent of cases documented by OHCHR contained allegations of torture, mistreatment, and incommunicado detention by SBU and other security forces prior to transfer into the criminal justice system.
The September report did not provide data on the total number of such cases.
There were reports that Russian-backed separatist forces systematically committed numerous abuses, including torture, in the territories under their control.
According to international organizations and NGOs, abuses included beatings, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 19 forced labor, psychological and physical torture, public humiliation, and sexual violence.
The HRMMU expressed repeated concern about reports of torture taking place in detention facilities controlled by Russian-backed separatists, to which they did not have access, and noted that reports of torture often surfaced long after the abuses had allegedly taken place.
For example, the HRMMU’s June report documented multiple new accounts of mock executions, severe beatings, and intentional deprivation of medical care from 2015.
On September 23, in connection with the SPT’s second visit to Ukraine, the SBU published a set of interviews with 11 individuals who alleged that they had been tortured while in the custody of Russian-backed separatists.
The SBU also published a list of eight alleged torture sites in Donbas that it reported were controlled by Russian-backed separatists.
The HRMMU continued to document cases on both sides of the line of contact of sexual and gender-based violence of conflict-related detainees, both men and women.
According to the Justice for Peace in Donbas human rights coalition, individuals held in illegal detention facilities in territories controlled by Russian-backed separatists reported cases of gender-based violence, in particular rape, attempted rape, and sexual abuse.
The HRMMU was unable to obtain first-hand accounts of sexual violence in such areas but reported that it had received multiple secondary accounts.
For example, a man detained by militants between March and April in an area of Donetsk controlled by Russian-backed separatists told the HRMMU about two women who were reportedly abducted at a checkpoint when coming from governmentcontrolled territory and incarcerated in a room next to his.
The detainee heard armed men harassing the women and attempting to rape them; two days later the women were relocated.
The HRMMU reported in June that “mines contaminate large areas of agricultural land in east Ukraine, often in areas which are poorly marked, near roads and surrounding civilian areas.
This has resulted in civilians being killed and maimed, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 20 often while walking to their homes and fields.
These risks are particularly acute for persons living in towns and settlements near the contact line, as well as the 23,000 people” who crossed the contact line every day between February and May.
According to the NGO Donbas SOS, approximately 27 square miles of territory in Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts were in need of humanitarian demining.
There were no media reports of child soldiers serving with government forces, and the UN Children’s Fund could not confirm the presence of child soldiers in the country.
There were media reports that government authorities had detained 17 persons between the ages of 15 and 18 who had fought with Russian-backed separatist forces since the beginning of the conflict in 2014.
Russian-backed separatist news sources continued to cite the voluntary recruitment of children as young as 12 into the armed groups.
In a January 22 interview in the newspaper Dzerkalo Tizhdnya, the head of the SBU’s Antiterrorism Center, Vitaliy Malykov, described the Russian-backed separatist St.
George the Victor battalion, in which he alleged that children between the ages of 12 and 16 were serving.
A three-month-long study by the Justice for Peace in Donbas coalition found that Russian aggression in Donbas has significantly increased the risk of children participating in armed conflict.
The group’s analysis of open sources and interviews revealed 41 individual cases of recruitment of children into armed formations.
Of these, most were boys 16 to 17 years old participating in armed formations in territories of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions controlled by Russian-backed separatists.
On September 28, a team of prosecutors from the Netherlands, Australia, Belgium, Malaysia, and Ukraine presented the results of their investigation of the 2014 downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-17.
The report largely confirmed the already widely documented Russian government role in the deployment of the missile system, a Buk or SA-11, and the subsequent cover-up.
In the report Dutch prosecutors traced Russia’s role in deploying the missile system into Ukraine and its attempt to hide its role after the disaster.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 21 In 2015 government authorities introduced measures to expedite the delivery of humanitarian aid to areas controlled by Russian-backed separatist forces.
Russianbacked separatists in Donetsk Oblast, however, sharply restricted government humanitarian aid as well as aid from international humanitarian organizations.
As a result persons remaining in territories held by Russian-backed separatists experienced large price increases for everyday consumables, especially meat and fresh vegetables.
Human rights groups reported severe shortages of medicine and medical supplies in territory not controlled by the government.
Russian-backed separatists continued to receive convoys of Russian “humanitarian aid,” which Ukrainian government officials believed contained weapons and supplies for combined Russian and separatist forces.
The report also described 15 attacks on operating schools that were not being used as positions by the military.
Treatment for persons living with HIV and tuberculosis was disrupted in the east of the country where fighting interrupted crucial medical supplies.
More than 6,000 persons living with HIV in the region struggled with a shortage of medicine and doctors.
Freedom of Speech and Press The constitution and law provide for freedom of speech and press, but authorities did not always respect these rights.
The government introduced measures that banned or blocked information, media outlets, or individual journalists deemed a threat to national security or who expressed positions that authorities believed undermined the country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Other problematic practices continued to affect media freedom, including selfcensorship, so-called jeansa payments to journalists for favorable news reports disguised as objective journalism, and slanted news coverage by media whose owners had close ties to the government or opposition political parties.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 22 In the Donbas region, Russian-backed separatists suppressed freedom of speech and the press through harassment, intimidation, abductions, and assaults on journalists and media outlets.
With some exceptions, individuals in areas not under Russian occupation or Russian-backed separatist control could generally criticize the government publicly and privately and discuss matters of public interest without fear of official reprisal.
The law criminalizes the display of communist and Nazi symbols, although there have been no prosecutions.
The law prohibits statements that threaten the country’s territorial integrity, promote war, instigate racial or religious conflict, or support Russian aggression towards Ukraine.
On September 15, the National Television and Radio Council issued a warning to Kherson-based radio station AKS for statements suggesting that Crimean Tatars were involved in terrorism.
If a station receives a second warning, it could lose its broadcasting license.
On December 9, the Verkhovna Rada passed a bill to restrict imports of certain Russian books with “anti-Ukrainian content” that violated Ukrainian law.
Privately owned media, the most successful of which were generally owned by wealthy and influential “oligarchs,” often presented readers and viewers a “biased pluralism,” representing the views of their owners, favorable coverage of their allies, and criticizing political and business rivals.
The 10 most popular television stations were owned by businessmen whose primary business was not in media.
The public television broadcaster was established in 2015 and planned to be fully operational by January 2017.
On November 1, the head of the public broadcaster, Zurab Alasania, resigned from his position in protest regarding a number of obstacles to establishing the channel’s operations, including the government’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 23 diversion of the channel’s budget for other purposes.
The practice of jeansa, or publishing unsubstantiated news articles for a fee, continued to be widespread.
For example, according to the Institute of Mass Information press monitoring, the highest proportion of jeansa in regional media was found in print outlets in Mykolaiv Oblast, where 15 percent of all published articles were political or commercial jeansa.
Violence against journalists remained a problem in the country, though attacks on journalists dropped for the second year.
Human rights groups and journalists criticized government inaction in solving these crimes, giving rise to a culture of impunity.
According to the Institute of Mass Information, there were 30 reports of attacks on journalists, half as many as in 2015, and almost a 10th as many as in 2014.
As in 2015, the majority of these attacks were perpetrated by private, not state, actors.
There were 42 incidents of threats against and harassment of journalists, up from 36 in 2015.
The Institute of Mass Information and editors of major independent news outlets noted online harassment of journalists by societal actors, reflecting a growing societal intolerance of reporting deemed insufficiently patriotic, a development they said had the tacit support of the government.
Some affected media professionals subsequently received death threats and were subjected to significant online harassment.
There were multiple incidents of violence and harassment against the television channel INTER, which is perceived to have a pro-Russian editorial policy.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 24 According to press reports, in January protesters spray-painted “Kremlin mouthpiece” on INTER’s offices and threw rocks through its windows.
On February 25, volunteer Azov Battalion fighters blocked journalists’ access to INTER’s offices after INTER broadcasters were inadvertently recorded criticizing the “heavenly hundred,” demonstrators killed during the Euromaidan protests.
On August 4, Myrotvorets published hacked email correspondence purporting to show that an INTER TV journalist had coordinated the contents of an article with Russianbacked separatist leaders.
On September 4, approximately 15 to 20 masked persons entered INTER’s offices, setting fire to the building, destroying equipment, and trapping employees in the smoke-filled building.
As a result some staff members were hospitalized, including one with a spinal injury.
Authorities arrested six persons at the scene; an investigation into the attack by the SBU Investigative Department continued.
On November 21, five unidentified persons threw Molotov cocktails at INTER’s headquarters.
Authorities opened an investigation into the incident, which continued at year’s end.
During the year authorities detained but later released two suspects in the 2015 killing in Kyiv of Oles Buzina, who was perceived as pro-Russian.
There were multiple reports of attacks on journalists investigating government corruption.
On May 24, three masked men fled in a car after beating Anatoliy Ostapenko, a journalist affiliated with the independent media outlet Hromadske Zaporizhzhya.
Ostapenko was working on several investigations linking local authorities in Zaporizhzhya to corruption.
The Institute for Mass Information recorded seven incidents of censorship of individual publications, down from 12 in 2015.
Both independent and state-owned media periodically engaged in self-censorship when reporting stories that might expose political allies to criticism or that might Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 25 be perceived by the public as insufficiently patriotic or that might provide information that could be used for Russian propaganda.
For example, on August 29, former prosecutor general, Viktor Shokin, announced he would sue the investigative journalism television program “Schemes” over its claims to have uncovered evidence of his corruption, including his ownership of luxury property registered in the names of family members.
Authorities took measures to prohibit, regulate, and occasionally censor information deemed a national security threat.
The government continued the practice of banning specific works by pro-Russian actors, film directors, and singers, as well as imposing sanctions on pro-Russian journalists.
On May 31, the president signed a decree imposing visa bans on 17 Russian journalists; several dozen other journalists were sanctioned previously.
The government continued to block Russian television channels from broadcasting in the country, based on a 2014 decision by the National Television and Radio Broadcasting Council based on the perceived dangerous influence of Russian propaganda.
As of year’s end, only six Russian channels were permitted to broadcast, compared to 83 Russian channels able to broadcast in the country at the start of 2014.
According to the head of the National Television and Radio Broadcasting Council, as of November 2, the council had issued 23 warnings to Ukrainian cable providers for violating the ban on certain Russian channels.
Media professionals continued to experience pressure from SBU and the armed forces when reporting on sensitive issues, such as military losses.
On July 8, the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 26 press center of the Antiterrorist Operation asked the SBU to suspend the accreditation of journalists representing two Ukrainian and one Russian media outlets that were reporting from Avdiivka, Donetsk Oblast.
The journalists had released a video considered by the ATO headquarters to violate the rules for reporting from a conflict area, since it disclosed soldiers’ faces, locations, and weaponry.
After the request to remove it, the Ukrainian Hromadske journalists removed the video from their YouTube channel, but Russian journalist, Yulia Polukhina, published the material in Novaya Gazeta.
After later receiving concurrence, Hromadske published an abridged version of the video approximately three weeks later.
The HRMMU considered the response of the ATO headquarters to be disproportionate to the violation.
On February 24, the SBU deported Russian journalist, Mariya Stolyarova, and banned her from re-entering the country for five years.
Before the deportation the SBU conducted an investigation regarding an obscene statement Stolyarova made on air during a broadcast of material related to the “heavenly hundred” protesters who were killed during the Euromaidan demonstrations.
Law enforcement officers also questioned Stolyarova’s stay on territory controlled by Russian-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine and her alleged coordination of storylines with Russian-backed separatists.
According to the HRMMU, “persons living in the ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’ and ‘Luhansk People’s Republic’ know that expressing their opinion freely and publicly was not acceptable in armed group-controlled territory,” that “armed groups are directly influencing and shaping the content in local media,” and that they require favorable coverage as the cost of retaining registration to operate.
According to the HRMMU and media reports, on January 4, the “Ministry of State Security” of the “Donetsk People’s Republic” detained Kyiv-based blogger and activist, Volodymyr Fomichev, and charged him with unlawful possession of weapons.
Fomichev’s family insisted the conviction was baseless and the result of a forced confession.
On February 4, parliament passed a law criminalizing the illegal seizure of materials collected, processed, and prepared by Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 27 journalists or of technical devices they use in their professional activities.
The law also introduces a penalty of up to three years’ imprisonment for unlawfully denying journalists access to information, unlawfully banning them from covering particular topics, or for any other action impeding their professional activity.
According to the International Telecommunication Union, 49 percent of persons in the country used the internet in 2015.
Users of social media, particularly Facebook and VKontakte, sometimes had their access temporarily blocked for innocuous or political posts that other users mischaracterized as “hate speech” and flagged as terms of service violations.
In its yearly Freedom on the Net report, Freedom House assessed in November that internet freedom in the country deteriorated for the second year in a row, noting that, “Ukrainian authorities have become less tolerant of online expression perceived as critical of Ukraine’s position in the conflict, and the government has been especially active this year in sanctioning social media users for ‘separatist’ and “extremist” activities, with many users detained, fined and even imprisoned for such activities.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association Freedom of Assembly The constitution provides citizens with the right to freedom of assembly, and the government generally respected this right.
Most assemblies were peaceful and at times accompanied by a very large police presence to maintain order.
The HRMMU noted an overall improvement in the ability of the National Police to provide security for demonstrations.
Police arrested eight men, charged them with disobeying police, interrogated them without lawyers present, and did not bring them before the court within three hours, as required by the law.
The detainees spent the night sleeping on the floor of a small cell with only one mattress and a wooden bench.
After the court hearing ordering their release, they were brought back to a police station where the head of police in the Donetsk Oblast allegedly insulted and threatened them before their release.
The HRMMU also noted that the only demonstrations permitted in these areas were ones in support of local authorities, often apparently organized by the armed groups, with forced public participation.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 29 Freedom of Association The constitution and law provide for freedom of association, and the government generally respected this right.
Residents informed the HRMMU that they were being prosecuted by the “ministry of state security” for their pro-Ukrainian views or previous affiliation with Ukrainian NGOs.
The HRMMU also noted an increase in civil society organizations run by the armed groups, which appeared to have compulsory membership for certain persons, such as public sector employees. c.
The government cooperated with the Office of UNHCR and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection and assistance to internally displaced persons , refugees, returning refugees, asylum seekers, stateless persons, and other persons of concern.
International and domestic organizations reported the system Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 30 for protecting asylum seekers, stateless persons, and other persons of concern did not operate effectively.
The government and Russian-backed separatist forces strictly controlled the freedom of movement between governmentand Russianbacked separatist controlled territories in the Donbas region.
While five crossing points existed, only four were in operation for much of the year.
According to the HRMMU, between May and August, an average of 26,000 to 32,000 individuals crossed the line daily.
People formed long lines at all operating transit corridors and had to wait for up to 36 hours with no or limited access to water, medical aid, toilets, and shelter in case of shelling or extreme weather.
The HRMMU’s March report noted that two elderly persons died at government checkpoints due to lack of timely medical care; its September report noted three deaths for the same reason.
The HRMMU’s June report noted that, on April 27, four civilians were killed and eight injured at a crossing point near Olenivka in the “Donetsk People’s Republic,” when it was shelled while they waited in line overnight.
Movement across the line of contact was limited to four crossing points in Donetsk Oblast and one in Luhansk Oblast, which were frequently closed due to nearby fighting.
The crossing point at Stanytsia Luhanska traversed a temporary wooden structure that the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission believed was unsafe.
On August 16, more than 1,000 persons were observed at the same crossing point, and medical officials claimed 21 persons were treated for heatrelated illnesses.
In 2015 the SBU introduced a pass system involving an online application process to control movement into government-controlled territory.
Human rights groups were concerned that many persons in nongovernment-controlled territory did not have access to the internet to obtain such passes.
The order imposed significant hardships on persons crossing into government-controlled territory, in particular those who sought to receive pensions and government benefits, which ceased distribution in the territory controlled by Russian-backed separatists in 2014.
The HRMMU repeatedly voiced concern about reports of corruption by checkpoint personnel on both sides, including demands for bribes or goods in exchange for easing passage across the line of contact.
Russian-backed separatists continued to hinder freedom of movement in the eastern part of the country during the year.
In Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 31 April the crossing checkpoint in Stanytsia Luhanska was closed due to shelling by Russian-backed separatist forces and, as of December, it was open only for pedestrians.
Russian-backed separatists have also consistently prevented civilians from crossing at the Zolote checkpoint in Luhansk oblast.
The government and Russian occupation authorities subjected individuals crossing between Russian-occupied Crimea and the mainland to strict passport controls at the administrative boundary between the Kherson oblast and Crimea.
The three crossing points between Russian-occupied Crimea and mainland Ukraine were closed on several occasions in early August, creating long lines of individuals who were prevented from freely moving across the administrative boundary.
As of August 15, the movement of vehicles and persons fully resumed but slowed due to enhanced security measures.
Internally Displaced Persons According to the Ministry of Social Policy, as of November 15, there were more than 1. million registered internally displaced persons due to Russia’s aggression in eastern Ukraine and occupation of Crimea.
The largest number of IDPs resided in areas immediately surrounding the conflict zones, in government-controlled areas of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts, as well as in the Kharkiv, Dnipropetrovsk, and Zaporizhzhya Oblasts.
Many resided in areas close to the line of contact in hope that they would be able to return home.
The government granted social entitlements only to those individuals who had registered as IDPs.
According to the law, the government should provide IDPs with housing, but authorities had not taken effective steps to do so.
On February 16, the Ministry of Social Policy instructed its regional offices and local departments to suspend all social payments for IDPs, pending verification of their presence in government-controlled territory, ostensibly to combat fraudulent Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 32 payments.
According to the HRMMU, following this decision the SBU provided regional administrations with lists of individuals whose social entitlements should be revoked pending verification.
The HRMMU reviewed a list that the SBU submitted to the regional administration in Kharkiv and determined that it was developed from information in the SBU database on individuals who received permits to cross the contact line.
On June 8, the government adopted amendments to resolutions on IDPs to allow for automatic termination of benefits and prescribing two to six months for reinstatement, depending on the grounds for termination.
The HRMMU, the human rights ombudsperson, the Council of Europe, and other domestic and international human rights and humanitarian groups criticized these amendments.
According to the HRMMU, the government applied the IDP verification procedure extremely broadly.
The suspensions affected approximately 85 percent of IDPs residing in government-controlled areas and 97 percent of those residing in areas under the control of Russian-backed separatists, particularly the elderly and disabled whose limited mobility hindered their ability to verify whether they were included in the lists or prove their residency.
In one case the HRMMU interviewed a female IDP with disabilities in Kramatorsk, who was also the single parent of a 13-year-old daughter with disabilities.
She incidentally discovered that all of her other social payments had also been cut, including her disability pension.
According to the HRMMU, IDP integration remained impeded by the lack of a state strategy and the consequent absence of allocation of financial resources, leading to IDPs’ economic and social marginalization.
UN agencies reported that the influx of IDPs led to tensions arising from competition for resources.
Critics accused internally displaced men who moved to western areas of the country of evading military service, while competition rose for housing, employment, and educational opportunities in Kyiv and Lviv.
A shortage of employment opportunities and the generally weak economy particularly affected IDPs, forcing many to live in inadequate housing, such as collective centers and other temporary accommodation.
Other IDPs stayed Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 33 with host families, volunteers, and in private accommodation, although affordable private accommodation was often in poor condition.
UN agencies expressed concern about instances of eviction of IDPs from the collective centers.
On September 29, 22 elderly IDPs, including two disabled persons, were evicted from the Kuialnyk sanatorium in Odesa.
A representative from the Odesa regional administration stated that the management of the sanatorium had suspended utilities on September 26 due to nonpayment of bills.
While collective center accommodation was only intended as a temporary solution, many IDPs remained for extended periods.
There were reports of government officials expressing discriminatory views toward IDPs.
For example, on September 23, Minister of Internal Affairs Avakov publicly attributed an increase in the crime rate to an inflow of IDPs, provoking a public outcry.
Romani activists expressed concern that some Roma in eastern areas could not afford to flee conflict areas, while others had no choice but to leave their homes.
In September 2015 the Kyiv Administrative Court of Appeal overturned a National Bank decision that Crimean IDPs were nonresidents, which had restricted access to banking and financial services for those fleeing the Russian occupation.
The country is a transit and destination country for asylum seekers and refugees, principally from Afghanistan, Somalia, and Syria.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 34 In other instances government officials declined to accept initial asylum applications without a legal basis, leaving asylum seekers without documentation and vulnerable to frequent police stops, fines, detention, and exploitation.
International observers noted that the government did not provide resources for interpreters, which created opportunities for corruption and undermined the fairness of asylum application procedures.
Authorities provided language instruction for asylum seekers only in Kyiv, Kharkiv, and Odesa.
According to the State Migration Service, refugees and those seeking complementary protection could receive residence registration at homeless shelters for up to six months.
As of November 1, seven unaccompanied migrant children were registered, five of whom expressed a desire to apply for refugee status.
According to UNHCR, there were 35,179 persons in the country under its statelessness mandate as of mid-2015.
According to the State Migration Service, at the end of the year there were 5,343 stateless persons residing in the country.
On July 17, parliamentary by-elections were conducted in seven constituencies.
In 2014 citizens elected Petro Poroshenko president in an election considered free and fair by international and domestic observers.
Later that year the country held early parliamentary elections that observers also considered free and fair.
On July 17, citizens in seven constituencies voted in parliamentary by-elections.
According to the OSCE observer mission, the elections were organized and democratic but influenced by economic interests.
According to OPORA, a human rights NGO that monitored elections in the country, some candidates started campaigning prematurely, leading to unfair advantages for certain candidates and parties.
OPORA considered the elections to be free and fair with electoral irregularities that were not systemic.
IDPs were unable to vote in local elections unless they changed their registration to their new place of residence.
On February 25, President Poroshenko signed a bill that allows political parties to wait until after an election to select which members from a party list will take seats in the Verkhovna Rada.
The law was widely criticized by domestic and international election monitoring groups, as it shifts the power of selecting deputies from the electorate to the leadership of political parties.
There are no laws limiting the participation of women and members of minorities in the political process and women and minorities did so.
Corruption and Lack of Transparency in Government The law provides criminal penalties for corruption, although authorities did not effectively implement the law, and many officials engaged in corrupt practices with impunity.
While the number of reports of government corruption was low, corruption remained pervasive at all levels in the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government and in society.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 37 During the year multiple high-level officials who had been brought into the government to oversee anticorruption reform processes resigned due to efforts to impede their work.
Complaining of ingrained corruption, Minister of Economy Aivaras Abromavicius resigned in February and was followed by some members of his team.
Abromavicius stated in his resignation letter that corrupt officials had blocked systematic reform and were attempting to gain influence over state enterprises.
Authorities tried 31 corruption cases involving 70 persons, including judges, prosecutors, and state officers, but many were for minor violations.
In a major anticorruption case, the Verkhovna Rada stripped Member of Parliament Oleksandr Onyshchenko of immunity from prosecution in July under suspicion of corruption and embezzlement.
At year’s end he remained a fugitive outside the country, and the investigation continued.
Civil society criticized the Prosecutor General’s Office and the judicial system for failing to hold high-level officials to account for corruption.
One hundred twenty-eight persons were sentenced to prison; of these individuals 33 were serving sentences, while the rest had appeals pending.
As of July all three cases were undergoing appeals, and the defendants had yet to begin serving their sentences.
While members of the Verkhovna Rada are immune from prosecution, several members, such as Onyshchenko, were stripped of immunity for prosecution during the year.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 38 The NAPC is responsible for the development of national anticorruption policies, monitoring national compliance with anticorruption legislation, and verifying asset declarations of high officials.
The law designates NABU as the lead investigative agency for allegations of corruption by senior government officials, including the president, members of the Cabinet of Ministers, members of the Verkhovna Rada, and local governors.
NABU is responsible only for investigating corruption offenses committed after its creation in 2015.
There were reports that the Prosecutor General’s Office took steps during the year to hinder NABU’s ability to investigate high-level corruption.
On August 5, an investigative group from the Prosecutor General’s Office raided the NABU headquarters in Kyiv, alleging that NABU had illegally wiretapped its employees.
On August 12, Prosecutor General’s Office staff allegedly unlawfully detained and beat two NABU detectives who they asserted were engaged in wiretapping.
On September 20, three Prosecutor General’s Office employees were suspended pending the outcome of an internal investigation, which continued at year’s end.
According to the Justice Ministry, implementation of a 2014 law on “lustration” was 99 percent completed.
Some 700,000 civil servants and state officials were on the list for lustration.
The checks resulted in the dismissal of approximately 1,000 state officials.
According to the Parliamentary Anticorruption Committee, 80 percent of state officials from the Yanukovych era were discharged from their posts.
Law enforcement and judicial agencies, however, avoided full compliance with the law.
The judiciary lustrated only 40 judges, eight of whom contested the decision in court and were restored to their positions.
By law, the NACP is responsible for reviewing financial declarations and monitoring the income and expenditures of high-level officials.
On August 15, the government officially launched an asset e-declaration system.
By the conclusion Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 39 of the first phase on November 1, more than 120,000 officials had submitted edeclarations, indicating near total compliance.
The results were made publicly available, provoking public outcry about the lavish lifestyles of many public officials.
By law the NAPC reviews the declarations and refers suspected corruption cases to the NABU for further action.
Some observers questioned, however, whether the NAPC had the capacity to fulfill this function.
By law officials must respond to regular requests within five days and within 20 days to requests for large amounts of data.
Implementation of the law on public access to government information and training of officials on the regulations governing such access remained inadequate.
The government invited human rights groups to participate in monitoring activities, drafting legislation, and adopting administrative rules.
International and domestic human rights groups collaborated with the government to draft the National Human Rights Strategy and related action plan in 2015.
During the year civil society closely monitored implementation and expressed concern about government progress on the action plan.
Human rights groups described particular government resistance to implementing points in the plan that related to the rights of IDPs.
The HRMMU stated that, in the Ministry of Justice’s first progress report on the plan, some activities marked as completed were implemented only partially or not in substance.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 40 The Ministry of Justice, the Office of the Human Rights Ombudsman’s, and civil society groups such as the Ukrainian Helsinki Human Rights Union participated in open hearings in December to mark the one-year anniversary of the action plan.
Nongovernmental representatives reported slow progress and weak intragovernmental coordination, but both government representatives and human rights activists indicated progress in justice sector reform and the provision of social services.
Russian authorities and the separatists they backed routinely denied domestic and international human rights groups access to territories they controlled in Crimea and eastern Ukraine.
Valeriya Lutkovska served as parliamentary ombudsman for human rights during the year, and observers considered her office an effective promoter of human rights.
The office was a partner with leading domestic human rights groups and an advocate on behalf of Crimean Tatars, IDPs, Roma, persons with disabilities, LGBTI individuals, and prisoners.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 41 Sexual assault and rape continued to be significant but underreported problems.
According to the Kyiv-based international women’s rights center, La Strada, Russian aggression in the Donbas region led to a dramatic surge in violence against women across the country.
IDPs reported instances of rape and sexual abuse; many claimed to have fled because they feared sexual abuse.
According to the Ministry for Social Policy, police issued approximately 38,000 domestic violence warnings and protection orders during a six-month period.
Through September more than 24,000 individuals called the hotline for assistance, and 35 percent of the calls related to domestic or sexual violence.
According to La Strada, more than 49 percent of calls related to psychological violence.
During the year officials identified 19 centers for social and psychological help and nine centers for psychological and legal help for women who suffered from domestic violence.
NGOs operated additional centers for victims of domestic violence in several regions, but women’s rights groups noted that many nongovernment shelters closed due to lack of funding.
Each center could accommodate approximately 30 women and children, which was often inadequate.
The law provides that women enjoy the same rights as men, including under family, religious, personal status, labor, property, nationality, and inheritance laws, and are entitled to receive equal pay for equal work.
Registration of children born in Crimea or areas in the east controlled by Russianbacked separatists remained difficult.
Russian-backed separatist “authorities” routinely kept such paperwork if parents registered children in territories under their control, making it difficult for the child to obtain a Ukrainian birth certificate.
Additionally, authorities do not recognize documents issued by Russian-occupied Crimean or Russian-backed separatist entities and sometimes refused to issue birth certificates to children born in those areas.
As of September 30, the Ministry of Internal Affairs reported 4,817 crimes against children.
Parliament’s ombudsman for human rights noted the imperfection of mechanisms to protect children who survived violence or witnessed violence, in particular violence committed by their parents.
The Office of the Parliamentary Ombudsman for Human Rights includes a representative for children’s rights, nondiscrimination, and gender equality.
A major consequence of Russian aggression in the Donbas was its effect on children.
In January the law On Protection of Childhood was amended to include a provision supporting children affected by the armed conflict.
According to UNICEF the conflict has Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 44 affected 1. million children, including approximately 230,000 forced from their homes.
Children living in areas controlled by Russian-backed separatists did not receive nutritional and shelter assistance.
Human rights groups reported that children who experienced the conflict or fled from territory controlled by Russianbacked separatists suffered psychological trauma.
UNICEF reported that 200,000 children in the Donbas needed psychological rehabilitation, and approximately 580,000 urgently needed aid.
If it finds marriage to be in the child’s interest, a court may grant a child as young as 16 permission to marry.
Romani rights groups reported early marriages involving girls under the age of 18 were common in the Romani community.
The same offense committed against a child under the age of 14 is punishable by imprisonment for five to eight years.
The International Organization for Migration reported that children from socially disadvantaged families and those in state custody continued to be at high risk of trafficking and commercial sexual exploitation and the production of pornography.
Human rights groups believed this number was low, as children who fled without their parents cannot register as IDPs Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 45 unless another relative officially files for custody, which can be a lengthy process.
Approximately 90 percent of such children ended in the schools because of their parents’ poverty, their inability to raise children, or the child’s developmental disorders.
In recent years the government implemented policies to address the abandonment of children and their reintegration with their biological families.
Consequently, the number of children deprived of parental care decreased.
Human rights groups and media reported unsafe, inhuman, and sometimes life-threatening conditions in some institutions.
Children institutionalized in state-run orphanages were at times vulnerable to trafficking.
Observers noted the judicial system lacked the expertise to work effectively with minors, and the legal process for juveniles emphasized punishment over rehabilitation.
See the Department of State’s Annual Report on International Parental Child Abduction at travel.state.gov/content/childabduction/en/legal/compliance.html.
Before Russian aggression in eastern Ukraine, according to VAAD approximately 30,000 Jewish persons lived in the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 46 Donbas.
Jewish groups estimated between 10,000 and 15,000 Jewish residents lived in Crimea before Russia’s attempted annexation.
Institutional anti-Semitism was rare, and VAAD stated that attacks were isolated and carried out by individuals rather than organized groups.
VAAD claimed that negative attitudes towards Jews and Judaism continued to be low, although some individuals espoused anti-Semitic beliefs.
On December 21, however, unknown individuals vandalized the site with a pig’s head and blood.
Authorities opened an investigation into the incident and immediately condemned it.
In July authorities named a street in Kyiv after former Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists leader, Stepan Bandera.
At the same time, authorities also named a street in Kyiv in honor of Janusz Korczak, a Polish-Jewish writer who had died in Auschwitz.
According to the National Minority Rights Monitoring Group supported by the Euro-Asian Jewish Congress and VAAD, one case of suspected anti-Semitic violence was recorded during the year, compared to one case of antiSemitic violence in 2015, four such cases in 2014, and four in 2013.
The NMRMG identified 18 cases of anti-Semitic vandalism during the year, as compared to 22 in 2015 and 23 in 2014.
On January 13, arsonists damaged a Jewish cemetery in Kolomiya, following similar attacks in 2015.
On March 4, unknown persons set fire to a wreath left by the Israeli minister of justice at the Babyn Yar memorial.
In May, on Israel’s national memorial day for the Holocaust, an unknown group of persons burned an Israeli flag at the Babyn Yar memorial.
There were reportedly several anti-Semitic incidents targeting the memorial during the year.
On September 29, the government Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 47 held a commemoration ceremony marking the 75th anniversary of the Babyn Yar massacre, during which 33,771 Jews were killed in two days during the Nazi German occupation.
The law requires the government to provide access to public venues and opportunities for involvement in public, educational, cultural, and sporting activities for persons with disabilities.
There were reports of societal discrimination against persons with disabilities in places of public accommodation.
For example, February media reports described how a young man in Lviv, who used a wheelchair, had been repeatedly denied membership in a fitness club since 2014.
The club’s management gave several reasons for its refusal, including that his wheelchair could spread disease in the facility and that the man’s disability could scare off other patrons.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 48 NGOs noted the government was unable to provide outpatient care to persons with disabilities, thus putting the main burden on their families and forcing them to place children and sometimes adults with disabilities in state institutions.
The state cared for more than 70,000 of the country’s estimated 150,000 children with disabilities, but lacked the legal framework and funds to deinstitutionalize them.
Persons with disabilities in areas controlled by Russian-backed separatists in the east of the country suffered from a lack of appropriate care.
Government monitors observed incidents of involuntary seclusion and application of physical restraints to persons with mental disabilities at psychiatric and neuropsychiatric institutions of the Ministry of Social Policy.
On September 7, parliament adopted legislation to harmonize the country’s law with international standards with respect to the rights of persons with disabilities.
NGOs dedicated to combating racism and hate Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 49 crimes observed that overall xenophobic incidents declined slightly during the year.
The law criminalizes deliberate actions to incite hatred or discrimination based on nationality, race, or religion, including insulting the national honor or dignity of citizens in connection with their religious and political beliefs, race, or skin color.
Authorities did not prosecute any of the criminal proceedings under the laws on racial, national, or religious offenses.
According to the Prosecutor General’s Office, authorities registered 58 criminal investigations involving racial, national, or religious hatred during the first nine months of the year.
The International Organization for Migration , reported as of October 31, 10 documented cases of violence against racial or ethnic minorities that involved 17 victims.
Victims of the attacks were from Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ghana, Jordan, Nigeria, and Syria, as well as citizens of Tajik, Jewish, and Muslim descent.
Most of the incidents occurred in Dnipropetrovsk, Kyiv, Kharkiv, and Odesa.
There were cases of vandalism, including arson, targeting Jewish and Romani property in the Dnipropetrovsk, Cherkasy, and Zakarpattya Oblasts and in Kyiv, Lviv, Odesa, and Mykolaev.
On January 4, the Pechersk District Court in Kyiv sentenced a participant in a racist attack at a Dynamo Kyiv football match to two years in prison.
Romani rights groups estimated the Romani population at between 200,000 and 400,000.
Romani Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 50 settlements were mainly located in the Zakarpattya, Poltava, Cherkasy, Volyn, Dnipropetrovsk, and Odesa Oblasts.
There were reports of societal violence against Roma during the year, including cases in which police declined to intervene to stop the violence.
On August 27, police failed to stop a mob from attacking a Romani settlement near Loshchynivka, Odesa Oblast, and watched while the mob vandalized Romani homes and set at least one on fire.
The mob formed in reaction to the news that police arrested a man of Romani heritage in connection with the killing and rape of a local nineyear-old girl.
In subsequent days local authorities announced a plan to evict Roma from their homes forcibly but cancelled the plans after the majority of recently arrived Roma fled of their own accord.
Odesa’s regional governor, Mikhail Saakashvili, appeared to condone the evictions, stating, “I fully share the outrage of the residents of Loshchynivka…there is massive drug-dealing in which the antisocial elements that live there are engaged.
There were several reports during the year that police arbitrarily detained Romani individuals, at times beating or mistreating them.
While the government in 2013 adopted a seven-year action plan to implement a strategy for protecting and integrating Roma into society, the European Roma Rights Center reported that it had not led to significant improvements for Roma.
According to human rights groups, the government did not allocate funds for the plan’s implementation.
According to parliament’s ombudsman for human rights, 24 percent of Roma have never had any schooling, and only 1 percent of the Romani population had a university degree.
According to the Romani women’s foundation, Chiricli, local authorities erected a number of barriers to prevent issuing passports to Roma.
Authorities hampered Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 51 access to education for persons who lacked documents and segregated Romani children into special schools or lower-quality classrooms.
During the year many Roma fled settlements in areas controlled by Russian-backed separatists and moved elsewhere in the country.
According to Chiricli approximately 10,000 Roma were among the most vulnerable members of the country’s IDP community.
Acts of Violence, Discrimination, and Other Abuses Based on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity The labor code prohibits workplace discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity.
LGBTI groups, along with international and domestic human rights organizations, criticized the lack of such language in the National Human Rights Strategy, although the action plan for implementation included provisions for incorporating LGBTI rights.
For example, on February 28, hooligans assaulted two persons in Odesa after calling them a derogatory slur.
While homophobic threats from right-wing nationalist groups continued, their presence at festivals and marches was often limited to several dozen counterprotesters.
Although leading politicians and ministers condemned attacks on LGBTI gatherings and individuals, local officials sometimes voiced opposition to LGBTI rights and failed to protect LGBTI persons.
Overall, LGBTI groups enjoyed greater freedom to assemble than in past years.
In most cases security forces and local officials deployed adequate security forces to prevent violence and protect conferences and marches.
For example, security forces provided protection to an equality march in Kyiv on June 6 and a pride march in Odesa on August 11.
In the case of the equality march, authorities deployed more than 6,000 security personnel, protecting more than 2,000 marchers including members of parliament.
Police also adequately protected the equality festivals in Kyiv in May, in Dnipro in July, and in Zaporizhzhya in September.
During an equality festival in Kyiv, right-wing groups telephoned a bomb threat.
Instead of cancelling the event, security forces cleared the building, allowing the event to continue.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 52 One notable exception was the Lviv equality festival on March 19.
Hotels and conference spaces refused to honor reservations made by the festival, allegedly under pressure from city officials, who then banned all public gatherings.
After the festival relocated to another hotel, security officials allowed right-wing radicals to threaten participants.
After a bomb threat cancelled the conference, security forces evacuated participants on buses and took no action to prevent attacks from radicals, who threw rocks and firecrackers.
Security forces failed to take action against right-wing groups that “went on safari,” seeking persons suspected of being LGBTI for attack throughout the next day.
According to civil society groups, assailants injured five persons after the festival.
Nash Mir stated that while the number of incidents increased, there were no reports of murder or grievous harm done to LGBTI persons in the first half of the year.
Crimes and discrimination against LGBTI persons remained underreported, however; and law enforcement authorities only opened 17 cases related to such acts.
Nash Mir stated that extortion remained a problem and anti-LGBTI groups employed social media to entrap LGBTI persons.
Transgender persons continued to face discrimination and stereotyping in media.
Medical policies towards transgendered persons improved somewhat, as, individuals no longer had to undergo sex reassignment surgery to change their names and genders officially and could do so with counseling and hormone therapy.
This procedure was approved by the Ministry of Health and registered with the Ministry of Justice during the year.
Regulations still prevent reassignment for married individuals and those with minor children.
Transgender persons claimed to have difficulty obtaining official documents reflecting their gender.
According to Nash Mir, the situation of LGBTI persons in Russian-occupied Crimea and parts of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts under the control of Russianbacked separatists was very poor.
According to a report published by the Center for Civil Liberties and Memorial’s Antidiscrimination Center in Saint Petersburg, violence and intimidation against LGBTI persons in territories controlled by Russianbacked separatists in Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts was widespread and encouraged by Russian and Russian-backed authorities.
According to the report, the Occupy Pedophilia movement was active and tolerated by local and Russian Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 53 authorities.
The group used social media to identify LGBTI persons and then abused them physically and verbally.
According to the report, a foreign victim was beaten and forced to perform degrading acts.
The report also claimed that Russianbacked separatists forced suspected LGBTI persons to dig trenches for military fortifications if ransoms were not paid.
There was overall improvement during the year in social attitudes towards homosexuality and a decline in homophobic rhetoric from churches and leading political figures, and increasing numbers of Verkhovna Rada members voiced support for LGBTI rights.
Seven Verkhovna Rada members participated in the June equality march in Kyiv.
Authorities prevented many children infected with HIV/AIDS from attending kindergartens or schools.
The most at-risk adolescents faced higher risk of contracting HIV/AIDs as well as additional barriers to accessing information and services for its prevention and treatment.
The law also provides for the right of most workers to form and join independent unions, to bargain collectively, and to conduct legal strikes.
Legal recourse is available for reinstatement, back wages, and punitive damages, although observers described court enforcement as arbitrary and unpredictable, with damages too low to create incentives for compliance on the part of employers.
Unions reported significant bureaucratic hurdles in the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 54 registration process, entailing the payment of multiple fees and requiring visits to as many as 10 different offices.
Efforts to reform legal entity registration complicated registration specifically for trade unions.
The legal procedure to initiate a strike was overly complex and effectively prohibited strike action in practice, contributing to increasing numbers of informal industrial actions.
By law industrial disputes should follow procedures of consideration, conciliation, and labor arbitration that parties can draw out for months.
Only after the exhaustion of this process are workers able to vote to strike, which courts may still block.
The right to strike is also restricted by the requirement that a large percentage of the workforce (two-thirds of general workers’ meeting delegates or 50 percent of workers in an enterprise) must vote in favor of a strike before it may be called.
Poorly defined legal grounds for striking allowed the government the possibility to deny the right to strike due to national security or to protect the health or “rights and liberties” of citizens.
Additionally, the law prohibits strikes by overly broad categories of workers, including personnel in the Prosecutor General’s Office, the judiciary, the armed forces, the security services, law enforcement agencies, the transportation sector, and the public service sector.
In 2014 the European Court of Human Rights adjudicated restrictions in the transportation sector, declaring restrictions on strikes in the sector illegal.
The decision required the government to amend legislation in conformity with the ruling, but, as of December, it had not done so.
Transportation-sector workers could also refer to the Law on Transport, which regulates the strikes in the transport sector and allows strikes in case of nonfulfillment of administrative duties by employer.
Legal hurdles also made it difficult for independent unions, those not affiliated with the Federation of Trade Unions of Ukraine , to take part in tripartite negotiations, participate in social insurance programs, or represent labor at the national and international levels.
These legal hurdles, set in place by outdated laws and an obsolete labor code, further entrenched the FPU and hindered the ability of smaller independent unions to act effectively when representing their members.
Throughout the year the labor inspection service continued to be functionally suspended due to an incomplete reorganization.
Observers disputed the independence of unions from government or employer control.
Authorities further denied unions not affiliated with the FPU a share of disputed trade union assets inherited by the FPU from Soviet-era unions, a dispute dating back more than a decade.
There were cases where workers who renounced membership in an FPU-affiliated union and joined an independent union faced loss of pay, undesirable work assignments, and dismissal.
Several pieces of legislation passed during the year weakened protection of freedom of association, including the aforementioned law complicating trade union registration and a law complicating the tax status of trade unions.
Independent union representatives continued to be subjected to violence and intimidation.
In January the deputy head of the Kryvyi Rih, Dnipropetrovsk chapter of the Independent Trade Union of Miners of Ukraine , Elena Maslova, was beaten on her way home from work.
NPGU president, Mykhaylo Volinets, claimed the attack was in response to Maslova’s union activities.
The union reported that authorities have not identified any perpetrators and did not investigate the attack.
In February the president of the Novovolinsk chapter of the NPGU, Anatoliy Muhomedzhanov, was beaten in the office of the mine’s director.
The trade union alleged that multiple witnesses saw who beat him, but police did not pursue the incident.
Arrears and corruption issues exacerbated industrial relations and led to numerous protests.
In August the NPGU leader in Selidovo and Novogrodifka, Victor Trifonov, set himself on fire during a sit-in in the Kyiv building of the Ministry of Energy and Coal of Ukraine.
In response government officials accused trade union members of siding with separatists in the east of the country.
In September the president of the Free Health-care Workers Union, Oleg Panasenko, reported that unknown persons destroyed a union protest camp at the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 56 entrance of the Ministry of Health, while police were present and failed to intervene. b.
Penalties for violations ranged from three to 15 years imprisonment and were sufficiently stringent to deter violations, but resources, inspections, and remediation were inadequate to provide for enforcement.
Approximately 93 percent of the victims had been subjected to labor exploitation.
There were reports of trafficking of women, men, and children for labor.
Traffickers subjected some foreign nationals to forced labor in construction, agriculture, manufacturing, domestic work, the lumber industry, nursing, and street begging.
Traffickers subjected some children to forced labor The government made minor efforts to prevent or eliminate forced labor, citing a lack of budgetary resources.
Children who are 15 years of age may perform undefined “light work” with a parent’s consent, leaving the issue open to interpretation by employers and opening the system to abuse.
The law allows children to do some forms of “nonhazardous” work beginning at 14 as part of an apprenticeship in the context of vocational training.
The government did not effectively enforce the law due to a lack of resources within the Ministry of Social Policy and a continued moratorium on surprise labor inspections for much of the year.
Penalties for violations ranged from small fines for illegitimate employment or other labor law violations to prison sentences for sexual exploitation of a child or involvement of a child in illicit activities or Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 57 pornography; they were insufficient to deter violations.
The most frequent violations of child labor laws related to work in hazardous conditions, long workdays, failure to maintain work records, and delayed salary payments.
As of September 20, the territorial bodies of the State Service on Labor had conducted 2,547 inspections in which they examined compliance with child labor laws.
The businesses inspected included 17 agricultural enterprises, 24 trade companies, 35 service providers, and 36 companies in other sectors.
Discrimination with Respect to Employment and Occupation The labor code prohibits discrimination in the workplace based on race, color, political, religious and other beliefs, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, ethnic, social, and foreign origin, age, health, disability, HIV/AIDS condition, family and property status, or linguistic or other grounds.
Penalties include a fine of up to 50 tax-free minimum incomes, correctional labor for a term of up to two years or restraint of liberty for a term up to five years, with or without the deprivation of the right to occupy certain positions or engage in certain activities for a term up to three years.
Such actions accompanied by violence, are punishable by correctional labor for a term of up to two years, imprisonment for a term of up to five years, or imprisonment for a term of two to five years, if such Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 58 actions were committed by an organized group of persons or if they caused death or other grave consequences.
According to the Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office, men earned on average 29. percent more than women.
Domestic and international observers noted that women held few elected or appointed offices at the national and regional levels.
Acceptable Conditions of Work The monthly minimum wage was 1,378 hryvnias from January 1 through April 30; it rose to 1,450 hryvnias on May 1 and to 1,600 hryvnias on December 1.
As of January 1, 2017, the minimum wage for private-sector workers is to increase to 3,200 hryvnias according to the 2017 draft budget.
The hourly minimum wage was 8.29 hryvnias from January through April and rose to 8.69 hryvnias on May 1 and to 9.29 hryvnias $.034) on December 1.
Some workers in the informal sector received wages below the established minimum.
The poverty income level rose during the year from 1,330 hryvnias per month to 1,399 hryvnias during the year.
The labor law provides for a maximum 40-hour workweek, with a minimum 42hour period of rest per week and at least 24 days of paid vacation per year.
A lack of legal remedies, bureaucratic wrangling, and corruption in public and private enterprises, often blocked efforts to recover overdue wages, leading to significant wage theft.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 59 Total wage arrears in the country rose during the year to 1. billion hryvnias ($70 million) as of September 1.
More than half of the debt was in the Luhansk (23.2 percent), Donetsk, , and Kharkiv regions.
While the law and associated regulations contain occupational safety and health standards, employers frequently ignored them due to the lack of enforcement mechanisms and the government’s failure to hold employers accountable for unsafe conditions.
According to one NGO, employers in the metal and mining industries often violated the rule and retaliated against workers by pressuring them to quit.
The government did not effectively enforce minimum wage, hours of work, and occupational safety and health standards in all sectors, including the informal economy.
It is impossible to determine whether these penalties were enough to deter violations as with little to no inspection regime, coupled with a largely nonfunctioning reporting mechanism, it was difficult for the government to detect violations.
The government has had a moratorium in place on surprise inspections since 2014, with the goal of cutting the number of required inspections and certifications, deregulating the economy, and preventing corruption.
The moratorium constrained the government’s ability to enforce labor laws effectively.
During this period authorities required the State Labor Service and its predecessor, the State Labor Inspectorate, to pursue a lengthy interagency process to obtain permission from the Cabinet of Ministers to conduct an inspection.
Labor inspections could also occur at a company’s request or upon the formal request of the investigator in the framework of criminal proceedings against a company.
Wage arrears, nonpayment of overtime, operational safety problems, and health complaints were common in the mining industry.
Also through September there were 3,168 occupational injuries for all employment types , which was 0. percent above the same period in 2015.
Workers faced unsafe situations in areas outside government control in the Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts.
Despite Russian aggression close to industrial areas in the Donbas region, enterprises involved in mining, energy, media, retail, clay production, and transportation continued to operate through December.
Fighting resulted in physical damage to mines and plants through loss of power, destroyed transformers, physical damage from shelling, and reportedly intentional flooding of mines by combined Russian-separatist forces.
Russian law has de facto applied in Ukraine’s Crimea since the Russian occupation and purported “annexation” of the peninsula.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 61 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY A local authority installed by the Russian government and led by Sergey Aksyonov as “prime minister” of the “state council of the republic of Crimea” administered occupied Crimea.
On September 18, Russia’s nationwide parliamentary elections included seats allocated for occupied Crimea, a move widely condemned by the international community.
Russian security services continued to consolidate control over Crimea and restrict human rights.
Occupation authorities imposed and disproportionately applied repressive Russian Federation laws on the Ukrainian territory of Crimea.
The most significant human rights problems in Crimea during the year related directly to the Russian occupation.
Russian security services engaged in an extensive campaign of intimidation to suppress dissent and opposition to the occupation that employed kidnappings, disappearances, physical abuse, political prosecution, repeated interviews, and interrogations by security forces.
Occupation authorities deprived members of certain groups, particularly ethnic Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars, of fundamental civil liberties, including the freedom to express their nationality and ethnicity, subjecting them to systematic discrimination.
On May 12, Russian authorities banned the Crimean Tatar Mejlis, a democratically elected body representing the Crimean Tatar people, claiming it was an extremist organization, and prohibited all meetings, gatherings, or financial activities of the group.
Continuing their policy of imposing Russian citizenship on all residents of Crimea, occupation authorities subjected persons who refused Russian citizenship to discrimination in accessing education, health care, and employment.
They also interfered with freedom of expression and assembly, criminalizing the display of cultural and national symbols, preventing groups of Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 62 private individuals from celebrating their national and cultural heritage, and restricting access to education in Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar languages.
Russian authorities engaged in a widespread campaign to suppress free speech and media in Crimea.
Occupation authorities questioned, detained, and charged with extremism the few remaining independent journalists who worked independently, often merely for expressing their belief that Crimea remained part of Ukraine.
Russian-installed authorities took few steps to investigate or prosecute officials or individuals who committed human rights abuses, creating an atmosphere of impunity and lawlessness.
Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and other Unlawful or Politically Motivated Killings Russian occupation authorities did not adequately investigate cases of abductions and killings of Crimean residents from 2014 and 2015.
Disappearance Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 63 According to the Ukrainian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Crimean Tatar Mejlis, as of October 1, 28 persons had disappeared since the occupation of Crimea, including 12 later found dead.
Russian occupation authorities did not adequately investigate the deaths and disappearances.
Human rights groups reported that police often refused to register reports of disappearances and intimidated and threatened with detention those who tried to report a disappearance.
Ukrainian government and human rights groups believed Russian security forces kidnapped the individuals for opposing Russia’s occupation to instill fear in the population and prevent dissent.
On May 24, a group of uniformed men kidnapped Ervin Ibragimov, a member of the Bakhchisaray Mejlis and of the Coordinating Council of the World Congress of Crimean Tatars, after stopping his car on a road outside Bakhchisaray.
Footage from a closed-circuit television camera showed the men forcing Ibragimov into a car and departing.
According to the Crimea Human Rights Group, the men wore uniforms of the Ministry of Internal Affairs’ traffic police.
A week before he disappeared, Ibragimov told friends that he had noticed a car waiting outside his house that later followed him during the day.
Ibragimov had planned to travel to the town of Sudak on May 25 to attend the court hearing of a group of Crimean Tatars charged for holding an “unauthorized” gathering on May 18 to mark Crimean Tatar Deportation Remembrance Day.
On June 1, Ibragimov’s employment record book and passport were found near a bar in Bakhchisaray.
While occupation authorities opened an investigation into the case, according to the Crimea Human Rights Group, they specifically excluded the possibility of a political motivation for the disappearance or of state involvement. c.
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment There were widespread reports that Russian authorities in Crimea abused residents who opposed the occupation.
For example, on June 11, Ukrainian blogger and activist, Yuri Ilchenko, escaped from house arrest in Sevastopol and fled across the administrative boundary to government-controlled Ukraine.
Ilchenko had been awaiting trial on extremism charges from February 2015 for his online writings expressing his opposition to the occupation of Crimea.
Ilchenko and his parents Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 64 claimed to be the first individuals in Sevastopol formally to decline taking Russian citizenship.
In August he gave several accounts to the press describing his mistreatment during detention in a pretrial facility in Simferopol that lasted from February 2015 through June 2.
Ilchenko claimed that security officials had repeatedly beaten him and collaborated with other inmates to continue beatings and threats while he was in detention, to coerce him explicitly into taking Russian citizenship, and to punish him for speaking Ukrainian.
He claimed they forced him to remain awake for days and beat him when he fell asleep in retaliation for refusing to wear a “St.
Ilchenko claimed occupation authorities denied him clothing, bedding, and medical care.
Human rights monitors reported that occupation authorities also threatened individuals with violence or imprisonment if they did not testify in court against individuals that authorities believed were opposed to the occupation.
Prison and detention center conditions reportedly remained harsh and overcrowded.
In June the director of the Russian Federal Prison System stated that Crimea lacked sufficient prison facilities and that there were twice as many inmates as there were cells necessary to house them.
According to a 2015 report on Crimea by the OSCE’s Office of Democratic Institutions and Human Rights and the OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities, health care in prisons had deteriorated since the occupation began.
Yuri Ilchenko reported that prisoners in the Simferopol pretrial detention facility lacked proper food, sanitation, and health care.
On March 1, the Crimea Human Rights Group reported that a group of four Crimean Tatars detained in February on politically motivated “terrorism” charges were living in cells in a Simferopol pretrial facility that were infested with fleas and bedbugs, were forced to sleep in shifts on a single filthy bed, and given food that contained cockroaches.
According to the 2015 OSCE/ODIHR report, persons incarcerated during the Russian occupation did not have the opportunity to retain Ukrainian citizenship.
Russian authorities compelled all individuals who were in prison or pretrial facilities when the occupation began to accept Russian citizenship.
As of August the Human Rights Ombudsman’s Offices of Ukraine and Russia were working on a solution that would allow some prisoners to return to Ukraine.
Occupation authorities permitted “human rights ombudsman,” Ludmila Lubina, to visit prisoners, but human rights activists regarded Lubina not as an independent actor but as representing the interests of the occupation authorities. d.
Arbitrary Arrest or Detention Occupation authorities arbitrarily detained protesters, activists, and journalists for opposing the Russian occupation.
Role of the Police and Security Apparatus Russian government agencies, including the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the FSB, the Federal Investigative Committee, and the Office of the Prosecutor General applied and enforced Russian law in Crimea.
In addition to abuses committed by Russian forces, “self-defense forces,” largely consisting of former Ukrainian Ministry of Interior officers allegedly linked to local organized crime, reportedly continued to operate and commit abuses.
These forces often acted with impunity in intimidating perceived occupation opponents and were involved in extrajudicial detentions and arbitrary confiscation of property.
While the “law” places the “self-defense forces” under the authority of the “national police,” their members continued to commit abuses while receiving state funding for their activities as well as other rewards, such as beachfront property and service medals.
For example, on December 8, members of “selfdefense” forces allegedly beat two residents of the village of Shchelkino.
Police arriving at the scene declined to arrest members of the self-defense forces.
There were reports that Russian occupation authorities made arbitrary arrests, in particular targeting Crimean Tatars.
On May 12, police arrested Ilmi Umerov, a member of the Crimean Tatar Mejlis, accusing him of “undermining the territorial integrity of the Russian Federation” for stating that Crimea remains part of Ukraine.
Umerov, who suffered from health problems, has since been taken from court hearings in poor health.
On August 18, Umerov was forcibly subjected to psychiatric hospitalization, ostensibly for an examination, exacerbating his health problems.
On September 7, occupation authorities released him from the hospital following international publicity over the case.
As of October 25, occupation authorities had arrested 19 Crimean residents, mostly Crimean Tatars, accusing them of belonging to Hizb-ut-Tahrir, a pan-Islamic organization prohibited in Russia but not Ukraine.
Human rights groups believed occupation authorities intended to intimidate Crimean Tatars, discredit the Mejlis leadership, and instill fear in the local population to prevent dissent through the arrests.
Russian authorities continued to detain Akhtem Chiygoz, the deputy leader of the Crimean Tatar Mejlis.
Russian authorities arrested Chiygoz in January 2015 and charged him with “inciting a mass riot” during protests he organized at the Crimean parliament in 2014 that were disrupted by pro-Russian activists, resulting in clashes between the groups.
Subsequently, occupation authorities prosecuted individuals alleged to have participated in the protest, although Russia did not exercise control over Crimea at the time.
Video footage shows Chiygoz and other Crimean Tatar leaders working to defuse tensions in the hopes of avoiding clashes with counterprotesters.
Occupation authorities refused to investigate acts of violence committed by pro-Russian “protesters,” who were likely working for Russian security services according to independent observers.
On December 12, authorities extended Chiygoz’s detention until April 2017.
Throughout the year Russian authorities conducted mass arrests designed to humiliate and intimidate Crimean Tatars.
On April 1, Russian security forces Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 67 detained 35 men, mostly Crimean Tatars, in Pionierske, took them to a “center to combat extremism,” and collected DNA samples from them.
Human rights groups claimed that Russian security forces attempted to recruit some as police informants.
On May 7, Russian security forces detained another 35 Muslims, many of whom were Crimean Tatars, at a market in Simferopol. e.
They also transferred Crimean cases to Russia’s legal system and changed the venue of prosecution for some detainees.
Human rights groups identified several dozen Crimean residents as political prisoners held in either Crimea or Russia.
Oleg Sentsov, Oleksander Kolchenko, Oleksiy Chirniy, Oleksander Kostenko, Ilmi Umerov, Akhtem Chiygoz, Ali Asanov, Mustafa Dehermedzhy, Mykola Semena, Andrii Kolomiets, Ruslan Zaytullaev, Rustam Vaytov, Nuri Primov, Ferat Sayfullaev, Enver Bekirov, Vadim Siruk, Muslim Aliev, Emir-Ussein Kuku, Refat Alimov, Arcen Dzhepparov, Enver Mamutov, Remzi Memetov, Zevri Abseitov, Rustem Abultarov, and others.
According to Mejlis member Gayana Yuksel, as of October 26, occupation authorities have deprived 67 Crimean Tatar children of a parent because of politically motivated imprisonment since the start of the occupation. f.
On February 11 and 12, Russian occupation authorities raided Crimean Tatar villages in the Yalta and Bakhchisaray regions.
According to the Crimea Human Rights Group, men with guns and in balaclavas burst into homes and in some cases broke through doors or windows, despite encountering no resistance from the residents.
Between April 16 and 20, authorities conducted several raids on Crimean Tatar homes in the Alyushta region.
According to press reports, police entered Crimean Tatar homes and demanded to know how many persons lived in the house, where they went shopping, where their children studied, and who sold drugs in the village.
According to Mejlis members, Russian authorities had invited hundreds of Crimean Tatars to “interviews” where authorities played back the interviewees’ telephone conversations and read their email aloud.
Media reported that in July the FSB interviewed a doctor in a Feodosia hospital after a colleague had denounced him for privately expressing proUkrainian views.
The doctor stated that posters in the hospital hallways advertised an FSB hotline.
The eavesdropping and visits by security personnel create an environment in which persons are afraid to voice any opinion contrary to the occupation authorities, even in private.
According to press reports, on January 22, the Russian FSB sent a notice to all post offices in Crimea containing a list of individuals deemed “extremist,” but which was in fact a list of individuals known to oppose the occupation, with instructions to report to the FSB any correspondence sent or received by these individuals.
On February 2, Russian migration and security officials questioned Erol Abdulzhelilov, grandson of Crimean Tatar leader Mustafa Jemilev, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 69 demanding his passport and summoning him to a police station.
On February 18, Russian authorities summoned Yevgeny Kostenko, the brother of Oleksander Kostenko, imprisoned on political grounds, and threatened him with a forced psychiatric examination when he refused to answer questions.
On September 26, occupation authorities pressured the young children of imprisoned Crimean Tatar activist, Emir-Ussein Kuku, to make statements about Kuku that could be used to strip him of his parental rights.
Following the sabotage of electrical lines from government-controlled territory to occupied Crimea, Russian officials cut power and natural gas to the homes of Crimean Tatar Mejlis members in retaliation.
Freedom of Speech and Press Occupation authorities significantly restricted freedom of speech and press, and subjected dissenting voices to harassment and prosecution.
They refused to register independent print and broadcast media outlets, forcing them to cease operations.
Human rights groups reported that the FSB engaged in widespread surveillance of social media, telephones, and electronic communication and routinely summoned individuals for “discussions” for voicing or posting opposition to the Russian occupation.
For example, on August 12, occupation authorities in Yalta charged Larysa Kitaiska with extremism because of a social media posting that they believed to be anti-Russian.
Kitaiska had left Crimea for mainland Ukraine after the occupation began, but had temporarily returned to resolve a property matter when she was charged.
Kitaiska left Crimea shortly after she was charged; she maintained that occupation authorities brought the case in retaliation for her pro-Ukrainian views and participation in the 2013-14 Euromaidan movement.
On October 5, armed security forces raided the home of Suleyman Kadyrov, a member of the Feodosia Mejlis, because of a March Facebook posting in which Kadyrov stated that Crimea remains a part of Ukraine.
Occupation authorities refused to register most independent media outlets, forcing them to close in 2015.
On March 25, Krymska Svitlytsya, the only Ukrainian-language newspaper remaining in Crimea, ceased publication.
On January 15, Russian occupation forces detained blogger and journalist Zair Akadyrov as he covered the trial of the “February 26” group of political prisoners and took him to a police precinct for questioning.
On December 7, the “prosecutor general” of Crimea charged Mykola Semena with “undermining Russian territorial integrity via mass media,” a criminal offense punishable up to five years in prison.
Occupation authorities detained Semena twice in 2015, and human rights groups believed that Russian security forces hacked into his computer to prove he had written articles critical of the occupation.
Authorities placed Semena, who was in poor health, under house arrest in April, under the condition that he not leave Crimea.
On September 29, a judge denied Semena’s request to seek medical treatment in government-controlled Ukraine.
On June 14, Russian occupation authorities arrested Alexi Sapov, editor of Argumenty Nedeli-Krym.
Sapov was one of the last reporters to cover the trials of Crimean Tatars.
Sapov was previously a journalist in Vladimir, Russia, where his reporting led to accusations that he had blackmailed a member of the Russian parliament.
There were numerous cases of Russian security forces or police harassing independent media and detaining journalists in connection with their professional activities.
On May 11, Russian authorities detained Igor Burdyga, a Ukrainian journalist covering the anniversary of the deportation of Crimean Tatars.
According to Burdyga authorities detained him for his journalistic work, accused him of being a member of the Ukrainian nationalist group Right Sector, and forced him to testify Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 71 that he had been involved in the demolition of electrical power lines in Ukraine that supplied Crimea.
After seven hours of detention, authorities released Burdyga and he left Crimea.
Following Russia’s occupation of Crimea, journalists overwhelmingly resorted to self-censorship to continue reporting and broadcasting.
Russian occupation authorities banned most Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar-language broadcasts, replacing the content with Russian programming.
Human rights groups reported that Russian authorities forbade songs by Ukrainian singers, such as Ruslana and Jamala, from playing on Crimean radio stations.
According to media accounts, occupation authorities interrogated residents of Crimea for posting pro-Ukrainian opinions on Facebook or in blogs.
On May 27, journalist Lilia Bujurova received a warning from security forces about postings she made on social media that Crimea was part of Ukraine.
On November 11, the Yevpatoria city court sentenced Serhiy Vasylchenko, a local anarchist, to 10 days in jail for “extremism” after he made calls on social media to boycott the Russian Duma elections in Crimea.
Throughout the year, Russian authorities blocked internet sites they considered “extremist,” but that in fact provided mainstream reporting about the situation in Crimea.
For example, in February they blocked the sites of Ukrainska Pravda, censor.net, and Apostrophe.
Academic Freedom and Cultural Events Russian authorities in Crimea engaged in a widespread campaign to suppress Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian languages.
While Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian are Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 72 official languages in occupied Crimea, authorities continued to reduce instruction in schools and offered the languages only as an optional language at the end of the school day.
The Mejlis reported that authorities continued to pressure Crimean Tatars to use the Cyrillic, as opposed to the Latin, alphabet.
According to human rights monitors, authorities interviewed students about their opinions on Ukrainian sovereignty over Crimea.
Authorities singled out Crimean Tatar boys for questioning, and witnesses reported that FSB officers stated they would conduct similar investigations in the future. b.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association Freedom of Assembly Organizations representing minority communities reported gross and widespread harassment and intimidation by occupation authorities to suppress their ability to assemble peacefully.
On March 1, authorities in Simferopol refused to allow the commemoration of the birthdate of Taras Shevchenko, the national poet of Ukraine.
On March 9, Simferopol authorities issued a blanket prohibition on public gatherings not organized by the government from March 7 to March 22.
Occupation authorities prohibited gatherings and meetings to commemorate the 72nd anniversary of the 1944 Soviet mass deportation of Crimean Tatars on May 18.
On May 17, Ilmi Umerov received a preemptive warning from police not to organize any type of gathering.
In the days leading up to the anniversary, schoolteachers forbade students, particularly Crimean Tatar students, to skip Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 73 school to participate in commemorative events.
The Mejlis reported that Crimean Tatar communities did not seek permission for gatherings as they assumed that occupation authorities would forbid them.
Throughout Crimea peaceful assemblies took place, but authorities arrested Crimean Tatars displaying flags and other symbols, including at least one person in Bakhchysarai, four in the Kirovsky District, and four in Sudak.
On August 20, a group named The Deceived of Crimea gathered in Simferopol to protest rampant corruption in Crimea following Russia’s occupation in 2014.
Despite having obtained permission from the local government, authorities prohibited protesters from assembling for a demonstration planned to coincide with a visit by President Putin of Russia.
There were reports of occupation authorities using coercive methods to provide for participation at pro-”government” rallies.
For example, according to press reports, a Duma candidate shared on social media a photograph of an order authorities sent to municipal government offices in Feodosia, which stated that attendance at a September 8 rally in support of the United Russia party was mandatory and that those unable to attend must write an explanatory note to their superiors.
There were reports that occupation authorities charged and fined individuals for allegedly violating public assembly rules in retaliation for gathering to witness security force raids on homes.
For example, courts fined at least five Crimean Tatars for gathering to witness security force raids on neighboring homes in Bakhchisarai in May.
Crimean Tatar leaders claim the charges were designed to intimidate Crimean Tatars into passively remaining in their homes during raids.
Freedom of Association Occupation authorities broadly restricted freedom of association for individuals that opposed the occupation.
On February 15, the “prosecutor general” of Crimea filed a motion to ban the Crimean Tatar Mejlis, an elected, representative body of Crimean Tatars that the Ukrainian government legally recognizes.
On April 13, the prosecutor general provisionally banned the Mejlis pending a court decision; the Russian Ministry of Justice upheld the decision on April 18.
On April 26, a Russian occupation court Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 74 declared the Mejlis an extremist organization for continuing to recognize Ukrainian sovereignty in Crimea.
On September 29, the Russian Supreme Court upheld the lower court’s decision.
The ban forbids Mejlis organized meetings or demonstrations, sharply restricts its financial activities, and prohibits the display of the Mejlis flag and symbols.
While the Mejlis was led by a central council of 33 members, its organization extended to towns and villages, meaning that up to 2,000 local members of Mejlis groups were under threat.
In late September authorities fined at least eight Mejlis members for allegedly taking part in a meeting of an illegal organization, stemming from their informal gathering at the home of Ilmi Umerov on September 22.
They had gathered to wish exiled Crimean Tatar leader, Refat Chubarov, a happy birthday via Skype, but authorities had monitored the meeting and determined that it constituted a meeting of the banned Mejlis.
On February 11, Russian authorities summoned Nariman Jelal, the highest ranking member of the Crimean Tatar Mejlis not incarcerated or exiled, demanding he detail the activities of the Crimean Tatar Mejlis and his future travel plans.
Russian authorities raided groups and institutions associated with Ukrainian culture.
Many of the seized materials dealt with the Holodomor, a famine produced by Soviet authorities in 1932 and 1933 that led to the deaths of millions of Ukrainians.
On July 18, authorities questioned Leonid Kuzmin, a member of the Ukrainian Cultural Association.
Authorities compelled Kuzmin to sign a nondisclosure agreement, forbidding discussion of the grounds for his questioning.
Russian occupation authorities carried out numerous raids on Crimean Tatar cultural and spiritual institutions.
On January 27, Russian police raided the Crimean Tatar children’s center Elif in Dzhankoi, seizing books and materials.
On January 28, police raided the Islamic Cultural Center in Simferopol, again seizing books and materials.
Russian laws imposed on Crimea that regulate NGOs prohibit any group that receives foreign funding and engages in vaguely defined “political activity” to register as a “foreign agent,” a term that connotes treason or espionage.
While authorities had not included any Crimean NGOs on the list during the year, the law Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 75 had a chilling effect on their activities (see sections 2.b. and 5 of the Country Reports on Human Rights for Russia). c.
According to human rights groups, Russian authorities routinely detained adult males at the administrative boundary for additional questioning, threatening to seize passports and documents, seizing telephones and memory cards, and questioning them for hours.
Crimean residents travelling on Ukrainian passports were required to complete migration paperwork when crossing the administrative boundary between Kherson Oblast and occupied Crimea.
As of April 1, Russian authorities forbade Crimean residents with Ukrainian license plates from driving out of Crimea and required all Crimean residents to obtain Russian driver licenses.
On February 25, when Ukrainian journalist Anastasia Ringis attempted to visit her parents in Crimea, Russian authorities prohibited her from entry until 2020.
On March 22, Ukrainian authorities reported that Russian occupation authorities banned Kherson residents Rustem Gugurik, Bekir Gugurik, and Bilyal Seytumerov from admission to Crimea for five years.
Occupation authorities also prohibited entry into Crimea by Mustafa Jemilev and Refat Chubarov, members of the Verkhovna Rada and the former and current chairmen of the Crimean Tatar Mejlis, respectively; Crimean Tatar activist Sinaver Kadyrov; and Ismet Yuksel, general director of the Crimean News Agency, on the pretext that they would incite radicalism.
There were reports that authorities forcibly relocated stateless persons in retaliation for their political activism.
For example, on November 7, authorities deported Crimean Tatar activist Nedim Khalilov, who had initiated a court case several Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 76 months earlier against occupation authorities, which sought to have Russia’s occupation of Crimea declared illegal.
Khalilov possessed only a Soviet identity document, which stated that his place of birth was Uzbekistan.
He had obtained neither Ukrainian nor Russian citizenship on ideological grounds.
After a brief court hearing, occupation authorities forcibly deported Khalilov to a detention center in Russia; at year’s end, he was still awaiting deportation to Uzbekistan, where he had no relatives, housing, or other support.
Russian occupation authorities require all residents of Crimea to be Russian citizens.
Those who refuse Russian citizenship may be subjected to arbitrary expulsion.
According to the Russian Office of the Federal Bailiff’s Service, occupation authorities expelled a couple with Israeli and Ukrainian citizenships from Kerch in February.
Additionally, authorities denied those who refused Russian citizenship access to government employment, education, and health care, as well as the ability to open bank accounts and buy insurance, among other limitations.
One media report detailed the case of a woman in Yevpatoria who could not have stitches removed because she had not accepted Russian citizenship.
In another case, a displaced person from the Donbas could not receive treatment for a dog bite.
According to the Crimea Human Rights Group, on April 8, occupation authorities fined the company Voyazhkrym 35,000 rubles for employing a Ukrainian.
On April 18, authorities fined the Fregat shipbuilding company in Kerch 250,000 rubles for employing a Ukrainian.
In some cases authorities compelled Crimean residents to surrender their Ukrainian passports, complicating international travel, as many countries did not recognize passports issued by Russian occupation authorities.
Occupation authorities announced that, as of January 1, individuals who retained Ukrainian citizenship must register their passports or be subjected to fines or imprisonment.
The Mejlis and local NGOs, such as Krym Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 77 SOS, believed the actual figure could be as high as 100,000 as most IDPs remained unregistered.
Many individuals fled out of fear that occupation authorities would target them for abuse because of their work as political activists or journalists.
Additionally, many professionals left Crimea because Russian occupation authorities required them to apply for Russian professional licenses and adopt Russian procedures in their work.
Russian occupation authorities have prevented residents from voting in Ukrainian national and local elections since Crimea’s occupation began in 2014.
The Crimea Human Rights Group recorded incidents where occupation authorities coerced residents into voting in the elections, including threats of dismissals and wage cuts.
According to media reports, more than half of the funding for transportation infrastructure during the year was misspent or unaccounted for, and funds for infrastructure in Crimea were being funneled to the Kerch bridge project without adequate oversight.
Human rights sources also reported misspent or stolen medical services funds adversely affected the provision of health care under Russian occupation.
There were no known requirements for Russian occupation authorities or their agents to file, verify, or make public any income or asset disclosure statements, nor was there a mechanism to provide for public access to information about their activities.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 78 Section 5.
During the year Ukrainian government instituted a process whereby births in Crimea could be recognized with documents issued by occupation authorities.
There were reports that Russian authorities continued to permit kidnapping of orphans in Crimea and transporting them across the border into Russia for adoption.
Crimean Tatars are an ethnic group native to Crimea, dating most recently to the Crimean Khanate of the 15th century.
There were reports that government officials openly advocated discrimination and violence against Crimean Tatars.
For example, during a public online discussion on December 13, Natalya Kryzhko, a member of the “parliament,” threatened to “load on barges and drown them in the Black Sea” in reaction to requests by two Crimean Tatar villages to restore their historic Crimean Tatar place names.
According to human rights groups, Russian security services routinely monitored prayers at mosques for any mention that Crimea remains part of Ukraine.
Crimean Tatars reported that Russian occupation authorities threatened the custom of home funeral services and have compiled lists of gravediggers and Muslim leaders.
According to the Crimean Human Rights Group, on June 10, a court convicted Vladimir Baluch of insulting an official during an investigation into a stolen automobile.
Baluch maintained the charges were in retaliation for his displays of Ukrainian ethnic symbols and opposition to the occupation.
On December 8, the FSB raided Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 80 Baluch’s home after he posted a sign “renaming” his street in honor of the “heavenly hundred” protesters who died during the 2013-14 Euromaidan protests in Kyiv.
During the raid the FSB claimed to have found explosives, which Baluch insists its agents planted, and arrested Baluch.
In 2015 security forces detained and beat Baluch for flying a Ukrainian flag at his home.
Occupation authorities harassed and intimidated members of the churches and used court proceedings to force the UOC-KP in particular to leave properties it had rented for years.
According to a January 16 court decision, the UOC-KP was compelled to vacate part of the St.
Church officials reported regular and systematic surveillance of UOC-KP churches and parishioners.
Acts of Violence, Discrimination, and other Abuses Based on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Human rights groups and local gay rights activists reported that much of the LGBTI community fled Crimea after the Russian occupation began.
Those who remained live in fear of verbal and physical abuse due to their sexual orientation.
According to a report commissioned by the Ukrainian Center for Civil Liberties and Memorial’s Antidiscrimination Center in Saint Petersburg, the Russian group Occupy Pedophilia is active in Crimea.
The group used social media to lure suspected LGBTI persons to locations where they are humiliated, filmed, and beaten.
According to one report, a group of six men patrolling a park beat two individuals in Simferopol.
Individuals were accosted and abused for wearing nonconformist clothing, on the assumption that they must be LGBTI persons.
Human rights groups stated that these groups operated with the tacit support of local authorities, who did not investigate such crimes.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 81 Russian occupation authorities prohibited any LGBTI groups from holding public events in Crimea.
On April 25, an LGBTI activist in Sevastopol announced plans to hold a peaceful protest.
In response Sergei Aksyonov, the head of the occupation authorities in Crimea, stated that authorities would prevent any such assembly.
Subsequently, “self-defense” forces threatened to expel LGBTI individuals from Crimea forcibly.
The NGO Freedom House reported that pro-Russian authorities threatened to nationalize property owned by Ukrainian labor unions in Crimea.
