Following the events of August’s failed coup, the republics had declared their independence fearing another coup.
The CIS announced that the new organization would be open to all republics of the former Soviet Union, and to other nations sharing the same goals.
The CIS charter stated that all the members were sovereign and independent nations and thereby effectively abolished the Soviet Union.
On 21 December 1991, the leaders of eight additional former Soviet Republics signed the Alma-Ata Protocol which can either be interpreted as expanding the CIS to these states or the proper foundation or refoundation date of the CIS, thus bringing the number of participating countries to 11.
The CIS and Soviet Union also legally co-existed briefly with each other until 26 December 1991, when Soviet President Gorbachev stepped down, officially dissolving the Soviet Union.
This was followed by Ivan Korotchenya becoming Executive Secretary of the CIS on the same day.
Eduard Shevardnadze was overthrown in Georgia; Viktor Yushchenko was elected in Ukraine; and Askar Akayev was toppled in Kyrgyzstan.
In February 2006, Georgia withdrew from the Council of Defense Ministers, with the statement that “Georgia has taken a course to join NATO and it cannot be part of two military structures simultaneously”, but it remained a full member of the CIS until August 2009, one year after officially withdrawing in the immediate aftermath of the Russo-Georgian War.
Following the withdrawal of Georgia, the presidents of Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan skipped the October 2009 meeting of the CIS, each having their own issues and disagreements with the Russian Federation.
The Creation Agreement remained the main constituent document of the CIS until January 1993, when the CIS Charter was adopted.
However, to fully terminate its relationship with the CIS it would need to legally withdraw from the Creation Agreement, as Georgia did previously.
On 14 March 2014, a bill was introduced to Ukraine’s parliament to denounce their ratification of the CIS Creation Agreement, but it was never approved.
Following the 2014 parliamentary election, a new bill to denounce the CIS agreement was introduced.
Since that month, Ukraine has had no representatives in the CIS Executive Committee building.
As of 1 June the CIS secretariat had not received formal notice from Ukraine of its withdrawal from the CIS, a process which will take 1 year following notice being given.
On 19 May 2018, President Poroshenko signed a decree formally ending Ukraine’s participation in CIS statutory bodies.
The CIS secretariat stated that it will continue inviting Ukraine to participate.
Ukraine has further stated that it intends to review its participation in all CIS agreements, and only continue in those that are in its interests.
The CIS secretariat stated that they will keep inviting Ukraine to participate in CIS activities.
In light of Russia’s support for the independence of breakaway regions within Moldova, Georgia, and Ukraine, as well as its violation of the Istanbul Agreement , legislative initiatives to denounce the agreement on the creation of CIS were tabled in Moldova’s parliament on 25 March 2014, though they were not approved.
They were also allowed to participate in various CIS initiatives,g. the Commonwealth of Independent States Free Trade Area, which were, however, formulated mostly as independent multilateral agreements, and not as internal CIS agreements.
Additionally, Ukraine became an associate member state of the CIS Economic Union in 1994 and Turkmenistan an associate member state of the CIS in 2005.
The Interparliamentary Assembly was established in 27 March 1992 in Kazakhstan.
On 26 May 1995 CIS leaders signed the eventually ratified by nine parliaments.
The Assembly is actively involved in the development of integration processes in the CIS and also sends observers to the national elections.
The Assembly held its 32nd Plenary meeting in Saint Petersburg on 14 May 2009.
CIS members, especially in Central Asia, continue to have among the world’s poorest human rights records.
Many activists point examples such as the 2005 Andijan massacre in Uzbekistan to show that there has been almost no improvement in human rights since the collapse of the Soviet Union in Central Asia.
The consolidation of power by President Vladimir Putin has resulted in a steady decline in the modest progress of previous years in Russia.
The Commonwealth of Independent States continues to face serious challenges in meeting even basic international standards.
The CIS Charter establishes the Council of Ministers of Defense, which is vested with the task of coordinating military cooperation of the CIS member states.
To this end, the Council develops conceptual approaches to the questions of military and defense policy of the CIS member states; develops proposals aimed to prevent armed conflicts on the territory of the member states or with their participation; gives expert opinions on draft treaties and agreements related to the questions of defense and military developments; issues related suggestions and proposals to the attention of the CIS Council of the Heads of State.
Also important is the Council’s work on approximation of the legal acts in the area of defense and military development.
The headquarters has now moved to 101000, Москва, Сверчков переулок, 3/2, and 41 Leningradsky Prospekt has now been taken over by another Russian MOD agency.
The CIS is known to have mediated some regional hostilities between the “Stan countries” in Central Asia.
Kazakhstan’s President Nursultan Nazarbayev proposed that CIS members take up a digitization agenda to modernize CIS economies.
Yushchenko has shown renewed interest in Ukrainian membership in the European Union and such membership would be incompatible with the envisioned common economic space.
The same elections were pronounced by the OSCE to have failed international standards for democratic elections.
Soon after CIS observers hailed the Kyrgyz parliamentary elections of 2005 as “well-organised, free, and fair”, as large-scale and often violent demonstrations broke out throughout the country protesting what the opposition called a rigged parliamentary election.
In contrast the OSCE reported that the elections fell short of international standards in many areas.
International observers of the Interparliamentary Assembly stated the 2010 local elections in Ukraine were organised well.
Russia has been urging that the Russian language receive official status in all of the CIS member states.
Russian is also considered an official language in the region of Transnistria, and the autonomous region of Gagauzia in Moldova.
Viktor Yanukovych, the Moscow-supported presidential candidate in the controversial 2004 Ukrainian presidential election, declared his intention to make Russian an official second language of Ukraine.
However, the Western-supported candidate Viktor Yushchenko, the winner, did not do so.
At the time of the Soviet Union’s dissolution in December 1991, its sports teams had been invited to or qualified for various 1992 sports events.
The “Unified Team” competed in the 1992 Winter Olympics and 1992 Summer Olympics, and a CIS association football team competed in UEFA Euro 1992.
A CIS bandy team played some friendlies in January 1992 and made its last appearance at the 1992 Russian Government Cup, where it also played against the new Russia national bandy team.
The Soviet Union bandy championship for 1991–1992 was rebranded as a CIS championship.
