A prime example of how today’s mainstream media paradigm works in the United States is the case of Ukraine, where Americans have been shielded from evidence that the 2014 ouster of democratically elected President Viktor Yanukovych was a U.S.-supported coup d’etat spearheaded by violent neo-Nazi extremists.
But most Americans probably haven’t heard any of that evidence revealing a coup, thanks to the mainstream United States media, which has essentially banned those deviant facts from the public discourse.
If they are mentioned at all, they are lumped together with “fake news” amid the reassuring hope that soon there will be algorithms to purge such troublesome information from the Internet.
Putin recognizes that many Ukrainians felt that an association with the European Union could help solve their problems.
But that created a problem for Russia because of the absence of tariffs between Russia and Ukraine and concerns about the future of bilateral trade that is especially important to Ukraine, which stood to lose some $160 billion.
When Yanukovych decided to postpone the E.U. agreement so he could iron out that problem, protests erupted, Putin said.
But — from that point on — Putin’s narrative deviates from what the United States government and mainstream media tell the American people.
Contrary to the United States claims blaming Yanukovych for the violence in the Maidan protests, Putin said, “Yanukovych didn’t give an order to use weapons against civilians.
And incidentally, our Western partners, including the United States, asked us to influence him so that he did not give any orders to use weapons.
And they promised … they were going to do everything for the opposition to clear the squares and the administrative buildings.
After the bloodshed of Feb., Yanukovych and opposition leaders on Feb. signed an accord, brokered and guaranteed by three European governments, for early elections and, in the meantime, a reduction of Yanukovych’s powers.
Moreover, one day afterwards he used our support and relocated to Crimea thinking that there was still a chance that those who put their signatures on the agreement with the opposition would make an attempt to settle this conflict by civilized democratic legal means.
But that never happened and it became clear that if he were taken he would be killed.
Putin noted how the new regime in Kiev immediately sought to limit use of the Russian language and allowed extreme nationalist elements to move against eastern provinces known as the Donbass where ethnic Russians were the vast majority of the population.
Putin continued, “First, there were attempts at arresting them using the police, but the police defected to their side quite quickly.
Then the central authorities started to use Special Forces and in the night, people were snatched and taken to prison.
In the United States mainstream media, however, the crisis was blamed entirely on Putin and Russia.
As for the so-called “annexation” of Crimea, a peninsula in the Black Sea that was historically part of Russia and that even after the Soviet break-up hosted a major Russian naval base at Sevastopol, Putin’s account also deviated sharply from what Americans have been told.
And there was even the threat that violence would be perpetrated by nationalists against Crimea, against those who consider themselves to be Russian and who think Russian is their mother language.
We had to facilitate the work of the Parliament of Crimea, the representative government body, in order for this Parliament to be able to assemble and effect actions in accordance with the law.
Yes, we created conditions for people to go to polling stations, but we did not engage in any hostilities.
More than 90 per cent of the Crimean population turned out, they voted, and once the ballot was cast, the Parliament, based on the outcome of the referendum, addressed the Russian parliament, asking to incorporate it into the Russian Federation.
Putin shed light, too, on a little-noticed confrontation involving a United States destroyer, the USS Donald Cook, that steamed through the Black Sea toward Crimea in the middle of the crisis but turned back when Russian aircraft buzzed the ship and Russia activated its shoreline defense systems.
But Putin didn’t see the confrontation with the United States destroyers as grave as that.
Even though we did indeed deploy our most sophisticated, our cutting-edge systems for the coastal defense,” known as the Bastion.
I don’t know who the Captain was, but he showed much restraint, I think he is a responsible man, and a courageous officer to boot.
It doesn’t at all mean that it would have been attacked by our missiles, but we had to show them that our coast was protected by the missile systems.
It also remains a question why the United States mainstream media feels that it must protect the American people from alternative views even as the risks of nuclear confrontation escalate.
