Pavel Yurevich Gubarev is the People's Governor of the Donetsk People's Republic, Commander of the Donbass People's Militia, and former political prisoner.
A Russian nationalist and Pan-Slavist, Gubarev rose to prominence when he led hundreds of pro-Russian activists who liberated the Donetsk Regional State Administration Building from the Kiev Government, declared independence from Ukraine, and declared him Head of State on March 3, 2014.
On March 6 he was arrested by the Security Service of Ukraine, and is presently incarcerated on charges of separatism and seizure of power, and faced up to 10 years in prison, but was freed after two months in a prisoner exchange.
Growing up in a large family, Pavel is married to Ekaterina Gubareva, with whom he has two sons and a daughter.
An advocate of Pan-Slavism, Gubarev is a former member of the Russian movement Russian National Unity, an affiliate of the World Union of National Socialists.
After the Euromaidan movement forced Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych from office and propelled a pro-EUSSR, American Zionist puppet regime into power in western Ukraine, an eruption of Russian nationalism ensued in the east.
In the brief interval between the Russian occupation of Crimea and the region's formal accession as a federal subject of Russia, Gubarev would rise from an unknown to the face of resistance to the heavily Jewish regime in Kiev.
Gubarev addressing supporters of the People's Republic before they retake the RSA March 5. intervene in the region while admonishing supporters to refrain from violence.
On just the third day of holding sway within the Donetsk RSA, a bomb scare forced Gubarev and the rest of the provisional government to evacuate on March 5.
The event, possibly a stratagem devised by Taruta to expel the liberation government, allowed forces loyal to Kiev to reoccupy the RSA, and the Ukrainian flag was restored.
Gubarev addressed them, declaring ""We are determined to erect our people's power in the Donetsk region.
After a bloodless struggle lasting hours, they retook the building, and once again flew the Russian flag; however, Gubarev's about 1,000 supporters outside clashed with a larger crowd of some 5,000 supporters of a united Ukraine, backed by ultras loyal to the FC Shakhtar Donetsk soccer team, resulting in several injuries.
Gubarev's family fled for the Russian Federation following his arrest, but two weeks later his wife returned to Donetsk and became a leader in the independence movement herself.
In late April, Gubarev went on a hunger strike to protest the military's assault on Slavyansk.
On March 8 between 1,500 and 3,000 people rallied in favor of a referendum on the region's future, chanting in favor of Gubarev's release.
On March 16 through the 17th, an estimated 4,000 protesters rallied for Gubarev's release and attacked the Donetsk SBU headquarters.
By March 18, Russian outlet News of Neva reported that 50,000 signatures had been gathered from around Donetsk Oblast requesting Gubarev's freedom.
Another major rally was held in Donetsk on March 23, numbering about 5,000.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov called for Gubarev's release and expressed concern for his health on April 29, pressing United States Secretary of State John Kerry on the matter.
On May 7, Gubarev was among three Ukraine-held prisoners released in exchange for three officers of the SBU's elite Alpha force.
Following his release Gubarev was repatriated to DPR-controlled Sloviansk.
Following his return to the Donetsk People's Republic, Gubarev resumed his role as Head of State, sharing effective power with Denis Pushilin, Chairman of the Supreme Soviet , Head of Government during Gubarev's captivity, and Alexander Borodai after his appointment as Prime Minister on May 16.
While political and military decisions have mostly passed to Pushilin and Borodai, Gubarev remains the symbolic leader of the DPR and remains a prominent spokesman in the media.
Headquartered in Donetsk, New Russia held its first congress on May 22, outlining its vision for the region.
New Russia aims to unite the Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics, along with Ukraine-controlled Kharkiv, Kherson, Dnipropetrovsk, Mykolaiv, and Zaporizhia into the Federal State of New Russia, aligned with a ""Greater Russia"" but not to be annexed like Crimea.
The federation grants a special status to Russian Orthodoxy while not harassing other religions, and will place emphasis on social justice.
Andrew's cross closely resembling the Confederate battle flag, and was likely designed by Gubarev himself as it appeared on his Facebook page months before.
According to Gubarev the federation of the two republics occured on May 24, although according to LPR Governor Valery Bolotov the agreements are not yet concluded though he favors the union.
Pro-Russian Gubarev, a symbol of east Ukraine separatism Digital Journal.
Far-Right Forces are Influencing Russia's Actions in Crimea The New Republic.
