Earl Robinson was a Communist who was later blacklisted during the McCarthy period.
Sinatra had befriended a number of blacklisted writers during the McCarthy period, and even openly dined with them to publically show his support for them.
According to the United Nations, the greatest humanitarian crisis in the world today is happening in Yemen. | doubt that you would know this from the mainstream media because they do not talk about it very much, and certainly not with the frequency with which it deserves.
The result is that the civilian population is being killed in great numbers, and there is a great risk, according to the UN again, that in this already food-insecure country, over 7 million people could perish from starvation, and over 18 million will die without immediate humanitarian assistance.
First of all, the fact that a long-time CIA analyst turned critic thought I was on track with my message, and bothered telling me while he was on a trip half way around the world, gave me great encouragement.
At that time, the United States and South Africa were supporting the UNITA counterrevolutionary forces against the revolutionary Angolan government, which in turn was being bolstered by Cuban ground forces.
I was listening to NPR, and I heard David Greene, a fellow Pittsburgher, do a story about the 2008 RussiaGeorgia conflict.
This is more difficult than it may seem at first blush, given our seemingly unshakeable belief in the myth of “American Exceptionalism’—that is, the belief that the United States is a uniquely benign actor in the world, spreading peace and democracy wherever we go.
I think when we objectively look at the US’s actions—even when compared to Russia’s over the past fifty or so years—and the reasonably foreseeable results of those actions, we shall see that this belief is wholly unwarranted.
Thus, if the United States democratic system is so fragile and brittle that it could be impacted by the machinations of “internet trolls” (which the Senate Intelligence Committee spent a whole day talking about) or by RT News broadcasters, this says volumes about the poor state of our own democratic institutions.
I think what often happens when we talk about the types of issues raised in this book—for example, human rights, or the rightness of military action —there is a very strong tendency to focus on the failures of others rather than of ourselves.
While this may be comforting, it is largely useless, because we have much more control over the conduct of our own country (at least to the extent it is truly democratic) than we do over others.
To this day, it should be emphasized, the United States continues to reaffirm the Monroe Doctrine, pursuant to which it views Latin America as its “backyard,” in which it can intervene at any time to protect what it views as its interests.
One might recall that Nicaragua brought a case against the United States before the ICJ—also known as the World Court, and created by the UN Charter for the peaceful resolution of international disputes—in the mid-1980s.
In the end, Webb was right, even more right than he knew, but even to this day, the job done on him by the mainstream media lingers in the public’s mind, leading many to believe that the Contra cocaine story was not true.
Thus, after WWII, the United States decided that, in order to gain advantage in its struggle against the Soviet Union and the East Block, it would partner with the most unsavory forces in the world—right-wing dictatorships, terrorist groups, and even neo-Nazis.
As for the losses that the working class of the West suffered due to the loss of the USSR and the East Bloc, former Assistant Secretary of the Treasury under President Reagan, Paul Craig Roberts, has this to say, and he has said it often: The collapse of the Soviet Union was the worst thing that ever happened to the United States.
The other consequence was a change of mind in socialist India and communist China, large countries that responded to “the end of history” by opening their vast under-utilized labor forces to Western capital, which resulted in the American economic decline that this article describes, leaving a struggling economy to bear the enormous war debt.
Clinton ended the entitlement to cash benefits which the poor had been given by prior legislation (Aid to Families with Dependent Children) and replaced it with legislation (called, quite appropriately, Temporary Aid to Needy Families) that put a 5-year lifetime federal limit on cash aid to the poor and allowed states to set even shorter limits.
Nelson Mandela, whom the CIA helped capture and imprison in 19627 and who remained on the United States terrorist list until 2008, credits the victory at Cuito Cuanavale for bringing the South African government to the bargaining table, and leading eventually to the end of apartheid.
This is a little inconvenient episode that you will rarely study in school.
It has been equally sad for me to see the West, and particularly the US, so gleefully dance on the grave of the lofty hopes of the Russian people in particular.
A OUR KILLERS AND THEIRS PROBABLY THE BIGGEST OBSTACLE TO AMERICANS’ ability to perceive our own actions in the world, and our own place relative to other countries like Russia, is our deep-seated belief in “American Exceptionalism”—that is, the belief that our country is uniquely good, democratic and freedom-loving, and that anything we do in the world, no matter how incidentally harmful, is motivated by the purest and best motives.
Every other country, especially adversaries like Russia, are motivated by the worst and most selfish motives, the philosophy goes, and therefore are inherently more dangerous than the US The truth is, however, that “American Exceptionalism” is a false religion and is not borne out by even a cursory examination of United States history, particularly post-WWII, and even compared with Russia for the past half a century.
As just one example, Obama ordered the successful drone killing of 16year-old Abdulrahman al-Awlaki, an American citizen, as well as another innocent American citizen named Samir Kahn.
As a Truthout piece correctly complains,°° the Democrats, who long ago ceded to Obama the right to kill at will abroad, and who are fixated on Russia-gate to the exclusion of almost anything else, are shamefully raising no opposition to any of this, and neither does the press seem to be.
And, for what it’s worth, “though both Politkovskaya and Nemtsov were outspoken critics of Putin, friends, colleagues and family have not accused him of ordering the assassinations.” ad Gessen does not believe the fact that the Chechen leader Kadryrov may have ordered the killings of Politkovskaya and Nemtsov totally lets Putin off the hook, for the Chechen leader Kadryrov ultimately works for Putin, but still, this does not make Putin a “killer” in the way that he is being accused of.
Or, as the Chicago Tribune commentary states, “t would, however, be unfair to ascribe crimes Kadyrov may have ordered or committed directly to Putin.
Much more on this later, but suffice it to say that if we assume the very worst of Putin in regard to these wars (which I do not think the facts warrant), they pale in comparison to the wars of aggression that the United States has and continues to wage in many more countries throughout the planet.
The Red Army would go on to liberate death camps, most notably Auschwitz, “the largest killing center and concentration camp,” as well as the concentration camps of Stutthof, Sachsenhausen and Ravensbrueck.
Among the executed were many religious martyrs, and there were mass slaughters as well, consistently supported or initiated by Washington.
Instead, a disproportionate amount of tax revenue is sucked right back into the military-industrial complex, a form of welfare for the rich, while the working class and poor are left on their own to suffer.
In the end, General Sullivan followed Washington’s orders faithfully, as did many US military leaders to come, committing possibly one of the greatest genocides in history, certainly involving the slaying of tens of millions of indigenous persons.
Marciano notes that this aroused the very first anti-war protests against the American intervention in Vietnam—this time by United States sailors who could not stomach the hypocrisy of what the United States was doing and whom they were doing it with.
One might believe that the US, in the Spirit of ’76, would welcome and support such an independence victory.
The war was also expanded to the then-very peaceful country of Cambodia, creating one million refugees out of six million inhabitants, thereby radicalizing some of the population and leading directly to the “killing fields” of the Khmer Rouge—a force which the United States would first oppose but then support when the Vietnamese, having defeated the United States (after the French), invaded Cambodia, thus freeing the Cambodians from the viscious Khmer Rouge.
As Eric Hobsbawm succinctly explained, “ince the fall of the Berlin Wall, we once again live in an era of genocide and compulsory mass population transfers, as in parts of Africa, southeastern Europe and Asia.
This invasion was carried out, moreover, with the reluctant assent of the Soviet Union which—under Mikhail Gorbachev, who was, and remains, quite popular in the West, but not in Russia—voted in favor of the Security Council Resolution authorizing force to expel Iraq from Kuwait.
The bombing ... was hardly surgical, but was clearly designated to break a whole country and its population for a long time to come.
Recall that, when asked about these 500,000 dead Iraqi children, then Secretary of State Madeleine Albright responded, “The price is worth i Albright, known now for her fancy pin and broach collection, would later express regret for saying this, but she never expressed regret for aggressively supporting the policy which resulted in these deaths.
Ok Ok 7 CLINTON MEDDLES IN RUSSIA WITH DISASTROUS CONSEQUENCES MEANWHILE, BACK IN RUSSIA, ITS “CONVERSION” experience was quite exacting on the lives of average Russians, and the United States made sure it was so.
Indeed, Yeltsin has been compared to another favorite of the US, Augusto Pinochet, the fascist leader the United States installed in Chile in 1973 in order to make sure that social justice would not break out in that country. a And, in the end, what galls the United States the most about Vladimir Putin is not how authoritarian and un-democratic they view him to be (though polls do show that he is wildly popular in Russia), but that Putin has helped Russia rise from its knees and become an independent nation and world actor again.
The first city I visited was Barrancabermeyja, an oil town which, at that time, was quite progressive in many ways, including being the site of the wonderful Popular Feminist Organization , which was so welcoming to me when I was there.
Agency for International Development , are actually owned and controlled by paramilitary forces which also make money through drug trafficking. is On this note, let’s delve into the nature of the paramilitary groups, the brainchildren of the US, which continue to haunt Barranca and other Colombian towns.
That year, a US Army Special Warfare team visited Colombia to help refine Plan Lazo, a new counterinsurgency strategy General Ruiz was drafting.
In short, it reveals a highlevel of tolerance of, and condonation by, United States policy-makers for the suffering of the Colombian people at the hands of our long-time friends and allies, the right-wing paramilitaries.
In the end, the only plausible explanation for the United States partnership in such crimes is its quest for a disproportionate share of the world’s resources, and any countries trying to lay claim to their just portion (whether it be Colombia, or Russia, or China) need to be put in their place. ** ok On Sept., 1973, General Augusto Pinochet led a violent coup against the elected government of President Salvador Allende, bringing an end to democratic rule in that country for the next sixteen-plus years.
The CIA, not having any qualms about constitutionality or civilian rule, admits that it agreed with the assessment that the kidnapping (though it claims not kailling) of Schneider was necessary, and so it provided weapons for the kidnapping operation.
The United States sent $75 million in emergency military assistance to Rwanda in 1994, after Kagame drove the government that had perpetrated the Rwandan genocide from power; but when it could have supported efforts to stop the killing, the Clinton administration was instead actively lobbying to withdraw UN forces from the country.
Rwanda would use that military assistance, and continued military training from the US, to invade the DRC, along with Uganda, from the East in 1996, and then again in 1998.
And, when Laurent Kabila himself became less compliant, particularly in regard to granting mining contracts to foreign firms, Clinton supported Rwanda and Uganda in moving against him in 1998, and he was successfully removed at the very end of the Clinton Administration in January of 1991. — Meanwhile, other African nations invaded the DRC from the West.
Moreover, as has recently been reported, the Garifunas—Hondurans of African descent who have been there for centuries—are being subjected to intense discrimination and are being forced off their land in large numbers by real estate developers and others who covet their land, with many being forced to leave Honduras altogether. eta The case of Honduras is worth considering in light of the current concerns about Russia.
Moreover, as much concern is expressed about the fate of journalists in Russia, there is very little said about the extraordinary kalling of journalists in Honduras post-coup.
Gorbachev made it clear to these governments that if they had trouble holding on to power, they should not expect the USSR to come along (as in Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968) to save them.
Gorbachev acceded to Germany’s western alignment and the United States would limit NATO’s expansion. ia Through such a bargain, the final nail had been placed in the Cold War coffin, or so Russia had thought, for, as we all know, the West’s promises were swiftly broken, with Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, the Baltic states and other formerly East Bloc countries being admitted to NATO membership in 1999, and Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia admitted in 2004.
Even putting aside the fact that such actions of the United States and NATO constituted a grave breach of trust with post-Soviet Russia, these actions must be viewed as objectively provocative of Russia.
And, in the end, Khrushchev agreed within a matter of days to take the missiles out of Cuba in return for the secret promise that the US would take its missiles out of Turkey months later.
But, despite Russia’s quick responsiveness to the United States demand to leave Cuba, the United States did not relent in its continued milking of the “Soviet threat” to justify its military build-up.
The flame of war could burst out across the whole of Europe. pee However one regards the US/NATO bombings in the former Yugoslavia in 1995 and then again in 1999—bombings which Clinton characterized (as was his wont) as a “humanitarian intervention” carried out to protect civilians from human rights abuses—one has to at least understand the trepidation with which the Russians viewed this event.
As NATO gloated thereafter, “e will continue to promote the development of greater interoperability between Ukrainian and NATO forces.
Despite Tyahnybok’s openly neo-Nazi and anti-Semitic philosophy, Senator John McCain has proudly rallied alongside him in Kiev.
As Nuland states in the same conversation, “I think Yats is the guy ... ,” as if it were for the United States to hand-pick the new government.
Even if one does not go as far as putting the lion’s share of the blame on the West for the Ukraine crisis, one at least has to understand why Putin and Russia would feel very threatened by these events.
The result was that pro-Russian separatists in Ukraine, without any prompting or support from Vladimir Putin—though that support would certainly come later—seized parts of the eastern Donetsk and Luhansk regions in March of 2014—-ery shortly after the coup—and declared their own “People’s Republics,” of course harkening back to the old Soviet Union.
The Azov men use the neo-Nazi Wolfsangel symbol on their banner and members of the battalion are openly white supremacists, or anti-Semites.
But again, few have bothered to look into this curious lead, and few seem to care.
And, while both the EU and US called this referendum a sham and refused to honor it, polls show that the Crimeans themselves believe this referendum to be valid; and that the Crimeans, including the Tartar minority which is reasonably wary of Russia, are happier under Russian governance than Ukrainian.
Again, I fully understand that the United States takes the position that what country Crimea is a part of is none of the Crimeans’ business, and while I also get the point that Russia should never stray beyond its borders for any reason, it is hard for me to feel too excited by any of this, and equally hard for me to believe that others in this country feel as strongly about this as they apparently do.
At a minimum, it is not clear to me how Russia’s actions regarding Crimea, especially as they ended up being welcomed by the Crimeans, is any cause for Americans to believe that Russia is somehow a threat to humanity. ok Meanwhile, the United States used the collapse of the USSR, which had once put some brakes on United States Empire, to expand throughout the entire globe.
To add to the humiliation of post-Soviet Russia, women from Russia and the former Soviet Republics have replaced Korean women as sex workers in South Korea.
In any case, the United States even has China, and Russia as well, outgunned in the South China Sea, with three aircraft carrier strike groups deployed there at the end of Obama’s term, to just one aircraft carrier each for China and Russia.
As The Guardian explains, “Mosaddeq epitomised a unique ‘anticolonial’ figure who was also committed to democratic values and human rights ...4T The United States moved against him because of his decision to nationalize Iran’s oil concerns, including some owned by British Petroleum, and because they distrusted this left-leaning leader as a possible communist who could not be relied upon to keep Iran’s vast oil wealth out of the hands of Russia.
Not surprisingly, the Iranians still resent the United States for its role in overthrowing a democratic government and setting up what can only be described as a torture state.
OK Another momentous, and arguably more disastrous, Cold War maneuver of the United States was its support for the Mujahideen in Afghanistan, which at that time shared a 1000-mile-long border with the Soviet Union.
As Iraqis continue to suffer from ISIS terrorism, and as the United States is fighting ISIS in Mosul, it is important to remember that it was the invasion of Iraq—a war of choice if there ever was one—that caused this.
Then, after the United States invasion dislodged the Taliban, cultivation skyrocketed.
The CIA does so, he explains, by partnering with Afghani drug kingpins, for example, with the late Ahmed Karzai—the half-brother of Hamid Karzai, who was the first President installed by the United States after the 2001 invasion—who was coincidentally killed after it became public that he was running drugs.
Moreover, as Hersh was reporting a decade ago, we have been arming, and assisting Saudi Arabia in arming, brutal and retrograde forces in their own right that fight alongside with and provide supplies of arms to groups even the United States recognizes as terrorist, such as alQaeda.
This was another case of the West, the US included, removing a secular leader in Muammar Gaddafi, quite possibly the greatest enemy of al-Qaeda, and allowing the country to be overridden by religious extremists.
In other words, it was the US’s rebel friends who were actually carrying out genocide in Libya, and NATO, which had a UN mandate to protect civilians in Libya, was aiding and abetting them in doing it.
Of course, human rights groups investigating this claim ultimately found no evidence of it But, the damage was done, paving the way for the NATO invasion and the takeover of Libya by forces who actually have, and continue to, carry out rape on a large scale.
As a number of commentators have argued persuasively, this was not enough for Washington, which was concerned that Gaddafi was still shutting the United States and other Western countries out of a number of key infrastructure investment opportunities in favor of Russia and China.
Consequently, Clinton shunned all efforts by the Gaddafis to avert an invasion, instead preferring a war—as Bill Clinton had preferred a war in Yugoslavia, and as both Bushes had preferred wars in Iraq—despite its quite predictably horrible consequences, which would give the United States and its allies the hand they wanted in the future of Libyan and African affairs.
But NPR assured the concermed listener that the new regime would see to it that the Libyans would adapt to this new world order and get to work as they damn well should.
The reaction of the United States government and media has been, of course, a collective yawn.
Finally, it might also be recalled that Putin helped broker a peace deal in Syria that the United States, or at least its political leaders, agreed to, only for that deal to be scuttled within days when the United States Central Command accidentally/on purpose*”° bombed a Syrian troop convoy, killing 62 soldiers and wounding 100.79’ As the Washington Post explained, this “marked the first time the United States has engaged the Syrian military since it began targeting the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq two years ago.
The strike also came at a particularly sensitive time in United States and Russian efforts to forge a cease-fire in Syria’s civil war ace This coincidence was simply too much for the Russians, who called an emergency meeting of the Security Council in response.
This is not even to mention the outdated, anti-democratic Electoral College system, which allows someone (like Hillary Clinton, for example) to win the popular vote but lose the election anyway.
It was in fact comicable to hear Comey, in testifying about his investigation of the Russia-Trump collusion allegations on March 20, 2017, say that it was unusual for the F.B.I. to confirm or deny the existence of any investigations,°""> when that’s exactly what he was doing at that moment, and exactly what he did just weeks before the 2016 election, thereby helping to derail Clinton’s candidacy.
Finally, there is good reason to be skeptical of the claims surrounding this alleged plot.
Thus, in the end, after the FBI quickly pointed the finger at North Korea—impossibly quickly in the minds of many computer experts—and after the media gleefully went along, the press had to sheepishly admit later that the hacking was most likely an “inside job” by a disgruntled Sony employee.* wid Well, I guess it’s good we didn’t end up nuking North Korea over this anyway.
I do not know if that is truth or apostasy, but what is known is that the Kennedys never trusted the CIA after the Bay of Pigs, feeling that they had been misled about the chances of success of the operation.* i Indeed, while the CIA had concluded that only direct United States intervention against Cuba would succeed (rather than simply relying upon Cuban exiles to do the job for the US, as was done in the Bay of Pigs) it never bothered sharing this assessment with President Kennedy beforehand.
As the Veterans of United States Intelligence Services eloquently point out, the CIA, as evidenced by their own quite unprecedented public warnings to Trump, is against a détente with Russia.
A journalist I trust, Pulitzer Prize winner Seymour Hersh, has properly condemned the media for accepting these claims at face value.
This brings us to the new revelations of Wikileaks, which have been made as I write this book.
Indeed, such conduct by an intelligence agency is itself a great breach of the public trust.
But the senior official who leaked the story of Flynn-Kislyak conversation to Ignatius—obviously for a domestic political purpose—did not feel bound by any such tule.
That leak was the first move in a concerted campaign of using such leaks to suggest that Flynn had discussed the Obama administration’s sanctions with Kislyak in an effort to undermine Obama administration policy.
This book is essential reading for anyone trying to make sense of the chaos of our current political moment.
