Last year after the Crimean parliament declared its independence from Ukraine on 17 March, Russia moved two units of S-300PM to the Hvardiyske Air Base.
Previously, Russia had employed this tactic with the former Georgian enclave of Abkhazia.
Space snapshots of the breakaway region show the S-300 units still deployed to the territory but in prepared firing positions.
Likewise with Ukraine, it’s expected that units in expeditionary sites will probably transition to more permanent ones.
Available commercial imagery suggests the S-300PMs at Hvardiyske were jumped sometime between late 2014 and early 2015.
Space snapshots from April confirmed that the equipment was no longer at the airbase.
Imagery of Sevastopol shows that the former Ukraine S-300 position located at 44°32’39″N 33°25’58″E had a Russian S-300PM unit in residence as early as February 2015.
Sevastopol is home to Russia’s strategically important Black Sea Fleet.
It is currently unknown if this is a new unit deployed from Russia or if it’s one of the batteries jumped from Hvardiyske — though the latter seems likely.
The Russian press however did report further S-300 moving into the Crimea in December 2014.
They were reportedly moved in response to NATO’s increased presence in the region.
Additional movement was also noted less than three miles to the east at another former Ukrainian S-300 site.
At least three short range Pantsir-S1s were also visible on imagery acquired in February.
The latest imagery from September 2015 continues to confirm the new deployment locations.
The S-300 is a highly capable surface-to-air missile system first deployed by the Soviet Union in 1979.
The system is often compared with the U.S.-built Patriot missile defense system.
The latest variant, the S-3000PM2, was developed in the mid-1990s as a direct competitor to Raytheon’s Patriot PAC-2/3s.
With the redeployment to the coast, units can acquire targets further out into the Black Sea.
While we’re still looking for updated imagery in order to find the other jumped unit, here’s a list of known S-300 surface-to-air missile sites on the Crimea that could play host to the battery.
Please feel free to drop any hints of potential locations in the comments below.
At times there were quarrels and insults will, which usually blame the officials.
There is nothing to divide people – ordinary people are the same everywhere.
This situation can not be assessed today, for an objective assessment will take time.
After 10 years, you will see the results of all events that are not visible right now.
Russia and Ukraine – one nation, brother with brother may quarrel, but always reconciled.
Exactly come and visit Donbass region and ask lockals if they want to be with Ukrainian regime after all suffering that was thrown at them by mad Poroshenko’SS regime.
Every government lies and none are close to the United States in the lying league.
Sure, highlight Russian lies, when they lie, but a lot of the stuff on Bellingcat is conjecture towards Russia with lots of ifs, ands and maybes.
One could be forgiven for thinking the purpose of this blog is to be anti-Russian as there’s nothing on Yemen, Libya, Afkanistan, Iraq, SA but lots on Ukraine & Syria.
Well I’d argue that in the former list of countries there’s no Russian link but there is in the latter.
But ok let’s say Bellingcat have a genuine interest in lies being told about Ukraine & Syria.
Anyhow I’m not here to try and convince anyone I was merely hoping someone from Bellingcat could answer my question.
Many people, if motivated to, could give you an answer, not only Bellingcat.
A former superpower and permanent member of the UN Security Council, with a large nuclear arsenal whose dire economy is threatening to topple it’s increasingly isolated leader, has recently initiated armed aggression and the invasion of another democratic European country, has now has extended its military operations to the Middle East.
There are few other countries leaders who have managed to make themselves so internationally unpopular in such a short time, and certainly no other with as many nuclear arms.
There is a large state sponsored terror campaign and Kremlin subsidized propaganda campaign going on around some very serious issues.
Mr Higgins has his goals and direction, he cannot report on every little thing in the world.
Another reason for focusing on Kremlin lies is that it is criminal enterprise masquerading as a state.
Anyhow, Russia wage a war of lies and propaganda on the West, and they should be called to check on that from the democracy and freedom champions.
Mr Higgins picked a great crew and they have exposed some very important items that the Kremlin should be called on.
IF you want to contribute to the project and bring up an idea for an article, I am sure Mr Higgins would consider it.
IF you do not want to contribute, then your criticisms are just a bunch of whining comments that really do not make sense.
They only have so big a budget and time to write on certain things and it is good to stay focused.
Creating lie after lie to cover up the solid “Fact” they have soldiers in Ukraine and finance and supply mercenaries to destabilize a neighboring country.
Its is better to be thought of as a fool, than to opens ones mouth and remove all doubt.
I think it says a lot of the calibre of Bellingcat’s writings when it attracts such conspiratorial scaremongers in the comments section.
Anyone who disagrees with the groupthink is obviously a paid Russian agent.
But if you feel all warm and secure shutting down debate in order to shield yourself from opposing viewpoints then make yourself at home.
Maybe one day you’ll realise how immature and conspiratorial such comments make you appear.
My guess is that Bellingcat is trying to find a resonating information topic.
One can see how many comments are under Russian-Ukrainian articles verses the rest of the world.
All recent articles are definitely anti-Russian and I would also like someone from Bellingcat to give any clue.
Putin has annexed Crimea and exploited the existing separatist sentiments at Donbass, supporting the rebels and trying to supply Kremlin people to ignite/head the riot, most probably with the weapon, that is true, with all of those ‘Kremlin’ people are already withdrawn.
The question is how far the ‘west’ is going to move in order to show the disapproval/punishment.
How many people died in anti-terror operation conducted by Ukraine at Donbass – estimated thousands.
Now the sides are negotiating, deceiving each other and the ‘west’ in trying to simulate the implementation of Minsk agreements, enforced by EU, Merkel and Oland.
Ukraine don’t want to accept the separatist regions back at any price, but only to return the full control.
The ‘West’ supported the coup d’état of democratically elected president in Ukraine just an year before the next re-election.
Ukraine still has not finished the investigation with the majority of evidences have disappeared.
I can understand Ukrainians who take that personally, with many of English speaking commenters at this site are definitely from Ukraine or originally came from Ukraine.
The question is how to settle down this conflict and at what further price.
Stranger, maybe you should read this article before you keep repeating misinformation, these figures are before the referendum.
It states – During the Crimean crisis from 23 February through 19 March 2014, six people were killed.
The two Ukrainian soldiers who were killed are regularly included in the military death toll from the War in Donbass.
That does not include the various others that have been killed since then, the forced abductions and beatings by Russian military and the Ukrainians from Crimea taken and transported to Russian Federation for circus trials.
A large part of Euromaidan’s investigation has been completed, and it points blame at the yanukothief’s police and interior ministers, but I have yet to see accusations against Spetsnaz, they were there directing the oppression of the demonstrators.
Odessa’s tragedy has also been mostly finished by International investigators.
They caused the fire, they attacked the proUnity soccer fans and killed six of them.
The leaders of the antiMaidan groups had prestaged the Trade Unions building as a defensive position and encouraged many to com inside and fire on everyone outside the building. 6 policemen received gunshot injuries from anti Maidan supporters. yanukotheif had another year and a half to continue embezzling from Ukraine.
You may consider the many of the comments anti Kremlin or perceived as anti Russian, ultimately they are opposing the Kremlin and its propaganda.
They do not attack the Russian population at large, just its policy makers.
Now as far as the Kremlin defenders here, they are firmly anti Ukrainian and state Ukraine is not a nation but a wife of Moscow they have a right to beat.
If I observe that wikpedia made an article about half the worlds Miem Kampf supporters are centered in Russia, that does not make me antiRussian, just that I am stating a researched fact.
Now the articles themselves, from everything I have read, they are usually right down the middle on passing judgement on the Kremlin.
That being said, I do support your opinion that negotiations need to be carried out, and past agreements need to be fulfilled so that peace can once again happen in Ukraine.
I just wished the people of Eastern Ukraine that did take up guns and steal them and tanks actually attempted to negotiate with Kyiv instead of the hatred, torture, corruption, destruction, theft, and death they brought.
The rest were Russian little green men with guns and oppression and Russian imposed martial law.
Russian military imposed martial law and Russian military taking over the Parliament building there and replacing the ‘democratically elected’ leader of Crimea with some nutcase that got less then 3 percent of the vote in the last election.
Some more of the full report by the Council of Europe’s full international investigation into Odessa can be found here.
I thoroughly monitored the news about 1-2 years ago during those events.
I didn’t do a research, but I remember how all Ukrainian military bases were captured, with the only single base all over Crimea from several dozens gave a resistance.
I remember the one reported death of Ukrainian military officer, the ethnical Russian, Sergey Kakuryn, under some vague circumstances.
By the link you sent there are 2 more military persons died, but one accident might be countered twice and the second one may be misinterpret by Ukrainian navy spokesman.
Every such accident is a tragedy and I am not going to compare with Donbass.
I’m just trying to compensate the one sided interpretation of those events.
I feel shame for Russians, but I don’t appreciate Ukrainians at the same time.
Many of Ukrainian militaries, most of them Russians from Crimea, just stayed to serve at the same bases in Russia, others left to Ukraine, nobody pursued them, the military machines were returned.
The investigation on snipers at Maydan has not been completed and EU Conceal accused Ukraine in sabotaging of the investigation.
The intersected call discussing Maydan between Urmas Paet and Catherine Ashton.
They are saying, referring to Ukrainian politic Olga Bogomolets, that snipers at Maydan fired at both sides – Police and Demonstrants at the same time.
If that is true, the reason was obviously to rage the crowd and police to escalate the stuck contradiction and complete the uprising.
Another good topic for bellingcat investigation which they wouldn’t dare to touch.
The police at Maydan stayed and protected the government buildings, until the very last moment they had no order to advance nor spread the crowd.
Yanukovich was pressed by United States and EU, also including Putin, not to allow any violence, not to try to spread the demonstrants.
Just before the very end they concluded an agreement with the opposition.
And just after that agreement with the opposition was met, firearms appeared at Maydan from some demonstrants, then snipers, firing both sides.
Immediately after that the parliament expressed distrust to Yanukovich and he fled.
You can see how police is staying while they are burned by Molotov cocktails and without an order, don’t even try to respond.
The protests at Maydan started not from that, but from the canceled Euro-Association.
Turky has been waiting for 50 years to enter EU, associations were signed with many countries, meaning just special trade agreements.
Yanukovich tried to sit at two chairs at the same time, supporting populistic euro association in mass media and trying to balance with Russia interests on the other side.
At the very last moment Russia gave a loan with the first trench of 3 billion dollars and Yanukovish slammed brakes the EU trade association.
Mustafa Nayyem, an Ukrainian journalist was the first to call people in Facebook to gather at Maydan.
Yanukovich was elected mostly by Eastern Ukrainian parts and Crimean, not the Western ones, while the most active and aggressive at Maydan were nationalists from the West.
Because Ukraine was asked at Minsk to listen to Donbass, conduct elections, give amnesty, grant more independence to Donbass.
Ukraine prohibited any elections in ‘occupied’ areas as well as didn’t grant migrants from Donbass any rights to vote, took meaningless law amends only in the first consideration in parliament, but announced in the West that they have completed everything according to Minsk, they have never tried to negotiate with Donbass.
Putin utilized those sentiments trying to support one side, and provoke, but he didn’t create that tension.
And the fact that United States applied economic sanctions specifically against Crimea.
I’m not saying Putin was right, I’m trying to compensate the only single-sided, stupid, black-and-white, oversimplified, information mc’donalds, for complete idiots perceiving of those events.
I’m trying to welcome everybody to think by their own brains and not to follow the paid or motivated by other means propagandists from both or more sides.
Russia lies by telling outright lies, the Western powers tend to lie by telling half truths.
So, the Russian lies are far easier to debunk, you just need to find the facts on the ground the will directly debunk what is said.
To debunk the Western lies is usually far more difficult because often there is no contradiction between what is said and the facts on the ground.
To see the lies you have to consider what is not being reported on in the press, what questions are not being asked by journalists etc. etc.
Russia is just out to suppress all the criticism about their actions, mainly by providing false information.
IMHO, I don’t thing BC is on a bash Russia mission, it just seems that way due to all the silliness Putin is capable of.
We are waiting for you to an article about the American missiles to other countries and the United States lies.
If you are objective and impartial, then you will not be difficult to find it in the United States.
You do not need to publish only articles from the United States State Department.
P, C, Chris, do not forget to answer when will the article about American missiles outside the United States.
It is nice of you to offer suggestions of what you would like to see, but ultimately Mr Higgins runs the show.
Click on it and you may be amazed at how many different articles touch on those countries.
From what I see, Bellingcat writes many articles about different sections of the world, not just the Russian Federation.
The Kremlin needs its bubble busted about all its lies it tells the world and its people and I am glad BC is so helpful in exposing the outright fabrications and manufactured stories of vova.
If Russia goes back into its little hole and concentrates on helping its own nation and rebuilding from within, there would be little to write about them on.
Then BC has its pick of ~200 different countries to do reports on. 50 percent of Russia has no hot water or running water, that is more then 50 MILLION people Syava.
Alcoholism and drug use is a major problem there, resulting in many deaths.
It has the nom de guerre of being the Capital of the World’s fascists groups, half of them have offices there.
It has a million people a year leaving the Russian Federation for greener pastures.
Yes, the last year had a million or so Ukrainian refugees, but most of them have left again being just migrant workers and have sought other countries to live.
Instead, they are going around waging their own created and escalated wars in Ukraine and Syria and creating hatred towards Russians for many future generations.
You would see a lot less Russian articles, if the concentrated on domestic problems instead of the Kremlin making its sole goal in life to degrade America from being a Superpower, and trying to reclaim their seat as one.
They actually may have become a Superpower again, if they concentrated on domestic problems.
AS I see it now, they will not regain that title for the next 30 years at least.
They will remain a gas station with nuclear missiles that has a horrible complex about their value of human life.
Next ten years for Russia will see China taking over large parts of it, or the Kremlin selling it off to the highest bidder.
They have already sold off a large part of Siberia for China to develop and bring its people in.
The Kremlin could prevent that if they paid attention to taking care of itself and the festering wounds it has already.
Chris and BC crew, it is interesting to see how the Kremlin defenders are working your comment board pleading for different articles and at the same time trying to discredit your honesty by claiming your biased by being proDemocracy and USA aligned.
Section revelations about America is waiting for, write about Serbia, Libya, Iraq, the bombing of a hospital in Afghanistan.
