Tymoshenko's detractors claim she is a friend of the Kremlin who would turn the Western direction in Ukraine back to Russia.
On the eve of the 2019 presidential election in Ukraine, one of the most important questions is how should the country respond to the ongoing Russian aggression.
Of the current candidates, President Petro Poroshenko has made his position clear.
Obviously, we know where the pro-Russian candidates such as Yuriy Boiko and Vadym Rabinovych stand, and according to the polls their chances of being elected are slim to nil.
However, there is one candidate for whom there is no clear determination.
She promises to end the oligarchic rule and set a new economic course for Ukraine.
But her detractors claim she is a friend of the Kremlin who would turn the Western direction in Ukraine back to Russia.
She is Yuliya Tymoshenko and she is the candidate who right now holds the highest ratings.
Leader of the Batkivshchyna party, Tymoshenko is vying for the presidency for the third time.
In 2010 she lost to Viktor Yanukovych who following the Euromaidan Revolution fled the country in disgrace.
This year again her main contender is Poroshenko, but the most recent polls are showing her in the lead.
Released by Ilko Kucheriv of the Democratic Initiatives Foundation, the results show Tymoshenko in first place with 16.1% of the vote.
The polls also indicate the same results , if her opponent in the second round is Anatoliy Hrytsenko, leader of Hromadianska Pozytsiya.
Let’s take a closer look at the credibility of Tymoshenko’s pro-Russian leaning by comparing her platform to that of Poroshenko.
The main policy put forward by Poroshenko’s campaign is to move Ukraine away from the Kremlin.
If indeed Tymoshenko has a Russia bias, then it would definitely be advantageous for Poroshenko to play upon her—or any other candidate’s—pro-Kremlin slant.
However, thus far in the campaign the president has not made any accusations against Tymoshenko, neither publicly nor personally.
At most, he has made oblique references to her gas policy during the period she was prime minister— specifically, when she called upon Ukrainians not to trust populists who were promising to reduce gas prices.
However, accusations of a pro-Russian stance are being launched by others, including politicians and media.
For example, an MP from Poroshenko’s Bloc, Oleksandr Bryhynets, has pointed out that Tymoshenko is often absent when Parliament is voting on major anti-Russian rulings.
Political expert Oleksandr Paliy has questioned Tymoshenko’s proposal to liquidate the oil company Naftogaz after the elections.
He claims that by such actions Tymoshenko appears to be coveting the Kremlin’s favour.
For example, she is criticized for not condemning Russian aggression against Georgia in 2008.
To be fair, this is often unduly manipulated—although Tymoshenko kept silent for some days, she did later make a clear statement in support of the territorial integrity of Georgia.
Other troubling accusations are coming forward in regard to Ukraine’s NATO deliberations in 2008 when Tymoshenko was prime minister.
Tymoshenko is being blamed for turning Ukraine away from the NATO path—again suggesting that she did so to please Moscow.
As the elections near, it’s getting harder to know how to weigh these many accusations toward the Batkivshchyna leader.
At the meeting of the State Security and Defence Council, she stated “There should not be any martial law,” referring to the Georgian example when then president Mykheil Saakashvili tried to oppose the aggression and lost.
Later, Tymoshenko declared that releasing the transcripts from that meeting was equivalent to a crime.
Ukraine’s aggressive behaviour in the Black Sea and possible destabilization in Crimea, as well as Ukraine’s failed attempts to stop the construction of the Nord Stream-2.
Detektor Media emphasized the first propaganda message and noted that it often appeared in Tymoshenko’s messages.
In particular, it pointed out how she repeated the Russian propaganda that the Ukrainian government benefits from the war in Donbas.
She has repeated other propaganda messages, notably that policies of the post-2014 government have led to a demographic decline in Ukraine—people are leaving in droves, she claims.
Tymoshenko has also accused Poroshenko for his agreement with leaders of the “so-called” separatists, implying it would lead to escalating the war and the need to cancel the elections.
In this way, Russia wants to interfere in the inner political discussion and impose an opinion that there is some connection between the results of the elections and peace in Donbas,” writes the political monitor Petro Burkovskyi.
Detektor Media contends that when taking into account the strong desire for peace, such a manipulation of the facts repeated over-and-over can significantly influence one’s outlook.
In his analysis, Vitaliy Kulyk, director of the Center for Research on Civil Society Challenges, wrote that the topic of war is inconvenient for Tymoshenko—it raises too many complications and she seems to reference them in muted language.
He gives the example of her statement on Poroshenko’s agreement with the leaders of the so-called DNR and LNR, when she claimed that Poroshenko wants a big war with the seized territories—a war that would lead to imposing martial law and cancelling the elections.
Kulyk points out that the day after her statement, when Tymoshenko met with former United States Ambassador to Ukraine John E Herbst, she seemed to change her tune.
In his follow-up interview with the Russian-language channel RTVI, Herbst supported Tymoshenko by asserting she is not the Kremlin’s friend.
She now claims that her main goal upon re-election would be to release Ukraine’s territories from the occupants.
She says she would also insist that the United States increase pressure on the Russian Federation, both by political and economic means.
Kulyk suggests it would be wiser for Tymoshenko to change her posturing on war and peace and to reduce her emphasis on the election outcome.
Whether Tymoshenko herself contributes to the Kremlin’s supposed favouring of her candidacy or the Kremlin simply exploits all avenues for her victory, can not be known.
However, the Kremlin clearly sees her presidency as more advantageous than Poroshenko’s—particularly since the candidates Moscow was betting on are falling in the polls.
In November 2018, Alexei Venediktov, editor-in-chief of the Russian radio station Eho Moskvy appeared to confirm Kulyk’s concerns.
He claimed that by holding elections in the pro-Russian territories of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, the Kremlin totally violated the Minsk agreements.
He stated that with the current government in Ukraine, the conflict in Donbas would never be resolved.
I think that it’s not the elections in the LNR and DNR which important, but that said that with the current government in Ukraine we will not move forward.
Taking into consideration presidential campaign, this is a clear sign that Kremlin will support Yuliya Tymoshenko at the presidential elections,” writes Venediktov.
He goes on to say that including Tymoshenko in the Russian sanctions list in November 2018 could also increase her chances in the elections.
Many in Ukraine have speculated that including her in the sanctions was Russia’s attempt to whitewash any possible relation she might have to Moscow.
Tymoshenko is not by far the only candidate who uses populist slogans, however she is considered by some to be the worst.
In effect, it’s not her suspicious pro-Kremlin tendency that should be considered the most dangerous where Tymoshenko is concerned, rather two other facts—her past and her populism.
Tymoshenko’s career has been in the energy sector, which in Ukraine has always been closely related to Russia.
In one way or another, Tymoshenko’s views have been influenced by that fact.
Meantime, her relationships with Russia and with Putin have been shrouded in mystery.
For example, an article published in 2012 in lenta-ru, an online Russian media outlet , hinted at a pro-Russian stance for Tymoshenko.
In the article, Putin and Tymoshenko were described as having first met in March 2005 during Putin’s visit to Kyiv.
Despite the clear anti-Russian stance proclaimed during the Orange Revolution, then Prime Minister Tymoshenko assured Putin that she was ready to support Russian initiatives in the area of economic cooperation.
At the time, some speculated that her receptiveness toward the Kremlin could be explained by the criminal prosecution against her in Russia.
Those allegations were related to Unified Energy Systems of Ukraine, a company she headed in the 1990s.
When it came time to testify, she personally travelled to Moscow to do so in Russian court.
Ukrainian media have suggested it was in July 2005 that Putin first got Tymoshenko on the hook.
A popular story circulated that Tymoshenko was detected by the Russian Federal Security Services when she and her husband Oleksandr were detained at the Russian airport Vnukovo attempting to smuggle US$100,000.
The story was only published in 2012, and by then Tymoshenko’s policies had long shifted away from Russia.
Tymoshenko spent two-and-a-half years in prison for controversial gas agreements with Russia concluded during her stint as prime minister.
She gained wide support during her incarceration and was released following the Euromaidan Revolution.
Regardless of Tymoshenko’s potential links to Russia or her exploitive ways of winning popular support, if she continues to preach the narrative of “peace by any means” through negotiations with Moscow, the consequences to Ukraine may be tragic. or second, prepare for a full-scale intervention by the Russian forces.
Texty goes on to say that even if Tymoshenko refused to negotiate with the Kremlin, she would be met with strong opposition in the informational field.
As a consequence, the temptation to deal with the Kremlin would be weighty.
However, even if she agrees to peace with Russia, it doesn’t mean that Russia will not launch a full-scale offensive.
Texty concludes that Tymoshenko does not understand the new reality and the ramifications of the war.
In the end, even if her seeming pro-Russian ambivalence—ostensibly created by Ukrainian media—is exaggerated, Tymoshenko’s desire to win is never exaggerated.
Such an attitude might bring her the results she covets, but can hardly meet the hopes of Ukrainians.
