DIA-11-1704-161 PREFACE For more than 50 years, DIA officers have met the full range of security challenges facing our great nation.
A Modernizing Force. ..........4....46 Appendix A: Russian Strategic Rocket Forces... ............04.
Arms Sales: «2 ss Kwa de GE Sa eS ee wR ew we wo 85 RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations Kremlin Guards in 2017.
Fall and Rise of the Russian Military ollowing the collapse of the USSR in F 1991, the Russian Federation inherited several formidable tasks and challenges from its Soviet predecessor.
Russia’s new military faced dramatic budgetary, readiness, and personnel shortfalls, as well as uncertainty of its role as Moscow struggled to determine its place in the post-Cold War world.
Draft evasion became endemic, with many young Russian men using any and all legal or illegal measures to avoid military service.
One arguable exception to this series of military reform failures was the effort during the late 1990s to create “permanently ready forces,” a subset of the Russian force structure made up of units with better manning and equipment levels.
While they faced almost no opposition, the operation gave the world its first look at a military that appeared surprisingly disciplined and well-equipped for those whose image of Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations Russian forces was formed during the years of decay in the 1990s.
Ukrainian forces have stressed the capabilities of the Russian-enabled separatist units, especially with respect to C4ISR, artillery firepower, and air defense.
The Russian military today is on the rise—not as the same Soviet force that faced the West in the Cold War, dependent on large units with heavy equipment, but as a smaller, more mobile, balanced force rapidly becoming capable of conducting the full range of modern warfare.
The new Russian military is a tool that can be used to underpin Moscow’s stated ambitions of being a leading force in a multipolar world.
DIA, D3 Design ince returning to power in 2012, Rustoo heavily in favor of the United States at sian President Putin has sought to Russia’s expense.
Moscow seeks to promote a reassert Russia as a great power on multi-polar world predicated on the principles the global stage and to restructure an internaof respect for state sovereignty and non-intertional order that the Kremlin believes is tilted ference in other states’ internal affairs, the RUSSIA MILITARY POWER primacy of the United Nations, and a careful balance of power preventing one state or group of states from dominating the international order.
This perception of vulnerability vis-a-vis the United States is most clearly evident in the latest Russian National Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations Security Strategy published in December 2015.
The security strategy also cites the buildup of NATO military capabilities closer to the Russian border, the deployment of United States missile defense capabilities in Europe, and the ongoing United States pursuit of strategic non-nuclear precision weapon systems as a serious threat to Russian security.
Russia also has a deep and abiding distrust of United States efforts to promote democracy around the world and what it perceives as a United States campaign to impose a single set of global values.
It has also restructured its internal security forces to ensure a more loyal and responsive apparatus.
Russia maintains security forces that are not subordinate to the military to conduct a range of internal security and policing functions.
Ministry of Emergency Civil defense, disaster response, 82 Situations humanitarian relief, firefighting 282,000 500) Federal Protection Service Presidential, VIP, and regime 83 ; 20,000 protection *Estimate Insurgency in the South Russia’s enduring insurgency in its restive North Caucasus region continues at a consistent but low level.
These groups and their members conduct small-scale operations and bombings against Russian foreces—primarily from the Ministry of Internal Affairs police or the National Guard.
RUSSIA MILITARY POWER External Defense Relations The Commonwealth of Independent States was a regional coordination body created among a number of the former Soviet states in the wake of the dissolution of the former Soviet Union.
Some of the non-Russian member states worry that Moscow is using the organization to undermine their sovereignty and Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations independence and are cautious of deepening military cooperation with Russia, as evidenced by Uzbekistan’s withdrawal in 2007.
Nevertheless, the Kremlin continues to view its military outreach to these countries as important to enhancing its global stature and strengthening its regional influence.
Defense Budget Russian government spending on national defense has generally grown over the last decade and in 2016 reached a post-Soviet record.
Funding for the 10 year program was heavily back-loaded such that just 31% was to be spent in the first 5 years and nearly 70% was to be spent from 2016 to 2020.1% In order for Moscow to meet its original target for SAP spending and maintain its operational spending at current levels, defense spending from 2016 through 2020 will have to increase substantially over 2011-2015 levels.
Moscow fears that the speed, accuracy, and quantity of non-nuclear strategic precision-guided weapons can achieve strategic effects on par with nuclear weapons,"" one of the primary reasons that since at least 1993 (and most recently codified in the 2014 Military Doctrine) Russia has reserved the right to a nuclear response to a non-nuclear attack that threatens the existence of the state.
In the West, deterrence is often seen as an established condition, whereas in Moscow it is an active, flexible process that continues throughout the conflict spectrum.
Closely linked to strategic deterrence is the concept of strategic stability.
Strategic stability is the sum total of political, economic, military, and other measures (e.g., Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations force) retained by states in a stable balance whereby neither side has the opportunity, interest, or intent to carry out military aggression.
Russia has observed modern conflicts and incorporated aspects of these observations into its deterrence and warfighting strategies.
Military and Security Leadership Decisionmaking in Russia is highly centralized, and President Vladimir Putin dominates Russia’s decisionmaking, including for military and security issues.
Open source The General Staffs primary mission is to ensure the military security of the Russian Federation , that is, to protect the vital interests of the state and society from internal and external threats.
He is a respected armor officer with substantial combat experience and time in command in Russia’s restive North RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations Caucasus region.
Open source General Lieutenant Sergey Rudskoy served as first deputy chief of the GOU for 9 years before becoming its chief in November 2015, Rudskoy has been the General Staff's senior representative at international forums, and he will likely leverage this experience to enhance coordination with other militaries operating in Syria.
As such, he is the primary decisionmaker and is authorized to assume direct command and control during times of crisis and martial law.
This includes overseeing all hiring, equipping, training, care, and feeding of military personnel.
He uses the nuclear briefease, which is carried by officers who always remain near the president.
As heir to the former Soviet Union's nuclear arsenal, Russia has one of the world's two largest inventories of strategic weapons.
Land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles are controlled by the Strategic Rocket Forces , and the sea-based and air strategic systems are managed by the Navy and Aerospace force, respectively.
Moscow plans to spend about $28 billion by 2020 to upgrade the capacity of its strategic nuclear triad.
The second element of the nuclear triad is a fleet of at least 10 nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines under administrative control of the Naval High Command.
The Russian strategic Navy is modernizing, mainly by building and deploying the DOLGORUKIY-class SSBN platform for the new SS-N-82 BULAVA sea-launched ballistic missile .2% The third element of the nuclear triad is the Russian Aerospace Force's fleet of strategic bombers, which forms the core of the LongRange Aviation Command.
The new bomber design is expected to have some stealth and shortor rough-runway capabilities, and employ both conventional and nuclear armament.?:210 The main function of strategic forces is effective, reliable deterrence.
These include air-to-surface missiles, short-range ballistic missiles, gravity Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations bombs, and depth charges for medium-range bombers, tactical bombers, and naval aviation, as well as anti-ship, anti-submarine, and anti-aircraft missiles, and torpedoes for surface ships and submarines.
Moscow has completed destruction activities and closed the facilities in Gornyy, Kambarka, Maradykovskiy, Leonidovka, Schchuch’ye, and Pochep and continues destruction of its remaining chemical weapons stockpile at a facility in Kizner.
At the same time, air forces would also prioritize the defense of the country against enemy air attack and conduct close air support of RUSSIA MILITARY POWER ground operations, achieving air supremacy in the first days of the war using all means.
This emphasis on strategic air operations is reflected in long-term procurement goals of platforms and weapons focused on space, aerospace defense, and precision-guided munitions.
Though still in development, Russia’s 21st century integrated air defense system will be designed to integrate future and existing systems around a central command structure that is designed Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations “ws e Russian S-400 Surface-to-air missile systems a key component of Moscow’s A2/AD strategy.
These include the continued production and deployment of coastal defense cruise missiles, air/surface/ sub-surface-launched anti-ship cruise missiles ,“* submarine-launched torpedoes, and naval mines, along with Russian fighter, bomber, and surface-to-air missile capability.
RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Russia was unable to achieve real progress in the development of precision strike until the first decade of the 21st century, when it was able to create a viable state armaments program that allowed prioritization of certain key components of 21st-century warfare.
Between 2010 and 2015, Russia’s strategic forces, space and aerospace defense platforms, and precision-guided munitions** such as ISKANDER, KALIBR, or KH-101 were defined as priorities, and system development, production, and testing occurred.
Moscow seeks to maintain the health of its current constellations Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations Kh-101/102 air-launched cruise missiles on a Tu-95MS heavy bomber; Moscow first used its precision strike arsenal in combat during a series of 2015 strike operations by seaand air-launched cruise missiles against targets in Syria.
Over the next several years, Russia will prioritize the modernization of its existing communications, navigation, and earth observation systems, while continuing to rebuild its electronic intelligence and early warning system constellations.
Russia’s current systems provide an array of capability including high-resolution imagery, terrestrial and space weather, communications, navigation, missile warning, electronic intelligence, and scientific observations.
On 1 August 2015, Russia created the Russian Federation Aerospace Forces by merging RUSSIA MILITARY POWER the former Air Force and Aerospace Defense Troops.
Moscow views information and psychological Information Confrontation warfare as a measure to neutralize adversary actions in peace to prevent escalation to crisis or war.
Russian propaganda targets a wide variety “Information confrontation,” or [Pb , is the Russian government’s term for conflict in the information sphere.
RUSSIA MILITARY POWER of audiences, including its own population, selected populations of other countries, domestic and foreign political elites, and the West writ large.
Compromised material can then be leaked to the media at inopportune times. e Hacktivists.
These groups Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations appeal to Russia due to the difficulty of attribution and the level of anonymity provided.
Under the guise of hacktivism, a group called “CyberCaliphate,” seemingly ISIS associated, conducted a hack against French station TV5 Monde in January 2015.
The intent is to demoralize, embarrass, and create distrust of elected officials.
Bots are automated pushers of content on yA a> y y ra Russia uses a Troll Army to disseminate and overwhelm blogs and twitter communications.
Media Laws A Hedge Against Instability In the past decade, Russia has implemented numerous laws curbing domestic media in broadcast, print, and cyber media, taking an abrupt turn from the post-Soviet glasnost policies of media “openness” and its own constitutional guarantees of freedom of speech.
The use of social media to organize opposition street protests in Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations 2011 and 2012 prompted a reappraisal of official internet policy.
Drawing on a combination of facets from Russia’s whole-of-government or interdepartmental strategy and overt or covert military means, indirect action seeks to exploit weaknesses and fissures in target countries in order to fulfill Moscow’s desired national goals.
Further, military academics have suggested that electronic warfare fuse with cyber operations, allowing electronic warfare forces to corrupt and disable computers and networked systems as well as disrupt use of the electromagnetic spectrum.?”.3%4 Russia has aspirations to develop and field a full spectrum of electronic warfare capabilities to counter Western C4ISR and weapons guidance systems.
In Syria, Russia used a mix of maritime and air assets to forward deploy its forces, and Russia will almost certainly be able to logistically support its current level of operations in Syria via a mix of those means for the foreseeable future.
After politically supporting the Syrian regime throughout the Syrian civil war, Moscow began to deploy military forces to Syria in September 2015, likely both to shore up the regime and assert Russia’s status as a military player and powerbroker in the Middle East.
Moscow has launched Kalibr land-attack cruise missiles from naval units in the Caspian Sea and the Mediterranean Sea, demonstrated new capabilities with air-launched cruise missiles from its Tu-160M1 BLACKJACK and Tu-95MS BEAR H heavy bombers, forward-staged long-range Tu-22M3 BACKFIRE bombers for strikes from Iranian territory, and deployed some of its most advanced air and air defense systems to Syria.
AFP Underground Facilities Russia inherited a vast underground facilities program from the Soviet Union, primarily designed to ensure the survival of the leadership and military command and control in wartime.
Two of the most important underground complexes for the National Command RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Authority and General Staff are located some 60 kilometers south of the city.
It encompasses a set of interrelated organizational and Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations technical measures and practical actions of staffs, troops, and facilities intended to deceive foreign intelligence.
For example, maskirovka in rocket units and subunits is organized and carried out for the purpose of ensuring that the enemy experiences maximum difficulty in collecting intelligence data to reduce the effectiveness of strikes, but is also carried out to create the false appearance of a combined unit in support of deception at the operational level of war.
By the time Moscow admitted to the presence of Russian troops in Crimea, this deception had created enough confusion to forestall significant international intervention in the conflict, and the ground reality was irreversibly tipped in Russia’s favor.
Shutterstock 45 46 Outlook: A Modernizing Force 4 | 1 he Russian military has built on the military doctrine, structure, and capabilities of the former Soviet Union, and although still dependent on many of the older Soviet platforms, the Russians have modernized their military strategy, doctrine, and tactics to include use of asymmetric weapons like cyber and indirect action such as was observed in Ukraine.
RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations Appendix A: Russian Strategic Rocket Forces The Strategic Rocket Forces (Russian name: Raketniye Voyska Strategicheskovo Naznacheniya ), is one of the most potent missile forces in the world.
Eight of the divisions operate road-mobile ICBMs, with the other four armed with silo-based missiles.
The SRF arsenal includes three older ICBM types—46 SS-18s and 30 SS-19s in silos, and 72 road-mobile SS-25s—and two newer ICBM types—60 silobased and 18 road-mobile SS-27 Mod 1s, and 73 of the most modernized SS-27 Mod 2s.1.
Russia has stated that it will soon begin testing a developmental, heavy, liquid-propellant ICBM called the Sarmat to replace the aging SS-18.
Although the number of missiles in the Russian ICBM force RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations will continue to decrease because of arms conmissiles will be equipped with multiple wartrol agreements, aging missiles, and resource heads.
The composition of the force is changconstraints, Russia intends to retain the largest ing significantly to meet the deployed strategic ICBM force outside the United States.%8 warhead total limit of 1,550.
The Western Military District has three numbered combined-arms armies , the Southern and Central Military Districts each have two, and the Eastern Military District has four.
Its main peacetime missions include maintaining adequate combat readiness, participating in international peacekeeping operations, participating in disaster recovery efforts, and assisting in the maintenance of internal security, if needed.
AFP RUSSIA MILITARY POWER reconnaissance, engineer, nuclear, biological and chemical defense, and signal troops. e Motorized Rifle Troops units are the most abundant formations in Russia's Ground Troops.
They support Motorized Rifle Troop missions with direct fires during meeting engagements.°* e Missile Troops and Artillery are the main means of indirect fires for Russian combined arms operations.
Rocket-artillery units operate multiple rocket launchers , and combined artillery units operate composite towed or self-propelled artillery and MLRs. e Air Defense Troops provide air defense for the Ground Troops.
The transition to the brigade structure was intended to optimize Russia's ground forces to fight in what the Russians call ""local wars and armed conflicts,"" limited wars along Russia's periphery, which the Russian General Staff believes to be very likely under modern conditions.
The re-introduction of some smaller divisions may be based more on their potential intimidation value than they are on their potential value in combat.
A typical combined arms army includes two to four combined arms brigades, usually motorized rifle RUSSIA MILITARY POWER brigades and in a few cases a tank brigade, plus artillery, missile, air defense, engineer, chemical defense, communications, intelligence and reconnaissance, and rear support units.
It, like the combined arms army, is both an operational and administrative Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations unit.
All Russian combined-arms brigades, however, regardless of specific primary combat vehicle, are organized in essentially the same manner.
In addition, the primary equipment of a separate motorized rifle brigade is shown in the table below.
The VDV's increased mobility comes at the expense of armor and firepower; its primary combat vehicles are generally lighter than their Ground Troops counterparts.
The MBTs are not intended for air drops, but will accompany VDV ground maneuver formations to increase firepower and lethality.
Russian VDV Primary Combat Vehicles Coastal Troops The Russian Coastal Troops consist of Coastal Missile Artillery Forces and Coastal Troops.
Efforts are underway to defense in Russia is primarily centered on rearm the coastal missile force with new, lonanti-ship missile systems.
The merger places former space and aerospace defense assets vital to strategic aerospace operations under one organizational structure.
The Russian Aerospace Forces include four tactical air armies, which are aligned with the military districts.
The 6th Air Force and Air Defense Army is subordinate to the Western Military 1612-11135 Eastern Military District e CHINA e Bomber e Fighter e Transport --Arctic boundary of OSK North Fleet MONGOLIA Moscow maintains aviation units in Armenia and Kyrgyzstan, represented on the map by the two fighter base symbols outside Russia’s borders.
The LRA is tasked with long-range bombardment of strategic targets with conventional Russian Air Forces Order-of-Battle* or nuclear weapons.
The primary aircraft operated by the VTA include the Il-76, An-124, An-22, An-26, An-72, and An-12.
However, the State Armaments Program of 2015, and the subsequent 2020 plan, significantly enhanced support for the purchase and employment of the newest and most capable air defense equipment including radar, surface to air misRUSSIA MILITARY POWER siles, command and control, and electronic warfare equipment.
Concurrent to the acquisition plan, Russia continues to support research and development efforts in the air defense realm.
The kill chain conBuilding a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations tains the seven elements that a fully functional Russian military integrated air defense system would employ in an air defense scenario.
Russia employs its military integrated air defense system at home and abroad.
With the economic stabilization of the Russian Federation in the early 2000s, the past Russian Navy Organization Russian Navy Northern Fleet Joint Strategic Command Eastern Military District/ Western Military District/ 10 years have seen a steady increase in the maintenance, training, and deployment activity of the Navy and, more importantly, the activation of a broad submarine and ship construction program to recapitalize the fleet.
Beginning in 2014 after the occuNSE E 67 68 pation of Crimea, new units began to enter the order of battle including modern coastal missiles and naval infantry.
Most of the flotilla’s combat power are based at Makhachkala, possibly to be closer to regional threats and also to avoid having to navigate the Volga River Delta to reach the sea, as is the case with ships based at Astrakhan.
All sea-launched ballistic missiles carried by these submarines—SS-N-18 , SS-N-23 , and SS-N-32 (DOLGORUKTY)—<can reach United States targets from their homeRUSSIA MILITARY POWER base piers and, if required, could be launched with the submarines on the surface.
Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations Surface Forces The Russian Navy’s major combatant surface ships, frigates and larger, comprise some 32 units assigned across all 4 fleets.
These are supplemented by 18 minor combatants and 4 amphibious assault ships.
The new SS-N-82 BULAVA submarine launched ballistic missile is being produced for the DOLGORUKITY-class SSBNs.
Although the FSB and SVR are considered military services under Russian federal law, they are more akin to civilian intelligence agencies.
According to Russian law, the SVR is authorized to carry out the following missions:*% * Conduct intelligence.
Putin reestablished the Military Industrial Commission in 2007 to better manage state control of defense production and acquisition.
RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations In addition, Russian officials claim a new class of hypersonic vehicle is being developed to allow Russian strategic missiles to penetrate missile defense systems.
Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missiles The SS-N-18 SLBM, first deployed in 1978, is a two-stage liquid-propellant system designed to be launched from a DELTA III submarine.
SS-26 ISKANDER-M is a mobile, single-stage, solid-propellant missile that is replacing the SS-21.
The corporation, which has oversight of 30 weapon manufacturing enterprises, is Russia’s largest developer and producer of anti-ship, anti-radar, and multipurpose missiles for tactical airborne, ship borne, and coastal cruise missile systems.
The missiles are the follow-on system to the Kh-55, the main armament of Russia’s Tu-95 and Tu-160 bombers.
Bombers Russia plans to upgrade and operate its fleet of Tu-160/BLACKJACK, Tu-95MS BEAR H, and Tu-22M/BACKFIRE bombers beyond 2030.60.68 The upgrades are intended to keep older aircraft operational until the fifth-generation PAK-DA bomber reaches production.
AFP RUSSIA MILITARY POWER engines, which will be produced at the Samara-based enterprise Kuznetsov, currently being modernized to start production by 2020.54 Fighters Russian fighter production occurs at several plants, including the Sukhoi Aircraft-Manufacturing Plants in Komsomolsk, Irkutsk and Novosibirsk, which produce the Su-30SM, Su-34, and Su-35; the MiG plants in Lukhovitsy and Nizhniy Novgorod produce the MiG-29.615 The fifth-generation fighter program began in 2008 and is a high-priority item for the Russian air force.
Russia is producing its new transport, the I1-76MD-90A, which is a redesign of the Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations Il-76/CANDID transport, and plans to produce 39 I1-76MD-90A planes by 2020.61 The Ilyushin Design Bureau has begun development of the Il-78MD-90A refueler and the Il-112 light military transport, based on Il-76 airframe design.
While construction of patrol boats and corvettes has continued at a steady pace, major combatants and amphibious ships have encountered significant delays.
There are currently three in RUSSIA MILITARY POWER service, with an additional eight scheduled to enter service in the coming years.
Shutterstock Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations Ground Arms Since 2010, there have been significant improvements in the condition of Russian ground arms, including the modernization and upgrade of the main battle tank inventory.
While Russia’s Ministry of Defense planned to phase out the T-80, the Omsk Transport Machine Building Plant, one of Russia’s two MBT production and modernization facilities, is planning to upgrade the T-80U with Sosna-U, Relikt third-generation dynamic protection complex, and advanced radio and C2 systems.
New Technology The Uralvagonzavod Corporation is Russia’s primary MBT production and modernization center and is responsible for the production of Russia’s newest MBT to fulfill part of the 2020 and 2025 State Armament Program.
This universal platform offers the Russian defense industry a more streamlined 83 84 T-14 Armata Tank. means of armored vehicle production and will reduce maintenance and modernization costs in the future.
Russian MRLs are produced in large quantities for the Russian Army and export customers worldwide.
In 2016, Russian officials announced that Moscow exported $14. billion in military products in 2015.851 Russia is an exporter of nearly every category of conventional military equipment, from small arms to long-range air defense systems and submarines.
In the air defense sector, S-400 TRIUMF, ANTEY-2500, BUK-M2E, and TORM2E surface-to-air missile systems, the PANTSIR-S1 air defense missile/gun system, and IGLA-S MANPADS are top sellers.
Similarly, Russian officials have acknowledged that exchanging arms for access to customers’ natural resources may be 85 86 necessary to stave off competition from other suppliers.
President Putin has expressed Moscow’s willingness to improve financing options for contracts, expand offerings for joint production and local assembly of defense equipment in customers’ countries, and improve upon post-sale support and equipment servicing.
Russia also is touting the effectiveness of its combat operations in Syria and using this to add cachet to its military products for export.
Moscow believes that advertising many of its weapons systems as combat-proven will generate additional interest and orders from customers.
Business Insider, 18 Mar 2015, www. businessinsider.com/russia-is-modernizing-its-air-force-201 5-3.
Vedomosti Online, 22 Dec 2011, www.vedomosti.ru/newsline/ news/1448040/oshibka_medvedeva.
