Ukraine’s Berkut units were disbanded after Maidan precisely because the units had been so discredited by their violent suppression of the protests.
Kostenko was charged with inflicting minor injuries to a Ukrainian Berkut officer in Kyiv on Feb 18, 2014.
Since the Berkut officer had not been a Russian national in Feb 2014, there was no possibility of keeping Kostenko in detention and then imprisoning him.
The trial of 22-year-old Kolomiyets on June 10, 2016 sent a particularly chilling message to all Ukrainians since the young man was effectively abducted from Russia and taken to Crimea.
Kolomiyets was charged with ‘attempted murder’ of two Ukrainian Berkut officers during the Euromaidan protests in Kyiv.
Some of the Crimea Berkut unit who betrayed their oath after Russia’s invasion and annexation of Crimea have since helped Russia to imprison Ukrainian activists in trials of astounding lawlessness.Two men are currently imprisoned in Russia for ‘offences’ which they allegedly committed in the capital of Ukraine before Russia’s invasion of Crimea.
The two cases make it abundantly clear that no Ukrainian who took part in Maidan should consider going to Crimea while it remains under Russian occupation, and they travel to Russia at great risk also.Read alsoKyiv Berkut's ex-chief spotted in Moscow dispersing rallies Oleksandr Kostenko is a former police officer who took part in Euromaidan from the beginning.
The only ‘lawyer’ present was one appointed by the investigators, and a ‘confession’ was obtained from Kostenko, as well as a statement that he had been beaten on the street by unidentified individuals.Kostenko retracted all such ‘confessions’ as soon as he was able to see to a real lawyer.Read alsoUkraine's chief prosecutor expects completion of Maidan investigation by year-endKostenko was charged with inflicting minor injuries to a Ukrainian Berkut officer in Kyiv on Feb 18, 2014.
The Memorial Human Rights Centre soon afterward declared Kostenko a political prisoner.Read alsoFirst Blood of EuroMaidan.
He was seized by local police on May 15, 2015, tortured, and then taken to Crimea.Kolomiyets was charged with ‘attempted murder’ of two Ukrainian Berkut officers during the Euromaidan protests in Kyiv.
As with Kostenko, a second charge was thrown in – this time of allegedly transporting hashish, with the investigators making no effort to render the story credible.Kolomiyets was sentenced to 6 years on the ‘attempted murder’ charges and 4 years over the drugs charge.The Memorial Human Rights Centre also declared Kolomiyets a political prisoner.
