Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine is a result of not only the policies of the Kremlin empire-minded chauvinists led by Vladimir Putin, but are also the result of strategic miscalculations and the irresponsibility of Ukrainian political elites throughout the years of Ukraine’s independence.
For years, Ukraine's top political and military leadership pursued the illusion of a possible strategic partnership with Russia.
Meanwhile, the Kremlin was consistently implementing a policy aimed at destroying Ukraine.
Plan A for the gradual and ""peaceful"" destruction of Ukraine, and Plan B for a one-time conquest by force.
The former plan was envisaged as a ""humanitarian"" aggression and the use of soft rather than hard, military power to destroy Ukrainian identity, a fundamental formative element of any national State.
The Yanukovych regime was Russia’s partner in its ""humanitarian"" aggression against Ukraine.
Controlled by Russian special services, it pursued anti-Ukrainian ""humanitarian"" policies.
Yet, even though Moscow was obviously aware of the poor condition of the Ukrainian Army, it clearly underestimated the aspiration of Ukrainians for freedom, and their determination and ability to resist.
Sadly, Ukraine’s political and military leaders failed to organize immediate resistance to Russia’s aggression shortly after it began.
As a result, Ukraine has lost Crimea and control over parts of Ukraine-Russia border territories in the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, through which Russian mercenaries, diversionists and regular Russian Army units infiltrated into Ukraine.
Thanks to the heroic dedication of the Ukrainian armed forces, the National Guard, which was set up under the umbrella of the Interior Ministry, and the volunteer battalions, large parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts were liberated from the aggressor.
However, Petro Poroshenko’s reluctance to introduce martial law and to mobilize the entire potential of the State and society to fend off the enemy was among the factors that extended the war's duration.
Today, Ukraine's elites, all of Ukrainian society, and members of the international community, must realize that Russia is waging a total war against Ukraine and, at the same time, is testing the readiness and ability of Western democracies to resist the Kremlin's revanchist and expansionist plans.
Russia's ultimate goal is neither to annex parts of Ukrainian territory nor to deprive Ukraine of the right to make its own civilization choice, but rather to destroy all things Ukrainian that exist and Ukrainian statehood as such.
The Russian aggression is violating the international order, threatening global security and undermining nuclear non-proliferation regime.
In resisting Russian aggression, Ukraine is at the same time is fighting for the West and its values.
If the Western democracies care about their own security, they should stand shoulder to shoulder with Ukraine to resist the aggressor with the aim to defend common civilization values, world peace and international order.
The proposed paper below is an attempt to provide a comprehensive analysis of the problems Ukraine and the international community are facing as a result of the recent war of aggression by Russia.
On September 18, 2014, I had the honor and privilege to personally witness a truly historic event Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko addressing a joint session of Congress.
President Poroshenko's speech was very eloquent and emotionally charged, but laser focused on the realities of Ukraine's present geopolitical situation.
His oration garnered many a standing ovation from members of the House and Senate.
His speech emphasized that Russia's war against Ukraine is not only a local war of aggression, but, if this unprovoked hostility in violation of international norms is not contained and reversed now, it will infect Europe in the future with bloodshed and will ultimately militarily engage the United States, thus, returning the world to the dangerous nuclear bipolar political and military stance that existed in the previous century.
In President Poroshenko's words ""It is Europe’s, and it is America’s war, too.
In return, Russia, the United Kingdom, France and China and the United States agreed, jointly and severally, to assure Ukraine's economic, political independence and territorial integrity.
In the past year, Russia breached this international agreement in a blatant and violent manner.
It first invaded and annexed Crimea, and then instigated an insurrection in Eastern Ukraine by alleged separatists/terrorists that were guided and supported by Russian troops, which hostilities are in reality an invasion and violation of Ukraine's territorial integrity.
Needless to say, the initial response to Russia's invasion were numerous verbal condemnations of the Kremlin's actions which resounded vociferously throughout the world.
As a stern scolding of Russia, the United States and the EU instituted a variety of economic sanctions on an escalating basis.
It is true that these economic sanctions have had a negative effect on Russia's economy, but it has not stopped the Kremlin's aggression and Putin has doubled down even further on his bellicose rhetoric and actions.
Ukrainian President Poroshenko acknowledged and appreciated this American non-lethal assistance for Ukraine but stated Ukraine's soldiers in the field "".. need more military equipment – both non-lethal and lethal.
Recently, the American Congress initiated legislation that would give President Obama the authority to grant lethal and nonlethal military aid to Ukraine.
The Ukraine Freedom Support Act of 2014 sailed through the Foreign Relations Committee of the Senate with unanimous bipartisan vote in short order.
Hopefully, Congress will act upon this legislation in a timely manner since time is of the essence for Ukraine.
After his speech, President Poroshenko ceremoniously met with American President Obama at the White House only to get additional verbal assurances and pontifical statements of solidarity – but no lethal military assistance nor MNNA status.
This ill-founded foreign-policy position is grossly naïve at best and is grounded on a systemic lack of understanding of the historical realities of the existing world order, how it came to be, and inadvertently puts global stability into great jeopardy.
International agreements are not to be disregarded merely because there's no money in it especially if they deal with nuclear nonproliferation.
America readily supplies lethal weapons worth billions of dollars to questionable allies in the Middle East.
We are ready to put ""boots on the ground"" to protect countries in that region, many of which have well-equipped armies of their own and the economic strength to fully support their own military, but these same countries do not put their citizenry's boots on the ground to defend their own territorial integrity from invasion.
However, when it comes to Ukraine, which does not ask America to put our soldiers in the line of fire Ukrainians already have their sons and daughters dying daily on the front lines but asks only for adequate weapons so that Ukraine's sons and daughters can suitably defend themselves, America rebuffs Ukraine's dire requests with lame excuses.
The Obama Administration must seriously take a long hard look at itself and its foreign-policy and the image it portrays of the United States and of our core American principles to the rest of the world.
The Administration must recognize that its present anemic policy towards Ukraine jeopardizes our own country's national security in the future.
Regrettably, the Administration's actions to date have given the green light to despots in other countries to ignore international norms and freely grab territory by unprovoked surreptitious warfare.
These dictators only need to make an economic calculation as to whether they can withstand the financial price of a scolding by the West--and all international agreements, promises, and pledges they signed don't matter.
International politics and world law and order should not be all about money.
America can continue to give blankets to Ukrainian soldiers so they can be warm in the winter -and also to use them to cover and bury their dead.
It does not reflect the principles of freedom upon which this country was created.
We Americans should and must do much, much more to aid Ukraine and to reestablish the primacy of the principles that we claim are our core values and that our promises mean something.
On September 18, 2014, the President of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko, will address a joint session of the United States Congress.
No doubt he will strongly applaud the latest round of sanctions that were imposed on Russia by the United States and the European Union on September 12, 2014 in response to Russia's ongoing invasion of Ukraine.
But he will also likely repeat his prior requests for immediate military aid from the United States and its Western partners so that Ukraine can defend itself from further Russian aggression.
It will not be a request for ""boots on the ground"" but for military weapons and supplies for Ukraine's armed forces.
Most of the civilized countries of the world have condemned the Russian invasion of Ukraine as an affront to international rule of law and as a violation of the numerous international treaties and agreements that require civilized countries to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of states.
These linchpin agreements such as the UN Charter and the Helsinki Accords maintained peace and stability on the Eurasian continent for over 70 years.
Regrettably, it is now patently obvious that Russia's actions clearly evidence that it will not abide by any promises that it has made or will make in any future treaty or other international agreement.
Numerous concerned voices in the American political, academic and mass media arena have urgently called for America and the EU to give immediate military aid to Ukraine.
All of these voices recognize that despite the increased economic sanctions, the Kremlin obstinately continues its military buildup within Ukraine and continues to violate the cease-fire agreement reached in Minsk earlier this month.
Currently, additional convoys of ""humanitarian"" trucks openly unload lethal weapons inside Ukrainian territory and Russian military forces in and outside of Ukrainian borders are bombarding Ukrainian defensive military positions within Ukraine.
Putin has doubled down on his bellicose pronouncements and has vehemently restated his resolve to return Russia to the previous borders of the former USSR and even to expand the Kremlin's hegemony over the eastern parts of the European Union.
He has now publicly declared the United States, NATO, and the European Union to be enemies of Russia and announced an escalated buildup of his military arsenal.
Putin has also made not so veiled threats of using his nuclear military capabilities in his quest.
Needless to say, the conquest of Ukraine is the Kremlin's first necessary step in achieving its imperialistic goals.
It is obvious that the present economic sanctions in and of themselves are woefully deficient and will not stop Russia's unlawful aggression against Ukraine.
Had Ukraine received American and Western military aid earlier in a timely fashion, Ukraine would have been in a better military posture to repel the pro-Russian terrorists and seal its border from further Russian incursion.
Prior to September 5, 2014, Ukrainian military forces were in a strategic position to defeat the pro-Russian terrorists in Ukraine.
On that day, NATO leaders were debating what sanctions to impose upon Russia.
In response to the verbal threats of NATO leaders which the Kremlin perceived as a shallow non-consequential scolding that same day Moscow ordered its troops into Ukraine with superior weaponry and fire power to substantially push back the Ukrainian military from its gains painfully attained with the life and blood of many a brave Ukrainian soldier.
The Ukrainian American Bar Association strongly urges the United States Congress to expeditiously pass on a fast-track basis this legislation so as to signal to the world that the United States abides by its word in international agreements that it signs and will help Ukraine defend its territorial integrity and sovereignty as the quid pro quofor surrendering its nuclear arsenal.
Failure to do so in a timely and expeditious manner will only reaffirm Vladimir Putin's strongly held belief that the United States is only a paper tiger – all words and no teeth.
If the United States does not keep its word regarding sovereignty and security guarantees relating to nuclear non-proliferation agreements, why should any other country such as Iran, Pakistan, India, Israel or North Korea have any faith in America's representations or promises in future nuclear disarmament negotiations and accords.
Any tardiness or inaction by the United States Congress in rendering timely military aid to Ukraine will also condemn Ukraine to an endless and hopeless waiting for American assistance -as the characters in ""Waiting for Godot""-only to have its sovereign territory painfully eroded by Russian aggression, with extensive casualties to its population, with millions of people displaced, and many a young Ukrainian soldier killed by a stronger and brutal aggressor nation whose only goal is imperial territorial expansion.
All this may be avoided if the United States Congress acts now and fulfills its obligation and duty to give timely military assistance to Ukraine.
In the past few weeks, what was painfully obvious from the very beginning to Ukrainians is now grudgingly acknowledged by the rest of the world.
Russia has now openly invaded Ukraine and only Putin's generously paid Western apologists or the extremely naïve could argue otherwise.
The Russian government's continuing boldfaced lies that the alleged Donbas ""separatists"" are self-reliant disgruntled Ukrainians who are Russian speakers seeking only to protect their rights can no longer be credulously accepted by the West.
Russia is and has for months been in a state of war against Ukraine -its sole objective is to eradicate Ukraine's independence, and return it to a vassal state under the dictatorship of Moscow thus giving a rebirth to a new USSR-like empire.
Since the cataclysmic events of World War II, the world's nations have attempted to establish basic principles of international law and behavior to be adhered to by the governments of all nations so as to prevent future conflagrations on a global scale.
The UN Charter, the Helsinki Final Act and the various organic documents of the European Union, have had as their linchpin the principle of territorial integrity and security and the inviolability of borders of independent states.
NATO was created in part to protect the territorial integrity of its member states from outside military threats.
Rather, Russia has intentionally trampled upon Ukraine's political and economic sovereignty and its territorial integrity for quite some time in full view of the world.
Regrettably, the response from the United States and the European Union has been a blinders-like muted scolding of Putin with tempered economic sanctions but specifically excluding any military assistance to Ukraine.
In recent days, and to the world's astonishment, Putin has brandished not so veiled bellicose threats emphasizing the nuclear armament power that he has at his disposal.
Clearly, it is in the long range self-interest of the West to take meaningful steps to stop and reverse Russia's aggression against Ukraine and thus protect its own political and territorial integrity from future jeopardy.
Failure to do so will undoubtedly completely undercut any future negotiations with other nuclear powers in the hope of achieving nuclear disarmament and world peace.
The time has now come for the West to take strong and meaningful action in support of Ukraine's independence and territorial integrity.
The West must stop moving the goal line in order to placate Putin in the unlikely Pollyanna-like expectation that he will take an ""off-ramp"" and deescalate the situation in Ukraine.
The hard and uncontroverted evidence proves exactly the contrary Putin only interprets such peace intended initiatives as a sign of weakness.
It is crystal clear that neither the United States nor the EU will put boots on the ground in Ukraine.
However, as Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has expressed to world leaders, Ukrainians have the resolve and will to defend their homeland – what Ukrainians need are military supplies and weaponry to aid them in their battle for national survival.
Therefore, we strongly urge that the following steps be implemented immediately by the United States government, NATO, and its European allies.
If Western governments continue on the existing path of placating Putin and ""doing business as usual"", then they will condemn our children and grandchildren to a probable conflagration on the European continent that will be as great or even greater than the horrors of World War II .....and from which America will have no escape.
