In any case it was United States funded and orchestrated overthrow of a democratically elected president.
If it looks like a war, smells like a war and kills like a war, it’s probably a war and the war in Ukraine started in 2014 even if western mainstream media does not wish to report it to conceal their own ongoing complicity in it.
So-called “Peaceful Ukraine,” was anything but peaceful in that region, because the citizenry did not accept the American appointed presidents following the American orchestrated coup overthrowing former President Viktor Yanukovych.
The inherent right of self-defence, individually or collectively, with the support of other states, exists so long as the Security Council has not taken measures to “maintain international peace and security,” and thus President Putin’s armed intervention is protected by international law.
The only way to stop that armed intervention now is for western nations to place a moratorium on weapons to Ukraine to provide a face-saving reason for Presidents Zelensky and Biden to begin to negotiate with President Putin on a level playing field, and for NATO to back off from the borders of Russia to pre-1991 positions.
Likewise, all sanctions should be dropped against Russia as a Confidence Building Measure to help return friendly relations between nations as stated in the original UN Charter.
This is unlikely to happen due to global extreme news censorship imposed primarily by the United States and allied western nations, the unlimited greed of western defense industries as well as United States DoD and NATO, and saturation level corruption in Euro-American politics, however this is the only way to secure peace with self-determination and dignity for the region and world.
Alternative scenarios all end with catastrophic results up to and including thermonuclear war.
This incidentally, is the second illegal war in which Joseph Biden played a key role in igniting, with the first being the Iraq War.
This case is substantially different because of the threat of nuclear war and potential containment breeches in the 30+ American BSL-3 and/or BSL-4 laboratories located in Ukraine.
It is now also clear why the United States has, for four decades, tried to prevent the Biological Weapons Convention from establishing a checking mechanism.
United States WMD in Ukraine .............cc:ccccceceeeeeeeees 42 Robert Pope’s Admission of United States violation of BWC in Ukraine..........ceesceeessseeeeseeeaes 42 Ms.
Davies, Global Research, February 28, 2022 / President Biden has called the Russian invasion “unprovoked,” but that is far from the truth.
In the four days leading up to the invasion, ceasefire monitors from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe documented a dangerous increase in ceasefire violations in Eastern Ukraine, with 5,667 violations and 4,093 explosions.
His military record and ability to maintain central authority for twenty-five years was exemplary.
It is unlikely President Putin would be object to the comparison, even if both were provoked into war by ruthless invading barbarians.
An explanation must be offered for what was really going on in Ukrainian laboratories working with highly dangerous pathogens.
That is the line relentlessly sold on MSM versions of news 24/7 around the world.
A closer examination of the facts leading to this current escalated state of armed conflict in Ukraine reveals an altogether different set circumstance involving a degree of United States duplicitous treachery most people with a moral mind would find nearly impossible to believe unless they’ve studied the exceedingly long and bloody histories of American foreign aggression.
America’s Deadliest Export: Democracy, and Killing Hope: United States Military and CIA Interventions Since World War II, reveal an altogether different face of American foreign policy based on Machiavellian style friendships wherein “help” is offered only to be betrayed in astonishingly deadly and selfserving ways.
This time the United States moved in as a friend to Ukraine, and then worked very hard to pick a fight between Ukraine and Russia launched by a coup against Ukraine’s former president Viktor Yanukovych.
Adding insult to injury those “guests” then go about murdering your brothers and sisters, nieces and nephews, sons and daughters that object to the activities of this ultimately horrid guest.
The United States intentionally — using overt and covert means provoked Ukraine’s northern neighbor and friends in Russia in many, many ways, and is “only” providing weapons, money, paid mercenaries, highly sophisticated intelligence and unrivaled highly deceptive mass media support to the “friends” they betrayed in Ukraine as the violence escalates and coffers of the United States and EU “defense” industries go “kaching, kaching, kaching” swelling with blood-for-money profits.
And thus, to describe the role of the United States in the current escalated military violence in Ukraine as “duplicitous treachery” is not an overstatement at all, but rather the shortest, simplest and most accurate description possible.
And thus, the United States has a great deal of experience at setting up these bloody and destructive “color revolutions,” which in all cases are profitable only to EuroAmerican “defense” industries with the added perk that the United States then determines who will be the next leaders of those countries.
Goodbye dad, welcome American puppet president, and increased “austerity” — which means poverty, degradation and brutal suppression of any dissent.
So, while dad is off in another country nursing his broken heart and wounds, the American puppet president is then free to play “foot-loose and fancy free” with the local citizenry, while murdering off any and all who object to this sickening scenario.
In the case of Ukraine, those objecting were and still are scattered around the country, but primarily concentrated in the Donbass region, Donetsk and Luhansk where this current escalated phase of the violent military conflict really began back in 2014.
Russia attacked “peaceful Ukraine” is as far from the truth as “far from the truth” can possibly be because thirteen thousand men, women and children is a lot of people to kill.
Many are the children in Donbass, Donetsk and Luhansk towns especially who grew up entirely living in underground bomb shelters because nobody knew when or where the next missiles and bombs would hit.
During those years United States corporate controlled “news” covered almost none of that, and when some tiny mention was made always referred to that region as a “break-away state,” implying a certain treachery on their part for abandoning their “beloved” nation of Ukraine, even though the reality is they just couldn’t accept a foreign appointed and controlled puppet president.
It might seem an odd thing for United States biological “research” centers to be located in a place like Ukraine , but much of that work is so dangerous due to the possibility of leaks the United States didn’t want it done at home but rather some far away, “ally” country.
In the case of Ukraine, greatly expanding that biological research had the added perk of really annoying, even terrifying the Russians who really didn’t want large quantities of the world’s deadliest pathogens right across its border in Ukraine especially given they can pass through any border undetected making them as or more dangerous as a nuclear bomb, or many nuclear bombs.
Interestingly “Undersecretary of State Victoria Nuland confirmed this “discredited story” that there are “biological research facilities” in Ukraine and the United States “is concerned” Russian forces might seize them.
Nuland wasn’t the only United States official to admit the United States had, and probably still has deadly, highly infectious pathogens that could be used as biological weapons.
However, it wouldn’t be surprising given Hunter Biden did help secure millions of dollars in funding for United States contractors in Ukraine specializing in deadly pathogen research, his laptop emails revealed, raising more questions about the disgraced son of then vice president Biden.
These are certainly “tryin’ times,” as noted by bluesy R&B singer Roberta Flack.
With that as an introduction to the eight-year American duplicitous treachery involved in the horrifically bloody conflict in Ukraine, the reader is invited to read the rest of this document and appreciate the cleverness, deadliness and ultimate selfishness of United States foreign policy, without being suckered into the grandiose overly simplistic illusions corporate owned mainstream “news” media has created to hoodwink western audiences into paying for and supporting another in a long, long, long line of cruel unjust wars.
As a nation it deserves recognition by other states, self-determination and security including safe borders.
The same is true for Russia, and based on its historical uniqueness and current political situation, Donbass as well.
There is a “longish” section in this article proving beyond any doubt that armed invasion was provoked “in extremis,” what Russia or any nation, especially a super-power would consider a life and death threat.
The questions that follow in this document substantiate those beliefs and also prove motive, intent, methods, and opportunities for President Biden to essentially start another war , this time in Ukraine.
Before European leaders hitch their wagons to the perpetrators of what is already an eight-year war — a series of Crimes Against Humanity against the innocent people of Lugansk and Donetsk perpetuated by Kiev and motivated, aided and abetted primarily by Presidents Obama, Biden and NATO, they are invited to consider the questions for President Biden listed on this document, the referenced evidence supporting the relevance of those questions, and President Biden’s answers, should he have the courage to try to answer any of them.
Even while the people of Lugansk and Donetsk were voting in the 2014 referendum, Ukrainian national guardsmen reportedly fired their weapons as they tried to close a polling station in Krasnoarmeisk, killing an unspecified number of people... according to American news sources at that time.
Whether or not Euro-American authorities, media or publics wish to recognize it, the people of Lugansk and Donetsk were on the losing side of a civil war initiated by Kiev because they strongly objected to an American backed coup against Ukraine’s former President Viktor Yanukovych.
But, alas, this will probably never happen because war is so profitable for the United States and western Europe’s ultra-rich corporate capitalists and the politicians they can so easily afford to put in office.
Given that moratorium will probably not happen until a few million Ukrainians are dead, it might be more expedient if United States and relevant international prosecutors start the process to prosecute the real progenitors of this war, NATO, Former President Obama, President Biden, and other politicians that vote to prolong the war by adding fuel to the fire, specifically encouraging Ukrainians to fight to the bitter end.
Then Senator Biden’s key role in starting the Iraq War Then Senator Biden, chair of the Senate committee on foreign relations played a key role in starting the Iraq War.
Yet his role in bringing about that war remains mostly unknown or misunderstood by the public.
When the war was debated and then authorized by the United States Congress in 2002, Democrats controlled the Senate and Biden was chair of the Senate committee on foreign relations.
American intelligence American “intelligence” has become only another adjunct, an echo chamber in the United States socalled Defense Department and presidents, that bounces back and forth between 1 Please read the link provided on 2) above in full before continuing to read this document.
The vast majority of Americans and people worldwide have no idea whatsoever how much their news is heavily and illegally censored by the United States government, and downstream government funded related organizations.
In 78 days, NATO jets conducted 2,300 sorties, dropping 420,000 missiles and bombs, including cluster munitions and depleted uranium rounds.
President Trump for example sold the “China virus” lie, and now President Biden has sold “the war that Russia started in Ukraine” lie.
I’ve been saying we should go in on the ground, we should announce there’s gonna be American casualties.
Hunter Biden’s Ukraine salary was cut two months after Joe Biden left office By Miranda Devine, May 26, 2021 The Ukrainian energy company that was paying President Biden’s son Hunter $1 million a year cut his monthly compensation in half two months after his father ceased to be vice president.
On might consider this concealing or destroying evidence, a form of obstruction of justice.
US-NATO Installed a Neo-Nazi Government in Ukraine by Prof Michel Chossudovsky Global Research, March 23, 2022, First published Global Research 6 March 2014 This article first published by Global Research on March 6, 2014 at the very outset of the Ukraine crisis explains the nature of the Kiev proxy regime.
What is a stake is a US-EU-NATO sponsored coup d’etat in blatant violation of international law.
The forbidden truth is that the West has engineered -through a carefully staged covert operation— the formation of a proxy regime integrated by Neo-Nazis.
It has been excluded from the dictionary of mainstream media commentary.
Journalists have been instructed not to use the term “Neo-Nazi” to designate Svoboda and the Right Sector.
Composition of the Coalition Government We are not dealing with a transitional government in which NeoNazi elements integrate the fringe of the coalition, formally led by the Fatherland party.
He is referred to by the Western media as the “kommandant” of the EuroMaidan movement.
Dmytro Bulatov, known for his alleged kidnapping by police, but also with UNA-UNSO connections, was appointed minister of youth and sports.
Neo-Nazis in Control of Armed Forces, National Security, Economy, Justice and Education, Global Research, March 02, 2014 / The Lustration Committee is to organize the Neo-Nazi witch-hunt against all opponents of the new Neo-Nazi regime.
The targets of the lustration campaign are people in positions of authority within the civil service, regional and municipal governments, education, research, etc.
It will in all likelihood be directed against Communists, Russians and members of the Jewish community.
It should be understood, however, that the Neo-Nazis do not ultimately call the shots.
The composition of the Cabinet broadly coincides with United States Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland “recommendations” contained in the leaked telephone call to the United States ambassador to Ukraine.
It would call on States to ensure that education systems develop the necessary content to provide accurate accounts of history, as well as promote tolerance and other international human rights principles.
Censorship of news from foreign and domestic news sources challenging government dictums on the Ukraine War 21.
Deadly pathogens, biological weapons and law It wasn’t just Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Victoria Nuland admitting to United States research on deadly pathogens in Ukraine.
United States DOD, Big Tech & Big Media Will Try to Mute Hunter Biden's Ukraine Bioweapon Labs Story / The Russian Ministry of Defence on 24 March presented new evidence that Ukraine was involved in bioweapons research, revealing that President Joe Biden’s son, Hunter, funded the Pentagon’s military biological programme in Ukraine via the investment fund Rosemont Seneca.
Karen Kwiatkowski, a former analyst for the United States Department of Defence.
However, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Victoria Nuland on 8 March told United States senators that ""bioresearch facilities"" in Ukraine actually exist, while a 2010 BioPrepWatch article preserved in web archives and the United States Armed Forces' Counterproliferation Centre confirmed that America had maintained bioresearch cooperation with Kiev since 2005.
At least 31 laboratories across 14 settlements are suspected of being involved in US-funded military biological activities.
Metabiota and Black & Veatch are known as major supplies of equipment for Pentagon biolaboratories around the world, the MoD specifies.
Below, ties are shown to the Lugar Center in Georgia, the Ukrainian Ministry of Health and associated centers and institutes, and teh Ukrainian Defence Ministry's epidemiological departments.
Russian Defence Ministry According to Kwiatkowski, major mainstream sources are likely to suppress the story as major United States defence contractors are heavily investing in American mainstream media.
The former Pentagon analyst notes that judging from surveys, 90% of United States mainstream media personalities, reporters, and publishers are politically Democrats, which makes it almost impossible that they would attack the Democratic administration and key politicians.
He recalled that he was the first one to blow the whistle that the anthrax attacks of October 2001 came out of the US Biological Warfare Weapons Lab and programme.
April 1, 2022 Amid its ongoing special operation in Ukraine, Russian forces discovered US-operated biolabs in the country carrying out dangerous pathogen research.
While Washington initially tried to deny their existence, they later confirmed it, but claimed the labs’ activities were unremarkable.
The Russian Ministry of Defense revealed new documents on Thursday that had been seized by Russian forces in eastern Ukraine, including correspondences between American financier Hunter Biden the son of United States President Joe Biden and figures involved in biological research in Ukraine, which an investment firm of his helped to bankroll.
The documents revealed an intent to create a ""Central Depository of Especially Dangerous Microorganisms in Kiev,"" according to Russian MoD spokesperson Maj.
Igor Konashenkov, as well as ways to distribute biological agents via drone.
Robert Pope Pope was deputy director of operations, readiness and exercises at the DTRA from 2017 until 2020.
He previously held various positions at United States Air Force European Command , United States Central Command , and the Pentagon.
The published emails revealed a correspondence between Pope and Ukraine’s acting health minister between 2016 and 2019, American-born Ulana Suprun, who went to Ukraine to participate in the US-backed coup in 2014.
He led the Department of Defense’s program to develop capabilities to detect, locate and neutralize foreign WMD and improvised explosive devices.
Williams also served as Assistant Deputy Administrator for Nonproliferation at the National Nuclear Security Administration of the United States Department of Energy, the organization responsible for the country’s nuclear weapons arsenal.
Joanna Wintrol Wintrol headed DTRA projects in Ukraine until 2021 at the United States Embassy in Kiev’s Defense Threat Reduction Office.
Emails published by the MoD revealed she directly supervised experiments with deadly pathogens, including the UP-2 Project for “mapping highly infectious diseases in Ukraine,” including anthrax; the UP-4 Project, described as a “risk assessment of particularly dangerous pathogens transmitted by birds in Ukraine during migration”; the UP-8 Project studying “spread of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus and hantaviruses in Ukraine and the potential need for differential diagnosis of patients with suspected leptospirosis.
Previously released documents showed she also oversaw Project P-782, conducting research into the transmission of diseases through bats.
According to a DTRA publication, CSE was formerly known as the Chemical Weapons Elimination program and the Chemical Weapons Destruction program.
The effort “started in 1992 to build the capacity of the states of the Former Soviet Union to reduce the threat from chemical weapons by securing and eliminating CW stockpiles, chemical research capabilities, and production facilities, while also redirecting scientists to peaceful purposes,” the agency said.
He has been with the company since 1978 and was formerly its Chief Operating Officer.
Black & Veatch was long known to be working on Pentagon projects in Ukraine, but the documents seized by Russian forces earlier this month revealed the firm’s job in overseeing biological programs there, including the UP-8 project previously mentioned, studying Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, leptospirosis and hantaviruses.
Lance Lippencott He has been the project manager in Ukraine for Black & Veatch since 2011 and its biological project coordinator.
In August 2021, he told the Kansas City Business Journal that his work on airborne biological agents in Ukraine had helped Black & Veatch to develop a device for purifying air of SARS-CoV-2 virus particles, the virus that causes COVID-19.
Lippencott is a graduate of the United States Army Military Academy at West Point.
Another document from Lippencott to the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense concerns the extension of the UP-8 project mentioned above.
Russian Ministry of Defence Mary Guttieri With a doctorate in microbiology from UMass Amherst, Guttieri was the Executive Vice President at Metabiota from 2014 until 2019, and was previously the vice president of its Science & Technology Administration.
In Ukraine, Guttieri was the integrator of research projects for the US biology program and supervised the execution of biological projects related to the research of animals as vectors of disease.
She specializes in epidemiology and pandemics and has a PhD in Public Health.
However, according to the Russian MoD, there was no information in the documents about her supervising any specific biological programs in Ukraine.
He previously spent 20 years in the United States Navy, where he worked as a research microbiologist and head of the Navy’s Threat Assessment Department.
The pathogens in Ukrainian labs vary by facility, Pope said, but some can be characterized as presenting a concern in the Ukrainian environment.
Herein lies the grand deception, another duplicitous treachery of the Euro-American empire.
It cleaned house and disavowed biological and chemical weapon research.
The United States swooped in and collected those biological and chemical weapons, and according to United States top official in Ukraine Robert Pope, continued that research right on Russia’s doorstep.
There are no bioweapons in Ukraine, while at the same United States officials have admitted there are, totally confident United States taxpayers and voters along with the rest of the international community will swallow the lie and either never hear the factual admissions of United States officials asserting there are indeed biological weapons in American funded and operated laboratories in Ukraine, or perhaps just not care.
Global database of anthrax occurrences versus outbreaks of anthrax by country anuary 2005-August 2016; data digitized from ref.
Victim nations of the US drive for hegemony in perpetuity (including those afflicted by smear campaigns like the “China Virus” and deadly pathogens) should have a voice, and not be censored by the United States or anyone.
Bardhan, International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh PAHO.org There are always leaks from those BSL-4 labs.
In sum, the allegations of Soutnik News in regards to Robert Pope, and that BSL labs in Ukraine do contain biological weapons is confirmed, by Robert Pope’s own words.
The Bulletin’s Board of Sponsors was established in December 1948 by Albert Einstein, with J Robert Oppenheimer as its first chair.
Members of the Board of Sponsors are recruited by their peers from the world’s most accomplished science and security leaders to reinforce the importance of the Bulletin’s activities and publications.
Again, this confirms that United States funded and operated BSL in Ukraine did indeed have what could be and naturally would be viewed by a United States target nation as biological weapons, proving by confession, United States denials of having those weapons are categorically false.
Wintrol’s published confession quoted above makes two of the top three United States officials admitting to and confirming Russian allegations about Ukraine having biological pathogens that could be weaponized.
According to the Russian Ministry of Defense, on February 24, employees of biological laboratories in Ukraine destroyed especially dangerous pathogens.
Among them were the causative agents of plague, anthrax, tularemia, cholera, and other deadly diseases.
By the way, an agreement on joint biological activities was concluded between the Pentagon and the Ministry of Health of Ukraine.
But the real recipient of the funds was the laboratories of the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense.
It’s too bad it required a military intervention by Russia for United States security officials to destroy those deadly pathogens as it should have done decades ago, if indeed they did, as transporting them another location outside Ukraine would be all too easy given that United States diplomats can transport anything anywhere without inspection as per their diplomatic immunity.
DTRA allocated $80 million for biological research in Ukraine as of July 30, 2020, according to information obtained from the United States Federal Contractor Registration.
United States company Black & Veatch Special Projects Corp. was tasked with the program.
There are also issues involving destroying evidence, witness tampering, obstructing justice and so on.
Thousands of American soldiers and civil servants have lost their lives in the War on Terror.
While the United States government claims to stand against terror, this same government refuses to acknowledge its role in creating what has become a deadly international quagmire.
CIA Handouts That Rocked the World sets the record straight by laying the blame on high-ranking United States government officials.
During the 1980s, the CIA recruited and trained Muslim operatives to fight the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
Later, the CIA would move those operatives from Afghanistan to the Balkans, and then to Iraq, Libya, and Syria, traveling on illegal US visas.
There is also former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s very open public support for the internationally recognized LTTE terrorist group in Sri Lanka, and even this author visited a United States designed Talban training madrassa near Islamabad accompanied by Pakistani military in November 1993 while working as a journalist.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, SECTION 1.
White supremacists and other far-right-wing extremists are the most significant domestic terrorism threat facing the United States.
Funding American terrorist groups (like the CIA and other American neo-Nazi groups) is quite OK — no problem.
However, providing funding and or weapons to the Ukrainian neo-Nazi groups such as United States and EU governments have been routinely doing for years might pass this threshold.
Why right on his border unless they are there as a threat or weapon, regardless as to the excuses by United States officials, who appear to have earned themselves potential life sentences in federal prisons.
Thus, no doubt, corporate controlled mainstream media will censor the whole illegal biolabs story to ensure the voting public never hears about until years in the future, jf civilization as we know it survives that long.
Karen U Kwiatkowski and former United States Dept. of State official and diplomat Michael Springmann in launching previous unjust and illegal wars.
Someone can dismiss allegations brought forward by sputniknews.com as Russian propaganda, but fact checking their sources proves it to be 100% accurate at least in the above quoted article.
Credibility issues regarding Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons There has never been a credible international body to regulate the development of potential dual-use biological pathogens and chemical weapons.
BWC states-parties had been meeting since 1995 under a body known as the Ad Hoc Group to negotiate the protocol—a legally binding agreement to strengthen the BWC, which outlaws biological weapons but does not contain verification measures.
Because of these dual-use dilemmas, the BWC Protocol was not designed to be capable of detecting violations with a level of confidence comparable to that of verification systems for treaties controlling nuclear or chemical arms.
Instead, the primary aim of the Protocol was to provide greater information about, and access to, dual-capable facilities and activities that could potentially be misdirected for BW purposes.
Such increased transparency was believed to provide a useful deterrent by complicating any efforts of countries attempting to defraud their BWC obligations.
The American Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency has for decades done, and routinely continues to do all three in hundreds of secretive labs around the world without external monitoring of any kind.
That is prima facie evidence of saturation corruption at the highest levels of the United States government.
Maybe World War III will change their minds, but alas, it will be too late.
It was home to nomadic peoples and farmers only moved south with great difficulty.
After the Mongol invasion in the 13th century, the Wild Fields was a dangerous place to find yourself.
It was then that many of the cities without which it is impossible to imagine today’s Donbass were founded.
In 1869, the British industrialist John Hughes built a factory around which the village of Yuzovka grew — it had a few more names, including Stalino, before a local man renamed it Donetsk, in 1961.
Coal deposits and increasing factories formed the unique ‘face’ of the region.
The region was inhabited by several streams of colonists from Russia and Ukraine and its population was very diverse, but its peoples mixed easily due to the proximity of their languages and cultures.
Meanwhile, the Central Rada in Kiev declared Ukraine autonomous, before making a declaration of independence after the October Revolution.
The Rada made broad territorial claims, which included the territory of Donbass.
The nuance was that the Rada did not exercise any authority over most of these territories, and it soon was quarreling with the Provisional Government in Petrograd.
In Kiev, the Communist uprising was suppressed, and Russian officers, who considered the Rada a lesser evil than the Reds, actively participated.
Its center was Kharkov, a large industrial city that was not part of the Donetsk Basin region but closely tied to it.
Although the area was administratively divided into three entities, they had a common economy and interests.
While the Rada was in session, local councils in the east of Ukraine announced the unification of the Donbass and Krivbass coal basins.
It also included cities belonging to the region of the Don Cossack Army, such as Mariupol and Krivoy Rog, which was administratively part of the Kherson province, as well as Kharkov.
Moreover, Ukraine’s independence projects were of no interest to it creators.
This whole district has its own completely independent fundamental importance for Russia and lives a separate life.
The administrative subordination of the Kharkov district to Kiev is not called for by anything at all, but on the contrary, does not correspond with reality.
Mar 3, 2022 — Putin is afraid of a free peaceful Ukraine, competing in a fair election, his own people, and the free press.
They also claim that 96% of voters in the neighboring province of Luhansk voted for independence.
Donetsk is Ukraine’s most populous province, home to a tenth of the population.
Time.com reported voters were killed by Ukrainian national guardsmen for trying to achieve the independence they believe they deserve owing to a history of independence and the coup they believe was orchestrated by the United States proving the independence movements’ conviction to their beliefs.
Call it “displacement,” that is transferring anger from one person, event or object to another, and Americans and Western Europeans are ready to kill — somebody, anybody that provides a convenient target right now.
President Trump brilliantly turned that anger on China with his “China virus” lie.
This is different because it’s the world’s premier colonial power picking the fight, instead of the colonized.
This concept has been used to mitigate the lack of definition provided by Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, which states that sovereign nations may fend off an armed attack until the Security Council has adopted measures under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
The Iraq War, promoted by then Senator Biden was “legally” justified by the Doctrine of Preemption, even though there was no proof.
For centuries international law recognized that nations need not suffer an attack before they can lawfully take action to defend themselves against forces that present an imminent danger of attack.
Legal scholars and international jurists often condition the legitimacy of preemption on the existence of an imminent threatmost often a visible mobilization of armies, navies, and air forces preparing to attack.
We must adapt the concept of imminent threat to the capabilities and objectives of today's adversaries.
The United States has long maintained the option of preemptive actions to counter a sufficient threat to our national security.
The greater the threat, the greater is the risk of inaction-and the more compelling the case for taking anticipatory action to defend ourselves, even if uncertainty remains as to the time and place of the enemy's attack.
To forestall or prevent such hostile acts by its adversaries, the State will, if necessary, act preemptively.
In the case of the Iraq war to which he was referring there was no proof.
In the case of the Ukraine War, overwhelming proof does exist regarding American/NATO buildup for war against Russia.
Imminent threat is all too easily proven by Euro-American military forces’ relentless movement east after 1991 in violation of numerous agreements, especially in Ukraine.
Imminent threat is established by Victoria Nuland’s admissions regarding American biological “research” and destroying evidence right on Russia’s border.
That one single admission alone, legally justifies the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
Biological weapons can be just as, or even more dangerous than nuclear weapons.
Actual and imminent threat refers to a physical danger that is real, would occur within an immediate time frame, and could result in death or serious bodily harm.
The duration of the risk, the nature and severity of the potential harm, the likelihood that the potential harm will occur, and the length of time before the potential harm would occur.
An inciter is generally one who is present at the scene of the offense and who encourages the principal offender to commit an act that he is already inclined to commit on his own.
Given the reasonable possibility that you did not cook up the plan for this international crime syndicate yourself, please be so kind as to share the name of the individuals and/or group that proposed this scheme to you.
Corporate United States media and foreign policy hardliners want to create a new Afghanistan in the middle of Europe by flooding Ukraine with weapons.
Photographic evidence shows that these weapons have already ended up in the hands of neo-Nazi paramilitaries — units which have already received training and arms the United States and its NATO allies.
Many are now fleeing back across the Polish border, filled with fear in the face of heavy casualties.
Supposedly acting independently, they nonetheless stuck to the same talking points and often the same verbiage, suggesting a concerted effort to spin the unit as heroic defenders of Ukraine against the alleged “real” fascists — the Russians.
The latest wave of the lionization of Azov began sometime before the Russian military operation — notorious was the much-publicized image of an AK-47-wielding Ukrainian granny training to repel invaders in the regiment’s camp.
The last week of March, however, saw the puff pieces come in a tight group, like the bullet holes after an AK burst.
The first of the bunch was a ten-minute video, from Britain’s statebroadcaster BBC, on March 27, in which presenter Ros Atkins sought to debunk Russian “untruths” about Nazis in Ukraine.
While it acknowledges that Azov was created in 2014 “by volunteers with nationalist and often far-right political leanings,” the FT shrugs off its Nazi connections.
More to the point, the symbols themselves were picked out by Azov founder Andriy Biletsky — a notorious white supremacist — as he himself told another outlet back in 2014.
Azov has a “history of neo-Nazi leanings, which have not been entirely extinguished by its integration into the Ukrainian military,” but is “an effective fighting force,” check.
Azov’s political wing only won 2.15% of the vote in 2019 — quoting a German researcher this time — check.
Its story opens with the emotional description of a funeral for an Azov soldier killed in the fighting outside of Kiev.
As an aside, Azov members are apparently really good at sticking to the message — and knowing their audience and which buttons to push.
For example, the Times piece repeatedly mentions their praise of the British NLAW anti-tank rockets.
Contrast this to the some of the coverage Azov got in the West before 2022.
In an interview after the coup, he told the magazine he picked out Azov’s insignia.
Even Bellingcat, that “open-source intelligence collective” apparently serving as a conduit for the British intelligence agenda, has raised red flags about Azov.
Here they are in October 2019, complaining about how the militants browbeat Zelensky into not withdrawing from the Donbass as required by the Minsk agreements.
This isn’t exactly the first time the corporate and state media in the West have run cover for a group they themselves had until recently described — correctly — as extremist.
In fact it’s hard to find a terrorist group the United States did not create or support.
Likewise with Azov that was absorbed into the Ukrainian National Guard in 2014.
Russians are not so universally hated in Ukraine as western media makes it appear.
But western mainstream media news is not reporting news objectively, and only reporting views and injuries on the side of those who do support the American backed “neo-“ Nazi regime in Ukraine.
Facebook Allows Praise of Neo-Nazi Ukrainian Battalion If It Fights Russian Invasion The reversal raises questions about Facebook’s blacklist-based content moderation, which critics say lacks nuance and context.
By Sam Biddle February 25 2022 Facebook will temporarily allow its billions of users to praise the Azov Battalion, a Ukrainian neo-Nazi military unit previously banned from being freely discussed under the company’s Dangerous Individuals and Organizations policy, The Intercept has learned.
The policy shift, made this week, is pegged to the ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine and preceding military escalations.
The Azov Battalion, which functions as an armed wing of the broader Ukrainian white nationalist Azov movement, began as a volunteer anti-Russia militia before formally joining the Ukrainian National Guard in 2014; the regiment is known for its hardcore right-wing ultranationalism and the neo-Nazi ideology pervasive among its members.
The footage shows multiple people, apparently Russian prisoners of war, lying on the ground.
The injured soldiers are interrogated by armed men, many of whom are wearing blue armbands commonly used by Ukrainian units.
Some of the wounded personnel apparently died during the interrogation.
Footage also shows three other prisoners ordered out of a van and shooting their legs at a point-blank range.
The founder of the US-government funded Bellingcat “investigative journalism” outlet Eliot Higgins, for instance, has described it as “very serious incident” and called for a “further investigation” of the disturbing imagery.
The Germanand French-brokered protocols had been designed to regularize the status of those regions within the Ukrainian state.
This therefore should not have been difficult to verify and apparently it wasn’t.
Russian Special Forces Capture Ukrainian Nationalists Who Tortured Russian Soldiers, Lawmaker Says 29.03.2022 Earlier, a video was circulated on social media in which several armed Ukrainians were seen torturing and shooting captured Russian soldiers, prompting calls for Kiev to address the issue.
The Ukrainian government stated that such behaviour was unacceptable and vowed to investigate the matter.
The Russian Defence Ministry has not yet confirmed the lawmaker's claim.
A video depicting several Ukrainians, either members of the armed forces or one of the nationalist battalions, humiliating and torturing Russian soldiers has been making the rounds online for days.
Several of the Russian servicemen had their legs shot and were left without any medical assistance, according to the footage.
The soldiers were captured during the special military operation that Moscow had launched in Ukraine on 24 February.
The Russian investigative committee ordered the launch of an investigation into the incident, during which at least eight captured Russian soldiers were killed after being tortured.
The committee said that it will spare no efforts to identify the perpetrators of the crime.
Meanwhile, Azov appears to have spread its extremist approaches to war throughout the Ukraine military while enjoying the full support of Euro-American mainstream media “MSM” in all of its forms, including social media.
According to Facebook rules now anyone can advocate for torturing and killing any Russian anywhere simply by yelling “Ukraine” first.
And thus, the USA under the leadership of President Biden has devolved into a level of depravity far below what most sane and healthy minds can possibly conceive.
As for those caught up personally in the current Euro-American war fever on any side, the price is likely to be beyond imagining.
Socrates observations about the fate of democracies devolving into populism, in this case an insane mob rule, has certainly been proven eerily and morbidly accurate.
President Biden’s top cabinet officers in addition to members of the senate that profit from war, in addition to the captains of the monopolist Euro-American MSM news media are most certainly culpable in all of these crimes.
April 3, 2022 Militants from Ukrainian nationalist battalions are taking humanitarian aid away from civilians in Donbass, Victoria Serdyukova, the Human Rights Commissioner of the Lugansk People's Republic , told Sputnik.
Under shelling, people come to the part of the city where the humanitarian convoy will be located.
Members of nationalist battalions arrive there with weapons in their hands, and they forbid them to receive this humanitarian aid.
Throughout early 2022, 55% of Afghans will face acute food insecurity, including nearly 9 million people at emergency levels— one step before famine conditions.
Food insecurity is likely to deepen in 2022 as the country is facing shortages of food, rapidly rising food prices and an ongoing drought.
Yet this sort of criminal behavior is deemed not worthy by the “media club” (actually an international crime syndicate and cabal) referred to in the Nebojsa Malic article quoted above.
During its entire history the USA has only experienced 17 years without a war.
Many in the USA now admit the Vietnam War was a “mistake,” while others assert the entire war was a War Crime.
Likewise with the Iraq War in which at least 2.38 million human beings have been killed thus far and has likewise been lamented as a “mistake”® or a crime, as was and is the Afghanistan War.
USS7. billion e United States: $6.32 billion e Canada: $6. billion e France: $4. billion e Ukraine: $3. billion e Australia: $2. billion e Argentina: $2.12 billion e Germany: $2. billion e Kazakhstan: $1. billion e Poland: $1 billion Ukraine only comes in at 5‘ place with less than half of the wheat exports of Russia but is usually listed first for some odd reason on MSM these days.
Ukraine and Russia are two of the top five grain exporters in the world.
By some estimates, what is at stake is global food security since the global agricultural trade involved is worth nearly $1. trillion.
The immediate food related effects of the conflict are being felt in Egypt, Turkey, Bangladesh, and Iran who buy more than 60 percent of their wheat from Russia and Ukraine, and all of them have outstanding food imports.
Lebanon, Tunisia, Yemen, Libya, and Pakistan also rely heavily on the two countries for their wheat supply.
The USA creates the real and imaginary monsters in the world just to keep enriching the already ultra-super rich who incidentally mostly don’t pay taxes on that wealth.
And yet, now, the United States is attempting to crash both Russia’s and China’s economies.
We don’t hear much about the human suffering in Palestine, Afghanistan, Iraq, Yemen, Chad, Niger, Ethiopia, Somali (which is in the third year of a drought and relentlessly bombed and sanctioned by the US), Mali, and so on, and consequently not many Americans are crying about it.
The link here is a real-time counter the reader is invited to investigate.
It was they who fought to free African, Latin American and Asian nations from colonialism, only to have the United States swoop in later with larger armies and install puppet governments totally subservient to the United States for the purpose of extracting their natural resources for pennies on the dollar.
Nations that tried to nationalize their energy natural resources were crushed and their leaders killed.
Though President Biden may not know this yet reports are slowly starting to leak out from the hermetically sealed American political/media echo chamber that all Ukrainian civilians around the country are not all so enthralled with love for the United States installed neoNazi regime in Kiev, and many are welcoming Russian liberation from that totalitarian and corrupt regime.
True, there is no doubt a million or more Ukrainians will happily take a United States visa to find what think will be a better life in the US, and are willing, ready and able to tell all manner of wild lies and exaggerations about Russian “atrocities” to obtain that visa and elicit teary-eyed sympathy, but that will not change events leading up to, and consequent from the realities on the ground in Ukraine during the past eight years, now and the inevitable future.
The inhumane acts are often attributed to nationalist and Neo-Nazi groups.
Many reported atrocities are being committed by Ukrainian nationalists and the neo-Nazi Azov Battalion.
Civilians are tied to electric poles or trees with tape, sometimes their faces are smeared with paint or green antiseptic dye, they are whipped and left in the cold.
Photos of the victims and footage of the punishment are widely shared on social media networks.
Among those targeted are the Roma people, one of Ukraine's ethnic minorities.
One photo shows a Roma family, including children, being tied to a pole with their faces painted with green dye in the city of Lvov.
There is no evidence that these people committed crimes, nor is there any provision in Ukrainian legislation authorizing the use of such brutal methods of punishment.
However, the discovery of a torture chamber in the basement of a building previously occupied by the Armed Forces of Ukraine in the village of Kryakovka, Lugansk region, tells another story.
Yet another infamous torture site codenamed ""Library"" was located in the International Airport of Mariupol, the Donetsk region.
However, according to Kasonta, everyone in the West is perfectly aware of what is happening in Ukraine and how Ukrainian nationalists, the Azov Battalion, and violent mobs are treating regular citizens and ethnic minorities in Ukraine.
Racism and xenophobia have long penetrated into the fabric of Ukrainian society, according to the analyst.
Thus, it comes as no surprise that African students were turned back by Ukrainian border guards while attempting to cross into Poland.
Meanwhile, the nationalist agenda became part of the Ukrainian education system.
According to Ukrainian outlet STRANA.ua, the nationalist projects received up to half of all the funds allocated by the Ukrainian government for children's and youth organizations in 2020 alone.
So, yes, United States and western European voters and tax payers are being conned again, by the same miscreants that led us into the last war, and the one before that and the one before that and so on for at least the past 70 years.
Had Russia submitted to the US’ attempted nuclear blackmail, Washington would have immediately set its sights on China, after which it would have restored its declining unipolar hegemony over the planet if it subsequently succeeded in strategically neutralizing that country too.
The author warned earlier this week that “Kiev Must Withdraw From Donetsk & Lugansk If It Truly Wants To Avert War”, pointing out that Moscow will decisively support its newfound Donbass allies with military means in order to ensure the security of their civilian populations if Ukraine kept up its unprovoked genocidal offensive against them.
Regrettably, the United States failed to rein in its Eastern European proxy army, which prompted Russia to commence its ongoing special operation in Ukraine.
Russian Ambassador to the UN Vasily Nebenzya articulated the reasons behind President Putin’s decision earlier this morning.
It was the culminating event of a four-day trip planned at the last minute for the purpose of rallying Europe to the cause of standing up to Russia’s military incursion into Ukraine.
Speaking before a large and enthusiastic crowd in the Polish capital of Warsaw, United States President Joe Biden concluded his remarks by going off-script.
Before his plane could get off the ground, the White House was scrambling to contain the damage done by Biden’s most recent gaffe.
According to British journalist Niall Ferguson, a senior Biden administration official was quoted as saying, prior to Biden’s slip of the tongue, that in the aftermath of the Russian military incursion into Ukraine, “The only end game now is the end of Putin regime.
According to Michael McFaul, the United States Ambassador to Russia from 2012-2014, Russian President Vladimir Putin believes that the United States works hard to foster regime changes around the world, including in Russia, through the vehicle of so-called “color revolutions” or mass civil uprisings.
The Russian government has long held that Western intelligence services had been using “democracy promotion” as a front to organize political opposition to Putin with the goal of removing him from office—i.e., regime change.
One of the most public aspects of this effort was the discovery by Russia of a so-called “spy rock” used by the British intelligence agency, MI6, to communicate with its agents in Moscow.
At the same time this object (in reality, a covert electronic device used to facilitate communications) was in operation, the Russian intelligence services were accusing the British of secretly funding Russian political opposition groups.
Incidents such as the ‘spy rock’ led the Russian government to crack down on foreign-funded non-governmental organizations , first passing laws which compelled groups that receive foreign funding and are deemed to engage in political activities to register as “foreign agents,” before barring NGOs altogether if they were deemed to pose a threat to Russia’s constitutional order, defense or security.
The list of banned organizations included USAID, prompting the Obama administration to withdraw from the Civil Society Working Group of the US-Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission.
According to the late William Blum (formerly of the United States State Department and foreign service officer who went on to become one of the most respected and quoted critics of United States foreign policy) the United States tried to, and in many cases succeeded in overthrowing at least 56 foreign governments, and an updated list compiled since his published analysis brings the total up to 67.
In none of those cases was the target nation in any way a threat to United States security, in stark contrast to the case of Ukraine and Russia, where the US’ build up WMD and highly trained neo-Nazi brigades most certainly did present a provably imminent threat to Russia’s security.
Yemen 2014, Ukraine 2014*, Turkey 2016, Venezuela 2019, Bolivia 2019*, Iran 2017 to present, Nicaragua 2018, China 2018 to present, Cuba and Russia 2022.
Palestine deserves to be on that list as it’s being rapidly and violently conquered by Israel on a day-by-day basis ever since the Nakba in 1948.
One can assert Israel is the aggressor, however Israel is just a cat’s paw (along with Saudi Arabia, other Gulf States and Egypt) of the USA in its ambition to conquer the entire region.
No nation in world history ever tried to overthrow that many governments (67 at minimum), directly or via proxies.
The most recent economic and media wars against Russia by the US, and in the Ukraine proxy war, is the third major assault by the United States on Russia.
The 1918 US-UK Allied invasion of Russia is a landmark in Russian History, often mistakenly portrayed as being part of a Civil War.
He tried floating a proposal for NATO to back off, and was totally rebuffed, in fact ridiculed for the effort.
The United States does not negotiate with its target nations in its drive for hegemony in perpetuity.
The United States government has acted in a collusive fashion to hide evidence and silence news critical of the United States government’s role in the 2014 coup in Ukraine and subsequent massive deadly indiscriminative violence against the innocent people of Lugansk and Donetsk.
Whereas Russia is attempting to engage in highly targeted attacks against forces trained to attack Russia by the US, Ukrainian forces bombarding Lugansk and Donetsk were not in any way careful about their targets during their deadly eight-year war against innocents.
No one in the mainstream media, or even the alt-news has asked why President Putin didn’t just execute his Nazi elimination plan via primarily drones and missiles the way the US has primarily pursued wars for the past 20 years.
The answer may be that drones, missiles and bombs cause far greater civilian casualties than ground troops and especially special forces which tend to be much more precise in their targeting.
President Putin acted honorably to defend innocent Lugansk and Donetsk civilians from the eight-year genocidal war in Donbass waged against it by the neo-Nazi riddled Ukrainian government acting under orders from the United States State department.
But, the highly censored corporate controlled American news does not report any of that; certainly not the 13,000 human beings murdered in Donbass between 2014 and 2020 in what was then “peaceful Ukraine” because they strongly objected to the illegal American backed coup in 2014.
Those collusive entities — with intent — created President Putin’s existential need to prevent an even greater build up of Euro-American tanks, missiles, military bases, special operations forces, neo-Nazi ultra-nationalist extremists, other Euro-American financed militias, and ongoing highly infectious and deadly biological pathogen “research” right on his border with Ukraine while simultaneously butchering 13,000 friends of Russia also on Russia’s border.
Russia already had one Nazi invasion, and absolute proof of United States loading Ukraine with neoNazi forces, other paramilitary forces, and even the government of Ukraine was and remains permeated with neo-Nazis, and let’s not forget the deadly pathogens produced, and stored right on his border.
No videos of children blown to bloody bits, sobbing grandparents, amputated limbs — nothing.
The people of Lugansk and Donetsk were under armed attack by American trained and coordinated forces, and they pleaded for assistance in self-defence from Russia which was also motivated by selfdefense given American massive buildup of military, paramilitary, neo-Nazi forces, and potential biological weapons right on its border in violation of numerous international laws, treaties, and agreements; agreements the UN Security Council failed to uphold.
President Putin’s legal analysts focus on Article 51 on the UN Charter as rational for disarming Ukraine.
There are two important exceptions to this obligation, the first being the right of individual or collective self-defence under Article 51 and the collective enforcement by the Security Council on the basis of Chapter VII of the Charter which deals with threats to the peace, breaches of the peace and acts of aggression.
It was the highly illegal aggressiveness of the US, and failures within the UN that led to the escalation of armed conflict in Ukraine in February 2022.
In the case of Ukraine’s war against dissidents in Donbass region that strongly objected to the 2014 American backed coup against the former democratically elected president of Ukraine.
A solid fact-based case can be made that President Putin was trying to stop a war, and prevent a vastly greater biological weapons war, with his intervention in Ukraine in 2022.
That phrase was created to reframe the phrase “overthrow foreign governments” to make egregious violations of international law more palatable to American voters.
Tourist accommodation firm says Russians, Belarusians not welcome Airbnb has banned the two nations’ peoples from using its services 5 Apr, 2022 The online market for lodging and tourism Airbnb said late on Monday it had suspended operations in Russia and Belarus, joining an array of Western corporate shutdowns in those two countries.
According to media reports, the platform is not planning to return paid bills for accommodation.
Money that was spent on bookings after the April 4 date will be converted into bonuses.
However, it is not clear how those bonuses could be used, as the service is no longer available.
Blocking markets leads to greater economic isolation for those doing the blocking, as much or more than the blocked parties who simply turn elsewhere for those same products and/or services.
Keeping/absconding/stealing the money of those people — regular people that already paid for those services is another example of collective punishment, again, a violation of international law.
Shame, shame Airbnb, and in the long run, rather poor public relations.
Sure, in the heat of a good lynching it seems highly appropriate, backed by populist demand, but in the long run will be analyzed as mob rule in just one more of the US’ bloody ruthless campaigns for global domination.
The United States as usual presumes that the wealthy mostly white nations (plus Japan and Taiwan as a couple of token minorities) really represent the entire world.
This is excusable because the United States laid the groundwork to hate Russians at least since my childhood in the late 1950s and 1960s.
Best Of Boris And Natasha The Contest Laer > SS ee D) 0:08 / 0:44 Scroll for details v a“ ” and style racist stereotypes that should be held in contempt by those who decry racism and prejudice in all its ugly forms.
Instead, now the United States leans heavily upon its century of anti-Russian stereotypes to whip up a mob to lynch all Russians everywhere.
Sanctions are imposed by the United States and its junior partners against countries that resist their agendas.
They are a weapon of Economic War, resulting in chronic shortages of basic necessities, economic dislocation, chaotic hyperinflation, artificial famines, disease, and poverty.
In every country, the poorest and the weakest — infants, children, the chronically ill and the elderly — suffer the worst impact of sanctions.
US imposed sanctions, violate international law and are a tool of regime change.
They are a crime against humanity used, like military intervention, to topple popular governments and movements.
International humanitarian law posits that no person may be punished for acts that he or she did not commit.
This is one of the fundamental guarantees established by the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Additional Protocols.
The case follows a temporary change to Meta's hate speech policy that allows some Facebook and Instagram users to express violent sentiments against Russian armed forced invading Ukraine.
Meta did not immediately respond to a request for comment from CNN Business regarding Russia's criminal investigation.
The Minsk agreements were a great idea that many nations worked together to bring to fruition.
The tragedy of the current escalated conflict can easily be traced to that betrayal by Kiev.
The Minsk agreements were a series of international agreements which sought to end the war in the Donbas region of Ukraine.
The first, known as the Minsk Protocol, was drafted in 2014 by the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine, consisting of Ukraine, Russia, and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe , with mediation by the leaders of France and Germany in the so-called Normandy Format.
This agreement followed multiple previous attempts to stop the fighting in the region and aimed to implement an immediate ceasefire.
Yes, the war did not start with President Putin’s intervention in Ukraine, but instead stemmed from the successful United States coup staged in 2014, overthrowing elected president Yanukovych.
The war continued until February 24 2022 when President Putin stepped in to start to end it.
The participants of the talks in Minsk agreed on a plan which focused on a ceasefire in eastern Ukraine and efforts to get the government functioning again.
Other points of the agreement include amnesty for all those who disarm and who did not commit serious crimes, corridors for refugees, and humanitarian aid access.
Ukrainian National Security and Defense Council chief Alexey Danilov warned on Monday that his country risks collapsing if it implements the UNSC-supported Minsk Accords.
This position doesn’t reflect reality but the existing Ukrainian elite’s self-interests and those of its foreign patrons.
Washington wouldn’t have done so unless it believed at the time that this was a pragmatic means for resolving its proxy’s civil war.
This objective observation discredits Danilov’s fears that society will meaningfully revolt over the Minsk Accords’ full implementation since Kiev certainly has the capabilities to offset that scenario.
Even if it loses control, then that’s the government’s own fault and not Russia’s or anyone else’s.
If carried out to its full extent, this could lead to Ukraine’s de facto or de jure federalization, which in practice might end up creating a Bosnian-like scenario whereby various regions achieve quasi-independence.
That might result in the emergence of new elites who can challenging the existing ones.
For instance, Russia, China, Turkey, and even the GCC might begin patronizing local partners in pursuit of mutual economic and/or strategic benefits.
There’s nothing wrong with that or inherently destabilizing about it per se but it nevertheless threatens the USled West’s current influence over Ukraine.
These five points prove that Ukraine definitely wouldn’t “collapse” if the Minsk Accords were fully implemented but it might end up with a very different administrative structure in the most extreme scenario.
That outcome would be disadvantageous for the country’s existing elites and their US-led Western patrons but would arguably be more strategically stabilizing in the long-run since Ukraine’s extremely deep contradictions are quickly reaching a breaking point as proven by recent events.
It presently remains unclear whether the detained represented genuine grassroots resistance to the increasingly authoritarian government and/or were part of a USbacked Color Revolution plot to punish Ukraine for its very close economic ties with China, but this development nevertheless confirms that domestic tensions are close to boiling over.
Danilov’s prediction of a “very difficult internal situation” has already come to pass and by none other than his own government’s counterproductively authoritarian hand and its unexpected disputes with its chief American patron.
The United States and its allies don’t have any need to abide by such little things, even if the Minsk agreement did have the force of law.
Public opinion of President Biden The latest research by Redfield & Wilton Strategies finds that 47% of Americans disapprove and 37% approve of President Joe Biden’s overall job performance as President.
His net approval rating, at -10%, is eight points lower than in our polling on 23 February, when 41% disapproved and 39% approved of Biden’s performance.
Redfield & Wilton Strategies survey The following is a graphic representation of the overall data of that survey.
Our Most Recent Research Latest GB Voting Intention 0 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% C3) Strongly approve Approve Neither approve nor disapprove @) Disapprove Joe Biden Administration Approval Ratings and Hypothetical Voting Intention (20 March @ Strongly disapprove Don't know 2022) Population Sampled: Eligible Voters in the United States Nearly twice as many people strongly disapprove of his performance as strongly approve of it.
By far the strongest single issue diminishing his tattered remnants of his popularity is economics.
Throwing an extra four billion dollars at Ukrainians to get those same Ukrainians killed in another game of thrones is wasteful at a time when inflation is also at all time highs.
The price of gasoline is one of the single most important issues for Americans and it’s skyrocketed thanks to President Biden’s urgent need to overthrow President Putin and try to demolish another nation.
Raising fuel prices and other inflationary trends, and paying billions to essentially kill innocent Ukrainians and Russian solders in another unjust war probably are not helping President Biden’s standing.
Maybe somehow, enough Americans have learned the mainstream news lies so much one must assume the opposite of what is reported to get any inkling of the truth.
So, it should not be terribly surprising that American trust in MSM “news” is justifiably rather low.
Apparently comic book style sales pitches based on greatly amplified versions of the same old lies just aren’t selling that well.
Distortions and delusions from America’s top politicians Nancy Pelosi compares Putin’s Ukraine moves to Hitler By Steven Nelson, February 23, 2022 House Speaker Nancy Pelosi compared Russian President Vladimir Putin to Nazi leader Adolf Hitler Wednesday, calling Putin “very evil” for his deployment of troops into eastern Ukraine.
At a Capitol press conference, Pelosi likened Putin sending Russian “peacekeeping” troops into separatist-held areas of Ukraine on Monday to the Nazi takeover of Czechoslovakia prior to World War Il.
The longer a debate rages, the greater the likelihood that someone will compare someone else to Hitler.
On Tuesday the former secretary of state reportedly told a private fund-raising party that Russian President Vladimir Putin's actions are similar to Hitler's in the run up to World War Il.
Clinton might have had some invisible hand behind events in Ukraine and President Biden’s feverish attempts at overthrowing the government of Russia.
She was President Obama’s principal foreign policy advisor that pushed for the disastrous and deadly so-called “Arab Spring” “color revolutions” that left nothing but death and chaos behind.
The Maidan riots in Ukraine were American funded and an emblematic example of a classic color revolution.
It’s really easy from lofty perches in DC and NY to beat the war drums that get men, women and children killed in far away lands, but not so easy to see one’s own family members butchered in another American orchestrated war and then try to live and sleep with those memories for the rest of one’s life.
For the record it is the United States that’s funding and training neo-Nazis and sending them to Ukraine to fight against Russians.
One of President Putin’s key goals was and remains to de-Nazify Ukraine.
The United States Department of State organized the government the United States put into Ukraine and loaded it with Nazis too.
It would be fascinating to do MRI scans on people like Presidents Trump and Biden, Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and mainstream news reporters to see to what extent they really believe the lies they tell, and to what extent they knowingly lie to the American public to help their family fortunes, friends, and political parties.
American news censorship and laws prohibiting it Updated Mar., 2022 RT America Shuts Down Amid Russian State-Media Bans, by Rebecca Alter Tech companies and telecom providers in Europe, Australia, and Canada are blocking Russian state-controlled media outlets in light of the Putin regime’s invasion of Ukraine.
On February 27, European Union president Ursula von der Leyen tweeted that the “state-owned Russia Today and Sputnik, and their subsidiaries, will no longer be able to spread lies to justify Putin’s war” and announced a ban on these outlets.
Multiple tech platforms have complied with the E.U.’s media ban and deplatformed, demonetized, or blocked RT and Sputnik from their services.
On Thursday, March 3, CNN Business reported that RT America — the United States cable branch of the Russia-owned news network — is effectively shutting down.
Opening the CIA’s Can of Worms By Edward Curtin, Global Research, February 28, 2021, edwardcurtin.com 15 February 2021 “The CIA and the media are part of the same criminal conspiracy,” wrote Douglas Valentine in his important book, The CIA As Organized Crime.
The corporate mainstream media are stenographers for the national security state’s ongoing psychological operations aimed at the American people, just as they have done the same for an international audience.
It is shocking only to those who don’t do their homework and see what is happening today outside a broad historical context.
It therefore should come as no surprise that those same elite corporate media are now leading the charge for increased censorship and the denial of free speech to those they deem dangerous, whether that involves wars, rigged elections, foreign coups, COVID-19, vaccinations, or the lies of the corporate media themselves.
Having already banned critics from writing in their pages and or talking on their screens, these media giants want to make the quieting of dissenting voices complete.
It is a perfect piece of propaganda posing as reporting, since it accuses Kennedy, a brilliant and honorable man, of falsity and stupidity, thus justifying Instagram’s ban, and it is an inducement to further censorship of Mr Kennedy by Facebook that owns Instagram.
What was once done under the cover of omission is now done openly and brazenly, cheered on by those who, in an act of bad faith, claim to be upholders of the First Amendment and the importance of free debate ina democracy.
Since the digitization of news, their new business models are geared to these separate audiences since they are highly lucrative choices.
It’s business driven since electronic media have replaced paper as advertising revenues have shifted and people’s ability to focus on complicated issues has diminished drastically.
The censorship is not being driven by power hungry reporters at the Times or CNN or any media outlet.
All these media and their employees are but the outer layer of the onion, the means by which messages are sent and people controlled.
If they do not play their part in this twisted and intricate propaganda game, they will suffer.
They will be eliminated, as are pesky individuals who dare peel the onion to its core.
For each media company is one part of a large interconnected intelligence apparatus — a system, a complex — whose purpose is power, wealth, and domination for the very few at the expense of the many.
These companies are deeply connected to United States intelligence agencies, as are the NYTimes, CNN, NBC, etc.
They too are part of what was once called Operation Mockingbird, the CIA’s program to control, use, and infiltrate the media.
In addition, Google and other search engines have silenced virtually all facts and opinions contrary to United States government narrative regarding the 2014 American backed coup in Ukraine, and February 2022 acceleration of the Ukraine War.
Meanwhile, the Ukraine War and body count escalates daily, and the United States and EU continues to agitate and advocates sending more and more weapons of mass destruction to Ukraine.
Even the ordinarily very diplomatic UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres has warned this conflict can end in nuclear war.
May 15, 2019 In the United States, “The Great War” led to unprecedented efforts by the federal government to control and restrict “unpatriotic” speech.
But the boundary between speech that undermined the government and legitimate criticism was often unclear.
This law, which is still largely in effect, makes it a crime to do three things.
First, convey false information in order to interfere with the American military, or promote the success of America’s enemies.
Phil Donahue on His 2003 Firing from MSNBC, When Liberal Network Couldn’t Tolerate Antiwar Voices, March 21, 2013 In 2003, the legendary television host Phil Donahue was fired from his prime-time MSNBC talk show during the run-up to the United States invasion of Iraq.
The United States occupation there now is illegal as the Iraqi government has asked them to leave, but they won’t.
No weapons of mass destruction were found, and the whole thing casually dismissed as a mistake.
Phil Donahue was never “rehabilitated” for disagreeing with the US government’s decision to start the war in Iraq.
William Blum, Killing Hope, United States Military and CIA Interventions since World War II, 15 [Permission to quote granted by William Blum via email March 15, 2018] American censorship has gotten much more extreme than when Bill Blum wrote the above referenced book.
On Thursday, 14 people and entities were sanctioned, including a senior Russian military planner, and Sergey Brilev, a well-known Russian TV anchor on the state-owned channel Rossiya.
One might wonder if that is true right now given those elected “representatives” have brought those “liberal democracies” to the brink of thermonuclear (and chemical and biological) war.
Censorship is not helping, and probably the primary reason those scoundrels keep getting reelected.
RT was banned in Ukraine in 2014 after Russia's annexation of Crimea; Latvia and Lithuania implemented similar bans in 2020.
Costa Rica” e Declaration on principles of freedom of expression e African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights e Declaration of principles on freedom of expression in Africa e Amsterdam Recommendations.
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe e Bishkek Declaration.
By December 2021, the Kiev government had amassed up to 125,000 troops along the contact line with the Donbass republics.
At the same time, OSCE reported more frequent use of heavy weapons, prohibited under the Minsk Agreements, by the Ukrainian Armed Forces against the breakaway regions.
Published satellite images of Russian army positions accompanying these news reports showed the Russian army on bases over a day's travel away.
Censored War in Donbass starting in 2014 At the same time, the Western mainstream media have kept silence for years about the shelling of the Donetsk and Lugansk Republics by the Ukrainian government forces and neo-Nazi battalions.
Just a limited number of independent American and European journalists and freelance photographers have been working in the Donbass region, chronicling the invisible war of the Ukrainian government against its own people.
According to the UN, over 13,000 have been killed in the region since the Maidan coup d'etat of February 2014.
Over the past several weeks the Ukrainian military had intensified bombardment of the Donbass region, prompting the leadership of the DPR and LPR to launch an evacuation of children and elderly people to Russia.
However, ‘Ukrainian spec ops groups have been targeting evacuees leaving to Russia with mines and shells,’ says Eliason.
The United States openly dismissed Russia's warnings about the ongoing genocide of Russian-speakers and crimes against humanity in Eastern Ukraine.
For his part, German Chancellor Olaf Scholz claimed at the annual Munich Security Conference on 19 February that it is ""really ridiculous"" to say that ""there is something like genocide"" in Donbass.
Coming this from the German chancellor is ""scandalous but expected,"" says Eliason.
De-Nazification Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov stated on Thursday that Russia started a military operation to protect Donbass in order to clear the country of Nazis.
In the wake of the 2014 Maidan coup, anumber of corporate media sources questioned the role of Ukraine neo-Nazi groups in the nation's political life but very then it was largely scratched from the Western mainstream narrative.
He bemoaned the fact that many Americans are unaware of 2 May 2014 ‘pogrom’ in Odessa where roughly 50 people were burnt alive in the Trade Unions House by Ukrainian radical nationalists and neo-Nazis.
The professor continued that the mainstream media has similarly overlooked the fact that the Azov Battalion, which is an official component of Kiev’s armed forces, has a pro-Nazi ideology.
What’s more, the rehabilitation of neo-Nazism in Ukraine has been tolerated by successive American administrations since the time of the 2005 ""Orange Revolution"" and continued to thrive, under George Bush, Barack Obama, and Donald Trump, according to Cohen.
The administration of Joseph Biden, who used to be Obama’s appointee in Ukraine, went even further, by providing tonnes of weapons and training to the Ukrainian military as the latter concentrated along the line of contact with Donbass.
For example, the very common practice during the first Cold War of condemning the Soviet Union for taking over much of Eastern Europe after the Second World War.
But the condemnation is very much misapplied if no mention is made of the fact that Eastern Europe became communist because Hitler, with the approval of the West, used it as a highway to reach the Soviet Union to wipe out Bolshevism once and for all; the Russians in World Wars | and II lost about 40 million people because the West had twice used this highway to invade Russia.
It should not be surprising that after World War II the Soviets were determined to close down the highway.
In the case of Ukraine mainstream news has “left out” critically important facts like how the US overthrew the government, the war really started in 2014 as the result of that, that Ukraine has not been peaceful ever since, and the United States has loaded it with Nazis, and weapons of mass destruction up to and including biological pathogens that could be used for biological warfare.
Those are essential for understanding the basis for Russia’s need to de-Nazify and de-militarize Ukraine.
You go to a movie, and violence is there,” Tanay told Psychiatric Times.
The average American watches nearly 5 hours of video each day, 98% of which is watched on a traditional television set, according to Nielsen Company.
Most self-involving video games contain some violent content, even those for children.
In a given year, more United States children will die from gun violence than will die from cancer, pneumonia, influenza, asthma, HIV/AIDS, and opioids combined.
In fact, the overall rate of firearmrelated death or injury in the United States is higher than the rate in most other industrialized countries.
Drawing on vast archives of shocking new documentation, Theaters of Command tells how the Pentagon and sometimes the CIA have had the final say over thousands of films, video-games, and TV shows, often imposing heavy rewrites.
The government’s deliberate creation of what investigator Roger Stahl terms “American empire’s cinematic universe” is one of the great swindles perpetuated against an unwitting public.
These actions have systematically scrubbed from the screen an unsavory century of military history including war crimes, illegal arms sales, racism and sexual assault, torture, coups, assassinations, and weapons of mass destruction.
This government operation amounts to the airbrushing of entire culture, laid bare here for the first time after decades of secrecy.
In stunning and unsettling detail, Theaters of Command tracks the full scope of Pentagon and CIA influence on everything from Lone Survivor to The Last Ship, Marvel to MTV, and James Bond to Jack Ryan.
This deliberate creation of what some have called “American empire’s cinematic universe” is one of the great under-reported PR coups of our time.
False flag Operations For those not familiar with this terminology, a false flag operation is when one side in a conflict does something horrible, like kills many of its own people, usually civilians, and then blames the opposing side in that conflict.
Whereas false flag operations are usually difficult to prove, in some cases enough circumstantial evidence collects to make it quite clear who was the real perpetrator of that crime.
And, evidence from Ukraine strongly suggests that Kiev’s neo-Nazis have perpetrated at least two false flag operations thus far in an attempt to encourage the United States and/or Europe to enforce a no-fly zone over Ukraine, escalating this conflict into a much larger international war.
The following was published March 23, 2022 in the Canadian Global Research online newspaper.
Fortunately, due to the infinite arrogance of the real aggressors in this ongoing tragedy, those who exalt Adolf Hitler, don’t even feel the need to do really convincing frame-ups and instead leave enough clues behind to prove that they themselves are committing these atrocities, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
The Mariupol Theater Bombing We don't know for sure what happened to the theatre, but it wouldn’t be the first time the Ukrainian government made false claims By Pedro Gonzalez Global Research, March 24, 2022 / On March 16, the Donetsk Regional Drama Theatre in Mariupol, Ukraine, was bombed.
Maxar satellite images showed the word “CHILDREN” written in Russian in large letters on the pavement outside.
The incident occurred within hours of President Volodymyr Zelensky’s virtual address to Congress, where he asked again for the United States to establish a no-fly zone over Ukraine.
Civilians would be endangered or even killed before the world’s watching eyes.
But these allegations, in the context of a war that has been distorted by misinformation, merit examination precisely because the incident had the supposedly desired effect.
So far, more than 30,000 people have been evacuated through humanitarian corridors from Mariupol, which is surrounded by Russian troops.
If Moscow wanted to slaughter civilians, it could have easily targeted vehicles rolling in bumper-to-bumper traffic out of the city, heading in the direction of the pro-Russian separatist-controlled north.
This is not to say civilians have not been killed during the conflict— they have—but Russia is not deliberately targeting them as part of a genocidal campaign.
These facts, coupled with what happened in the days before the bombing, raise questions no one in the mainstream is asking.
This is done so that they could scream to the whole world that Russia’s aviation did this and that the Ukrainian sky needs to be closed immediately, etc.
Later, investigative journalist Max Blumenthal noted that Western media repeated Ukrainian officials’ claims about the mosque in Mariupol being shelled by Russia with scores of civilians, including children, inside.
Zelensky and his officials had previously made similar misleading claims about the bombing of the memorial at Babi Yar, a ravine in Kiev that was also the site of massacres committed by the Nazis during World War Il.
On March 13, a Twitter user named Elena Evdokimova issued another warning.
Militants of the Azov nationalist battalion blew up the Mariupol theater building, which they rigged with explosives earlier, Russian Defense Ministry announced Wednesday.
The Defense Ministry debunked Kiev’s accusations of an airstrike on the theater building, where civilians could have been held hostage.
According to the verified information, militants of the Azov nationalist battalion carried out another bloody provocation by blowing up the rigged theater building,” the Ministry of Defense said.
People sheltering in a theater in the Ukrainian city of Mariupol are emerging from the building after it was bombed, the former head of the Donetsk region said Thursday.
Apparently, CNN was interested ONLY in information that was being supplied by Ukraine’s government.
Of course, ‘reporting’ in that way is only propaganda — not journalism.
One of the first lessons of objectivity is to slow things down to make sure that fact is not obscured by emotion.
The video has been released in its present form, it appears, with the express intent of producing a visceral “shock and awe” moment for the viewer.
If this was indeed the case, then those who released it — the Ukrainian National Police — have succeeded beyond their wildest imagination.
The linkage between the dead and the Russian military was established immediately, without any fact-based data to back it up, and subsequently echoed in all forms of media — mainstream and social alike.
Anyone who dared question the established “Russia did it” narrative was shouted down and belittled as a “Russian shill,” or worse.
That these conclusions are the byproduct of mass hysteria is beside the point — why seek to be objective when the narrative fits every stereotype that had been carefully assembled beforehand by the same people parroting the Bucha_ story today.
And let’s be clear — the Ukrainian narrative of the events in Bucha seems to stretch credibility.
The chronology of the narrative produces the first red flag that the story being peddled by Ukraine, and echoed in the West, is not what it seems.
It is established fact that Russian troops evacuated Bucha on March 30.
Ukrainian National Police began entering Bucha on March 31, and that same day the mayor of Bucha announced that the town was fully under the control of Ukrainian officials.
At no time was there any suggestion by the mayor or any other Ukrainian official of mass killings undertaken by Russia.
The videotape in question was released by Ukrainian authorities on April 2; it is not certain if the video had been taken earlier, or on that day.
What is certain is that the images shown in the video differed sharply from the narrative initially portrayed by the mayor.
For its part, Russia has vehemently denied the allegations, and has requested an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council to discuss what the Russian Foreign Ministry has called the “criminal provocations by Ukrainian soldiers and radicals” in Bucha.
The presidency of the Security Council is held by Great Britain, and the British mission to the UN has denied the Russian request, stating that a discussion on Ukraine currently scheduled for Tuesday, April 4 would serve as a forum for any discussion about Bucha.
One would think that the Security Council, which has shown a readiness in the past to meet on short notice to discuss the events coming out of Ukraine, would seek to accommodate Russia’s request on a matter of such importance.
The goal of the British, however, does not appear to be the rapid search for truth and justice, but rather to buy time to allow the political fallout from the alleged massacre in Bucha to develop further.
One example of this tactic manifesting itself is the reaction of United States President Joe Biden.
Biden took advantage of the Bucha crisis to advocate for the delivery of more weaponry to Ukraine.
All this from the president of acountry which has _ refused to recognise the International Criminal Court.
For reasons which should beobvious toanyone’ willing to applysome critical thought.
Fortunately for President Biden and the Ukrainian government, the British chief prosecutor of the court, Karim Khan, announced in early March 2022 that he had launched an investigation into alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity committed in Ukraine.
Given the high profile of the Bucha allegations, one would imagine that Khan has dispatched a forensics team to take control of the crime scene and oversee autopsies on the victims to establish the time of death, mechanism of death, and whether the victims had died where they were allegedly found, or if their bodies had been moved there from another location.
Khan would also be empowered to conduct interviews with the Ukrainian National Police, who have a history of close relations with members of the Ukrainian far right, including the infamous Azov Battalion.
Of particular interest would be any investigation into orders given to the police regarding the treatment of those Ukrainian civilians deemed to have collaborated with the Russian military during its occupation of Bucha.
The results of such an investigation would more than likely conflict with the narrative being pursued by the Ukrainian government and echoed in the West by compliant media outlets and politicians alike.
This is the prime reason why Khan is not currently on the ground in Bucha.
One can assume that if and when Khan is eventually given access to evidence about the Bucha killings, it will have been manipulated by the Ukrainian National Police to such an extent that disproving the allegations will be virtually impossible.
The truth about what happened in Bucha is out there, waiting to be discovered.
Unfortunately, that truth appears to be inconvenient for those in a position to pursue it aggressively through a forensicsbased, on-site investigation.
The claims have been made by Ukraine itself, and amplified by some Western media outlets and human rights groups, some days after Moscow withdrew its troops from the area.
Some of the dead apparently had their hands tied, while others wore white armbands, commonly used by Russian forces and civilians in areas under Russian control.
We must stop them and kick them out. | demand new, devastating G7 sanctions NOW,” Kuleba wrote on Twitter.
Top Western politicians have backed Kiev’s assessment of Bucha, with some explicitly pinning the blame for the killings on Moscow as well.
Bucha-Like 'False Flag’ Incidents to Continue as West ‘Frustrated’ Over Propaganda Failures, April 3, 2022 Over the past 24 hours, the Western media have been fueling allegations that Russia committed mass killings of civilians in the Ukrainian city of Bucha as footage has shown city streets strewn with bodies.
The Russian Defence Ministry dismissed the accusations, underscoring that the footage is nothing short of yet another provocation.
With Kiev quickly accusing Russia of ‘genocide’ and ‘massacre’ in Bucha, Western media seems eager to automatically criminalize Moscow without a full investigation and it looks like the media is a tool for the West to make up for frustrations caused by the failures of its own propaganda, experts have stated.
Vanessa Beeley, an independent investigative journalist, points at how ‘NATO-aligned’ media plays its role to “protect their ‘side’” from repercussions for the war crimes they have been committing for decades"", while also highlighting inconsistencies in the Western-promoted narrative.
The sentiment is echoed by Joe Quinn, political commentator and author, who says that it was “entirely plausible” that that Ukrainian military policy was to shoot anyone on the street that did not have a blue armband, and in particular those with a white armband a sign recognized as an identifier of the Russian military.
According to Quinn, it was possible that some of the Bucha civilians wore white bandages as a sign of friendliness towards the Russian military, prompting the Ukrainians to assume that everyone with that bandage was somehow aligned with the Russian forces.
It is certainly a more plausible explanation than the irrational claim that retreating Russian soldiers decided to indiscriminately 'shoot' civilians on the street in Bucha,” Quinn says.
He also said that it can relate to the fact that Russia has made significant steps towards financial and economic independence from the West and stronger ties with China and India, which ""is causing a huge frustration"" in the West.
Occam's razor principle suggests it probably was Azov, as they have motivation, means and opportunities, however in a fair world ruled with justice one must await further evidence to be absolutely positive of their guilt before conviction, unlike United States media’s immediate assignation of blame on Russians in spite of strong evidence it wasn’t the Russians, such as forensic evidence from Bucha and the fact that Russians weren’t even in that town at the time those killed, were killed.
In 2017, the Syrian Arab Republic had been in the six-year long grip of a Western-backed regime change operation launched in response to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s 2009 refusal to allow US-allied Qatar to build a pipeline through his country, one that would have undermined his relationship with key-ally Russia.
Like the aforementioned Operation Cyclone, Timber Sycamore would see the arming, funding and training of Wahhabi terrorists groups by the West and its allies, with the intention of removing Assad’s secular government and replacing it with a Westernfriendly leadership.
With the Syrian regime change operation not going as planned, Washington’s Neocons would soon resort to desperate — and reckless — measures.
More general uses of the phrase “false flag” The phrase “false flag” can be used to describe an imagined threat by another nation used to justify an attack upon it as in the following quote.
Iran, the United States and False Flags By Robert Fantina, Global Research, September 15, 2020, American Herald Tribune 13 September 2020 / United States’ government spokespeople are forever demonizing Iran.
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has proclaimed that Iran is the world’s chief sponsor of terrorism.
In keeping with this, the possibility of the United States waging war against Iran is very real.
The United States is currently bombing, or supporting the bombing, of Palestine, Yemen, Syria, Afghanistan, Libya and Somalia.
It is sanctioning Venezuela, causing untold suffering there, wanting ‘regime change’ in that nation also.
And Pompeo has the temerity to say that Iran is the world’s chief sponsor of terrorism.
By any objective standard, that title must go to the United States / President Donald Trump and his cohorts continually raise the false flag of Iranian threats to the world, against all facts.
The United States has been at war for the vast majority of its history.
Yet more often than not they have been based on weak evidence, questionable motives, and outright lies.
How the United States Justifies its Wars (June 2020, Red Pill Press), journalist and human rights activist Robert Fantina explains how the United States government has rallied public opinion to support its wars and military objectives since before the American Revolution.
Next comes the use of propaganda to manipulate public opinion and enlist widespread buy-in.
Quoting and parroting the government, the media helps spread this propaganda.
This approach has successfully garnered support for both official warfare and acts of aggression such as plundering other country’s resources and removing left-leaning foreign leaders.
Since World War II alone it is estimated that the United States has killed at least 20,000,000 people in over 37 nations.
Two Men Wrongfully Convicted of Killing Malcolm X Are Exonerated After 55 Years Muhammad A Aziz and Khalil Islam, who each served more than 20 years of a life sentence, had always maintained their innocence, by Nora McGreevy, November 19, 2021 / Two men wrongfully imprisoned for the murder of Malcolm X_have been exonerated.
A lot less, particularly when they’re victims of the United States by Julie Hollar March 18, 2022 As United States news media covered the first shocking weeks of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, some media observers—like FAIR founder Jeff Cohen —have noted their impressions of how coverage differed from wars past, particularly in terms of a new focus on the impact on civilians.
We used the Nexis news database to count both sources and segments about Ukraine during the study period.
Comparing this coverage to that of other conflicts reveals both a familiar reliance on United States officials to frame events, as well as a newfound ability to cover the impact on civilians—when those civilians are white and under attack by an official United States enemy, rather than by the United States itself.
Ukrainian sources—no experts One of the most striking things about early coverage has been the sheer number of Ukrainian sources.
FAIR always challenges news media to seek out the perspective of those most impacted by events, and United States outlets are doing so to a much greater extent in this war than in any war in recent history.
But these voices were almost completely marginalized, with only five such civil society experts appearing during the study period.
Fair.com’s niche specialty incidentally is media bias and the entire article quoted above is well worth reading.
Escalate, escalate escalate After provoking, provoking and provoking, until finally some reaction is elicited, there is the inevitable escalation.
Before that happens though some western nation will declare war on Russia.
The mass and momentum pushing this drive to war will not be stopped by common sense or even self preservation.
None-the-less, Russia defeated the Nazis before and will again no doubt.
In any case the United States and NATO are currently flooding nations adjacent to Russia will soldiers trained to kill.
That is an artifact of a bygone age when the United States needed to pretend to be nice sometimes, at little bit at least.
Tod Wolters, commander of United States European Command told American senators on 29 March, falling short of specifying whether he meant permanent basing.
In recent months, United States military forces have soared from roughly 60,000 to 102,000 in Europe.
Tod Wolters was asked by Senator Roger Wicker whether the United States should increase the number of troops permanently stationed in Europe, rather than the rotating forces.
Still, Wolters’ remarks left more questions than answers, as it remains unclear whether the additional United States military forces would be deployed on a permanent basis. ""| think the reluctance came from two things,"" says Scott Ritter, United States military analyst, former UN Weapons Inspector and WMD Whistleblower.
The general is aware of these financial and political unknowns, hence his hesitance, adds the military analyst.
Meanwhile, the number of United States troops deployed across Europe has soared from 60,000 to about 102,000 since October 2021.
For comparison's sake, NATO-allied European states hosted a total of 450,000 United States military servicemen in 1957, during the Cold War era, according to Axios.
The one and only thing that matters is quarterly dividends from war related industries for the super-rich, because they also own the politicians and news monopolies.
In addition, it is commonly believed by most Americans that American wars are good for the United States economy, a fact which can help motivate American politicians to start wars.
As political pundit Caitlin Johnstone noted in 2020, the US has no allies, only hostages.
GENK GLoBalTiv€S Section summary Based on substantial well-researched and verified public information it appears President Biden, due to his, his son’s, and his top cabinet members’ corruption, threats and an astonishing array of provocations have brought the United States and Russia to the brink of WWIII and thermonuclear Armageddon.
The United States invaded Iraq based on false information regarding “weapons of mass destruction” including chemical and biological weapons, yet none were found.
American politicians and so-called defense industry giants wanted this war, did everything they could possibly do to provoke it, and are already profiting hugely from it, while innocent Ukrainian soldiers and civilians and Russian soldiers are being ruthlessly killed.
What’s more, the above article quotes a long list of top American foreign policy advisors predicting the armed conflict in Ukraine now, if NATO continued its eastern march with its unmistakable intent to provoke war.
Motives, intent, methods, and opportunity for President Biden to lead the United States to create this war are all there.
Material facts evidenced by eye witness testimonies, news reports, videos and photos prove the Ukrainian war started in 2014, with what many call a United States funded and orchestrated “Color Revolution” against former President Viktor Yanukovych, in violation of “The principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples under Article 1, paragraph 2” of the UN Charter.
Instead, the US, led by President Biden and his top cabinet officials, all of whom have “the appearance of conflicts of interest” between their government posts and weapons and related war industries, accelerated the slaughter of innocents in Lugansk and Donetsk.
That was not only “undiplomatic” but more extreme provocation by President Putin , virtually guaranteeing a Russian military response in the Donbass region, at least.
President Putin however went further, deciding the only way to secure that section of his southern border is to clear out Ukraine’s war-making capabilities once and for all.
Previous to this decision, the United States had been playing a game of “peek-a-boo” repeatedly dangling the possibility of Ukraine joining NATO, and then later denying they would permit it.
Provocation was the name of the game the United States and NATO were playing and finally, they got a response.
At this point the only way to stop the acceleration of this war, is for Ukrainian President Zelensky to surrender.
He however would never do that, buoyed by massive United States and European financial, military, media and “moral” support.
Consequently, the only other option to stop this war from devolving into WWIII, is to place a moratorium on weapons delivery to Ukraine, such that President Zelensky has a “facesaving” excuse for calling for a truce, and negotiating in a reasonable manner with Russian President Putin.
If the recipients of this Referral for Criminal Investigation where to take it seriously, and begin the investigation that should have started in 2014, the potential for peace with selfdetermination and dignity for all parties would spring to life.
The alternatives include loselose scenarios for the entire human species and earth’s ecology.
Public officials shall not use their official authority for the improper advancement of their own or their family's personal or financial interest.
Requires such Member, officer, or employee to recuse himself or herself from any matter in which there is or appears to be a conflict of interest under the Rule, and to notify the Committee of such recusal.
Requires such individual also to submit to the Clerk of the House, for public disclosure, the statement of disclosure for which such recusal was made.
Water and electricity were cut, no people or supplies were allowed in or out, and the city was subjected to constant shelling by heavy artillery.
The victims were killed primarily by the Ukrainian Army including by shelling—not by the Russians. e War crimes were also committed in neighboring villages, including some occupied by right-wing militias that Kyiv had to rely on because many Ukrainians did not want to join the army to fight their own people.
The war in Ukraine did not begin February 24, 2022 as western media makes it appear.
Earlier a residential neighborhood had been struck by a grad missile, while other Ukrainian army attacks destroyed schools.
Another woman said that the targets that were hit “were not new targets.
A woman told him that her daughter had been born on June 26, 2014, and that the war began in her village on July 19.
Ukraine not only instigated the war but has committed significant war crimes.
Those motivations can be proven and specific and credible evidence is provided in this document.
Among other things this article argues that President Biden and his son “Hunter” (and Devon Archer, a former John Kerry campaign manager, who also profitably sat on Burisma’s board of directors) “conflict of interest” investments in Ukraine is ultimately masking their desire to stop legitimate Russian energy export business investments in Nord Stream 2, and instead promote the American Fracking oil and gas.
In any event, due to campaign finance laws permitting unlimited “donations” from anonymous sources, nobody can know for sure just how deeply the Bidens and other administration officials are involved with taking bribes from fracking industrialists.
That's an error Client does not have access rights to the content so server is rejecting to give proper response.
International Court of Justice in the Namibia case 7, the Western Sahara case and the 8.
Motivation for President Trump to accelerate the Ukraine War will not be found because he actively worked against building up the war machine there and was impeached for it.
However multiple motivations for President Biden to greatly accelerate the war in Ukraine can be proven.
It isn't the same as intent, which relates to whether an action was accidental or intentional.
Intent is an element of just about every crime, meaning that the prosecution must establish that the defendant intended to commit the criminal act.
But motive usually isn't a criminal element—the prosecution doesn't have to prove the defendant had it.
In regards to incentives, just making Hillary Clinton and his CIA director happy might have been enough.
In any case, this referral for criminal investigation is not directed at President Obama per se, but rather focused primarily on President Biden who had multiple motivations and material incentives to rapidly escalate this war.
Hillary Clinton was President Obama’s foreign policy advisor and Secretary of State for some time.
As Doug Bandow wrote in Forbes.com, ""Hillary Clinton Never Met a War She Didn't Want Other Americans to Fight,"" as she is credited with the disastrous and massively deadly series of so-called Arab Spring revolutions in more than half a dozen formerly stable nations.
Though those conflicts, mostly initiated by “color revolutions,” (mostly red, as in the color of blood exposed to air) were highly profitable for war and related industries in the US, they wreaked havoc, homelessness, death and hunger upon tens of millions of citizens of those nations — and yet the American public did not weep for them.
Multiple motivations and clear intent for President Biden to commit crimes against humanity in Ukraine To prove a crime, one must show intent and motivation.
Below are four separate but related verifiable motivations with references for President Biden to start and relentlessly escalate the most current phase of the Ukraine War.
President Biden’s family’s long-standing corrupt business practices in Ukraine profit from starting a war just to kill the legitimate Nord Stream 2 pipeline between Russia and Germany.
Most of President Biden’s top political appointees have the appearance of conflicts of interest , whereby they have personally profited from corporate war industries in the past, and most certainly can and probably will continue those collusive relationships after retiring from office.
Profit motive of other Euro-American war and oil & gas industrialists and the politicians they own, who wanted to create a boogieman to justify their budgets, bonuses and dividends.
The United States spends more on the war industry than China, India, Russia, United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia, Germany, France, Japan, South Korea, Italy, and Australia — combined.
President Biden might well have had additional motivation to greatly accelerate the Ukraine War provided by former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.
As she certainly complicit in the so-called “Arab Spring” series of disastrous and deadly American funded “Color Revolutions” mostly started in 2011 before, during and after her stint as Secretary of State to then President Obama.
To cover up his profit and other personal motivations for his increased support to mostly neo-Nazi militias in Ukraine, President Biden cynically used “national security” justifications.
The United States had driven the nuclear arms race from the beginning, and Russia has maintained parity.
The United States is jealous that China’s economy could grow larger than United States at some time in the future.
Ukraine has been considered a “battleground” nation since the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
Number 4 immediately above is itself a violation of the UN Charter (e.g., interfering in the affairs of other nations thereby negating any possibility of those nations exercising a right to self-determination) and innumerable other international laws and treaties.
However, that several distinctly personal motivations for greatly accelerating the War in Ukraine can be proven, the appearance of conflict of interest becomes impossible to ignore.
Euro-American Defense related corporate shareholders & boards of directors Defense and cybersecurity stocks climb amid Russia’s invasion of Ukraine Mon 28 Feb 2022 Raytheon Technologies, the United States defense giant and maker of the Stinger ground-to-air missile that Germany has pledged to supply to Ukrainian forces, has seen its shares price increase more than 10% since the invasion began last Wednesday.
Raytheon’s stock rose over 4.6% on Monday and has risen more than 18% this year.
Lockheed Martin, the maker of the F-35 fighter jet, advanced more than 5.4% on Monday.
The company, with Raytheon, is the manufacturer of the Patriot missile defense system set to be deployed with the NATO battlegroup in Slovakia.
Outside the US, Britain’s BAE Systems, the largest defense contractor in Europe, Germany’s Rheinmetall, France’s Thales and Italy’s Leonardo have all seen their share prices rise sharply.
Yes, in addition to mass murder and scars that never heal enmities that will last generations so the super-wealthy can buy another island and boast at cocktail and drug parties about the “killing” they made on Wall Street.
Or worse, a nuclear winter that could kill a billion people instantly, cause another two billion to die of hunger, disease, and the tsunami of chaos and crime that will follow, and leave the rest scarred and damaged for life.
In 2021 alone we committed over $300 million in assistance to support Ukraine’s democratic and economic development, and over $650 million in security assistance.
Their children, if they survive, will not be so proud when they learn the whole truth behind, and human cost of their wealth.
He does not want his entire western front lined with American and NATO tanks, missiles, military bases, special operations forces and neo-Nazi ultra-nationalist extremists.
As many as 27 million Soviets lost their lives, with as many as 11. million military deaths joined by up to 10 million civilian deaths due to military activity and an additional 8 million to 9 million deaths due to famine and disease.
Those totals do not include the more than 14 million Soviet soldiers who were wounded during the war.
Among the Soviet Union's 15 republics, Russia withstood the highest number of casualties, with 6,750,000 military deaths and 7,200,000 civilian deaths.
Threatening aggression is a violation of the UN Charter and the US placing tanks, missiles, military bases, special operations forces, neo-Nazi ultranationalist extremists and especially BSL-3 and BSL-4 laboratories all along Russia’s western border is realistically viewed as a threat to Russia’s security.
There are furthermore many links between Neo-Nazi groups and United States government officials.
Hatewatch could not find Kreider or his contact information to seek comment from him.
The United States government has openly embraced many neo-Nazi groups around the world, including in the USA, Europe and Ukraine.
Given the US’s buildup of military along all of Russia’s western front, other military assets including space-based weapons, the west’s history of attacking Russia, and very long list of unwarranted and illegal foreign military attacks on nations, President Putin’s demands prior to it’s attack on Ukraine, appear critically necessary in order to ensure Russia’s selfdetermination as guaranteed by UN Charter.
Because President Putin is an oldfashioned romantic who apparently believes in family values and honor, and is willing to risk all to help those in Lugansk and Donetsk suffering under the withering fire of EuroAmerican-Kiev imposed genocide for eight long years, he is earning a place in history far more benign than the western political tools of the profit seeking corporations that are willing to ensure every last Ukrainian is killed to extract maximum quarterly dividends.
Living in a world where honor has been cast aside for profits and political expediency, makes President Putin very difficult or impossible for most American politicians to understand.
In any event, most American politicians don’t really care about his motivation for his attempt to disarm his increasingly aggressive, threatening and deadly neighbor.
Conclusions Starting wars has been a “tried and method” of stimulating the American economy when it appears a bit flat, as occurred as the result of the COVID-19 pandemic and mounting American debt.
Had former President Trump been reelected there is a reasonably high probability he would have somehow provoked a war against China instead of Russia.
Ukraine is a place well known to President Biden and his son Hunter due to their deep investments and profiteering there.
They wanted a war, and they got it, hugely aided by the fact that United States had one already going via it’s backing of the 2014 coup against the democratically elected president Viktor Yanukovych.
Given that President Biden , has profited enormously from the Ukrainian oil and gas industry, and many of his top appointed cabinet officials give the appearance of conflicts of interest between their official government positions, and positions in lobby groups and/or government funded think tanks, motivation and intent are established for President Biden to have intentionally provoked President Putin into his military invasion of Ukraine, a violation of the UN Charter, and numerous international treaties and laws.
That is a comic book style rational cooked up by some minion in the legions of American disinformation experts posing as journalists.
Top United States administration officials in addition to Hunter Biden, President Zelensky and European weapons manufacturers will not like the plan (for a moratorium on weapons gifted to Ukraine) at all.
That is because substantial evidence suggests they are complicit in launching and escalating the current armed conflict in Ukraine.
Likewise, they should have no say whatsoever in the determination to open a criminal investigation into their roles in starting this armed conflict/war.
Suppose Al Capone and/or Jack the Ripper had to give approval before a police investigation into their criminal activities was permitted.
This is the case | am bringing to the recipients of this request for a criminal investigation.
There appears only one reasonable and simple way to end the war in Ukraine almost immediately.
The UN needs to take a lead on a moratorium on arms shipments to Ukraine, in order to give President Zelensky a face-saving excuse for surrender.
Ukraine becoming a neutral country is the only solution to this war forced on it by United States and European political and economic ambitions.
This war is no different from any of the other wars the United States has launched since WWII, except it is still in its very early stages, and has a very real possibility of leading to nuclear war.
He had very substantial legal, national security and moral rationale for it — and yet the western media has entirely suppressed and mocked his legitimate motivations and instead demonized and censored him.
Americans meanwhile have not had fair access to news, falsely believing themselves to have that fair access.
Furthermore, many or most Americans are enjoying this war in Ukraine having been programmed by the United States government to enjoy viewing extreme violence.
At this time there is strong evidence Kiev is only escalating the US-NATO terrorism campaign in Ukraine begun in 2014 in attempt to further provoke and escalate it as much as possible to increase corporate profits in their respective countries and enlist NATO’s involvement, again leading to World War III, with Ukraine in the middle, which means the total destruction of “his” nation.
In order to encourage UN Secretary General Guterres to call for a moratorium on weapons shipments to Ukraine, investigation into alleged corrupt activities by President Biden, his son Hunter, and top cabinet members with “the appearance of conflict of interest” in violation of United States law and international treaties, policies and laws against corruption is desperately needed.
Though this may seem awkward, ill-advised, and/or politically risky, compared to the effects of thermonuclear war, those efforts would be trivial.
The onus of responsibility lies with the relevant authorities to whom this Referral for Criminal Investigation is addressed.
Russia is not Vietnam, Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia, or Yemen, and President Biden’s blitzkrieg media campaign may have met with initial western public support, however, that news media is not being honest at all about the date of the origin of this war, the true motivations for this war, the actual progress of the war (as United States media always makes it appear they are winning until they lose),""* 1 Please recall since WWII the United States does not fight wars to win, as the United States has lost all wars since then.
Instead, the United States fights wars to make profits from war and war related industries, and will pump that war for all it’s worth until the target country is flattened.
Then the United States disgracefully withdraws, while the corporate profiteers, the merchants of death, laugh all the way to the bank.
Ukraine is meat on the table of the “good ol’ USA,” at least those rich enough to profit from it.
The operation in Ukraine was launched on 24 February, as Russian forces hit Ukrainian military objects with precision weapons.
President Vladimir Putin noted it was started to stop the genocide in Donbass, where people have been suffering from an eight-year-long war waged against them by Kiev.
Appendix 1 — Reprints of some Russian source news Due to increasing censorship of Russian news media by the US, | am posting full text versions of some of the latest news regarding discoveries from Ukraine’s biological “research” facilities below.
According to the document, a nearly $32-million program was aimed at “organizing work of the laboratories, built and modernized with the help of the donor ,” as well as “monitoring infectious diseases” and conducting work to “react rapidly” to outbreaks.
The program also listed the “safe collection, processing, temporary storage and transportation of clinical samples” as its goals.
The Ukrainian biolaboratories network has been funded by other US agencies as well, Kirillov said, describing the scale of the biolabs program as an “impressive” one.
Scientific supervision is carried out by leading research organizations, including the Los Alamos National Laboratory, which develops nuclear weapons,” the official said.
The military offensive came following a seven-year standoff over Ukraine’s failure to implement the terms of the Minsk agreements, and Russia’s eventual recognition of the Donbass republics in Donetsk and Lugansk.
The document highlights a meeting between the attaché and representatives of the US-Canadian company Skymount, which is involved in Al-related research.
The system “performs the work of 60-person years per day, greatly reducing the manual labor hours to generate new target molecules from existing, pre-approved drugs,” according to its developers.
We are talking about the screening system for pharmaceuticals ‘Deep Drug’, which have not passed the licensing procedure in the United States and Canada,” Kirillov stated.
In 2010, for instance, Indonesia shut down the United States Navy Medical Center in Jakarta, which was apparently involved in a similar project, over “numerous violations,” he added.
The attack came following a seven-year standoff over Ukraine’s failure to implement the terms of the Minsk agreements, and Russia’s eventual recognition of the Donbass republics in Donetsk and Lugansk.
Russia has now demanded that Ukraine officially declare itself a neutral country that will never join the US-led NATO military bloc.
Russian media outlets recently reported that the Pentagon had commissioned more than 30 biological laboratories in Ukraine, where large quantities of dangerous viruses were stored.
Maybe because they have laboratories spread around the world, they are aware of the high risks of viruses leaking and triggering pandemics.
They assumed similar risks from Chinese laboratories, but that is stretching it too far.
And that's precisely why the US has failed to bring COVID-19 under control on its shores.
But they cannot wash away the fact about the existence of such laboratories around the world.
Maybe Americans “let it all hang out,” but they don’t in this part of the world.
As for Russia asking China for military assistance in a military operation in Ukraineit is laughably ridiculous.
Whoever makes that stuff up is creative, and knows how to inflame American audiences, however such totally unsubstituted rubbish only proves they know nothing about Russian military capabilities and protocol in this part of the world.
Nothing less than screenplay writing for Hollywood style movies — smear jobs based on complete fiction.
The Roots of American censorship are found in the Reich Ministry for Public Enlightenment and Propaganda Given how openly the United States now supports, fosters and embraces Nazism , it is only appropriate to mention the Nazis’ media roots.
The Reich Ministry for Public Enlightenment and Propaganda also known simply as the Ministry of Propaganda was responsible for controlling the content of the press, literature, visual arts, film, theater, music and radio in Nazi Germany.
The ministry was created as the central institution of Nazi propaganda shortly after the party's national seizure of power in January 1933.
In Hitler’s cabinet it was headed by Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels, who exercised control over all German mass media and creative artists through his ministry and the Reich Chamber of Culture which was established in the fall of 1933.
After Hitler’s death, Goebbels had his six children first given morphine and then cyanide pills.
Please consider the evidence contained in this Referral carefully before making any decisions regarding the validity of this evidence, as failure to consider and act upon it in a timely fashion can and probably will have catastrophic consequences for all of humanity.
The Security Council took no measures to “maintain international peace and security,” despite President Putin’s best efforts, thereby opening the door to armed intervention to legitimately protect the security of his nation.
The proven American “dual-use” biological “research” facilities in Ukraine alone, with some of them very close to the Russian border, represent arguably reasonable justification for President Putin’s armed intervention in Ukraine for the purpose of removing those threats, amplified by United States terrorist financing of neo-Nazi groups, especially in light of Russian casualties sustained from Nazi Germany’s attacks on Russia.
Nuland might not have known at the time of Hunter Biden’s key role in helping to escalate that dual-use pathogen technology “research” in Ukraine.
He also introduced Metabiota to an allegedly corrupt Ukrainian gas firm, Burisma, for a 'science project’ involving high biosecurity level labs in Ukraine.
Respect for this principle can be ensured solely by establishing guarantees that protect judicial procedures.
Every Russian has “links” with President Putin, as do many other world leaders.
Anyone who ever sold a washing machine to any Russian has links to President Putin.
The absurdity of United States sanctions is contemptable and proves United States contempt for international law, signed treaties, and innumerable signed contracts.
It also embraces expression that may be regarded by some as deeply offensive.
The right covers communications that are both verbal and non-verbal, and all modes of expression, including audio-visual, electronic and internet-based modes of communication.
The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of this article carries with it special duties and responsibilities.
Thus, the United States retains sole right to censor all news except “news” generated by the United States government.
Many make it clear both political parties are simply two sides of the same coin representing primarily corporate interests and not the people.
If they are pro-peace, against racism, misogyny and economic sanctions, and support drastically reducing the ever-widening wealth gaps within and between nations they are probably alt-news.
And yet to collect all that glory there has been a “dark side” to American history and current events and we all know it.
And there is the USA again, perfectly ready willing and able to give us 10 million “very good reasons” for every crime against humanity, foreign invasion, devastating predatory behavior in one nation after another, and we at least pretend to go along with it.
Like a predatory killer, a hungry tiger, a vampire, a sadistic mass murderer the United States is a super-sized grand-scale serial killer selecting one target group, and/or nation after another for robbery, human slaughter and destruction.
The United States can afford to feed every person on earth, yet is more interested in accumulating ever more vast and unimaginable wealth for that small group of already fabulously rich people.
That is unrestrained capitalism which is totally different from and vastly worse than any hungry tiger.
The USA does need to keep blowing-up and robbing other nations to keep the momentum of its incredible grandeur going.
And so, the list of American slaughter of by-in-large innocent other nations — they antiseptically call “interventions” is a very long one.
US Military and CIA Interventions since World War II | targeted countries % United States bombings United States government assassination plots Source: William Blum, Killing Hope: United States Military and CIA Intervention Since World War II, 2004 and Rogue State, 2005.
Many or most of the educated around the world have known one or two or more Americans and they can be amazing.
Sometimes they come into a situation, analyze the problems, diseases, structural flaws etc. faster than imaginable, and have figured out solutions and ways to implement those solutions with light speed.
It is easy to see all that goodness in so many American movies, TV shows, cartoons, in medical and other science journals, and even from time-to-time newspapers.
And more recently, beginning with the War Powers Act of 1973, presidential war powers have expanded so much that, according to the Congressional Research Service, it's no longer clear whether a president requires congressional authorization at all.
But the reality was much more complicated, and it's only gotten more complicated.
These operations may require low visibility, clandestine, or covert capabilities.
They can be conducted independently or in conjunction with operations of conventional forces or other government agencies and may include operations through, with, or by indigenous or surrogate forces.
Since then, it's more than tripled in size, received an ever-increasing share of funding, and has conducted _operationsin dozens of countries.
Army's 1st Special Forces Operational Detachment , the Naval Special Warfare Development Group , and the Air Force's 24th Special Tactics Squadron.
In addition to the SMUs, JSOC has its own intelligence division, the Intelligence Support Activity, and often oversees the 75th Ranger Regiment, the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment , and other special operations forces.
Psychologist Sigmund Freud was the first to deeply explore psychological defense mechanisms in humans.
In most cases, these psychological responses are not under a person’s conscious control.
Some are well known and | won’t elaborate on the meaning, but some are not so well known and deserve some explanation.
Denial — This is when a person consciously or unconsciously refuses to accept obvious facts.
For example, nearly all American politicians, and probably at least half of the United States population are in denial of the criminality of American foreign wars.
Repression — Memories of things done by a person that are incompatible with a person’s value system are simply suppressed and “magically” forgotten.
Projection Some thoughts or feelings people have about another person may make that person so uncomfortable they project those feelings, misattributing them to the other person.
For example, a person may dislike a new co-worker, but instead of accepting that, s/he chooses to tell him/herself that they dislike you.
Displacement This is when a person redirects feelings from the true source to another.
Or, perhaps after work the man goes running, or plays a furious game of basketball.
Regression This is like a kind of denial where a person unconsciously goes back to an earlier stage of life — like childhoodto avoid some uncomfortable or exceptionally painful reality they can’t deal with.
Rationalization This is making excuses for things a person says or does when they know those things are incompatible with their value system.
So, they can build elaborate systems of excuses — usually flimsy reasons to excuse their words or actions.
Reaction formation Instead of feeling bad about having done something wrong, a person flips to the opposite side and takes excessive pride in it.
The above list is how at least half or more Americans make it through the day and sleep at night knowing on some level, consciously or unconsciously their government, the government they vote to put in office, and they support with their tax dollars, kills, in fact knowingly kills thousands of people mostly people of color around the world every single day — mostly by starvation.
Please do not forget around 9 million people die every year of hunger and hunger-related diseases, and that breaks down into 25,000 dying every day from hunger, directly due to American inspired “conflicts,” and economic sanctions.
Anytime any national leader does not kowtow to American interests, they and their nation will be crushed.
If a nation signs on with the China led “One Belt One Road” project, they will be punished.
This is the Antebellum movie from which there is no waking up to a better reality for most of the world.
It’s a nightmare with no escape or end until death, which will be experienced without painkillers, however long it may take.
That’s the reality of American overseas foreign economic and military aggression.
He isn’t just fighting Euro-American “donated” weapons, or the neo-Nazi saturated government, he’s also fighting the saturation level Euro-American media’s disinformation machine that turns heroes into devils, and devils into heroes using all the trickery of American Hollywood media and the world’s most clever psychologists who know how to shape those lies into believable tales that people want to believe so they can escape one more massive horror unleashed by the insatiably bloodthirsty and power-hungry Euro-American corporate CEOs and federal government foreign policy makers.
And, that’s why every American and western European voter should read this book, and the links in their entirely.
The tyranny of ego Both bibles and virtually every major spiritual philosophy warns against the tyranny of ego.
Freud postulated that humans are primarily motivated by unconscious forces, with the two dominant ones being sex and aggression.
Well-being means to be fully related to man and nature affectively, to overcome separateness and alienation, to arrive at the experience of oneness with all that exists—and yet to experience myself at the same time as the separate entity | am, as the individual.
For one thing Russia is by far the world’s largest country occupying about 11. % of the earth’s land mass, and it is also one of the world’s natural resource richest countries.
It is also a harsh and unforgiving land as the artic cold sweeps in from the North Pole and kills all those not well prepared in advance.
To survive in Russia requires a great deal of planning, forethought and industrial cleverness.
Russia has been invaded by the west three times now with the last time, WWII resulting in about 24,000,000 total civilian and military deaths.
And so, instead of making amazing movies, cell phones and cars, the Russians make amazing weapons that actually work — unlike so many of the hyper-expensive American weapon systems.
Likewise, Russia has a nuclear arsenal just a bit larger than the USA, but if the truth be told, it wasn’t Russia leading the arms race at any time.
Yet, they follow behind and always make sure they can do one better at a fraction of the cost of American weapons, to make absolutely sure WWII never, never happens again.
Whereas the United States has not really prepared defensively for WWIII, thermonuclear Armageddon, Russia has.
It, like every other target of American unrestrained military aggression, wants to be friends.
Life so often offers us win-win solutions, and to then betray the friends who make possible such brightness in our lives and endeavors is treachery.
There is a limited warranty on all empires that have based their survival on such foundations.
Sooner or later, forces from both without and within always, always end up creating implosions and/or explosions leading to the downfall of such unmitigated arrogance.
And yes, Russians do drink too, but, have — as per the climactic mandates their environment demands — planned for another attack from the west far more meticulously than the USA or Europe.
Feed American foreign policy makers’ psychotic fantasy that it can attain absolute uncontested rulership of the world forever, or destroy human civilization as we know it in a thermonuclear war.
President Biden and the world will pay for this unimaginably deadly gamble in unimaginable ways if the Euro-Americans do not back-off and soon.
All of the psychological defense mechanisms and potassium iodine in the world will not protect the mostly good people of the United States and Europe if this conflict is permitted to escalate any further.
The United States was already sanctioning 1/34 of humanity before Russia’s armed intervention in Ukraine.
By cutting Russia out of the world economy the United States further isolates itself as well.
As casualties mount, and carefully crafted United States disinformation escalates, it seems as if President Biden’s war chiefs are attempting to goad NATO into sending ground troops to Ukraine or at minimum try to institute a no-fly zone over Ukraine.
That would transition this Russian attempt to clear Ukraine of weapons of mass destruction and neo-Nazi extremists into a major war, which the United States and EU “defense” industrialists would just love, in spite of the fact it would destroy all infrastructure in Ukraine and kill millions.
Those kinds of considerations however never slowed down the US and European war machines for a second.
They get to sell weapons, while primarily Europeans and Russians die in a macabre replay of WWIII, again, far, far from American shores.
In any case there is evidence President Biden’s true masters are attempting to trap Europeans into a very deadly quagmire of a major world war, without the loss of a single American life.
It was the Dulles brothers, John Foster and Allen that went around the United States and Europe soliciting funds to build Germany and Japan into the industrial powerhouses they had to be in order to think they could essentially take over the world.
It was the Dulles’ plan from the beginning to then break the German-Russian alliance forcing the Russians to carry the penultimately heavy burden of stopping Nazi Germany.
That made it easy for the United States to attack from the west and win the war they created in the first place.
Europe, North Africa and Japan were smoking ruins, while United States industrialists had wild parties and enjoyed the many fruits of their total victory.
Oh yes, forgot to mention 20 million humans were killed, sacrificed on the altar of American capitalists’ and politicians’ infinite greed.
Deaths from WWIII however are likely to be in the billions, but the profits will be in the trillions.
Those who might think this is too cynical and wicked for any person to really consider simply don’t personally know the sadists and bullies American target nations and people have had to deal with since that nation’s inception.
Expanding empires in history usually did so with a great deal of bloodshed, true, but then their empires usually enjoyed at least a few hundred years of relative peace afterwards.
Currently, the United States spends over $900 million per day on interest payments.
Entrepreneurs face a higher cost of capital, potentially stifling innovation and slowing the advancement of new breakthroughs that could improve our lives.
Growing debt also has a direct effect on the economic opportunities available to every American.
The status of the dollar in international trade fell below 50% several months ago largely due to sanctions imposed on Iran.
Now, banning Russia from SWIFT is very likely to accelerate that decline into a landslide.
It’s surprising the G7 and EU can’t figure out de-dollarizing the world economy will have a rather negative effect on the value of the dollar, which is an imaginary entity anyways since ditching the gold standard.
Besides that, exactly these kinds of isolationist policies directly led to the Great Depression of 1929.
Narcissistic personalities virtually always exhibit delusional beliefs in their own invincibility.
Thinking that the United States could attain and maintain “hegemony in perpetuity” was and remains delusional.
Countless would-be world conquerors have tried and died along with their empires.
If the answer is yes, then continue to permit President Biden and EU to continue pouring gasoline on the fire in Ukraine.
Given that in any large complex equation with many unknown variables, the best one can calculate the outcome is 50/50, the future of humanity, if there is to be one, is highly uncertain.
The unrivaled power of the United States military-industrial-media-university-medical /pharmaceutical-complex has become an existential threat to all life on earth.
And thus, the fate of advanced life on earth beyond plants, bacteria and viruses rests on a 50/50 gamble unless the “Western Alliance” of unrestrained capitalists start to back off now.
In the case of a thermonuclear war, the United States will be totally obliterated along with large parts of Russia.
Following that there will be revolutions around the world deposing American puppet leaders in developing countries.
The probability all 300+ Top Secret American biological research labs distributed around the world will keep their pathogens contained is-equal-to-zero.
In other words, the full range of all American biological weapons will be set loose upon the earth.
There will be no cures or vaccines due to obliteration of global supply chains.
He will push the red button ending civilization as we know it without a second thought when the time comes.
There is no animal more dangerous than a cornered animal, and this is the situation into which the west thinks they have pushed him.
The dollar as the global currency is finished, and its legitimacy as legal tender for currency was based entirely upon its status as the global currency.
Maybe, maybe not. | am certain he has an endgame in mind and believes he has predicted Euro-American responses precisely.
The odds are 51% according to my calculations, because | believe his intelligence sources are probably more reliable than American intelligence sources.
My mother always argued that a benign despot is better than a liberal democracy ruled by Narcissistic demigods which is not surprising given my parents’ Jesuit education; in any case | believe she was right about that and President Putin’s somewhat autocratic style of leadership has all the advantages of a good ship captain in a storm as argued by Socrates.
The side of peace; peace with dignity, self-determination and security for all.
The current conflict in Ukraine is only profiting those invested in western “defense” related industries, the vast majority of whom are already very rich men.
Everyone else in the world is losing at a time when humanity as a whole should be investing in COVID-19 recovery and working to prevent the next global pandemic as globalization, climate change, poverty and inadequate health care precautions are very rapidly spreading many infectious diseases.
That said, | also have to acknowledge President Putin has access to a great deal more information than | have, so | cannot and will not assert he was wrong for launching his military operation in Ukraine.
It appears there is more at stake here than simply the survival of Ukrainians, Russians and Americans.
The entire human species is in danger from possible release of biological pathogens from the 300+ American biological laboratories around the world should WWIII break out, the American empire descend into anarchy, and its’ puppet national leaders around the world violently thrown out of power.
Lastly in this section | would like to add five years ago | had friends in Ethiopia, Afghanistan, Ukraine and Russia and all was well with everyone.
In that same breath | have to add, | also have infinite empathy for the families of the valiant and disciplined Russian militaries who suffer the loss of their loved ones because of the greed of the Biden family, other politicians, corporate shareholders and puppet presidents like Zelensky.
Ultimately however all are slaves to the dictates of the reptile-like big corporations, and until their power is contained, and campaign finance in the United States and Europe cleaned up, these wars will continue until thermonuclear war and a global biological and chemical weapons blitzkrieg occurs— which may be upon us all at any time.
Likewise, | have complete empathy for the working poor and jobless world-wide, including the US, who are all held hostages to the absolutely corrupt dictates of the very same “rulebased order” President Biden so loves to brag about.
Global unrestrained capitalism has brought the working people and jobless to our knees and there is no hope in sight, except that provided by China and Russia.
It has been my long belief that the system of governance is not as important as the quality of people in those governments, though | have to admit Socrates was most certainly right about democracies ending with oligarchy, and now demagoguery.
Likewise, | see flexible socialist/capitalist hybrid economic systems like China’s to have an infinite number of advantages over the unrestrained predatory and corrupted capitalist systems of the United States and Western Europe.
The political system in the United States has reached such saturation level corruption, such expertise in overthrowing governments, and such a casual attitude towards killing innocents, no honest person in the world is safe now, anywhere.
Ukraine’s bid to join NATO was one of the reasons Moscow said it launched a military campaign against the country last month.
He said the Ukrainian team presented a draft roadmapping a future peace deal.
Russia proposed negotiations, proposed to conclude various kinds of agreements that were supposed to guarantee Ukraine’s security and provide Russia's national interests in this area.
And the North Atlantic Alliance has also been creating an anti-Russian foothold from Ukraine, more precisely, from Ukrainian territory, for years.
Moreover, the issue of Ukraine's acquisition of nuclear weapons was also made public knowledge.
There’s irrefutable evidence that Kyiv was planning to launch an offensive against Donbass in the near future.
In that case Russia would have had to stand up for tens and tens of thousands of our Russian citizens living there anyway.
That is, Ukraine stated that it’s ready to fulfill these demands that Russia has been insisting on all these years.
As head of Central Command, Austin actively campaigned to resurrect the Pentagon’s spectacularly failed program of trying to arm ‘rebels’ in Syria to fight ISIS, and in 2014 he backed immunity for United States troops from war crimes prosecutions by the government of Afghanistan.
Though claiming to divest themselves of any investment in Pine Island, just prior to the election Pine Island launched some new ‘special purpose acquisition companies’ which are essentially shell companies.
Major General Charles F Bolden Jr., USMC Senator Saxby Chambliss During his tenure in the Senate, he served as a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee..., the Senate Rules Committee; and his leadership and experience on homeland security and intelligence matters earned him an appointment to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, where he served as vice chairman from 2011 to 2014, advocating for dramatically improved information sharing and human-intelligencegathering capabilities.
His previous role as chairman of the House Intelligence Subcommittee on Terrorism and Homeland Security made him one of the leading congressional experts on those issues.
By Isaac Arnsdorf, 03/29/2016 “After his 2004 upset loss to John Thune, Daschle joined law and lobbying firm Alston & Bird as a “special policy adviser,” earning as much as $2. million a year, but he never registered as a lobbyist.
Daschle previously registered with the Justice Department under the Foreign Agents Registration Act to represent Taiwan.
Senator Daschle serves on numerous public and private boards, including the Center for American Progress and the National Democratic Institute for International Affairs.
And it’s just that sort of business as usual that Mandy Smithberger, the director of the Straus Military Reform Project at the Project on Government Oversight, says is concerning in this case.
Though not officially a lobby group, WestExec Advisors thrive in the so-called gray zone doing many, most or all of the same things as a lobby group.
Antony Blinken — Antony J Blinken was sworn in as the 71st United States Secretary of State on January 26, 2021.
Michéle serves on the boards of Booz Allen Hamilton, Amida Technology Solutions, The Mission Continues, Spirit of America, The United States Naval Academy Foundation, CARE, and sits on the Honorary Advisory Committee of The Leadership Council for Women in National Security.
Flournoy, for instance, previously served on the Pentagon’s Defense Policy Board, the President’s Intelligence Advisory Board, and the CIA director’s External Advisory Board; each of these positions gives members access to sensitive information, which in turn provides insights useful to attracting and serving corporate clients.
But many of the people who work closely with Biden are enmeshed in the opaque world of strategic consultancies and by extension a network of the world’s biggest businesses.
If they’ve been consulting for corporations with offshore interests, this spells potential conflicts.
The legality of that has yet to be challenged and given the potential for encouraging corruption in government, and the deadly consequences of that potential corruption.
The Ukraine War is at minimum prima facia proof of that deadly corruption.
The world of special interest control of American politicians may not be so opaque as Mandy Smithberger suggests.
Professional/Academic Career After leaving the Obama administration, Haines worked in the private sector consulting for companies such as the Denver-based national security contractor Palantir Technologies, which specializes in data analytics.
Palantir’s government business grew much faster in 2020 than its commercial business.
Its total revenue increased 47% from about $743 million to $1,093 million in 2020.
The United States keeps claiming “just war,” when its wars are profoundly unjust, and when someone actually does promote a real humanitarian intervention, nobody believes it is even possible.
It is like the boy who falsely cried “Wolf” so many times, nobody believes there are wolves anywhere, anymore.
Ae It is long past time to exculpate President Putin, and place the responsibility for the war in Ukraine that really began in 2014, where it belongs.
