Derek Tate of Alexandria, Va., center, carries his son Reid, 2, on his shoulders as his wife Sue stands at right, while President Barack Obama and first lady Michelle Obama greet military families as they host an Independence Day celebration on the South Lawn at the White House in Washington, Friday, July 4, 2014.
He argued that the system must be changed for the United States to remain the greatest nation on earth.
Soldiers patrol through a terminal at Paris Charles de Gaulle airport in Roissy, France, Friday, July 4, 2014.
French government officials would not elaborate Friday on the measures, citing the need for discretion in security matters.
PARIS — France is increasing security on flights headed for the United States this summer amid United States concerns that al-Qaida is trying to develop a new kind of bomb.
The Obama administration this week called for tighter security measures at foreign airports that have direct flights to the U.S., prompting British airports to increase security Thursday.
French government officials would not elaborate on the measures, citing the need for discretion in security matters.
One fear is that extremists with a United States or other Western passport could carry the new bomb onto a plane undetected by airport security.
At Paris’ Charles de Gaulle airport, U.S.-bound flights saw delays of 30 minutes to an hour Friday.
Sophie le Poulennec, a 26-year-old heading to Chicago, said she hoped there weren’t any new luggage restrictions as a result.
A United States counterterrorism official said fhis week fhaf American intelligence has picked up indications that bomb makers from Yemenbased al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula have traveled to Syria to link up with the al-Qaida affiliate there, known as the Nusra Front.
Olivier de France, a European security expert at France’s Institute for International and Strategic Relations, said expertise already exists to put explosive devices “in anything from shoes, soles, to energy drinks and even possibly surgically implanting these devices.
Palestinian militants, meanwhile, fired rockets and mortars from the Gaza Strip into Israel, and the Jewish state later carried out several airstrikes on what it described as “Hamas terror targets” in Gaza.
Also, fhe Israeli military said its troops opened fire offer spotting two Palestinians planting explosives near the Gaza border fence.
An ambulance carried the body of 16-year-old Mohammed Abu Khdeir, wrapped in a Palestinian flag and fradifional headscarf, fo a mosque in the east Jerusalem neighborhood where he lived.
During the procession, scores of masked Palestinians threw rocks at Israeli police on duty nearby, and they responded with stun grenades, spokesman Micky Rosenfeld said.Q Palestinians throw rocks as they clash with Israeli security forces during the funeral of 16-year-old Mohammed Abu Khdeir in Jerusalem on Friday, July 4,2014.
Israeli police clashed with Palestinian protesters in Jerusalem on Friday as thousands of people converged on a cemetery for the burial of an Arab teenager, who Palestinians say was killed by Israeli extremists in a suspected revenge attack.
LATIN BRIEFS Big Venezuelan newspaper sold under pressure CARACAS, Venezuela — One of Venezuela’s mosf prestigious newspapers has been sold at a moment of increasing pressure on the country’s independent press.
Details of the sale of Caracasbased El Universal to a group of Spanish investors were still emerging Friday.
Editor in Chief Elides Rojas confirms the sale and tells the Associated Press that Jesus Abreu will assume leadership of the paper.
Abreu is best known as the brother of the director of Venezuela's governmentfunded system of youth orchestras.
During an early morning radio interview, Rojas acknowledged there is apprehension in the newsroom about whether the paper will follow in the steps of other recently sold news media outlets that have softened their editorial line.
He said he was hopeful that the paper would maintain its editorial standards.
The 26-year-old Dutchman who remains the chief suspect in the 2005 disappearance of United States teen Natalee Holloway was tying the knot in prison a Friday with a Peruvian woman pregnant with his child.
Van der Sloot's lawyer says prison officials prohibited video and photos during the midday nuptials and that none of fhe groom’s relatives are expected.
Lawyer Maximo Altez says Van der Sloot's mother did send a tailored suit and dress shoes fitting his extra-large feet.
Van der Sloot was sentenced to 28 years in prison two years ago for the 2010 murder of a Lima woman he met in casino.
Hurricane Arthur left tens of thousands of people without power Friday in a swipe at North Carolina’s dangerously exposed Outer Banks, then brought lousy Fourth of July beach weather to the Northeast as it veered out to sea.
The weather along the narrow barrier islands — whose beaches draw hundreds of thousands of tourists every summer— had already cleared by Friday afternoon as Arthur scooted north and its outer bands scraped the Delaware and New Jersey shores.
Forecasters predicted the storm would weaken before its center moves over western Nova Scotia in Canada early Saturday.
While state and local officials worked to restore access to Hatteras Island and help those who had suffered storm and flooding damage, the effects of the hurricane were mostly confined to that part of the state.
Farther south, the beaches were once again packed with people soaking up the sun.
About 40,000 people lost power, and the rush of water from the ocean on one side and the sound on the other side buckled part of North Carolina Highway 12 in a spot on Hatteras Island that was breached in Hurricane Irene in 2011.
Dozens of workers were heading to fix the highway, and the Department of Transportation said it was confident the road would reopen Saturday as long as an underwater sonar test of a key bridge showed no problems.
After praising emergency officials and saying the state dodged a bullet.
McCrory noted that all of North Carolina’s beaches were open outside of the Outer Banks and encouraged residents and visitors to enjoy the holiday.
The families said they were departing from their “moderate polite approach” since the shootings in December 2012, they have met with politicians privately and eschewed what they call “naming and shaming"" because. they said in a statement, “Gov.
Family members from the group Sandy Hook Promise had traveled from Connecticut to Christie’s office this week to deliver a petition with 55,000 signatures asking him to sign the bill.
They had been seeking a meeting with him since May 22, they said, and tried to see him again, but were told he was not available.
About an hour after they left the State House, Christie announced that he was sending the bill back to the Legislature, having taken out the magazine limit.
After looking quite threatening the day before, Morehead City, Atlantic Beach and Beaufort only sustained minimal damage from Hurricane Arthur, and many were ready to enjoy the holiday weekend as the weather cleared rapidly Friday. pendence Day parade in Southport, a welcome surprise when he expected to be stuck in Raleigh monitoring the storm all day.
Q Onion Vidalia per 3 lbs ^ _ —■ Don’t forget sign up for your VIP card Strawberries per pack THE# SUPERMARKET IN ARUBA 1 www.lingandsons.com f lingandsons ■ lingandsons Offer valid SaturdayJuly 5th, 2014 or while supplies last.
NEWS m Obama celebrates ethnic diversity of America Aruba, Paradise in the Caribbean Continued from front And that’s why, if we want to keep attracting the best and brightest from beyond our borders, we're going to have to fix our immigration system, which is broken,” he said.
Deputy Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas, a Cuban who became a naturalized citizen in 1973, administered the oath of allegiance.
The immigration issue is earning renewed attention because of the influx to the United States of tens of thousands of unaccompanied children from Central America.
Under United States law, they must be returned to their home countries, angering immigration advocates who already take issue with Obama’s enforcement of deportations.
At the same time, Obama blames House Republicans for delaying action on legislation covering the millions already living in the United States illegally.
The grounding is the latest in a long string of delays that has plagued the Air Force's newest, and most advanced, fighter aircraft, and comes just days before the plane was to make its international debut at an air show in Britain.
The root cause of the problem at Eglin two weeks ago remains under investigation, the Pentagon’s press secretary, Rear Adm.
Eagle Beach, Aruba Fleet of F-35 jets grounded by Defense Department after fire FOR SALE A luxurious residential complex built to the highest level, with quality finishes, bright spaces and all the details one could dream for in their home.
Walking distance to Eagle Beach and Spectacular Ocean View. some of the immigrants who have flooded the Texas border with Mexico.
Earlier this week a crowd of protesters blocked buses carrying women and children migrants who were flown in from overwhelmed Texas facilities.
Later Friday, Obama and his wife, Michelle, welcomed hundreds of military members and their families, including the new citizens, to a barbecue on the South Lawn that was sponsored by the USO, a nonprofit organization that provides services and entertainment to United States troops and their families.
The event featured a concert by the rapper Pitbull, along with prime seating for the fireworks on the National Mall.
The president explained that he had other reasons to celebrate on Friday.
His oldest child turned 16. □ prehensive measure the Senate passed last summer has been blocked by House leaders who also lier this week that, as a result of inaction on Capitol Hill, he will pursue non-legislative ways he can adDemocratic candidates, but plans not to visit the border.
Sherry Roseann Ball, Diana Baker, Richard Asomah, Ganesh Arjun, and chef Jose Andres listen to the Marine Band play the national anthem during a naturalization ceremony for active duty service members and civilians, Friday, July 4, 2014, in the East Room of the White House in Washington.
Andres is being awarded as an “Outstanding American by Choice,” an initiative that recognizes the outstanding achievements of naturalized United States citizens who have demonstrated their commitment to our country. have done little to advance their own immigration proposals.
He scheduled a trip to Texas next week, mostly to raise money for everything I can to keep making our immigration system smarter and more efficient,” Obama said Friday.
Gerald Robinson’s sister-in-law told him the priest died Friday morning.
He was arrested 24 years after the nun's death and was found guilty in 2006 of stabbing and strangling Sister Margaret Ann Pahl at a Toledo hospital where they both worked.
Church historians have said it’s the only documented case of a Catholic priest killing a nun.
Robinson and Pahl had worked closely together at the hospital where he was a chaplain and she was caretaker of the chapel.
The 71-year-old nun was killed while she was preparing the chapel for Easter services in 1980.
Robinson emerged as a suspect when police found a sword-shaped letter opener in his desk drawer two weeks after the killing.
He also admitted lying to police, making up a story that someone else confessed to the murder.
Robinson developed a # In this Thursday, May 11, 2006 photo, in Toledo, Ohio, the Rev.
Gerald Robinson, a Roman Catholic priest, listens as the verdict is read finding him guilty of killing Sister Margaret Ann Pahl.
A federal court denied a request from Robinson to spend his final days in his Ohio hometown.
Robinson died Friday at a Columbus prison hospice unit. faithful following in his hometown of Toledo, where he delivered sermons and heard confessions in Polish.
He ministered to the sick and dying at nursing homes and hospitals after retiring from three Roman Catholic parishes.
Police arrested him in 2004 after investigators reopened the murder case when a letter surfaced that accused Robinson and other priests of molestation.
Police weren’t able to substantiate the allegations of sexual abuse, but it led them back to the nun’s murder.
Investigators said blood stains on an altar cloth seemed to match the patterns of the letter opener found in Robinson's apartment.
New technology not available in 1980 allowed them to connect the killing with the letter opener.
Prosecutors said Robinson tried to humiliate Pahl in her death, her stab wounds formed an upside down cross and a smudge of blood on her forehead meant as a mock anointing.
They blamed the murder on Robinson’s simmering anger over Pahl’s domineering ways, saying their relationship was strained and that Pahl was upset over the shortening of Good Friday services a day before she was killed.
Robinson, who wore his priest's collar throughout his trial, maintained his innocence while losing several attempts to overturn his conviction.
A new defense team argued that a now-deceased serial killer could have been the one who stabbed and strangled Pahl.
Prosecutors dismissed the theory, saying investigators and even the priest's original attorneys didn’t think there was a connection.
Robinson remained a priest after he was convicted, but he was barred from ministry.
He told The Columbus Dispatch in an interview three years after the trial that he was stunned by testimony linking him to the murder.
The long-serving Cochran relied on Democrats and independent voters in his narrow win over Chris McDaniel.
In an interview with CNN, McDaniel said what matters is that fraud be uncovered where it exists and that many Mississippi residents “are very angry"" because they think their votes in the June 24 primary were nullified by fraud.
Most of what McDaniel is describing as irregularities involved people who apparently voted in both the June 3 Democratic primary and the Republican runoff.
Mississippi does not register voters by party, but state law bans a person from voting in one party’s primary and another party’s runoff in the same cycle.
He did say that if the courts side against him, he would accept the outcome.
But he would not say whether he would ultimately endorse Cochran for Senate in the general election.
Michael Watson, an attorney who is working with the McDaniel campaignO SATURDAY 5 JULY ms.
NEWS m Immigrants hitting a human wall in California town Demonstrators argue about immigration outside a town hall meeting in Murrieta, Calif., July 2, 2014.
Many residents here say they have been stunned by their neighbors’ reactions in an ongoing dispute over the busing of immigrants for processing to a local Border Patrol facility.
Fearing for the safety of the migrants and federal officers, immigration officials decided to reroute the buses to San Diego, an hour south.
And a day after many here celebrated what they saw as a temporary victory, more than a thousand residents packed a high school auditorium Wednesday night for a town-hallstyle meeting that lasted more than four hours, voicing fears about an influx of migrants.
As federal officials have begun to send the expected 240,000 migrants and 52,000 unaccompanied minors who have crossed the border illegally in recent months in the Rio Grande Valley to cities around the county, Murrieta so far is the only place that has managed to turn them away.
Officials in Dallas have said they will welcome thousands of migrant children and have helped to coordinate donations from residents, but residents of Artesia, New Mexico, expressed frustration at a meeting this week that immigrants were being placed at a temporary detention center there.
Nowhere have the Central American immigrants been met with such tremendous anger as they have here, in this middle-class conservative community about 90 miles southeast of Los Angeles.
We do our own daily fishing so we serve the freshest seafood on the Island.
Gertrude Weaver spent her birthday at home at the Silver Oaks Health and Rehabilitation in Camden, southwest of Little Rock.
Weaver was born in southwest Arkansas near the border with Texas, and was married in 1915.
She and her husband had four children, all of whom have died except for a 93-yearold son.
Along with Census records, the Gerontology Research Group used Weaver’s 1915 marriage certificate, which listed her age as 17, to confirm her birth year.
Although no birth record exists for Weaver, she celebrates her birthday each year on July 4 and did the same this year.
Sunset & Dinner Cruise Includes snacks, open Bar, Caribbean music, after 2 hours of Sunset Cruise you will enjoy a 3 course Dinner at our Pelican Nest Restaurant on the Sea, spectacular view, professional service, Freshly made dishes to spoil your senses.
Visit us at Casa del Mar, Playa Linda, Holiday Inn Concierge/lobby desk/ beach huts or at our own Pelican Pier, located between the Holiday Inn & Playa Linda Resort.
Representatives of the Republican National Committee returned here for a third visit this week, after naming Cleveland and Dallas the two finalists.
The busily rehabilitating city in Ohio, a state whose voters have have correctly picked the president every time since 1964, is the only city on both the Republicans' and Democrats’ list of candidates to host their national conventions.
The restaurant scene is percolating, and young newcomers are giving faded neighborhoods wesf of downtown, where brew pubs and bistros are opening, a patina of hipness.
And now, Cleveland is a candidate for bofh the Republicans’ and Democrats’ 2016 conventions the only city to make both lists.
Landing either one, with its tens of thousands of visitors and prime-time TV coverage, would immerse the city in a bath of national attention that is making boosters giddy. that this is about the renaissance of Cleveland.
Barack Obama and Mitt Romney spent so much time barnstorming the small towns and university arenas of Ohio in 2012 it sometimes seemed the entire election was being fought in the Buckeye State.
Although Cleveland is heavily Democratic, with large numbers of black voters, the surrounding suburbs of Cuyahoga County have many Republicans.
But a convention may have less influence on local voters than many assume.
Both Democrats, who gathered in Charlotte, North Carolina last time, and Republicans, who were in Tampa, Florida, lost their convention states.
Ryan Mahoney, a spokesman for the Republican National Committee, said the choice would come down to other factors.
Central considerations are the ability of the host committee to raise money to pay tor the event, the number of hotel rooms and the calendar.
Republicans want to avoid the mistake of 2012 when they waited until August, depriving Romney of general-election funds to counter a summer of Democratic attacks.
Cleveland promises it could hold a convention in June, and Dallas in July.
If they select Cleveland, the Democrats, who are not planning to choose until later, will strike the city off their list.
Jim Swift, a native of Shaker Heights, a Cleveland suburb, who worked on logistics at previous conventions, threw cold water on boosters’ hopes in a column in The Plain Dealer.
He warned of snarled traffic, violent protests and the unlikelihood of a “media narrative"" about a Cleveland comeback.
It came two decades ago with the opening of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and a downtown renewal that included the 20,500seat arena where the Cleveland Cavaliers play, which would be home to the party hats and balloons of a nominating convention.
Wfe fish cur own daily fish so we serve the freshest cuality seafood on the Island.
NO SERVICE CHARGE Open for Lunch + Dinner 11:30am • 10:30pm Monday CLOSED We are located close to the High + Low Rise Hotels Reservation Suggested SATURDAY 5 JULY ms.
But this indirect approach, intended to avoid costly, bloody wars like the one the United States waged in Iraq, immediately collided with reality, when a lethal jihadi insurgency swept across the same Iraqi battlefields where thousands of Americans had lost their lives.
The seizing of large parts of Iraq by Sunni militants an offensive hastened by the collapse of the U.S.-trained Iraqi army stunned the White House and has laid bare the limitations of a policy that depends on the cooperation of often balky and overmatched partners.
While the militants, from the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, or ISIL, have moved swiftly to establish a caliphate from eastern Syria to central Iraq, the White House is struggling to repel them with measures administration officials concede will take months or longer to be effective.
The United States, constrained by a war-weary public, will have to rely on a constantly shifting cast of surrogates to confront the threats it once took on largely by itself a trade-off that will require patience as well as a new determination at the White House to arm and train local forces.
Last week, Obama announced a plan to spend $500 million to train and equip rebels in Syria.
But the Pentagon has only begun detailed planning for the program, and officials said it would be months, or even more than a year, before the fighters would be battle-ready.
In Iraq, the Pentagon faces months of work to rebuild the shattered Iraqi security forces, which it trained over a decade at a cost of $25 billion.
And the administration's efforts to press the Iraqis to fend off the militants by forming an inclusive national government have been bogged down by the country’s deep-rooted sectarian feuds.
White House officials acknowledged it would take time to execute Obama's policy, but pointed to other parts of the Middle East where they said the United States had deployed a rapid-response force of drones, special forces and intelligence assets.
Obama has not ruled out targeted airstrikes on militant positions in either Iraq or Syria.
But that could raise political problems with a skeptical Congress and a wary American public, and the efficacy of strikes is uncertain, given how ISIL fighters have intermingled with other Sunni militants who oppose the government.
Martin E Dempsey, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said at a briefing Thursday.
Having captured Mosul and seized weapons and ammunition, the Sunni militants have stepped up their offensive in Syria, capturing much of the oil-rich province of Deir ez-Zor on Thursday.
Obama’s cautious response appears properly calibrated to the nature of the threat, said Steven Simon, who served on the National Security Council during Obama’s first term.
Despite their swift advances, ISIL fighters have been stopped short of Baghdad by Iraqi forces and Shiite militias.
Administration officials said the Iraq crisis had not altered its policy in Syria because the goal was always to equip rebels to fight extremist groups, as well as the forces of President Bashar Assad.
Nor has the White House set aside its goal of ousting Assad, they said.
Yet for President Barack Obama and congressional Democrats, the numbers kindled hopes of a lift to their party’s downbeat prospects in this fall's midterm elections.
Even as international crises dominate the news and the attention of the White House and Congress, the economy continues to be the main concern of most voters, polls show.
While Thursday’s jobs report for June sent stock markets soaring as investors celebrated another sign of a rebounding economy, voters are not so easily moved.
Republicans remain confident of winning control of both chambers of Congress for the final two years of Obama’s administration, and emphasized other, negative data the president's continued slump in the polls, and a majority’s disapproval of his overall job performance as well as his handling of the economy.
And, Republicans argue, the four months left until November are too few to shift the political winds Democrats face.
O President Barack Obama presents a diploma at a United States Military Academy commencement ceremony in West Point, N.Y., May 28, 2014.
Speaking here, Obama laid out plans to fight terrorism through local allies, but the quick rise to power of Sunni extremists in Iraq has stunned the White House and underscored the limitations of depending on often unreliable partners.
SATURDAY 5 JULY 2014 The Pelican Pier is excited to be a part of Located between Holiday Inn Hotel & Playa Linda Resort The FIFA WORLD CUPT3 [Gentlemen receive a FREE SHOT, and lqdies^rFRE E.SANGRffi^ july , OVoi 0 ioi O/ol Ojoi OVoi 0. rr,jj jj/jji-r . r , scored by the country you proudly represent. >--> j 1 come and enjoy every game at the Pelican Pier and play —Man GUESS THE SCORE * Wearing your team’s T-shirt or face painting. to win awesome prizes.
Ukraine claims winning ground in rebellious east A child plays football near soldiers from the “Donbass” battalion of Ukraine, outside the Parliament in Kiev, Ukraine.
Fighting in eastern Ukraine left at least nine Ukrainian soldiers dead Friday, as government troops pressed their offensive against pro-Russian insurgents.
Iraq’s al-Maliki signals his intent to DAVID McHUGH Associated Press KIEV, Ukraine — Fighting in eastern Ukraine left at least nine Ukrainian soldiers dead Friday, as government troops pressed their offensive against proRussian insurgents using heavy artillery and combat jets and prospects of a truce appeared dim.
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko said Ukraine was ready to conduct another round of talks between representatives from Ukraine, Russia and the rebels on Saturday, but didn’t name their venue.
Two previous rounds of such negotiations held during a 10-day ceasefire have yielded no visible progress, but they brought the warring parties together for the first time.
Moscow strongly pushed for extending the truce and holding more talks in an apparent hope to negotiate a settlement that would allow it to secure a degree of influence over the neighbor.
The continuing fighting is putting more pressure on Russian President Vladimir Putin, who has been facing increasingly angry nationalist demands to send troops to help the insurgency — a move that would inevitably trigger crippling Western sanctions.
Ukraine's National Security Council chief Andriy Parubiy said Friday that Russia was massing troops near the Ukrainian border and claimed that it let insurgents attack the Ukrainian border posts from its side.
The two neighbors, who share a 2,000-kilometer border that is unmarked and unguarded outside of a few checkpoints, have been trading claims and counterclaims ever since Ukraine began fighting pro-Russia separatists in April.
The government said nine troops were killed and 13 others were wounded in Friday’s fighting in the east, according to the Interfax news agency.
Valentyn Nalyvaychenko, the head of Ukraine’s SBU security service, told journalists that over the past four days 20 Russian tanks or armored vehicles had illegally crossed the border to take part in the insurgency.Ukraine says Russia is arming and supporting the separatists, a charge RYAN LUCAS QASSIM ZAHRA Associated Press BAGHDAD — Despite mounting pressure to step aside, Iraq’s Nouri al-Maliki vowed Friday not to abandon his bid for another term as prime minister and pledged to stay on until the Sunni militants who have overrun much of the country are defeated.
The sharp words are certain to prolong the political impasse gripping Iraq, which is facing urgent demands for a new government that can hold the nation together in the face of an onslaught that threatens to cleave it in three along ethnic and sectarian lines.
The offensive by militants who have swept across much of northern and western Iraq since last month has been fueled in part by grievances among the country's Sunni Muslim minority with al-Maliki and his Shiite-led government.
Al-Maliki, a Shiite who has been prime minister since 2006, has been accused by former allies and others of monopolizing power and contributing to the crisis by failing to promote reconciliation with Sunnis.
The United States has urged the formation of a more inclusive government but has not explicitly called for al-Maliki to bow out.
In what has been seen as a rebuke of al-Maliki, Iraq's top Shiite cleric.
For its part, Moscow has repeatedly accused Ukrainian troops of firing shells that landed on the Russian side and on one occasion last month hit a Russian border post, wounding one customs officer.
Russian border guards said 10 artillery shells flew from the Ukrainian side Friday, but no one was injured.
It is nearly impossible to prove or dispel the claims from the opposing sides, since the fighting consists of intermittent clashes between small units with no fixed front line and it is deadly dangerous for journalists and other observers to travel around. □ stay in job lawmakers to quickly form a new government that can confront the militant threat and unite the country.
Lawmakers failed in their first session of parliament on Tuesday to make any progress.
On Friday, al-Sistani lamented the inability of political leaders to agree on a new prime minister and urged them to redouble their efforts, a cleric who represents him told worshippers in a sermon in the holy city of Karbala.
Al-Maliki's State of law bloc won the most parliamentary seats in April elections, which would traditionally make him the leading candidate to head a new government.
But al-Maliki failed to gain a majority in the legislature, meaning he needs allies to form a government.
That has set the stage for intense wrangling over the makeup of a coalition — and, above all, who will be prime minister.Q Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki arrives for a meeting in Baghdad in June, 2014.
Al-Maliki said in a statement issued by his office Friday, July 4, 2014, that he will fight until the Islamic militants who have overrun much of the country are defeated, suggesting he won't step down despite pressure for him to do so.
SATURDAY 5 JULY EWORLD NEWS Kony “hibernates,” evades jungle hunt Rebel leader RODNEY MUHUMUZA Associated Press NZACKO, Central African Republic — The African troops hoped the latest defector from the Lord’s Resistance Army rebel group would have fresh insight into the location of infamous warlord Joseph Kony.
But Sam Opio, a senior rebel commander who defected last week, shook his head and said he hadn’t seen rebel leader Kony since 2010.
All recent defectors have denied seeing or communicating with Kony in the last few years, complicating the work of U.S.-backed Ugandan troops who are hunting down rebels in the dense, often-impenetrable jungles of Central Africa that cover the size of France.
An Associated Press reporter recently trailed soldiers tracking a small group of rebels.
Ugandan commanders lead the chase for Kony, who is wanted by the International Criminal Court over many atrocities, from Obo, a tactical base set up in the middle of a sprawling bush in the southeastern part of Central African Republic.
Their mandate — to kill or capture Kony —sets a high bar for foot soldiers who may also be at a disadvantage against a man who has spent all of his adult life in the bush.
John Kagwisa, the intelligence officer for military operations against the rebels, said of Kony.
In Central African Republic, a sparsely populated but chaotic country with a history of political upheaval, Kony has a wide theater in which to operate and stay ahead of his pursuers.
He now eschews any use of hitech devices, leaving soldiers heavily reliant on any human intelligence they can glean from defectors or civilians who encounter rebels scattered through Congo and Central African Republic.
Ugandan military commanders leading the mission say that it’s likely most of the defectors haven't seen or heard from Kony in years.
Kony now uses personal couriers to send out his orders, so even senior commanders for the Lord’s Resistance Army may spend years without seeing their boss, they said.
Michael Kabango, commander of Ugandan troops in Central African Republic.
Despite the challenges, commanders say the daily slog in the jungle is justified because it keeps rebels on the run and unable to regroup.
Ugandan and United States soldiers examine the belongings of three fighters who defected from the Lord's Resistance Army rebel group in Central African Republic.
African troops hoped the latest defector from the Lord's Resistance Army rebel group would have something fresh to say about the possible whereabouts of the infamous warlord Joseph Kony.
China court jails Christian pastor for twelve years DIDI TANG Associated Press BEIJING — The pastor of a Christian church in central China was sentenced to 12 years in prison on Friday in what supporters say is a crackdown aimed at curbing fast-growing religious activity, his lawyer said.
Zhang Shaojie of the Nanle County Christian Church in Henan province was convicted of fraud and of gathering crowds to disturb public order, according to lawyer Yang Xingquan.
Zhang’s church is sanctioned by the Communist government, which allows worship only in state-monitored groups, but has been involved in a dispute with local authorities over land for a new building.
The country also has a large number of unsanctioned underground, or home, churches that have attracted millions of worshippers and have been targeted in repeated crackdowns.
A report by the Washington, D.C.-based Pew Research Center said there were likely 67 million Christians in the country in 2010, including 58 million Protestants and 9 million Catholics.
The ruling party is wary of religion as a possible rallying point to challenge its rule and uneasy about the rapid spread of Christianity three decades after Beijing loosened social controls in pursuit of economic development.
In the eastern Zhejiang province, where Christianity has been particularly popular, local governments have been tearing down crosses on Christian churches, even if they have been officially sanctioned, on the grounds that they lack construction permits.
The crackdown on Christian churches could be an extension of an ongoing campaign to suppress the growth of civil society in the country, said Prof.
Mother kills kindergarten teacher in class ANGELA CHARLTON Associated Press PARIS — The mother of a pupil at a French preschool stabbed a teacher to death in front of her class Friday, the last day of the school year, authorities said.
The education minister said the mother apparently had “serious psychiatric problems,” and pledged support for teachers in the face of angry or violent parents.
Deadly attacks in a school are extremely rare in France, and the stabbing in front of a class of 5and 6-year-olds raised concern at the highest levels.
French President Francois Hollande expressed outrage at the attack at the Edouard Herriot school in Albi in southern France.
A police official said the mother stabbed the teacher with a knife soon after school started Friday morning.
Hamon said the attacker’s child had been in the school only for a month and a half, and the mother had had very little contact with the school staff until Friday.
It was unclear whether her 5-year-old daughter was in class at the time of the attack.
Police and city officials would not comment on possible reasons for the attack on Fabienne Terral-Calmes, 34.
The regional prosecutor was expected to speak publicly about the case Friday evening.
After Friday's attack, “the children were immediately taken in by another teacher who brought them to another classroom to talk to them, to tell them stories, to try to break them away from what they had just lived through,"" Hamon said.
WORLD NEWSI * 11 SATURDAY 5 JULY 2014 Xi rebukes Japan for brutality in China, Koreas HYUNG-JIN KIM Associated Press SEOUL, South Korea — The leaders of China and South Korea expressed concern Friday about Japan’s recent reinterpretation of its war-renouncing constitution and its re-examination of a past apology for wartime atrocities, a South Korean official said.
Many people in China and South Korea still harbor a strong resentment against Japan, and there are concerns in both countries about growing nationalism in Tokyo.
Visiting Chinese President Xi Jinping and his South Korean President Park Geunhye had “lots of discussions” about Japan, and shared worries about its “revisionist attitude” and reinterpretation of its constitution to allow its military a larger international role, senior South Korean presidential official Ju Chul-ki told reporters.
Both leaders also regretted Japan's recent review of its landmark 1993 apology for forcing Asian women into wartime prostitution because it was an apparent attempt to “disparage” the apology, Ju said, according to the presidential Blue House.
Last month, a Japanese panel confirmed the validity of a study that led to the apology, but South Korea called the review unnecessary and said it included material that undermined the reliability of the apology.
Historians say up to 200,000 women from across Asia, many of them Koreans, were forced to provide sex to Japan’s front-line soldiers.
Japanese nationalists contend that the so-called “comfort women"" were voluntary prostitutes, not sex slaves, and that Japan has been unfairly criticized for a practice they say is common in any country at war.
Earlier Friday, Xi highlighted Japan’s past brutality against China and Korea during a speech on the final day of his visit to Seoul.
He noted that in the late 16th century a Chinese dynasty sent troops to help a Korean dynasty defeat invading Japanese troops.
China assisted North Korea and fought against South Korea during the 1950-53 Korean War, while American-led United Nations troops fought alongside South Korea.
The countries now have booming trade ties and share concerns about Japan’s military ambitions and what critics see as recent attempts by Tokyo to obscure its bloody past.Q Chinese President Xi Jinping delivers a speech during Korea China Investment Forum at a hotel in Seoul, South Korea Friday, July 4, 2014.
Mandalay City tense but under control YANGON, Myanmar — The funeral of a Buddhist man killed during sectarian violence this week in the central Myanmar city of Mandalay stirred passions Friday but no major new unrest was reported.
Calm was restored to the city with an overnight curfew declared Thursday after two nights of violence by Buddhist extremists against Muslims.
The unrest raised fears that ethnic violence that has plagued the country for two years might escalate again.
Hundreds of people on foot and motorcycle joined the funeral procession Friday for the Buddhist man who had been killed.
His hearse was draped with a poster of his bloody body blaming Muslims for his death.
The crowd damaged a Muslim cemetery and threw stones at mosques but otherwise avoided violence.
Win Mya Mya, a Muslim member of the opposition National League for Democracy party led by Nobel laureate Aung San Suu Kyi, said some people who wanted to incite unrest shouted that they didn't want any mosques in the city, and were responsible for the stone-throwing.
Security forces have been criticized for failing to do much to stop the two nights of violence.
He said they did not enforce a ban on assemblies of more than five people that was imposed Thursday.
This week’s unrest was the first in Mandalay, an important center of Buddhist culture and learning where Muslims and Buddhists have traditionally lived peacefully together.
Smith Biuti. near the tow rise Hotets SATURDAY 5 JULY EWORLD NEWS Haitians thwarted as they seek Dominican status EZEQUIEL ABIU LOPEZ Associated Press SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic — Thousands of Haitians have been lining up this summer at government offices in the Dominican Republic trying to take advantage of a rare chance to secure legal status in a country where they’ve long lived in the shadows.
Since a program to grant residency to Haitians who have been living in the Dominican Republic since 2011 opened June 2, only a tiny fraction of applicants have managed to show sufficient documentation from their homeland to secure the status, officials say.
And a deadline to register or face deportation arrives early next year.
Migrant workers like Luccene Philome, part of a small group who spent a recent night camped out at the Ministry of the Interior to be at the front of the line the next day, say they are being told that their documents must include a Haitian identity card, passport or birth certificate.
The 36-year-old, whose many years as a bricklayer have worn down his hands. even had a tough time getting his fingerprints taken by Dominican officials.
Migrants from Haiti have long had a tough time in the Dominican Republic, but in this case their anger is largely directed at Haiti’s government, which has been slow to issue the needed documents amid its usual bureaucratic torpor and has been charging fees that are far higher than most people can afford.
Haitians have staged several protests in recent weeks outside their government’s embassy in Santo Domingo over the issue.
Haiti is charging the equivalent of about $60 for a new birth certificate, voter ID and a passport, a special rate for the migrant registration process since it normally costs $80 for a just a passport.
Still, it’s too expensive in a place where migrant workers barely earn $5 a day, said William Charpentier, director of the National Migration Roundtable, a nongovernmental group.
The Haitian government has been coming under increasing international pressure to address the issue and a solution may emerge before the deadline.
But the Dominican residency process, known as “regularization,” is clearly off to a slow start.
The Dominican Republic, which is comparatively much wealthier than its neighbor, has long been a magnet for low-wage workers from Haiti but it has been seeking to limit unregulated, cross-border traffic in recent years.
The surge of Central American migrants to the United States in the past few months has been a stark reminder of the poverty and violence they face at home.
To some, the haggling over a program to help poor farmers in El Salvador has looked tonedeaf.
At the heart of the dispute is the way the Salvadoran government buys corn and bean seeds for subsistence farmers.
The United States had objected to moves to favor small, local seed producers on the grounds that they violated the Central American Free Trade Agreement.
But Wednesday, after articles about the dispute appeared in the Washington media and 16 members of the House of Representatives called on Secretary of State John Kerry not to use changes to the food program as a condition for aid, the United States Embassy in El Salvador said that the dispute had been resolved.
The United States trade representative's office said that the countries had already reached a resolution last week.
The resolution clears up one issue that blocked the $277 million aid package approved in September by the Millennium Challenge Corp., a United States aid agency.
Washington is still waiting for El Salvador to tighten controls on money laundering to release the funds.
In 2012, the Salvadoran government excluded foreign seed companies from a program known as the Family Farming Plan in an effort to encourage local producers. □ 10th Prokids Bonaire IFCA Championship Comes to a Close fail! -‘‘A well deserved closing event for an entire week of two world championship events” BONAIRE The 10th Prokids Bonaire IFCA Championship 2014 started with a very enticing opening ceremony on June 25th and closed with a bang on June 29th.
The final results were announced during the Award Ceremony where all the winners who competed in Slalom and Freestyle were called on stage to receive their trophy, certificate and prizes.
The other winners of Beach Soccer Veterans, Beach Soccer Youth and Beach Bolas also received their trophy and prizes on stage.
After the award ceremony the celebration went on with performances by the well known Janiro Eisden from the group Basic One together with Biggy Boy directly from Aruba and DJ Caliber from Curacao.
The MC for the evening was Mr Gerrald Victorina the General Coordinator of the PWA Bonaire World Cup event and the 10th Prokids Bonaire IFCA Championship 2014 event that took place during the entire week of June 20th till June 29th.
After the opening speeches from different guests speakers and acknowledgements to all who contributed for the success of the events the Award Ceremony could start by calling the winners of fhe different Beach Sports such as Beach Soccer Veterans, Beach Soccer Youth and Beach Bolas, followed by the winners of Freestyle and from Bonaire, U-15 Boys first place Wave Antonia from Curacao, second place Smit Luis from Bonaire, and in third place Rowan Richie from Curacao.
U-17 Boys first place Stephard “Cheppy” Gustowski and second place Quincy Marchena, both from Bonaire and in third place Johnny Yagen from Israel.
U-20 first place Ethan Westera from Aruba, second place Kenroy Francisco and third place Richard Richie, both from Curacao.
We would like to thank the entire community of Bonaire and other visitors who came to Sorobon and cheered forthe participants in all the different sports the entire week.
We would also like to thank all our sponsors for fheir support and contribution once again for making the event such a successful one.
MCB Bonaire NV, TCB, Government of Bonaire, Budget Car Rental, ‘Fundashon Wega di Number', TELBO, ENNIA, ‘Krioyo Paint’, Obersi Group, Budget Marine, Hitess Bonaire, Don Andres, Akkermans Auto Supplies, STINAPA, Gio's Gelateria & Cafe, Cactus Accounting, Flamingo TV, Bonaire Windsurf Place, ClickPrinf Aruba, Caferpilar, Selibon, Indebon, Kite City, Bonaire Container Services and Starboard.
U-9 Girls first place Rosa Ruijter from Bonaire, U-9 Boys first place Jeankarl Mayer, second place Dante Abraham and third place Davion Coffie all three from Bonaire.
U-13 Girls first place Alyssa Wijnand from Bonaire, second place Anne Coenen from Curacao and third place Koleta Abrahamsz from Bonaire.
U-13 Boys first place losu Balzaretti from Mexico, second place Davinton Janga and third place Gian Martis, both from Bonaire.
U-15A Boys first place Wave Antonia and second place Stijn Overwater, both from Curacao, third place Melvin van der Linde from Aruba.
U-l 5B Boys first place Raynold Wilsoe, second place Arnold Wilsoe and third place Hayley Thode, all three from Bonaire.
U15B Girls first place Luz Day Zambrano and second place Davie Janga, both from Bonaire.
U-17 Boys first place Gunther Landwier from Bonaire, second place Mark Tjon from Aruba and third place Jurgen Saragoza from Bonaire.
U-20 Boys first place Ethan Westera and second place Willem ten Ham, both from Aruba and in third place Richard Richie from Curacao.
U-7 Baby Class Girls first place Gillien Vrolijk from Aruba, U-7 Baby Class Boys first place Kingston Coffie and second place Everson Frans, both from Bonaire.
U-9 Boys first place Jeankarl Mayer and second place Dante Abraham, both from Bonaire.
U-l 3 Girls first place Koleta Abrahamsz from Bonaire and in second place Anne Coenen from Curacao.
U-13 Boys first place Faan Coenen from Curacao, second place Davinton Janga and third place Darwin Perdomo, both from Bonaire.
U-15 Girls first place Luz Day Zambrano Divi Resorts Donates 5 Electric Cars to EPB HATO SATURDAY 5 JULY fl1 *l LOCAL ORANJESTAD Divi has proudly donated 5 Electric Cars to EPB Hato for the “Auto Monteur"" Unit on July 2, 2014.
Mr Alex Nieuwmeyer, Managing Director of Grape Holding N.V. and Divi Resorts donated the 5 Electric Cars to the school so they can use this to help increase their knowledge of the Electric Car System and make this a special project for the school.
Mr Nieuwmeyer together with the Executive Team from Divi Resorts; Mr Patrick Franssen, Mr Gerrit Griffith and Mrs.
Maria Geerman-Esguerra were all in attendance for this wonderful moment.
The school’s teachers; Mr Reginald Ramon-Teacher of Auto Monteur Unit, Ms.
Mari Flor Nicolaas Unit Manager, in representation of EPB Hato together with some students, were more than happy to receive this kind donation from Divi and said that they would make excellent use of the cars.
This great family happened to walk past the Arawak Garden when their eyes fell on Fishes & More Restaurant, one of the lovely restaurants of this intimate plaza.
They decided on the spot that this would be the place to have dinner and they did, greatly enjoying the shrimp and lobster casserole as well as the live music.
The Arawak Garden is situated across from the Occidental Resort on the hi-rise strip.
Restaurants, a piano bar, small kiosks and live music make up the Garden, which is a popular choice for visitors and locals alike.
The Shops At Alhambra Casino Offering a wide vanity pi Retail S Dining Outlets.
Joseph Parascondola Celebrates His 80th Birthday in Aruba PALM BEACH Joseph and Rosemary Parascondola from Manchester, New Jersey have been visiting the beautiful island of Aruba for over 32 years and are loyal guests of the Marriott family.
They visit every year and sometimes even twice a year and enjoy the courteous people, the warm weather and dining at Chalet Suisse.
This year their children and grandchildren joined the trip to celebrate Joseph’s 80th birthday in Aruba at the Marriott Aruba Surf Club.
ORANJESTAD The downtown marina is home of Driftwood Fishing Charters, the successful fisherman of the established seafood restaurant Driftwood in Oranjestad.
A fisherman who knows about fish, what our local waters have to offer, and what the words :fresh seafood” really mean.
Herby loves to share his fishing passion with the many visitors to the island.
Twin Engine Post yacht, appropriately called “Driftwood I and II, is available for charters on 12 noon and from 1pm to 5pm.
This authentic Aruban seafood restaurant is located in characteristic downtown Oranjestad.
Driftwood Restaurant Authentic Aruban Seafood Restaurant; Klipstraat #12, Downtown Oranjestad.
The tournament's poster boy with the dyed-blonde fauxhawk fractured a vertebra in his back during Brazil’s 2-1 quarterfinal victory over Colombia on Friday.
The injury has ruled the striker out of the rest of the competition, dealing a massive blow to the team’s chances of finally winning a World Cup at home.
Brazil advanced to the semifinals for the first time in 12 years, with the goals coming from defenders Thiago Silva and David Luiz.
But the jubilation was quickly tempered when Brazil team doctor Rodrigo Lasmar said Neymar broke his third vertebrae and is expected to be out for several weeks, ruling him out of Tuesday's semifinal match against Germany in Belo Horizonte.
The 22-year-old Neymar has been the focal point of both the Brazilian team and the entire World Cup, and he lived up to expectations with four goals in the first three matches.
But he took a knee to the back late in the match against Colombia at the Arena Castelao in a collision with Juan Camilo Zuniga.
The Brazilian star was crying in pain as he was carried off the field, and was taken to a private clinic.
Brazil’s Neymar is carried away after getting injured during the World Cup quarterfinal soccer match between Brazil and Colombia at the Arena Castelao in Fortaleza, Brazil, Friday, July 4, 2014.
Continued on Page 20 Associated Press SATURDAY 5 JULY DISPORTS Billy Hurley takes Greenbrier lead by 1 shot Billy Hurley III tees off the ninth hole during the second round of the Greenbrier Classic golf tournament at the Greenbrier Resort in White Sulphur Springs, W.Va., Friday, July 4, 2014.
Associated Press JOHN RABY AP Sports Writer WHITE SULPHUR SPRINGS, West Virginia — Billy Hurley III shot a 7-under 63 on Friday to take a onestroke lead after the second round of the Greenbrier Classic.
The former United States Navy officer says it was “pretty cool” that it occurred on America’s birthday.
Brice Garnett , Steve Strieker and Chris Kirk were another stroke back at 6 under.
Reigning Masters champion Bubba Watson was among five players at 5 under.
Hurley spent five years in the United States Navy and played golf sparingly while stationed in Hawaii.
But being mentally tough on the course comes easy for Hurley, whose missions included steering a Navy destroyer through the Suez Canal.
Hurley rejoined the United States PGA Tour this season and has three top 10 finishes so far, including a tie for eighth at Congressional last week.
His best career finish is a tie for fourth in the AT&T National two years ago, also at Congressional.
A solid ending at The Greenbrier resort would get Hurley into the British Open later this month.
Playing partner Chris Stroud said he was amazed at how Hurley could recapture his golf game after his time in the military.
Chappell’s round included holing a 35-yard pitch on the par-3 15th after a poor tee shot.
Matteson holed a 35-yard pitch on the par-3 15th and needed just 19 putts — one shy of the PGA Tour record held by eight players.
First-round leader Jonas Blixt of Sweden had three early bogeys and shot 73 to drop into a tie for 25th at 3 under.
Associated Press TOM WITHERS AP Sports Writer CLEVELAND — Four years after their messy breakup, the Cleveland Cavaliers and LeBron James are talking about a reunion.
The sides met as James continued his family vacation, a person with knowledge of the details told The Associated Press on Thursday.
The person spoke on condition of anonymity because of the sensitive nature of the talks.
James recently opted out of the final two years of his contract in Miami.
The twotime NBA champion has gone to four straight finals with the Heat.
However, after the team was throttled by San Antonio in this year’s finals, James said he would weigh his options this summer.
One of them could be resigning with the Cavs, the team he spent seven seasons with before leaving in 2010 to join forces with Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh in South Florida.
Wade and Bosh also opted out of their deals with Heat, raising speculation the “Big Three” could be headed in different directions.
James' decision to leave Cleveland prompted owner Dan Gilbert to condemn him in a scathing letter to Cavs fans.
The owner also told The AP he felt James had quit during games in the playoffs.
ESPN has reported that Paul also met with representatives for Phoenix, Houston and Dallas.
The Cavs have waited patiently for their chance to try and convince the Akron, Ohio, native to come home.
Now, they’re working on bringing back James, who has never ruled out the possibility of a return.
Two years ago, James was asked if he could ever see himself playing for the Cavs again.
I’m here as a Miami Heat player, and I’m happy where I am now, but I don’t rule that out in no sense.
James was booed mercilessly by Cleveland fans in his first games back with the Heat, but in recent years he has been received more favorably.
In having Paul meet with other teams, James could simply be putting on pressure for the Heat to upgrade their roster.
Miami has been pursuing free agents and Yahoo Sports reported team president Pat Riley and coach Erik Spoelstra met in Los Angeles with Lakers free agent Pau Gasol.
The Heat could have trouble surrounding James with enough talent if the reports he will only accept a maximum contract are accurate.
James is scheduled to be in Las Vegas next week to host a basketball camp, and then is expected to attend the World Cup in Brazil.
Federer-Djokovic Wimbledon final HOWARD FENDRICH AP Tennis Writer LONDON — Roger Federer was on the decline — or so the thinking went.
Started losing before the quarterfinals at majors, including in 2013’s second round at the All England Club, of all places, to a guy ranked 116th.
Federer moved one victory away from a record eighth Wimbledon championship and 18th Grand Slam title overRoger Federer of Switzerland watches a return over the net to Milos Raonic of Canada during their men's singles semifinal match at the All England Lawn Tennis Championships in Wimbledon, London, Friday, July 4, 2014.
Associated Press Novak Djokovic of Serbia celebrates after defeating Grigor Dimitrov of Bulgaria in their men's singles semifinal match at the All England Lawn Tennis Championships in Wimbledon, London, Friday, July 4, 2014. all by reaching Sunday’s final, where he will face Novak Djokovic.
Federer was asked how much it would mean to add to his trophy collection.
After so much buzz about the rise of a new generation to challenge the supremacy of tennis’ “Big 4,” — a quartet, including Rafael Nadal and Andy Murray, that will have won 36 of the past 38 Slams — Federer and Djokovic turned aside up-and-comers in Friday’s semifinals.
Djokovic, the 2011 champion, went first on Centre Court, overcoming dips in his play to beat 1 Ith-seeded Grigor Dimitrov of Bulgaria 6-4, 3-6, 7-6 , 7-6 and reach his third final at Wimbledon and 12th in the past 16 majors.
Federer, tied with Pete Sampras and William Renshaw with seven Wimbledon titles, followed with a 6-4, 6-4, 6-4 victory over 11 thseeded Milos Raonic of Canada.
Dimitrov (who beat defending champion Murray in the quarterfinals) and Raonic (who beat the man who beat Nadal in the fourth round) are 23 and were making their debuts in a Slam semifinal.
Federer was in his 35th; six-time major champion Djokovic was in his 23rd.
It was sunny, 77 degrees and windy, and Djokovic and Dimitrov found themselves slip-sliding around the worn court, especially along swaths of brown dirt.
One of their many lengthy, entertaining exchanges ended with both face-down on the turf.
Djokovic appeared ready to run away with a win, one point from leading by a set and two breaks.
But Dimitrov, cheered on by girlfriend Maria Sharapova, hit an ace to erase a break point and reeled off five consecutive games to grab the second set.
For Djokovic was volleying poorly — something that surely bothered one of his coaches, three-time Wimbledon champion Boris Becker — and generally struggling to find his strokes.
After one botched forehand, Djokovic threw his racket end-over-end in the air and caught it.
In the third, his one-handed backhand accounted for three mistakes in the tiebreaker, and he also double-faulted.
In the fourth, Dimitrov wasted four set points, including three in the tiebreaker, which he led 6-3, before losing six of the last seven points.
What keeps Djokovic awake at night is that he lost his past three major finals, and five of his past six.
But it's only their second major final; the other was at the 2007 United States Open, won by Federer.
Associated Press STEVE DOUGLAS AP Sports Writer RIO DE JANEIRO — It just wouldn’t be the World Cup without Germany in the semifinals.
Harnessing all their biggame experience, the Germans delivered a performance of maturity and efficiency to hold off France 1-0 on Friday and become the first team to reach four straight semifinals in the sport's marquee tournament.
Defender Mats Hummels scored the winning goal in the 13th minute, outmuscling his marker at a free kick to glance a header in off the underside of the crossbar.
Criticized for poor defending in earlier matches, Germany selected a more robust lineup and restricted a flat France team to only a handful of clear-cut opportunities in muggy conditions.
While France's young players slumped to the ground and some shed tears after the final whistle, the Germans soberly saluted all corners of the Maracana Stadium.
And next up for Germany is a meeting with host nation Brazil, which beat Colombia 2-1 later Friday.
It will be Germany’s 13th appearance in the semifinals in 20 editions of the World Cup.
France struggled to impose the kind of attacking game that made the team one of the most exciting in Brazil during the group stage, although Benzema — the team's chief attacking threat — squandered chances in both halves.
Late in the first half, the Real Madrid striker seized on a rebound following Manuel Neuer's save from Mathieu Valbuena’s shot but his close-range effort was deflected wide by Hummels.
Then, in stoppage time, he created space for himself about eight yards out at an angle, but a fierce shot was swatted away by Neuer.
In Loew’s eight-year tenure, Germany has reached the last four in every major tournament it has played — but remains without a title since winning the European Championships in 1996.
While the German team seemed comfortable at this level, the occasion was perhaps too much for a young, revamped France team playing together at the World Cup for the first time.
The most notorious of those previous meetings was in the 1982 semifinals in Spain, when Germany won on penalties following a 3-3 draw in a match marked by a late and high tackle by Germany goalkeeper Harald Schumacher on France defender Patrick Battiston that escaped punishment.
That went down as one of the most riveting matches in World Cup history, but the rematch — 32 years on — couldn’t have been more different.
Associated Press Brazil wins Continued from Page 17 “He will not be in condition to play, he will need a few weeks to be fit again,” said Lasmar, the team doctor.
The foul on Neymar came toward the end of one of the dirtiest games of the tournament as Brazil committed 31 fouls and Colombia had 23.
The captain must sit out after getting his second yellow card of the tournament after impeding Colombia goalkeeper David Ospina.
Brazil, which is trying to become the first host to win the World Cup since France in 1998, had been eliminated in the quarterfinals at the last two tournaments.
The “Selecao” lost to the Netherlands in the quarterfinals in 2010 and to France in 2006 after winning its fifth title in 2002.
This time around, Brazil won its group and then beat Chile on penalties in the second round.
On Friday against Colombia, Silva gave Brazil the lead in the seventh minute, scoring with his left knee after a corner from Neymar passed through the Colombian defense.
Luiz added the second from a free kick in the 69th, side-footing a long-range shot into the top of the net.
James Rodriguez scored his tournamentleading sixth goal from the penalty spot after Brazil goalkeeper Julio Cesar brought down substitute Carlos Bacca inside the area.
Rodriguez tried to control the pace of the match, but it was Brazil that created most of the scoring chances as Ospina had to make a series of saves in the first half alone.
The Colombians tried to pressure after Rodriguez’s late penalty, but Brazil held on with solid defending.
Colombia, playing at the World Cup for the first time since 1998 and in the quarterfinals for the first time ever, had entered the match after scoring 11 goals, second only to the Netherlands.
There was a lot of talk about Rodriguez and Neymar before the match, but the 22-year-old forwards didn’t really deliver in Fortaleza.
Rodriguez scored the late penalty but was otherwise mostly ineffective, as was Neymar before he left on a stretcher.
Zelous Wheeler homered in his big league debut after eight years in the minors.
David Robertson notched his 19th save with a hitless ninth inning and the Yankees started an 11-game road trip with a sigh-of-relief performance that put their record back at the .500 mark.
Phil Hughes was rolling right along against his former team, leading 2-0 until Beltran's big hit cleared the tall wall above right field following consecutive singles to start the fifth.
ATHLETICS 4, BLUE JAYS 1 OAKLAND, Calif. — Sonny Gray allowed four hits over seven innings to bounce back from his worst start of the season for Oakland.
The Blue Jays scored their only run with the help of an odd replay challenge by manager John Gibbons, who wanted to have his own player called out.
Stephen Vogt scored the winning run on a passed ball in the second inning and the A’s made it hold up behind Gray and two relievers.
Gray walked three, struck out five and got some help from Oakland’s defense, which turned three double plays, including one in the eighth after Josh Thole's leadoff single.
Jose Reyes hit a flyout to deep right and Oakland's Brandon Moss made a strong throw back to first baseman Nate Freiman, who tagged out Thole trying to get back to the bag.
TIGERS 8, RAYS 1 DETROIT — Max Scherzer allowed two hits in eight outstanding innings, and Detroit backed its star righthander with three early homers.
Ian Kinsler, Victor Martinez and Torii Hunter all went deep as part of a five-run first inning for the AL Central-leading Tigers, who snapped Tampa Bay's five-game winning streak with their 12th victory in 14 games.
Scherzer allowed a first-inning sacrifice fly by Evan Longoria, buf that was the first of 10 straight hitters retired by the reigning American League Cy Young Award winner.
After allowing a single in the fourth, Scherzer retired another 13 in a row before he was pulled with a pitch count of 106.
Erik Bedard allowed six runs and eight hits with two walks in two innings.
ANGELS 5, ASTROS 2 ANAHEIM, Calif. — David Freese hit a two-run double.
Matt Shoemaker pitched in and out of trouble for six innings, and Los Angeles won the opener of a four-game series.
Shoemaker allowed two runs, seven hits and three walks, and worked with runners on base in every inning.
The right-hander, who began the season in the bullpen, gave up eight runs and 11 hits in four innings on Friday in a loss at Kansas City.
He had been 5-0 with a 3.00 ERA in his seven previous starts this season.
Shoemaker had seven strikeouts against the Astros, giving him 57 through his first 10 big league starts.
Dodgers top Rockies 3-2 Los Angeles Dodgers' Juan Uribe follows through with his swing after hitting an RBI-single to drive in the go-ahead run against the Colorado Rockies in the ninth inning of the Dodgers’ 3-2 victory in a baseball game in Denver, Thursday, July 3, 2014.
The Associated Press DENVER — Zack Greinke pitched eight solid innings and Juan Uribe hit the go-ahead single in the ninth inning for Los Angeles.
Matt Kemp worked a leadoff walk off LaTroy Hawkins , went to second on Scott Van Slyke’s groundout and scored when Uribe singled under the glove of second baseman DJ LeMahieu.
Kenley Jansen worked fhe boftom of fhe inning to get his NL best 26th save in 29 chances.
Justin Morneau and LeMahieu had two hits each for the Rockies, who have lost four straight and 15 of 17 to move within a half-game of last place in the NL West.
CARDINALS 7, GIANTS 2 SAN FRANCISCO — Jhonny Peralta hit a tworun homer, Carlos Martinez earned his second win as a starter, and St.
Martinez also drove in a run for the Cardinals, who won their second straight after losing three in a row.
Madison Bumgarner fell to 0-3 over his past four home starts after allowing five runs — four earned — and six hits over five innings.
Bumgarner also drove in a run for the Giants, who have lost 17 of 22 and fell ouf of first place in the NL West.
DIAMONDBACKS 10, PIRATES 2 PITTSBURGH — David Peralta had three hits, including a two-run homer, and drove in four runs to help Arizona avoid a series sweep.
The Pirates are 0 for 8 in chances to sweep opposing teams this season.
They looked primed to get their first sweep as starter Vance Worley retired the first 12 batters he faced and carried a no-hitter into the sixth inning.
Ender Inciarte broke up Worley’s no-hit bid with an RBI single with one out in the sixth.
Peralta followed with his third home run of the year which barely cleared the 21-foot-high fence in right field and gave Arizona a 3-2 lead.
PHILLIES 5, MARLINS 4 MIAMI — Ben Revere scored the go-ahead run when Miami second baseman Donovan Solano bobbled a grounder in the ninth, and Philadelphia rallied to snap a six-game losing streak.
A photographer on the back of a motorcycle rides standing up to takes pictures of Britain’s Christopher Froome, center, as he rides his teammates during a training.
Spain's Alberto Contador talks to teammates when leaving for a training ride in Leeds, Britain, Friday, July 4, 2014.
Associated Press JAMEY KEATEN Associated Press LEEDS, England — So your national team is out of the World Cup in Brazil, Wimbledon doesn’t seem the same without Serena Williams or Rafael Nadal and your baseball team is slumping.
Cycling’s big event gets going Saturday through bucolic countryside in northern England, where officials have paid for the right to host it, hoping to draw tourists, capture media attention and feed the recent cycling craze among Britons.
It could first require getting over a nagging belief that, after Lance Armstrong’s doping exposure, the sport may still be dogged by drugs cheats.
Cycling chiefs and experts generally agree that the era of widespread doping is over, but few would claim to know that today’s pack is fully clean.
Drugs testers will conduct hundreds of blood and urine checks during the race.
Most are “domestiques” who race above all to help their team leaders win.
Vincenzo Nibali of Italy, plus Spaniards Alejandro Valverde and Joaquin Rodriguez, stand an outside chance.
Conceding home-road advantage, Contador said Friday that “local hero” Froome remains the favorite.
Five of the 21 stages end in summit finishes, which usually promise drama as the cream of the climbers rises to the top first.
In all, the riders will cover 3,664 kilometers of roads in England, France, Belgium and Spain.
Aside from cobblestone treachery in Stage 5, the mountains mostly matter this year.
For the first time in 61 years, this Tour has only one long time trial — a race-against-the-clock, where racers set off oneby-one down a sfarfer’s ramp.
Contador and Froome are among the best in both climbing and time-trialing.
This year marks the second time that theTourde France is starting in Britain, after a successful fime in London in 2007.
Local officials use municipal funds to pay for the right to host the race in their cities, hoping for shortterm tourism revenues plus a longer-term return from the international media spotlight.
After three stages in England, this 101st edition enters France on Tuesday.
The riders will cover many of the same roads their forebears covered since the race was first run in 1903.
If turnout on English roads during the 2007 Tour de France is any precedent — when millions lined up twoto three-people deep to watch the pack zip by — expect big crowds again this year.
Saturday’s 190.5-kilometer rolling Stage 1 from Leeds fo Flarrogate is likely fo favor sprinters.
The Tour's green jersey goes to the best overall sprinter, one of many subplots to the overall title chase which includes pure climbers seeking the polkadot jersey to be the best man in the mountains.
The top 24 drivers in the first knockout qualifying stage were supposed to advance to the next round, but rain prompted NASCAR to cancel the final two sessions.
Reed Sorenson qualified David Gilliland walks through the garage area after winning the pole position for the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series auto race at Daytona International Speedway in Daytona Beach, Fla., Friday, July 4, 2014.
Associated Press second, followed by Landon Cassill, Bobby Labonfe and Jimmie Johnson.
Fie will attempt to become the sixth driver to sweep both annual races at NASCAR's most famous track on Saturday.
It was Gilliland’s third Sprint Cup pole and first since landing the top spot for the 2007 Daytona 500.
All three of his poles have been at restrictor-plate races, with the first one coming at Talladega in 2006.
David Ragan and I both have good enough cars to win, and that is an exciting feeling.
Associated Press ANICK JESDANUN AP Technology Writer NEW YORK — New Android wristwatches from Samsung and LG make a few evolufionary advances, though I won’t be rushing out to buy either.
Samsung's Gear Live and LG’s G Watch are good products and will appeal to those who like to be among the first to own new gadgets.
The watches serve as pedometers and let you catch up on email, texts and Facebook notifications while your phone is in your pocket or charging in the bedroom.
Even with the phone in your hand, you can check messages on the watch and keep playing video on the phone.
Both smartwatches try to keep things simple through voice commands rather than touch.
Android Wear has a lot of potential but still lacks the functionality of even last year's smartwatches.
Your ability to reply is limited, and there’s not much you can do yet without a companion phone nearby.
The companion phone must run Android 4. or later, which covers about a quarter of the Android devices in use.
It estimates distance and calories burned and measures heart rate on your runs, hikes and bike rides.
Shots from the watch's 2-megapixel camera are mediocre, but that beats missing the shot entirely because your better camera is in your pocket or handbag.
If you don’t need the camera, you can save $100 with the Gear 2 Neo, which has similar features otherwise.
The Gear 2 line doesn't use Android Wear, but a fledging system called Tizen.
Samsung says that helps extend battery life to two or three days, instead of the single day on the original, Android-based Galaxy Gear.
The watch face doesn't go dark as the one on the Gear 2 does after inactivity.
Unfortunately, the promised battery life is back down to a single day, though actual performance varied depending on use.
You can count steps and measure heart rate, but you can’t measure distance or calories with builtin apps.
Journal expresses ‘concern’ over Facebook study In this June 11,2014 photo, a man walks past a Facebook sign in an office on the Facebook campus in Menlo Park, Calif.
Associated Press SAN FRANCISCO — The scientific journal that published a study by Facebook and two United States universities examining people’s online mood swings regrets how the social experiment was handled.
The experiment prompted privacy regulators in the U.K. and France to open inquiries into whether Facebook may have violated any laws.
In a note of contrition, the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences concluded that the decision to manipulate the content appearing on the Facebook pages of about 700,000 people without their prior consent may have violated some principles of academic research.
The journal also pointed out that, as a for-profit company governed by its own terms of service.
The unusual “editorial expression of concern” surfaced Thursday, a day after Facebook Inc.
Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg apologized, acknowledging that the world’s largest social network should have done a better job communicating about the experiment.
The data-scientists conducted the study during one week in January 2012.
They were trying to collect evidence to prove their thesis that people’s moods could spread like an “emotional contagion” depending on what they were reading.
SATURDAY 5 JULY ^BUSINESS Markets lackluster on United States Independence Day LONDON — Following gains on Friday in Asia, where investors cheered a strong United States jobs report from the previous day, markets in Europe were lackluster as Wall Street remained closed for the Fourth of July holiday.
On Thursday, markets were buoyed by news that the United States economy generated a greater than expected 288,000 jobs in June.
The bank will pay as much as $320 million for a combination of consumer relief and housing counseling services.
The agreement stems from an investigation by federal prosecutors in Virginia into SunTrust’s compliance with the Flome Affordable Modification Program, one of several initiatives enacted by the Obama administration to encourage banks to modify loans for struggling homeowners after ticipated, many noted that subdued wages may hold the central bank’s hand for a while longer — a potentially positive backdrop for stock markets.
Trading volumes were low on Friday, however, due to the United States holiday.
Many investors in France and Germany likely also kept to the sidelines to turn their attention to the World Cup match between their countries later in the afternoon.
Federal prosecutors and investigators from several ofher federal government agencies found that SunTrust, which is based in Atlanta, not only acted slowly in processing borrower applications for mortgage modifications but also made misrepresentations to homeowners.
Most of the money being paid by the bank under the settlement will go toward a fund to compensate borrowers who were shortchanged by SunTrust.
Following gains around fhe world Thursday following fhe data that saw the Dow Jones index break 17,000 for the first time, Asian shares got a lift Friday.
The deal will require SunTrust to provide at least $179 million, and as much as $274 million, for consumer restitution.
The bank will also provide $20 million to a fund that will distribute money to organizations that provide housing counseling services.
SunTrust also will make a $10 million payment to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, two government-sponsored mortgage gained 0. percent to finish at 15,437.13 while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng added 0. percent to 23,546.36.
The market tone was equally subdued elsewhere with the euro 0. percent lower at $1.3599 and the dollar 0. percent down at 102.07 yenO finance companies.
SunTrust said in a news release that it would take a $204 million pretax charge in the second quarter to cover the cost of the agreement.
The bank said it had acknowledged weaknesses in its administration of the loan program and has put in place procedures to correct the deficiencies.
The government said thousands of the 26,000 borrowers who applied to SunTrust for loan modifications under the federal program might be entitled to relief under fhe restitution fund.
What’s good is the rapid growth of streaming media services like Spotify and YouTube, which let their customers listen to millions of songs online, often free.
According to data from Nielsen SoundScan that was released on Thursday, listeners in the United States used such audio and video streaming platforms to listen to 70. billion songs in the first half of 2014, an increase of 42 percent from the first half of 2013.
But in a pattern that has alarmed music executives, this growth appears to have come at the expense of fradifional sales, wifh downloads now joining CDs as a format in decline.
According to Nielsen, 120. million albums have been sold so far this year, down 14. percent from fhe first half of 2013.
Download sales a major growth engine for fhe music industry since the introduction of Apple’s iTunes store in 2003 began to cool several years ago.
But their slip from a format on the rise to one on the decline has come suddenly.
Last year, downloads of individual tracks fell for the first time ever, by 6 percent, and in the first half of 2014 they dropped 13 percent, to 593. million.
The top album so far this year is Disney's “Frozen” soundtrack, with slightly less than 2. million sales since January and about 3 million since it came out in November.
Following gains on Friday in Asia, where investors cheered a strong United States jobs report from the previous day, markets in Europe were lackluster as Wall Street remained closed for the Fourth of July holiday.
FTC attorneys say they’ve never seen a legitimate credit repair operation making those claims.
The FTC’s advice comes in the wake of a settlement it reached with RMNC Credit Services Inc., one of the nation’s largest credit repair companies.
The Texas-based company owned by Doug and Julie Parker, a husband-and-wife team, agreed to settle charges that it lied to credit bureaus about information in people's credit reports and illegally collected fees before performing any services, the FTC says.
The firm charged consumers more than $40 million in illegal advance fees for its services, the FTC says.
The letters purporting to be from consumers were signed by RMNC employees using the consumers’ names.
A federal court order imposes a $2.35 million civil penalty against the defendants, which will be partially suspended based on an inability to pay, after they pay a total of $400,000 in two installments.
The firm violated federal law by charging up to $2,000 in up-front fees for a six-month program to improve consumers’ credit ratings and by making numerous false statements to credit bureaus disputing the accuracy of negative information in consumers’ credit reports, the FTC says.
Step 1: Tell the credit reporting company, in writing, what information you think is inaccurate.
Tell the creditor or other information provider, in writing, that you dispute an item.
If the provider reports the item to a consumer reporting company, it must include a notice of your dispute.
And if the information is found to be inaccurate, the provider may not report it again.
By law you’re entitled to a free credit report if a company takes ""adverse action” against you, like denying your application for credit, insurance or employment.
Each of the nationwide credit reporting companies Equifax, Experian and TransUnion -is required to provide you with a free copy of your credit report once every 12 months, if you ask for it.
You may order reports from each of the three credit reporting companies at the same time, or you can stagger your requests throughout the year.
It doesn’t cost anything to dispute mistakes or outdated items on your credit report.
Both the credit reporting company and the information provider (the person, company, or organization that provides information about you to a credit reporting company) are responsible for correcting inaccurate or incomplete information in your report.
A friend introduced Moeck to a partner at the Silicon Valley venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield Byers, and at their first meeting, Moeck asked the partner to sign a nondisclosure agreement.
Such agreements, known not unusual for entrepreneurs to request and potential investors to sign nondisclosure agreements.
In fact, some investors say they walk away from a founder who even suggests signing one.
Even if a startup manages to get an agreement signed, it can be tough to enforce, said Aaron I Messing, a lawyer with OlenderFeldman in Summit, New Jersey.
Moeck went ahead with a pitch to Kleiner Perkins Caufield Byers even though they refused to sign a non-disclosure agreement -a once-routine measure that more and more venture capital firms now balk at. as NDAs, are designed to prevent an idea or technology from being stolen and copied.
Moeck was especially concerned because the venture capital firm was already backing Zynga, another gaming company.
But the Kleiner Perkins investor refused to sign an NDA, leaving Moeck to decide whether to proceed with his pitch.
Thom Ruhe, vice president of entrepreneurship at the Kauffman Foundation, said the declining use of NDAs “is cerfainly nof in the interests of entrepreneurs.
Although it is rare that an investor steals an idea, Ruhe said, it does happen.
Each time an NDA is signed, it stalls the conversation for a week because of the legal work involved, Hwang said, and over time, that can give a competitor the opportunity to enter a market first.
I t'AOAT^a.ft-Va, JlriAkiA^ a A Blondie Mother Goose & Grimm Baby Blues 5 7 9 4 1 8 6 7 5 4 1 3 2 8 1 3 7 1 9 2 5 6 3 4 Difficulty Level ★★★★ 7/05 Sudoku is a number-placing puzzle based on a 9x9 grid with several given numbers.
The difficulty level of the Conceptis Sudoku increases from Monday to Sunday.
A C R e| In 0 U N S m J E R D T E A l| Id A N C 1 3 A G A E D G y| I s H E E nJ |r 0 Y 2014 Tribune Content Agency, LLC All Rights Reserved.
Immigrants Continued from page 6 “We didn’t ask for this problem it was just dumped at our doorstep,"" said Mayor Alan Long, who has lived here most of his life and told residents he planned to send a “fat bill” to President Barack Obama.
A generation ago, Murrieta was not much more than a rural outpost, but in the past decade the population has exploded to more than 100,000, with suburban developments taking over large plots of scrub brush.
For the most part, residents were attracted to the promise of a quieter life and housing that was much less expensive than in the coastal cities where they once lived.
Although Latinos make up more than 25 percent of the population and have opened up several small businesses as the area has grown, Murrieta has not been as transformed by immigration as many other communities in Southern California have.
Many residents say they came here to escape the kind of crime and urban problems they now fear the immigrants could bring.
During Wednesday night’s meeting, dozens of residents vented at the Obama administration for what they saw as a failure to secure the borders.
And they vowed to continue to fight back, promising to show up at the local Border Patrol station every time they know a bus of immigrants is scheduled to arrive.
Dozens of pro-immigrant residents wearing Mexican soccer jerseys also showed up at the meeting Wednesday but mostly sat in silence.
Many more waited outside, having arrived too late to be let into the auditorium, which quickly filled to capacity.
Plus NY 52 OV $49k Marriott Aruba Ocean club DIVI WEEK PHOENIX wk 27,7/5 to 12 ocean front studio Rm 804, all amenities 4150$ and Divi Dutch Village wk 27 7/5 to 7/12, ground floor unit 13, king bed queen sleeper.
Associated Press By JULIE WATSON Associated Press SAN DIEGO The blood is not the most jarring part of the photograph taken shortly after the bomb blew off Marine Gunnery Sgt.
He knew his defiance in the face of death would keep his comrades going and ease the torment caused by what they had witnessed.
His attitude set the tone for the long journey the double amputee is taking along with nearly 2,000 troops who lost one or more limbs from combat injuries in Iraq and Afghanistan.
It’s also pushing military medicine to find better ways to accommodate such a large population of young, severely disabled combat veterans who want to maintain an active lifestyle.
Many wear out their prosthetic limbs in a matter of months doing everything from mountain climbing to running marathons.
With survival rates reaching historic highs during the two wars, the Naval Health Research Center is launching a major, six-year study on wounded warriors to track their quality of life and better understand the road to recovery.
So far, 1,500 people have signed up for the Wounded Warrior Recovery Project study.
About 50,000 military personnel have been injured in the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan, with 16,000 hurt so severely that they likely would not have survived previous conflicts.
Doctors say a positive attitude is key to recovery, so the study will also examine mental resilience and why some troops have it and others don’t.
It will rely on Web-based, telephone and mailed surveys conducted every six months about mobility, ability to function and social activity.
Researchers will also analyze military databases detailing clinical encounters with each service member injured while deployed.
The study aims to provide one of the broadest reviews yet of how post 9-11 veterans with a variety of combat injuries are coping and enjoying life, and how much their quality of life impacts their long-term care.
His case was featured in the New England Journal of Medicine in May to demonstrate the success of battlefield trauma care over the past decade.
The retired Marine has benefited from a host of new medical strategies used by the military, including laser treatments.
Peter Shumaker, chief of dermatology at Naval Medical Center San Diego, helped pioneer the use of an ablative laser commonly used to smooth wrinkled or acne-scarred skin to ease Meyer’s scar tissue, dramatically improving the range of motion in his fingers, among other things.
Meyer was hospitalized for a month after the 2011 bomb blast in Afghanistan.
He lost his right leg above the knee, and his right hand above the wrist.
After multiple surgeries, he was outfitted for prosthetics and learned to walk again.
His prosthetic arm has a flashlight so at night he can see where he plants his prosthetic foot.
His prosthetic arm has the knobs and battery pack positioned to one side so he can shoot a bow and arrow.
Thanks to the laser treatments on his scar tissue, he can now hold a toothbrush, write with a pen, dial his phone, and pull the trigger of a hunting rifle.
Laser treatments also removed a sore, allowing him to withstand his prosthetic leg for 18 hours a day.
Chad Hivnor, who recently retired from Lackland Air Force Base, helped pioneer the method.
Hivnor also discovered botulinum toxin A injections decrease perspiration where the prosthetic limb attaches, helping stop it from slipping off while the person is exercising or in hot climates.
The findings were recently presented to the American Academy of Dermatology to promote the treatment for severely scarred people in the general population.
Such unconventional treatments make a big difference in daily life, veterans and their doctors say.
One soldier’s scar tissue has softened so he can grasp his daughter's hand; another can now type.
A week after a recent treatment, Meyers rode on his motorcycle through a shopping district in Murrieta, 60 miles northeast of San Diego.
His pinky and ring finger operated the throttle that has been put on the left side because he only has a left wrist.
It has a side car that can carry another amputee, wheelchair or his dog.
Meyer and two others have started the nonprofit organization, Warfighter Made, which modified his motorcycle.
It also customizes sports cars, off-road vehicles and other transportation for veterans, who can join in the work.
Meyer works for the Injured Marines Semper Fi Fund, counseling fellow combat veterans.
He loves the photograph taken after he was injured because “it's the exact opposite of what somebody expects you to do.
Associated Press Jeff Abbott’s ‘Inside Man’ doesn’t disappoint JEFF AYERS Associated Press “Inside Man,” the fourth novel by Jeff Abbott to feature bar owner and ex-CIA agent Sam Capra, continues one of the best ongoing series in the thriller genre.
Readers will be hooked from the start when a friend of Sam’s — who doesn’t know about his spy past — asks for a favor.
Steve occasionally takes security positions, and he hopes Sam will help him protect a young woman by becoming an inside man.
Before Sam can learn more, Steve is shot and killed in front of the bar.
Sam learns the woman Steve was trying to protect is the daughter of a powerful tycoon with potentially shady dealings.
She agrees to let him pretend to be her boyfriend, and soon he has access to her possibly criminal family of treacherous brothers and sisters, and a father who might be going senile, taking his empire down with him.
Sam doesn’t know whom he can trust, and with no access to his usual safety net, has to tread carefully.
Associated Press JOHN DeFORE The Hollywood Reporter LOS ANGELES — A serial-killer mystery in which the culprit turns out to be one of Satan’s minions, Scott Derrickson’s “Deliver Us From Evil” adapts the detective genre to an exorcism tale that is very serious about the prospect of demonic possession.
Though based on claims made by real-life NYPD officer-turned-paranormal investigator Ralph Sarchie , the picture is stolen by a fictional character — a composite religious figure played wifh a predictable level of smolder by “Carlos” star Edgar Ramirez.
More aesthetically coherent if less frightening than the director’s 2012 hit “Sinister,” the pic has a shot at surpassing that outing commercially by virtue of its appeal to devout Catholics.
That audience will find “Evil"" very respectful of their faith, though its nods to religion are genreappropriate and never preachy enough to alienate the average horror fan.
Sarchie, a cop who covers fhe South Bronx with partner Butler , is proud of an internal “radar"" that steers him away from mundane radio calls and toward the juicy cases.
But an incident in which a deranged mother threw her toddler into the Bronx Zoo's lion pit is juicier than usual, with a mysterious, blood-stained bystander disrupting the investigation before vanishing.
Still, Sarchie is ready to write the mother off as a gardenvariety psycho even when a Jesuit priest, Ramirez's Mendoza, shows up to insist on a more complicated explanation.
Only after other crimes prove to share both tangible connections (tracing to three Marines who had a disturbing encounter during the Iraq war) and supernatural overtones does Sarchie admit there may be something to this chainsmoking, whiskey-drinking priest’s claim.
Maybe, the lapsed-Catholic cop starts to worry, the man they’re hunting really is possessed.
Enjoyably, this particular case isn't limited to one spirit-controlled victim terrorizing his family and friends.
The invesfigafion yields some appreciably icky encounters with putrefying corpses and deranged prisoners, which is good considering the sometimes flimsy cop-movie stuff that surrounds the scares.
Bulked-up McHale, who acquits himself well in action scenes, gets the kind of jadedly quippy dialogue one can easily imagine him parodying on “Community”; Munn’s part could have been scripted by cutand-pasting any of a hundred other neglected-policeman's-wife characters.
Broadway and TV casting director Barry Moss dies In this undated photo provided by Merle Frimark Associates, Broadway and television casting director Barry Moss poses for a photograph.
Associated Press MARK KENNEDY AP Drama Writer NEW YORK — Broadway and television casting director Barry Moss, who helped cast nearly 90 Broadway and touring productions, including the 1980 revival of “West Side Story,"" ""Nine,” ""Torch Song Trilogy"" and “The Who's Tommy,” has died.
Moss died June 17 of congestive heart failure in Manhattan, said his partner Bob Kale.
Among his casting credits are the 1995 revival of “How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying,” ""Titanic,"" ""Woman of the Year,"" ""My One and Only,"" ""Black and Blue” and “Sweeney Todd,” He also was the casting director for “The Cosby Show “and was a founding member of The Casting Society of America.
He joined the Mort Schwartz Agency, where he was put in charge of the theatrical department.
He soon met Julie Hughes, with whom he founded Hughes Moss Casting in 1981.
Associated Press KRISTIN M HALL Associated Press NASHVILLE, Tenn. — For years.
Ketch Secor of Old Crow Medicine Show has been thanking Bob Dylan from afar for “Wagon Wheel,” the multiplatinum hit based on an unfinished Dylan song.
The reclusive master songwriter finally responded — in a way Secor never expected.
The lead singer of Old Crow, whose new album “Remedy” came out Tuesday, likens his relationship with Dylan to a kid dropping letters in a bottle and tossing them in the ocean seeking a pen pal on another continent.
From that came “Sweet Amarillo,"" a waltz about a cowboy’s search for his lover.
After sending Dylan's management a demo, they received a short suggestion to move the chorus up and switch out the harmonica for a fiddle.
The actress says she also plays one in the big-screen comedy “Tammy,” in theaters this weekend.
I'd heard they (the creative team of McCarthy and husband Ben Falcone) wanted me for a part.
Even when she gets outrageous, when she gets on the most ridiculous jaunts and puts a bag on her head and all of that, you go with it, because it's real.
As Tammy and her grandmother (Susan Sarandon) careen out of control on their road trip, and in life, Lenore sets them both straight.
They met in college and I think they came out when it was very difficult for lesbians to be accepted.
When I get a young director who wants to do all these fancy shots and use all these wide lenses from a low angle, he’ll get nipped.
And I’m about to turn it over to the kids that are coming up, which I will do, willingly.
When (her TV series) “Harry's Law” got canceled and right after that I found out I had breast cancer and I had a double mastectomy that summer, I was pretty low.
And then, a year later, along came Melissa and (“American Horror Story"" producer) Ryan Murphy.
A few months ago, I made the choice not to have reconstruction, because it occurred to me, “I don’t want to go back to bed.
But, then, they did always create their own reality spun from grandiosity.
They are shamefully showcased on cable TV, which has so much airtime to fill that it doesn’t care if it’s hot air.
They are once more pounding on the fear button and warning that America needs to attack or risk being emasculated by Middle Eastern terrorists.
Even Fox News anchors are now pressing him with skeptical questions about the war.
Cheney is not only responsible for Iraq melting down and Afghanistan being mucked up.
He can also claim credit for so exhausting John Wayne’s America that a skeptic on military intervention, Rand Paul, is a credible candidate for the Republican nomination.
Darth Vader is campaigning for validation with his cowboy hat and ""Sith apprentice,” as Jon Stewart calls Liz Cheney.
Their idea of a charm offensive is to growl and spit and create something called The Alliance for a Strong America, a group demanding a more chesty foreign policy in a statement redolent of the manifesto that neocons and other Republicans waved back during the Clinton administration.
Speaking to Fox News’ Megyn Kelly and to conservative radio host Chris Salcedo, Liz blamed President Barack Obama for the chaos wrought by her father and W., basely claiming that he was intentionally trying to weaken America.
As a cherry on top of our $3 trillion disaster, there on the front page of The Times on Tuesday was Ahmad Chalabi, the neocons’ cagey partner in fakery and initial choice to replace Saddam Hussein.
Just when you thought our wreck in Iraq could not get any more sulfurous.
Asked on HuffPost Live on Tuesday whether Cheney was immoral or amoral, Lawrence Wilkerson, the regretful former aide to Colin Powell, replied amoral.
The Guardian reported on Sunday that Ukrainians have crowdfunded the first “people’s drone” to help their army stem infiltration by Russian-supported rebels in Ukraine’s eastern provinces that border Russia.
Millions there have already both fought for and voted to align their country with the free markets and free people of the European Union.
In Brussels on Friday, the newly elected Ukrainian president, Petro Poroshenko, signed a trade pact with the European Union that will lower tariffs on Ukrainian exports to the 28-nation EU market in return for Ukraine implementing anti-corruption, transparency and quality-control reforms designed to bring its economy up to Western standards.
It was the same deal that Poroshenko’s predecessor, Viktor Yanukovych, refused to sign last November under pressure from President Vladimir Putin of Russia.
That set off the revolution in Kiev’s main square that eventually toppled Yanukovych and ignited a rebellion by Putin-directed separatists in eastern Ukraine.
One nation threatening another for signing a trade pact in hopes of elevating the incomes of its people, which have badly lagged those of its neighbors, like Poland, who joined the European Union after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
I get that the Russians would not want Ukraine to join NATO, a defense alliance still aimed at containing Russian power.
I opposed NATO’s expansion at the end of the Cold War and would not support it now.
I had argued in May that Putin had “blinked” when, in the wake of Western sanctions and the threat of more, he pulled back troops from Ukraine’s border where he had massed them hoping first to block Poroshenko’s election and then the signing of the EU deal.
While he did not invade, he has shoveled arms and proxies into eastern Ukraine to foment separatism in Russian-speaking areas.
Today, Poroshenko fed up with Putin’s Goebbels-quality lying moved forces to regain control of eastern Ukraine and his country’s right to choose its future.
In denying Ukrainians the right to choose their own economic and political path, Putin shows how dumb and clever he is at the same time.
He is dumb in believing that, in this connected world of newly empowered citizens, he can enjoy the same “sphere of influence” that Russia had in Central Europe in the days of the czars.
If a leader wants to have a sphere of influence today in this age of “people of influence” he either has to earn it by how he behaves or take it all by force.
In Ukraine, Putin is in incapable of the former and for now doesn’t dare do the latter.
The czars never had to deal with people of influence who could crowdfund their own drone.
His principal achievement has been to eliminate any meaningful debate on alternative futures for Russia.
However, the Russian seizure of Crimea and its proxy war in Ukraine, added Frolov, “transformed the national conversation from a healthy debate on Putin’s presidential performance into a toxic discussion on war and Russia’s enemies.
Therefore, if Putin “is fighting Nazis in Ukraine, then by extension anyone who disagrees with him could be a Nazi collaborator and an enemy of Russia.
