Post-Soviet politics has always been notable for its unique terminology, reflecting the uniqueness of local political practices.
It is symptomatic of the inter-penetration of organised crime and politics in countries like Ukraine and Russia that the term is now widely used on the outside of prison.
Smotryashchie may represent organised crime in politics, but the term is also used for those who look after the interests of oligarchs and regional clans, so the latter can keep a safe and deniable distance from corruption at the heart of government.
They control the money flows and keep an eye on decisions that are supposed to favour their sponsors.
In Ukraine the term has a long history, but it came into wider use after 2014.
The centralised pyramid of corruption from the Yanukovych era was no longer around.
The slogan of ‘de-oligarchisation’ was largely meaningless, but leading oligarchs took a step back from the more visible schemes of the old era.
New President Poroshenko was not as crooked, but grew his business empire while he could.
Kuratory on the other hand, exist because the normal authorities, who are themselves steeped in informal culture, chose to shift certain functions even further into the informal arena.
Smotryashchie are also more like delegates than representatives, and are more closely tied to their sponsors and to a certain set of rules; while kuratory are deliberately given a level of operational freedom.
According to one of the leading architects of the original Putin system, Gleb Pavlovsky , kuratory exist because the Kremlin has always relied on informal practices and twenty years of political technology.
In this system, ‘curators’ are ‘semi-official figures through whom state governance flows.
But with the aggression against Ukraine taking the form of so-called ‘hybrid war’ from 2014 kuratory were perfect agents for disguise and deniability.
In Crimea, Defence Minister Sergey Shoigu was at the top of the pyramid.
Belaventsev oversaw the ‘choice’ of leaders for the coup d’état in February 2014; and, unusually perhaps, emerged out of the shadows to be appointed Putin’s special envoy in Crimea after the annexation.
Another Shoigu protégé Frants Klintsevich, head of the Union of Veterans of Afghanistan, organised the flight of ‘170 former soldiers, veterans of Afghanistan and Chechnya, and also sportsmen, bikers and participants of patriotic clubs’ to Sevastopol on 28 February 2014.
For the attempted uprising in eastern and southern Ukraine, however, there were a number of rival kuratory.
