Medvedchuk said that he did not consider Russia an aggressor, and told about rest in the Crimea.
F-15 fighter jet and US-130 military airliner arrived in Ukraine to conduct ""Clean Sky-2018"" multinational military exercises.
The main base for the training of combat aircraft will be the airfield in Starokonstantinov Khmelnitsky region.
Servicemen from the USA, Belgium, Denmark, Estonia, the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, the United Kingdom and Ukraine will participate in the Clean Clean-2018 military exercises.
The purpose of the maneuvers is to improve the interaction between Ukraine and NATO, and to strengthen regional security.
In the case of an attack on one of NATO countries, Britons can ""turn off the light in the Kremlin,"" according to sources in the United States security services.
Great Britain can leave Moscow without electricity in the event of Russia's attack on one of the NATO countries.
According to journalists, this opportunity was discussed at a secret meeting held by the British government this week.
In Britain, there is not enough power to resist Russia without using nuclear weapons.
Most likely, they will not start a full-fledged war, but in Estonia there are islands that they can capture to test the commitment of NATO to Article 5.
We can attack and disconnect the light in Moscow so that they understand what's wrong, ""said Sunday Times, a top-notch source.
This week, the Netherlands announced the deportation of four Russians suspected of cyberattacking by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the World Anti-Doping Agency, as well as attempting to steal documents of the investigation into the Boeing MH17 disaster over the Donbas.
The Netherlands argues that expelled people are working on Russian intelligence.
Later, the United States has accused three more likely employees of the Russian GRU to be involved in cyberattacks.
After that, Great Britain conducted the most recent military exercises.
Also in Manafort, three bank accounts and one life insurance policy are confiscated.
As you know, the former head of the presidential campaign, Truman Paul Manafort, agreed to blame the charges against the United States and conspiracy to impede justice brought to him by a special prosecutor Robert Mueller.
The jury found him guilty of five charges of tax fraud , as well as concealment of foreign bank accounts and bank fraud.
On September 17, prosecutions against Paul Manafort were due to begin with lobbying and advocacy.
Offenses of Manafort were discovered by the Attorney General Mueller, who is investigating the alleged interference of Russia in the 2016 United States election.
Victor Medvedchuk, leader of the Ukrainian choice, said he does not consider Russia an aggressor.
I say that because I believe that this is an objective truth"", added the politician.
He also spoke about sociological research showing the attitude of Ukrainians towards Russia.
However, it did not indicate which organizations conducted these surveys.
Therefore, the term"" aggressor ""is a propaganda stamp for me, but in no way is it a reality,"" Medvedchuk said.
Recall that in an interview with Deutsche Welle in April, Viktor Medvedchuk stated that he did not consider Russia an aggressor in the war on the Donbas.
On January 18, 2018, the Verkhovna Rada adopted a law on the reintegration of Donbas, which recognizes Russia as an aggressor and invader.
Kyiv, today, October 7, on the anniversary of the massacre of Kiev Jews in Babyn Yar, the Kyivan people walked from the cinema ""Kievan Rus"" to Babyn Yar, which on September 29 and 30, 1941, the Nazis led the people to death.
This is a simple civil event, Come, take candles, photos of the dead, take children and grandchildren.
We want this event to be annual, and let your children and grandchildren then bring their grandchildren to her,""said in the announcement of the event.
Thus, the confirmed number of dead and wounded wounds of Wagner mercenaries as a result of the clash of 07.02.2018 is already 58 people.
In addition, the SBU reported information about Wagner's mercenary from Uzbekistan Mamadzhanova Dilshod Mashrabzhanovich.
He was seriously injured and was taken by a Russian military aircraft in February 2018 from Syria to the Russian Federation.
According to his documents, he went to Syria from Rostov, but at the same time in the passport there are no marks on the passage of border control in the Syrian territory, which indicates the concealment of the participation of Russian troops in terrorist activities onterritories of other countries.
This is reported on Sunday by Spiegel with reference to the military department of the Federal Republic of Germany.
The driver of the armored vehicle crashed into a tree during the maneuvering at the Pabrad landfill.
A soldier driving a car with an open manhole suffered heavy head injuries from which he died.
The case is being investigated by the German military police and the Lithuanian authorities.
The purpose of the maneuvers is to demonstrate that NATO troops are at the helm of the Alliance's eastern flank.
The publication reminds that after the annexation by Russia of Crimea, NATO decided to strengthen the Baltic States and Poland with the presence of its troops, fearing further Moscow's aggressive actions.
At present Germany is represented in this country by the 393th Panzer Battalion and the 37th Panzer Brigade. -As it was reported, Ukrainian military will conduct large-scale training in the Sea of ​​Azov.
In Norway, from 25 October to 7 November, NATO's Strategic Training Trilogue 2018 will be held.
So, among the participants of 29 Allies and two of its partners Finland and Sweden.
According to the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine, the Armed Forces of Ukraine will participate in exercises.
To work in the sections of the headquarters of the multinational coalition 5 Ukrainian officers were involved.
They successfully passed the stages of theoretical training and operational coordination, and will soon go on to carry out assignments in their areas in Naples, Rammstein and Stavanger.
Under the scenario of exercises, NATO's multinational coalition carries out a large-scale military operation to liberate the illegally occupied northern part of the Kingdom of Norway.
Recall that at the end of September seven CIS countries, headed by the Russian Federation, began training on air defense.
