Its members are alarmed by Russia's violations of international commitments and increased military activity in Europe.
Russian recently updated basic strategic documents are full of indications about Moscow's world vision and security concerns.
They indirectly point to a tension between Russia's internal (economic, demographic, societal) weaknesses and its claim to be recognized as one of the 'centers of influence' in the emerging multipolar world order.
The West, including the EU, is clearly perceived as the major challenger to both Russia's great power ambition and security.
At the same time, various indicators suggest that Moscow is probably not fully confident that it will obtain a gratifying role in the emerging new international landscape.
All this has led Russia to rely massively on its restored military capabilities, while pursuing a very active diplomacy, in which the relative importance of the EU has declined in recent years.
The EU nonetheless has an important role to play in promoting the second engine of the 'double-track Russia strategy' that the West (the EU, NATO, the United States) has been pursuing — strengthening defenses on the one hand, pursuing dialogue and cooperative engagement on the other hand.
This paper was requested by the European Parliament's Sub-Committee on Security and Defence.
The content of this document is the sole responsibility of the author and any opinions expressed therein do not necessarily represent the official position of the European Parliament.
It is addressed to the Members and staff of the EP for their parliamentary work.
Reproduction and translation for non-commercial purposes are authorised, provided the source Is acknowledged and the European Parliament Is given prior notice and sent a copy.
New strategic documents for a radically transformed security context 6 1.
Such is the difficult background of the EU's effort to rebuild relations with Moscow in a profoundly modified geopolitical landscape.
The conflict in Ukraine, which initially was an indirect product of the tensions between the two players' policies in their shared neighbourhood^ has left deep scars.
The complexity of the new strategic situation on the European continent makes it all the more important to understand Russian security perceptions, international motives and goals, as well as their sources.
The idea is widespread in Europe that the cause of Russia's recent assertive international behaviour is to be found in the need for Vladimir Putin to restore the legitimacy of the regime after the demonstrations that took place in Russia following the 2011 elections and to hide the government's inability to reform the country's economy and institutions.
While this is certainly a factor that should be taken into account, it eclipses the fact that Moscow's criticism of the Western-led international order has been a very stable element in Russian foreign policy line since the mid-1990s.
Many international relations scholars have emphasized the worth of being aware of 'the other's' — the partner's, the adversary's — mental frame and perceptions, which seems even more important in tense or conflictual contexts.
Russia has provided its international partners and challengers with plenty of relevant clues and indications about its state of mind and assessment of the international situation by updating several of the strategic documents that frame its security, defense and foreign policies.
While Russian political scientists often state that the practical importance of these documents should not be exaggerated, they nonetheless offer a valuable synthesis of Russia's world vision — perhaps in a more sober style than many speeches of Russian officials in recent months.
This trend has only grown stronger since in 2007, at the Munich security conference, President Putin articulated the basic tenets of the foreign policy vision that has since then driven Moscow's behaviour on the world stage.
In substance, he vehemently criticized the United States' and its allies' international conduct, blamed them for creating hotbeds of international instability and for illegitimate use of force.
A Global Strategy for the European Union's Foreign And Security Policy, June 2016, 33.
The movement originated in the demonstrations that developed in Kiyv after President Yanukovych decided, in late November 2013, to suspend the signing of an association agreement with the European Union at the Eastern partnership summit that was to take place in Vilnius.
This decision occurred after Russia, in the preceding months, put a lot of pressure on the Ukrainian government, mixing threats and incentives.
This reflected a wider and profound divergence of perspectives between Russia and the EU on the future of the 'shared neighbourhood', as will be described further in this report.
Its Security strategy integrates various parameters including political and societal stability, as well as economic, health, demographic, environmental, military dimensions.
However, in recent years, Moscow's foreign and security policy has tended to rely massively on military and hard power tools.
In an unconventional manner if one considers the hierarchy of Russian strategic documents, the updated military doctrine was adopted before the new version of the Security strategy, and one quarter of the Security strategy is devoted to defense issues and international considerations.
This study aims to contribute to the necessary discussion on such a strategic issue by providing an assessment of Russia's post-2014 security and military policy as well as an analysis of its connections with and impact on the Russia-EU relationship and mutual perceptions.
This points to Russia's perception that its security environment has been radically transformed.
The idea that Russia should be recognized as a great power is a key parameter that has driven Moscow's posture on the world stage for several centuries.
Moscow has constantly claimed a role in all major international strategic issues and has never accepted a limitation of its authority to regional matters.
This is due to a number of factors including Russia's Orthodox identity, position between Europe and Asia and the immensity of its territory^ This positioning also reflects the nostalgia of the Cold war era, when Moscow stood as one of the two superpowers.
This nostalgia is illustrated, among other things, by Russian officials' frequent references to the 'special responsibility' that their country, as one of the major nuclear powers, shares with the United States in world security affairs.
Russia, the new Security strategy says, has become a great power again.
A new polycentric world is emerging but it is characterized by rising regional and global instability.
For centuries, Russian strategic thinking has been dominated by the idea that the country faces threats and challenges in all strategic directions.
In strategic terms, this reflects Russia's entrenched inclination to surround itself with buffer zones as a protection from invasions and external instabilities.
This means, as the Russians see it, that Russia should be able to control either militarily or politically neighboring spaces and countries.
In a more contemporary approach, such a control has been viewed as the key to Russia asserting itself as one of the 'centres of influence' in the budding polycentric world.
Integration processes with countries in the former Soviet Union (Commonwealth of Independent States, Eurasian Economic Union, Collective Security Treaty Organization) are important vectors for achieving this goal.
Domestic challenges Although they underline that the Russian 'economy has been able to maintain and strengthen its potential despite the instability of the world economy and despite sanctions', the authors of the 2015 Security strategy do not propose a peculiarly rosy picture of Russia's internal situation.
The Strategy seems to integrate the economic crisis — or at least stagnation or slim growth rates — as a parameter that is here to stay, at least in the mid-term perspective.
While Russia is also endowed with a number of comparative advantages (including relatively well educated population, a developed industrial capacity, a dynamic IT sector), there is a lot here to validate President Obama's claim that Russia is a country that 'doesn't make anything''®, and Western observers' assessment that Russia's international ambitions are not justified by its real capacities and strengths.
In 2014 the country accounted for merely 2. % of total world exports, and its share of total world imports was only 1.
Military spending {see 2.1) will not 'naturally' be questioned as a burden on the economy as it has been in European countries facing a budget crunch.
This is due to historical factors (military tools have been prioritized over the civilian economy and social concerns for centuries), but also to the Russian government's conviction that the defense industry is the nest of Russia's best technologies and knowledge, and that it is meant to become a locomotive of the development and modernization of the national economy'^ Another factor behind all this lays in the fact that Russia considers its place in the top 5 of the world arms exporters as a great power attribute — in the economic field.
In other words, investing in defense is not Just a source of military security, but also of Jobs, money and prestige.
This should not overshadow the fact that traditionally Russia has always perceived internal weaknesses as vulnerabilities that the outside world can take advantage of to erode Russia's strength.
There is an obvious preoccupation about the possible dangerous interactions between domestic challenges and the external environment, in the sense that these challenges, as the Kremlin sees it, could be exploited by hostile powers to undermine Russia's great power and security interests.
This is likely a factor of Russia's strong reliance on military levers to impose its status as a great power and to distract from its flawed integration in the global economy.
Russia Is a Regional Power Showing Weakness over Ukraine', The Guardian, March 25,2014.
Foundations of National Power in the Asia-Pacific, National Bureau of Asian Research, 2015.
Russia's national security strategy and military doctrine and their implications for the EU 1.
Although some parts of the military doctrine point to states that sponsor terrorist or radical groups and to these groups themselves, it is clear that 'the West' is the focus of Russia's threat and risk assessment while China, for example, is not explicitly and directly mentioned.
The current confrontation between Russia and the West is in fact the continuation and the product of tensions accumulated before the Ukrainian crisis — and exacerbated by it.
One has only to read Vladimir Putin's 2007 Munich speech to be convinced of this fact.
On many key parameters that frame Russian strategic thinking — the great power claim, the search for buffer zones, the rejection of the perceived trend towards international competition in the field of values — the 'Western world' is perceived as the main challenger.
Grievances connected to what Russia sees as 'systemic problems in the Euro-Atlantic region' , the enlargement of NATO, the location of its military infrastructure close to Russian borders, its 'offensive capabilities' and the trend towards the Alliance acquiring 'global functions', the 'symptoms' of the United States efforts to retain absolute military supremacy (the global antimissile system.
Global Strike capabilities, militarization of space) — all these problems were mentioned in the previous versions of these doctrines.
Western criticism of Russian policies in the postSoviet space, often described as neo-imperialistic, is all the more resented in Moscow that the Kremlin considers that NATO and the EU have expanded their own 'spheres of influence' through their enlargement and the development of wide networks of cooperative ties, including in the neighbourhood they share with Russia.
A newer element receives particular emphasis in these documents and should be paid attention.
The Security strategy denounces, in the list describing threats to the security of the state and of the society, attempts to destabilize an internal situation by means of inspiring colour revolutions.
All these are direct references to the colour revolutions that took place in Georgia , Ukraine , Kyrgyzstan , the Arab spring, and, finally, the Ukrainian 'Revolution of Dignity', which Russian officials continuously describe as an anti-constitutional coup supported by the West.
The 'securitization' of such issues, by their very inclusion in an official document whose role is to expose 'the system of officially adopted views by the State on the preparation to armed protection and on armed protection of the Russian Federation', points to a hardening of the Kremlin's policy.
Cooperation with the United States, NATO and the European Union, the strategic documents say in substance, must be based on the principles of equality and respect for each other's interests.
Since the mid-2000s, the Russian military has become again a tool in Russia's assertion on the world stage.
In a move considered by many as a turning point in Moscow's international strategy, the Kremlin decided to use force in Georgia in 2008.
As seen from the Kremlin, the tense and complex international environment the country faces fully justifies the financial effort devoted to the modernization of its military.
Russia's motivations and positions in all these directions are, of course, diverse but it perceives that possessing a credible military force is one key condition of its diplomatic and security interests being taken into account by others.
Russia's revitalised capabilities and threat assessment Serious military reform has been pursued after the Georgia war, which displayed the numerous weak points of Russia's military organization.
While Russia had attained its strategic goals in the South Caucasus, the way its troops had performed had shown that the military was still plagued with many flaws and problems.
The main goal of the 2008 reform was to improve the combat readiness of available troops and to enhance the ability to use them swiftly.
This implied cutting the number of understaffed, ill-equipped formations to replace them with more agile and more potent units.
In the army, the traditional division was suppressed and replaced by the brigade as the main formation.
The ultimate goal is to bring these smaller brigades to full strength and to have them better equipped and more autonomous than the former divisions (the process of organizing three categories of brigades — heavy, medium, light — to get an ability 'Tsennost' nauki v predvidenii' , Voenno-Promyshlennyi Kurer, February 27,2013.
Quoted in Shaun Walker, 'Syrian Mission Restores Pride in Russian Military after Years of Decay', The Guardian, 15 March 2015.
Only the airborne troops {vozdushnodesantnye voyska, VDV) retained divisions.
Together with the Special Forces, the VDV stand at the core of the rapid reaction force that the Russian military is establishing.
The military leadership has also done much to streamline the command structure in order to enhance the general coherence and coordination, thus efficiency, of the various components of the armed forces.
The number of military districts was cut from six to four in 2010; the four districts perform administrative and logistical functions, but become joint operational-strategic commands in cases of exercises and contingencies (in such circumstances, they command and control all forces — ground, air.
As a response to Russia's concerns related to the perceived degradation of its security situation in the Arctic, a Joint Strategic Command 'North' was created, in late 2015, on the basis of the Northern Fleet.
As was stressed previously, the West is perceived as posing security challenges to Russia.
Flowever, the Western technological advance in the military field that the Russians had an opportunity to witness in Iraq or Kosovo wars has made the previous model of preparing for war with the West (a huge, conscriptionbased mass mobilization army) obsolete.
Indeed, as stressed by General Gerasimov, 'frontal engagements of large formations of forces at the strategic and operational level are gradually becoming a thing of the past', while 'long-distance, contactless actions against the adversary' are becoming a major means of achieving one's goals.
The nuclear deterrent, the modernization of which has accelerated since the mid-2000s, combined with the multi-tier aerospace defense system that Russia is currently forming'® is seen as offering a solid hedge vis-a-vis these risks.
Power projection beyond the borders of Russia and its immediate vicinity is now a goal (as demonstrated by the Syria operation, but also by Russian participation toanti-piracy operations in the Gulf of Aden) but for the time being only for limited operations, with clearly delineated goals.
More ambitious plans might be considered for the longer term as they will depend on the economic situation, the evolution of the international security landscape, and Russia's ability to get access to military facilities of foreign countries.
Ambitions are also constrained, in the current situation, by the rather difficult state of the Russian navy and shipbuilding, at least as concerns blue-water surface ships.
Despite the perception that threats and challenges are present in all strategic directions, the basic plan that has supported the military reform launched in 2008 is in fact aimed at making the armed forces more efficient for the contingencies that they are most likely to face.
These are local conflicts, deleterious activities of militant or even transnational crime groups and possibly the management of large-scale social and political disorders — all this in the neighborhood of the country, which happens to be, as stressed earlier, a major priority in Russia's foreign policy.
It was these contingencies that dictated the 'shock therapy'^® the Kremlin imposed on the military right after the Georgia war.
Only recently has the Russian military obtained the funding to build the new aerospace defense system — and overcome the bureaucratic infighting that had long hampered the realization of the corresponding vision.
Military reform has been backed by strong political will on the part of the political leadership, as illustrated by the steadily increasing military budgets.
In recent years, the growing share of GDP devoted to defense has reflected the determination of the Russian government to maintain the effort to modernize the armed forces, in particular their re-equipment.
This effort paid off, as one can conclude from the rather well organized and efficient operations in Crimea and Syria.
While limited in size, these have shown that the Russian military has now decisively departed from the sorry state it was in when Vladimir Putin became the president of the Russian Federation in 2000.
In the context of the conflict in Ukraine, which the Kremlin presents as the product of a direct clash of interests between Moscow on the one hand, NATO, the European Union and the United States on the other hand, Russian jets have increasingly tested the defenses of NATO members, sometimes violating their airspace.
Numerous, and, for many of them, large-scale military exercises and mobilization activities have fueled the image of the Russian military as a resurgent force.
They create a lot of concern in neighboring countries, where it is feared that snap inspections could serve as a cover for preparations for military operations against them^\ But the trend showing a more active Russian military on the world stage appeared earlier.
In 2007, Russia resumed regular strategic bomber flights, which had stopped after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
The Russian Navy has widened its presence on the world seas, especially in the Mediterranean, where Russia has resumed a permanent presence in 2013, albeit on a much smaller scale than in Soviet times.
Combat training, which was sacrificed in the Yeltsin era due to the financial crunch, has been a key focus in the Russian MoD's effort to rebuild national military capabilities.
In the past few years, Russia has significantly increased the pace and size of its military exercises.
Army, air, naval, nuclear and airborne forces have all been involved, separately or together, in manoeuvres held in all military districts , sometimes with foreign countries.
The Russian leadership is all the more inclined to spend a lot of money on combat training that military exercises allow to impress neighbours and potential adversaries and to send strategic messages.
Russia's Political Use of its Military in Europe since 2014', www.ecfr.eu, December 19, 2016.
Johan Norberg, Training to Fight Russia's Major Miiitary Exercises 2011 -2014, FOI, December 2015, 23.
The military and Russia's international ambitions Under Vladimir Putin, the military factor has clearly been brought to the fore as an important element in the effort aimed at reasserting Russia's prestige and authority on the world stage after more than a decade of dramatic diplomatic drawdown.
In the previous years, the severe crisis of the armed forces had almost 'neutralized' the image of Russia as a military power.
In the early twenty-first century, 'most states continue to see the maintenance of a powerful conventional military... as an instrument of policy, but also as an essential attribute of a strong state and a global actor', especially 'states aspiring to great power status' As was stressed previously, Russia has never ceased to claim such a status since the sixteenth century, and has, under Putin, tried really hard to regain it.
The period from the 1990s till the mid2000s that saw the Russian state downplay, primarily out of necessity, the role of military instruments in the advancement of its international interests is unquestionably over.
Vladimir Putin has always been unambiguous in expressing his beliefthat without a credible military force, a country is exposed to pressure by other states.
It is no wonder that we already hear some voices saying that 'objectively' the question will soon be asked of whether resources of global significance should be declared as being above national sovereignty.
We must exclude any such possibility, even a hypothetical one, with respect to Russia.
This means that we should not tempt anybody with our weakness'^^ A number of domestic and international events have come to stimulate Vladimir Putin's eagerness to strengthen the country's military capabilities.
Vladimir Putin is also convinced that things might have turned up differently (i.e. less negatively from the point of view of Russian interests) in Serbia or Iraq had Russia been able to show its military muscle to try and influence these situations.
This should be taken into account in attempts at comprehending the motives behind Moscow's decision to use force in Ukraine or in Syria.
It was spurred by Moscow's resolve to avoid further unfavorable political and geopolitical changes in places where it considers having strategic interests to defend.
Vladimir Putin obviously judges that acting from a position of strength is also the right way to respond to the perceived Western challenges, and to 'contain' those of the West's initiatives that might be contrary to its interests.
This is clearly a factor of the multiplication of provocative military moves close to the territory or the airspace of NATO members or of partners of the Alliance and of recurrent nuclear messaging.
The notion that Russia faces stiff competition there, especially from Western powers, has been comforted by the conflict in Ukraine, which Russian officials present as an armed anti-constitutional coup supported by the West“ Consequently, the 'near abroad' features more prominently in the 2014 version of the military doctrine.
Garantii natsional'noy bezopasnosti dlya Rossii' [Being Strong: The Guarantees of National Security for Russia], Rossiyskaya Gazeta, February 17,2012.
The Collective Security Treaty Organization was created in 2002 on the basis of the Tashkent Collective Security Treaty signed in May 1992.
For example, in recent months, Armenia has complained more openly that its CSTO partners show insufficient interest in supporting its position in the conflict with Azerbaijan.
In 2008, Russia's CSTO partners did not follow its lead in recognizing the 'independence' of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
In terms of actual capabilities, the CSTO's potential remains limited despite constant talk of building up its military component.
This is due to both the members' lack of political will and of military resources.
Russia and Central Asian states share both a genuine concern about the rise of radical Islam in connection with the troubled situation in the Middle East and in Afghanistan and an inclination to use these challenges to justify repressive actions against opposition groups or delays in domestic reforms.
Integration with the former Soviet republics in the field of hard power is implicitly conceived as a factor that makes Russian regional imprint more significant than that of other powers.
That is why Moscow is not pushing too hard for a more pronounced show of solidarity within the CSTO — convinced as it is that, given the disparity of its members' security interests and their voiced concern with Russian domination instincts, this might Jeopardize this formal integration scheme.
In other words, a facade of military integration in a multilateral framework under Russian leadership is what is important in Moscow's perspective.
Comparisons with NATO are sometimes induced by similarities in the respective agendas and functionalities of the two organizations.
Tackling perceived asymmetries with the West The recent effort to transform the Russian armed forces has produced a military, parts of which are fully combat-ready, professional, well trained, and able to conduct complex operations.
The quite calibrated Crimea and Syria operations have partly illustrated this evolution, especially as concerns special forces and airborne troops.
But these operations have not been of a scale that allows to draw general lessons about the real state of the armed forces.
And the bulkof the Russian military, relying on conscription and uneven levels of modern equipment, does not offer Russia the operational capabilities that would allow to cover the quite extensive and multifaceted threat assessment that was described in the first section.
Russian conventional military power continues and will continue to lag behind the United States and NATO in terms of size and technological level.
Russia has, among otherthings, developed at an accelerated pace anti-access /areadenial capabilities (air and missile defenses, surface-to-surface ballistic missiles, land, air and sealaunched cruise missile batteries, layered anti-submarine warfare capabilities) in zones where, Russian strategists believe, the country could face external military pressure in the future.
NATO officials have repeatedly expressed concern that these capabilities can limit the Alliance's possibilities for action, including in regions/countries that are part of its zone of responsibility.
Electronic warfare is also set to become more prominent in Russian military toolbox.
Nuclear weapons appear to keep an important role, as was suggested by the nuclear signaling and gesticulation in the context of the Ukrainian conflict, especially in 201There has been a debate going on in the West about whether Russia is now de-emphasizing the nuclear component of its security and defense policy.
The Russians feel that the deterrence rationale has been increasingly challenged in the past fifteen years.
Quite certainly, Russian strategists take all these parameters into account when they think in prospective terms.
However, at the current stage, it seems that they seek to keep the widest range of tools as possible.
And in 2016, nuclear weapons are still very much present in defense planning, providing Russia with strategic comfort in front of the West's perceived pressure.
The scenario of the various exercises that, since 1999, have featured nuclearfirst use, with calibrated nuclear strikes designed to prevent an escalation of a conventional conflict and obtain the end of hostilities by the opponent, remains on the table.
Non-military instruments too seem to play an increasingly prominent role.
NATO is concerned that Russia could resort more frequently to the complex mix of tactics and tools it used in Crimea and Donbas.
Military tools were used^^ but they were combined with cyber-attacks, political and economic pressure, and intensive disinformation campaigns.
Thus, Russia's toolbox for coercive action is not situated only in the military field ; and the military factor promises to take on very ambiguous forms (disguised, denied, limited, merged with the use of other instruments...) in the future.
What preoccupies NATO officials most is the resulting blurring of the line between war and peace , which has triggered fears that Russia could play the same complex game with a NATO member country and complicate decision-making within the Alliance by creating ambiguous situations and intimidating some of the members, to the detriment of allied consensus.
Another question is whether Russia would consider these options only as a response to perceived hostile action by an opponent (which is already problematic given the traditionally very defensive outlook that guides Russia's foreign and security policies), or whether it would be prepared to resort to them in a more offensive, opportunistic mode.
It should be noted that the Russians consider that this complex mix of instruments is actually what Western powers have practiced in various places of the world in recent years.
Alexander Grushko, Russian representative to NATO, quoted by Interfax, 12 May 2016.
This argument is countered by experts that stress that Russia is developing very low yield and low collateral damage nuclear weapons.
Special Forces and military intelligence in particular, but also military exercises which, in the context of the Ukraine conflict, were used either to distract attention from actions elsewhere and to intimidate or create doubts about Moscow's military intentions.
Units were deployed along Ukraine's border in a show offeree aimed at deterring the Ukrainian government from acting and, as a signal to the West, at displaying Russia's determination to defend its perceived interests in the conflict.
In the same speech at the Academy of Military Science, Gerasimov asserted that 'the information confrontation opens wide asymmetric possibilities to reduce the combat potential of the adversary.
Russia's diplomatic activism Despite all the rust and incompetence that are still plaguing large parts of the Russian military, two factors should not be underestimated — one is Russia's feeling that it is facing a very hostile world, and that only credible military tools can protect it; the second is the Russian leaders' determination to use all means available to defend what they see as the country's strategic interests, a determination that is served by the facilitated decision-making on the use of force that the authoritarian nature of the regime allows for.
It is meant to ensure that Russia's standing as one of the new 'centres of influence' is widely recognized, and to impose the idea of the West's declining influence in world affairs.
On Syria, indeed, Russia has combined military action with intense diplomatic action.
Russia has modified the political landscape around the conflict not only by using its military, although admittedly this has been an essential factor, but also by showing an ability to talk to all involved players.
Although Moscow has not attained its initial goal of obtaining an international coalition that would have seen it siding with Western states (and major regional powers) 'on an equal basis', it has made it unavoidable for Washington to discuss Syria with Moscow.
Russia has also promoted an agenda of denunciation of the West's, especially the United States', role in undermining the rules of the international game, thus trying to affect its credibility.
For example, the Security strategy denounces the weakening of the system of global security and system of treaties and agreements in the arms control sphere.
This is a reference, among other things, to Russia's constant (since the late 1990s) criticism of Western military operations that were conducted without a mandate of the UN Security Council , of Washington's unilateral withdrawal from the ABM treaty, etc.
Introduction of Russian Futures 2025, by Hiski Haukkala and Nicu Popescu, 7.
This strategy has been pursued consistently since the late 1990s, starting with the 'strategic partnership' with China (which has gradually become a platform for the two countries to promote the establishment of a 'multipolar' world order, the essence of which is to counterbalance perceived Western hegemony) and the Russia-India-China strategic triangle, which was initiated in 1998 by Moscow, gathers once a year at the foreign minister level and is supposed to be another incarnation of the multipolar order.
In this perspective, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the BRICS grouping have been of particular value to the Kremlin.
Russia, which has also promoted the importance of G20 as a more legitimate and appropriate forum than G7, has worked to convince the rest of the world of the rising influence of these organizations/groupings, especially in a context where it needs to counter the West's argument that the Ukraine conflict has isolated Russia.
From this point of view, the SCO's decision to integrate India and Pakistan as new members and the BRICS' progress in building up its own system of financial institutions are evolutions that are worth advertising.
As stressed in the Security strategy, the best option to meet such challenges resides in regional or sub-regional agreements (one understands that it is all about the Eurasian Economic Union, the SCO, the BRICS...) as well as in using regional currencies — all being presented as hedges against crisis phenomena.
Flowever, Russia's diplomatic activity is not only a function of the crisis in Russia-West relations.
It reflects realism on Moscow's part about the vulnerability of its international position.
Russia's moving to a more active Asian agenda since the early 2000s is of course a consequence of its degraded relations with Western powers.
Flowever it also means that Moscow recognizes the weakness of its positions in Asia.
This is in large part due to the historically rooted Western-centrism of its international policy.
In its current situation, Russia is probably not completely confident that it will get a gratifying role in it.
For example, the Chinese and Russian presidents' decision, in 2015, to connect the Eurasian Economic Union and the new Silk Road looks more like an attempt by Moscow to use the dynamics of Chinese projects in order to reposition itself on the Eurasian stage at a time when its own integration project has been hurt by the Ukrainian crisis and the wariness it has inspired Russia's partners, including Kazakhstan and Belarus.
In this sense, it is worth considering the possibility that Russia's permanent show of military force is also an indirect message to other great powers such as China, with In the micl-2000s, the Russian government had already assessed that future demand for Russia's oil and gas exports would be far higher in Asia than anywhere else.
This corresponded in time with the Kremlin's becoming increasingly concerned about the situation in its deindustrialized and depopulated far eastern territories.
The global recession of 2008-9 reinforced this 'Asian vector' in Russian foreign activities.
Russia's national security strategy and military doctrine and their implications for the EU which the balance of power is not favorable to Russia a message that says that Russia, despite its internal and international weaknesses, needs to be taken seriously.
An active diplomatic presence on all strategic fronts is considered as a hedge against possible risks of international downgrading.
It remains to be seen whether this sense of Russia's vulnerability in the emerging world order could benefit, in a way or another, the relationship between Russia and the EU, which, despite all the tensions, is still supported by quite a solid economic basement and a diversified fabric of human ties.
However, one can only notice that the EU seems to feature quite low in the priorities of Moscow's foreign policy agenda, and mainly in a regional, not global, context.
Russia's vision of the European Union In recent years, however, seeking a strategic partnership with the European Union has become less prominent in Russia's general strategy.
This evolution had gathered speed even before the EU decided to impose sanctions on Russia.
As a result, partnership with the EU, although still important economically, appears less valuable in terms of Russia's sustaining its international standing than strategic convergence with China and other major rising powers.
It is obvious that despite their rather unfriendly atmosphere, relations with the United States have featured much more importantly in Moscow's security and strategic agenda for several years.
The looming relative decline in energy relations will likely contribute to this trend.
Of course, Moscow invests a lot of hope and political energy'^^ in forthcoming elections in a number of EU member states.
The Kremlin certainly expects that, should leaders with a 'pro-Russian' orientation come to power in Paris or Berlin, the already fragile EU consensus would be broken, sanctions would be abolished, and Russia's room for maneuver in Europe would be expanded.
But, should this wish come true, which at this stage can certainly not be taken for granted, it would not necessarily change Russia's rather skeptical assessment of the EU as a strategic partner.
This will depend on many variables the future United States administration's transatlantic and Russia policies, the European Union's own reaction to the emergence of a new political landscape in key member states, the depth of the changes these states would introduce in their Russia policy, and, ultimately, the EU's ability to strengthen itself as a strategic player.
Andrei Zolotov, 'Detachment ratherThan Estrangement Will Save Russia-European Relations', www.russia-direct.ora , November 2,2016.
In November 2016, Chancellor Merkel said that she thought that Russia may try to influence the 2017 German elections through cyber attacks and a disinformation campaign.
The widespread idea that Moscow sees the EU as a lesser challenge to Russian interests than NATO should therefore be modulated.
On this front, in the Russian perspective, the European Union appears as a major challenger.
Moscow has emphasized its intention to develop relations with Brussels 'on the principles of equality and respect for each other's interests' , and, focused as it is on the preservation of its 'sovereignty', refuses that the principles and rules that drive the EU-Russia relationship are 'imposed' by the European Union.
This has been expressed in the context of the negotiations on a new EU-Russia partnership and cooperation agreement, which has been deadlocked for several years.
Russia is definitely concerned that its neighbours' gradually absorbing EU norms and standards will lessen its influence over them — an influence that often materializes through inter-elite channels, informal, sometimes corrupt economic and investment schemes.
One of the purposes of the Eurasian Economic Union, Ukraine was supposed to be part of, was and still is to contain the rapprochement of its members with the European Union.
The EU's assertion that it 'will stand united in upholding ... each country's right to choose its future freely""**"" appears as a clear reference to its rejection of Russia's claim to a 'sphere of privileged interests' in the former Soviet Union.
This issue used to be considered as a possible testing ground for future Russia-EU security cooperation.
However, this potential has remained atrophied due to the fact that 'frozen conflicts' have been used by Moscow as one of the vectors aimed at asserting its influence over former Soviet republics that have shown a stronger determination than others to escape Russia's orbit.
This perception has been compounded by the fact that EU countries that are also NATO members have repeatedly opposed Russia's critical positions on NATO's policy — saying for example that the antimissile defense system in Europe is not directed at Russia, or that NATO's position is strictly defensive and that the Alliance threatens no country®*; in addition, all EU members that are also NATO members have accepted the need for the Alliance to reassure Central European members of the Alliance in the context of the Ukraine conflict.
Russia long hoped that the EU might take on a more serious defense and security role and that there would be a potential to develop defense and security cooperation with it.
This was a key goal of Vladimir Putin's foreign policy line during his first term.
Moscow considered this a credible prospect at that time because in 1999 the EU adopted its first 'common strategy' (which it devoted to Russia) and seemed determined to instil more dynamism into CSDP after the Saint-Malo summit. to draw the post-Soviet countries into its integration orbit, to pull them out of the Russia-centric integration orbit.
This seriously derailed those Russian efforts to establish the Eurasian Economic Union, which actually resulted in the Ukraine crisis' (Dmitry Suslov, Higher School of Economics, Moscow, quoted in Alexey Khlebnikov, 'What Are the Obstacles for EU-Eurasian Economic Union Cooperation?', www.russia-direct.ora.
Samuel A Greene, 'Future Approaches to the US', Russian Futures 2025, 43.
A Global Strategy for the European Union's Foreign And Security Policy,33.
The considerable degradation in relations with Germany and France, which used to be Russia's major interlocutors inside the EU, has contributed to this interpretation.
In a situation where EU members' foreign policy interests generally diverge rather than converge, such a show of unity was — and remains — quite remarkable.
The very active influence policy that Russia is deploying towards Western countries , although its real impact is difficult to measure, has created more mistrust in European capitals.
Moscow's strong inclination to rely on military power and intimidation is an essential source of growing distrust on the part of the EU, which is much more reluctant to use these tools, as is well known.
Hopes that Russia may become more amenable again out of a need to attract more European investments, technology transfers or industrial partnerships proved short-sighted.
Maintaining unity has been and will continue to be a constant test, since all EU members do not see the 'Russia problem' in the same way.
The military challenge that Russia represents is not the subject of an EU consensus.
Poland considers Russia as a military threat, and the idea is widespread in this country that a conflict with Moscow involving Poland is a possibility for the future.
Resilience in this case meaning that although the economy has suffered from the sanctions, the Kremlin has not altered its course in Ukraine and sanctions have not impacted the popularity of the Russian president.
In the same way, not all EU members have a strong interest in the eastern neighbourhood” EU members even do not see eye to eye on the kind of dialogue the Union should develop with Moscow.
Russia's behaviour in Ukraine has seriously challenged Germany's traditional Ostpolitik.
However, Berlin still views Moscow as a central actor in European security, albeit a negative one, and has promoted the most extensive dialogue as possible.
In other words, despite the collapse of the bilateral partnership in its previous form, the only perceived way to move fonward is through negotiation and cooperation.
However, these differences directly affect the ability of the EU to consider in a unified manner the best way to address the 'Russia issue' — how to tackle the real challenges that it raises , how to establish cooperation with Moscow when interests concur.
Obviously, while the door is not fully closed, both sides express reservations on possible cooperation in their strategic documents.
Mutual distrust, disillusionment and frustration certainly do not shape a strategic environment that is conducive to cooperation.
Therefore, cooperation prospects appear quite grim and will remain so should the current political circumstances persist in the future.
Economic and energy cooperation will continue, although at a reduced pace because of the sanctions and of the economic stagnation on both sides.
However, even in difficult political contexts, cooperation can take place if sides identify common concerns and interests.
The two sides do not seem to see eye to eye on the potential mutual cooperation agenda.
The EU Global Strategy proposes, 'in addition to those foreign policy issues on which we currently cooperate', a list of subjects on which 'selective engagement could take place ... including climate, the Arctic, maritime security, education, research and cross-border cooperation.
Many people in a number of EU countries consider that solving a number of global issues requires having Russia on board.
However, in recent months, Russia's credibility on some of these issues has declined — at least as viewed from many European capitals.
On non-proliferation, Russia has been recognized as a rather constructive player — both on Iran and on North Korea.
Moscow's recent decision to suspend the U.S.-Russia Plutonium Management and Disposition Agreement and to outline conditions for the resumption of this cooperation that are not related to the object of the agreement®^ it has deteriorated its image as a contributor to non-proliferation.
The developments in Syria, where Russia and Western states' visions and interests have not been reconciled®'*, have made anti-terrorist cooperation a more complex endeavour.
What is clear is that Russia certainly hopes that overtime, some European states will be willing to attenuate the sanctions regime for the sake of developing more extensive cooperation with Russia on this front.
In such a context, the EU, for fear of spoiling its consensus on Russia, will continue to find it more comfortable to leave it primarily to member states to pursue ad hoc cooperation with Moscow.
The problem is that their strategic documents show that they consider the other to be the one that has contributed to the weakening of this architecture.
The EU section on the European security order underscores the EU's perception that Moscow has 'challenged the European security order at its core' and explains by Russia's behaviour the fact that Shared Vision, Common Action, 33.
However, the EU may be willing to try and improve the quality of dialogue with Russia for the sake of a more relaxed European security landscape and of the establishment of a political environment that is more conducive to avoid escalation spirals and, over the longer term, to rebuild trust.
The European Union has an important role to play in promoting the second engine of the 'double-track Russia strategy' ®® that the West has been pursuing since the beginning of the Ukraine crisis — strengthening defenses on the one hand, pursuing dialogue and cooperative engagement on the other hand.
The EU may also want to use such an effort to retain some level of leverage over Russia.
In this perspective, the matters that the EU proposes as potential fields for engagement in its Strategy appear as low-key starters, on which Russia might be willing to make overtures without sending the signal — to the domestic public opinion, to its non-Western partners — that it is yielding to European pressure.
There have been precedents of Russian cooperation with the West in maritime security.
In the Arctic, while Russia has invested in the deployment of new military capabilities, it also pursued a cooperation line that it could extend to the EU to show willing.
Cultural and people-to-people contacts and exchanges can only be useful, although the Kremlin has shown a propensity to view that kind of interaction more suspiciously.
In more strategic terms, the EU could also consider developing interaction with the Eurasian Economic Union.
It remains to be seen whether Russia will be prepared to make the effort; indeed it has tended, in recent months, to basically say to the West that it is expected to take the initiative.
Andrew Monaghan, 'Russia Wants the West to Learn to Agree', www.chathamhouse.ora.
For the time being, concerns have been expressed in Europe, not only central Europe, that the new president may neglect European security and clinch some kind of a deal with Russia over the heads of Europe and of the former Soviet republics that have tried to escape Russia's embrace.
It is also anticipated that in France and, maybe, in Germany the forthcoming elections might bring to power leaders with a more 'pro-Russia' orientation.
As was stressed before, Russia is not completely comfortable with the changing world order as it is not so sure, given its problematic internal situation, of the place it can build for itself in it.
The 'Eurasian' dimension refers to the idea of a 'bipolar Europe' that Russia has promoted in recent years.
So Europe is still in Russia's mind, but in a much more complex geopolitical setting than in the not so distant past.
Depending on the future global balance of forces, the EU could face very different situations in the evolution of its dialogue with Moscow.
The evolution of Russia's relations with its neighbours, at a time when it seems that its inclination to coerce them into Eurasian integration has proved rather counterproductive (which may bring out either efforts towards appeasement or more pressure), should be followed closely.
