It derives the equilibrium states under various assumptions about Western and Russian preferences over outcomes.
The “paths” of their generation,e., the sequences of strategic choices made by each side, are also explored, casting light on the structure of incentives guiding behavior in the conflict, and perhaps predicting what the actual outcome will be when the world moves beyond this crisis.
Incomplete information on preferences prevents derivation of a unique prediction of the outcome of the crisis, but the analysis enables us to substantially narrow the range of possibilities.
This interaction involves tacit negotiation between leaders in the West and Russian President Putin as various policies, and policy changes, are implemented.
The revised version of the theory of moves formulated by Willson offers a convenient framework for analyzing the strategic interaction between the main actors in this crisis.
It uses the policy alternatives for those actors to form a matrix of “states” (i.e., possible situations on the ground, each associated with a pair of policies, one for each actor) over which each actor has a preference ordering.
We identify an “initial state” from the history of the crisis, and the strategic interaction begins when one actor changes its policy unilaterally, thus moving play into a new state.
The “negotiations” (implicit in this case) continue with the actors having alternating turns to move.
The strategic interaction ends after two consecutive passes, which represents an agreement by the main actors to accept the current state as the “ultimate outcome” of the interaction, or after reaching a finite limit on the total number of moves.
Thus, given the policy alternatives for the actors and their preference orderings over the possible outcomes, we obtain predictions from the model about the UO and the equilibrium path to that outcome, both of which can be compared to the unfolding events in the crisis.
Although incomplete knowledge of the preference orderings prevents derivation of a unique prediction of the UO, the analysis enables us to narrow the range of possibilities considerably.
The original and revised versions of ToM differ in their specification of the rules governing the interaction between the players.
In the original version by Brams , one “pass” by any player after the initial move terminates play.
By requiring two consecutive “passes” to end play, Willson’s revised version allows a player to reverse moves,g., impose and later retract sanctions or invade and later pull out, which more richly models the give-and-take of the strategic interaction in the Ukrainian crisis than do the rules of play in the original version.
In addition, unlike the original version of ToM , the Willson formulation can accomodate more than two policy alternatives for each actor, and they need not necessarily have the same number of alternatives.
As in all modeling exercises, we want to adopt rules of play that fit the possibilities in the situation.
Zeager, Ericson, and Williams compares of the two versions of ToM more thoroughly.
Kilgour , Kilgour and Zagare , Simon , and Brams offer examples of related work within the ToM framework.
Gilboa provides a thoughtful review of the ToM “project” from the perspective of a prominent game theorist.
As the analysis will show, the UO of the strategic interaction between the West and Russia in the revised version of ToM is very robust to changes in the preference orderings of the two sides over the possible outcomes.
For five of the eight plausible scenarios that we consider (each associated with a different configuration of preference orderings) – and many more variations on these specifications – the UO involves Western economic sanctions together with active destabilization of the Ukrainian state by Russia.
In two other scenarios, the UO has a business-as-usual policy (neither economic sanctions nor military assistance) by the West, despite active destabilization by Russia.
In the remaining scenario, the UO involves Western economic sanctions in the face of an invasion of Ukraine by Russia.
Thus, the most common UO emerges for a wide range of scenarios, and in the other plausible scenarios, only one of the parties ultimately settles on a different policy.
Section 2 specifies in very broad terms the policy alternatives for the actors, the possible outcomes (situations on the ground) resulting from each pair of policies, and preferences for each actor over those outcomes.
Section 3 identifies the initial state for the analysis, the move that begins the strategic interaction, plausible rankings of the possible outcomes for each side , the UO for various combinations of preferences, and investigates the incentives and constraints guiding the actors along the equilibrium paths to those outcomes.
There we consider, in part, how the Ukrainian leaders would rank the possible outcomes of the interaction, the UOs that emerge from our analysis, and how their actions could influence the details of the preference orderings of the main actors, and thus, perhaps, the ultimate resolution of the crisis.
Policy alternatives To keep the analysis tractable, the policy alternatives are described in very broad terms, hoping to only capture the essentials of what matters to the parties involved.
Even this small set of policies strains the information we have on the preferences and motivations of the major actors; more policy choices would go well beyond what we can claim to know.
A consistently pursued “policy pair” frames the situation on the ground, substantially impacting, if not fully determining, outcomes for the Ukrainian people and the economies of both Russia and the West.
It is over these potential outcomes, resulting from their policy choices, that each side has preferences which, given the constraints embedded in the structure of the model, will drive the policy choices of each side.
History, culture, and ideology of course play a deep role in informing and molding the perception of costs and benefits in each of these dimensions.
For Russia, the policies are listed above in order of increasing economic costs for a given strategy of the West, although changing Western policies can alter that ordering.
They are also ordered, for a fixed Western policy, in terms of increasing geopolitical benefits, although again that can be altered by changing Western strategies.
These conditional orderings along a single dimension cannot uniquely determine the ordering over the “states” arising from the nine policy combinations of the two primary agents; agents’ preferences over trade-offs across dimensions must be considered to complete that ordering.
Russia’s underlying policy motive, moreover, appears to be geopolitical, subject perhaps to economic constraints.
That overriding fear drove the rapid military seizure and subsequent annexation into the Russian Federation of Crimea and Sevastopol, a prior move that set up the current crisis.
Russia is a “revisionist power” seeking to alter current international institutional arrangements, norms, and configuration of power/influence.
These motivations inform trade-offs, feeding into Russia’s evaluation of, its preference ordering over, the outcomes generated by her policy choices together with those of the West.
Still, it is not completely clear how these policy motivations, and the policies pursued, interact with the policy choices of the West in determining Russia’s full preference ordering over outcomes “on the ground,” an issue we explore in the analysis.
Western policies are also weakly ordered in terms of increasing economic cost, with “military assistance” adding to the cost of sanctions even if it does not go as far as active Western combat participation.
But their geopolitical implications for the West are very different, involving increasing benefits in terms of credibility and the maintenance of modern norms of international behavior.
As was the case with Russia above, the conditional orderings for the West along each single dimension must be extended to a complete ordering over the nine “states” resulting from the strategy pairs.
Moreover, it is not completely clear how these general policy motivations interact with the policy choices of Russia that determine outcomes “on the ground,” providing a preference ordering over those outcomes.
This will allow us to explore the possible equilibria of this strategic interaction, and highlight critical factors in their generation.
Potential outcomes of West-Russia policy combinations Each West-Russia policy combination, for example, BU-LG, if consistently maintained as an agreed outcome can be associated with a set of physical conditions, of sociopolitical, economic, and military characteristics resulting from these maintained policies.
In Appendix 5.1, we elaborate the consequences in each of the nine potential outcome states, and indicate what we believe to be the most plausible attitudes, based on those consequences, of both Russia and the West toward that situation as a final outcome.
Potential rankings from highest, “9,” to lowest, “1,” are presented in number pairs, , where n is the ranking of the West and m is the Russian ranking.
Constructing these ordinal rankings of the nine potential “states of the world” arising from the complex interactions of these policy combinations is a crucial first step in our analysis.
It requires careful consideration of all the ramifications of each actor’s policy as it unfolds in the face of the policy being pursued by the other actor, and prediction of the most likely consequences of this interaction.
We however also analyze outcomes for different, more likely counterfactual, preferences in order to explore the robustness of our results, and to illustrate how different preferences can alter the equilibrium outcome of this interaction.
Russia has launched a cross border invasion of Ukraine, albeit with limited objectives, while the West has added direct military support, short of combat forces (“boots on the ground”), to Ukraine while continuing to impose significant economic sanctions on Russia.
While the ranking for some of these terminal states is clear, for others it is not.
Thus we will analyze a number of different ToM-matrices, each reflecting a different preference ordering of one or both of the decisive parties.
This will allow us to explore more fully how outcomes might depend on preferences, the potential paths that the “negotiations” might follow, and the ability of ToM analysis to aid understanding of, and make predictions about, the final outcome that is yet to be determined.
Subsequently, players alternate their moves, with a player at her turn choosing either to maintain her current policy stance or to alter those polices , selecting a different policy stance.
Play ends after 2 consecutive passes, representing an agreement to accept the current state as final,e., the UO, or after the players have collectively exhausted a fixed, finite number of moves.
In the payoff configurations that we consider, ToM always gives a single UO, independent of initial state and first mover, in fewer than six moves.
This is a consequence of the specific set of preferences that we find plausible.
Willson proves the existence of a very loose, finite bound on the number of moves for convergence to either a fixed UO or alternating UO, depending on first mover and parity of the number of moves.
Note that our 6-move horizon is similar to the horizon that Kilgour and Zagare find necessary to solve sequential-move games with 2 × 2 payoff configurations 6 Zeager, Ericson, and Williams discusses such modeling in depth.
The choice of an initial state for the analysis is somewhat arbitrary, but some points allow us to formulate more interesting questions than others do.
However, the seizure of Crimea, since 18 March 2014 formally incorporated into the Russian Federation as a constituent member, albeit unrecognized by the West, must now be considered as irreversible in the context of the current crisis; short of a Russian military defeat in a hot war with the West, it is irreversible.
Thus Russia would never move from IN despite any Western actions/ strategies within the scope of those we are considering.
Hence, for this analysis we will take the initial state to be BU-DS (March– April 2014) with the West engaged in “business as usual” in disbelief of what is happening, while Russia actively engages in destabilization of Ukraine through fostering, sponsoring, and arming unrest in the Ukrainian east among the Russian ethnic population and those who lost influence with the fall of the Yanukovich regime.
This DS strategy involves the insertion of leadership, weapons, finance, and mercenaries on the side of those opposed to the new “Maidan” government, raising the hope, indeed expectation, among those most dissatisfied in the region, that Russia would again “do a Crimea” and annex them into the Russian Federation, where they would be protected from both Ukraine and the West.
It is worth noting that, in this state, Russia is also maintaining an active readiness posture (including large-scale military exercises during summer and fall of 2014) for quick invasion should that be decided on.
In fact, the West chose SN , as the model predicts from the preferences outlined above.
Could this be a long run outcome of the 7 While we take the first move as given in the game-tree analysis , recursive rationality can be used to evaluate whether such a move is optimal, as indeed it is in this case.
A major purpose of this analysis is to explore those questions under the ToM assumptions of agent farsightedness and rationality.
To provide context, we include a time-line of key events in Appendix 5.2.
We begin the analysis with what we consider one of the most plausible rankings of the outcomes described above from the perspective of each side, presented in the ordinal “payoff” matrix labelled “Scenario 1” below.
Note that these rankings do not reflect the preferences of the Ukrainian state or people; those only have an impact to the extent they are considered by the major actors, Russia and the West.
But the rankings are predicated on the assumption that Ukraine, or whatever part of it remains out of Russian control, continues to pursue a Western orientation, and that the West does not totally abandon independent Ukraine.
The West’s preference ordering reflects an aversion to the application of sanctions, except as a response to active Russian destabilization or invasion of Ukraine, and an even stronger aversion to providing military assistance, unless Russia invades.
Russia’s preferences reflect a total unwillingness to “let go” of Ukraine, as well as an unwillingness to accept active Western intervention, particularly in the form of military assistance to Ukraine.
The latter makes invasion the most desirable strategy for Russia, although Russia would otherwise prefer to “neutralize” Ukraine through destabilization.
For Russia, the best possible outcome is BU-DS, where the West ignores Russia’s disruption of the Ukrainian state.
Russia LG DS* IN BU ° West° SN* *† MA † 8 We consider Ukrainian leaders’ preferences in the Conclusion, and the possibility that the impact of their actions might influence the preference orderings of Russia and the West.
With our initial state and first mover , this outcome can be achieved immediately, or reached after chains of threat and counterthreat – chains of policy changes threatened or temporarily implemented.
The UO is achieved within four moves, independent of initial state and first mover.
From our initial state it takes only 1 move, followed by two optimal passes, although there are numerous 4-move paths that reach the same ultimate outcome.
We explore some of these paths to the UO in the ToM game tree in Section 3.2.
This scenario admits a number of plausible variations in the orderings.
The top of the Russian preference ordering seems clear, although the top two states might be reversed, and the ordering among the next three states could be altered, particularly as we assume that the West is unwilling to use (or, perhaps, is incapable of using) its own military forces in defense of Ukraine.
Note that here we assume that Russia would prefer to “let go” of Ukraine if the West pursues “business as usual” rather than destabilize Ukraine in the face of Western military assistance, a perhaps questionable assumption.
The West preference ordering over Russia strategies is more complicated, involving trade-offs (economic vs. geopolitical) across Russian strategies.
Still the top three states, involving “proportionate” response to Russian actions, seem relatively uncontroversial.
However, we explore variations in both preference orderings to explore the robustness of this equilibrium and to understand the impact of differences in preferences on the UO of this interaction.
The program implements a dymanic programming backward recursion in moves remaining; see the discussion in Appendix 5.4.
The same two pure strategy Nash equilibria also remain, despite LG being a dominated strategy for Russia.
The West’s willingness to escalate along with Russia, and respond strongly to an invasion by Russia, is critical in generating this more desirable equilibrium of the strategic interaction.
Russia LG DS* IN BU ° West° SN* *† MA † Indeed, as long as Russia will not seriously contemplate “letting go” of Ukraine , only the rankings among the states arising from “destabilization” and “invasion,” and their interaction with the West’s policies, can have an impact on the outcome.
This eliminates all but one NE in the simultaneous-move game, but leaves the sequential-move Ultimate Outcome unchanged.
Indeed, the UO is no longer a NE, and the NE is strictly inferior for both sides.
If Russia uniformly prefers “destabilization” to “invasion,” reversing the valuations of the states valued 4 and 5 in Scenario 2, the only impact is to eliminate the MA-IN state as a pure-strategy NE; the SN-DS Ultimate Outcome of the ToM analysis is unaffected.
This illustrates both the robustness of the UO and a significant difference between the simultaneousand sequential-move analysis of the strategic interaction in this case.
Here we can see the extra weight Russia’s preferences put on intervention in the West’s increased emphasis on the MA response.
This kind of outcome leads us to reject the NE of a simultaneous play game as a useful analytic framework for these international interactions.
Russia LG DS* IN BU ° West° SN* * MA † Thus we have a unique, from any initial state and any initial mover, equilibrium , involving ongoing active Russian destabilization of the Ukrainian polity answered by strong Western sanctions.
It can again be rapidly attained from our initial situation, and within four moves for any initial state and mover combination.
As we will see, only different West preferences, more averse both to sanctions and to providing military aid to Ukraine, can upset this stable outcome.
There are other Russian preference orderings, valuing economic ties with the West above the geopolitical situation on its southwestern boundary, but we do not consider these plausible, at least under the current Russian political leadership.
There is perhaps greater room for variation in West preferences, particularly as they are the result of negotiation and compromise among many sovereign states with numerous divergent interests.
Variations in Western preferences We have so far worked only with what we believe are the most plausible West preferences, but the strategic interaction becomes more interesting when we alter them.
Even the EU, without considering the United States position, is not the coherent decision maker that Putin’s Russia is.
Thus we explore several variations in the finer structure of West preferences to see how robust the SN-DS outcome actually is to changes in that structure.
The worst situation for the West, in any conceivable preference ordering, is to engage in hostile action when Russia “lets go,” in which case “business as usual” is a natural best state.
But as soon as Russia engages in “destabilization” or “invasion,” one might imagine both stronger and weaker responses that those assumed above.
The strongest conceivable response , given that direct military intervention on the ground is inconceivable, would hold business as usual in response to invasion or destabilization as the third and fourth worst states respectively, with MA-DS the fourth and SN-IN the fifth best responses.
Russia LG DS* IN BU ° West° SN* *† MA † This strengthening again results in the unique, stable UO, SN-DS, to which the interaction converges, within four moves, from any initial state with any first mover.
Indeed, from the actual initial state and mover , it can be achieved in the first move.
And again there are the same two pure-strategy Nash  3 1   1 1   equilibria, and a mixed-strategy equilibrium  0, ,  ,  0, ,   , of the simul 4 4   2 2   taneous move game, the Pareto optimal one of which is the UO.12 There are many variations in West preferences that favor weaker responses to Russian destabilization and/or invasion of Ukraine.
Again the UO is SN-DS, as the West still shows a taste for sanctions in response to aggressive Russian policies.
And again it can be achieved in a first move from the initial state by the West, or by no more than four moves from any initial position and first mover.
Again this UO is robust to the kinds of permutations of Russian preferences discussed above, although reversing 6 and 7 in the Russian ordering moves the NE to SN-IN; with single simultaneous moves, Russia would choose to invade.
Russia LG DS* IN BU ° West° SN* *† MA A further weakening in the West’s willingness to respond could favor “business as usual” in the face of destabilization , only supporting “sanctions” in the case of a Russian invasion of eastern Ukraine.
Thus Russia engages in intensive destabilization, while the West pretends it is not happening.
Were Russian preferences to reverse the 6 and 7 ordering as above, then another pure-strategy NE, SN-IN, appears; in a simultaneous-move interaction, the West could be caught using sanctions against an invasion despite its reluctance to do so.
But a strong West willingness to provide military assistance in case of an invasion generates a new, Pareto-inferior, NE, MA-IN, in the simultaneous-move interaction – the strongest available Western response to the strongest Russian action.
In a sequential-move framework, with its proffered opportunities and implicit threats, this negative outcome is avoided.
Russia LG DS* IN BU* °*† West° SN MA † Finally, consider the situation where the West is reluctant to provide military assistance, preferring Sanctions in the case of Invasion, and Russia decides it needs to insure Novorossiya autonomy in, or independence from, Ukraine (Scenario 8), perhaps as a first step toward annexation, as it was with Crimea in February 2014.
IN is then a dominant strategy for Russia and SN remains the West’s best response.
Here the UO, SN-IN, is achieved after three or more moves; it is also the only NE in the simultaneous move interaction.
Thus Russian military intervention is met by hand-wringing and continuing, perhaps strengthened, economic sanctions which Russia ignores in its single-minded pursuit of its primary strategic objective.
If that West preference ordering is reversed, and the West would rather provide military assistance than apply further sanctions, the UO of recursively rational sequential interaction reverts to SN-DS, as in almost all the scenarios that we have considered.
The NE also shifts, but in the other direction; MA-IN becomes the sole NE of the simultaneous-move interaction.
There are many other West preference orderings with varying degrees of aversion both to sanctions against Russia and to providing military assistance to Ukraine.
These Western preferences all imply that Russian destabilization of the Ukraine will ultimately be ignored by the West, even if early moves to impose sanctions, or even to provide military assistance to Ukraine, were to be undertaken.
The strategic structure of these interactions is such that recursively rational actors with these preferences must eventually settle on the UO, BU-DS, which abandons Ukraine to destabilization.
Analysis of ultimate outcomes The ultimate outcomes in these scenarios display a number of similar and important features.
These features are shaped by the conflicting interests reflected in Russian and Western preferences over the “states of the world,” differences most clearly expressed in the very top and the bottom four states of the preference orderings.
For the West, with its focus on commercial relations and strong aversion to military confrontation, the changes in preferences explored here have similarly little impact.
The “farsightedness” of the sequential decisions in ToM leads to compromise that settles on “sufficiently good” outcomes for each side that reflect the relative determination of, and constraints facing, the players.
Thus, the UO capture the Pareto optimal NE when it exists, and, in all our cases, a state on the Pareto frontier even when no NE are on that frontier.
Thus the possibility of a coordination trap, such as can easily occur in NE, is avoided, as we will see in the analysis of the ToM game trees below.
The interaction can be concisely summarized in a finite game tree where each rational player recursively derives, for any state in which she might find herself, the value of each possible continuation move, assuming the other player is similarly rational.
Typically, there will be multiple paths that reach the UO, involving different threats and counterthreats that support the equilibrium.
The longer the horizon of the game, the more opportunities there will be to “test” the opponent, to allow her to make a mistake, before being forced to settle into a shortest direct path to the UO.15 Here we use 4-move game trees to analyze a couple of the scenarios we have presented.
Before late August 2014, this appeared to best reflect both Western and Russian preferences.
Scenario 1 analysis In four interconnected figures , we display the possible paths from the intial state and highlight the equilibrium paths leading to the UO in our primary specification , capturing what we believe are most likely to be the actual preferences of both sides of this conflictual situation.
The decision nodes have player labels and the terminal nodes are shaded.
Scenarios 1 game matrix, notation, and tree root with optimal decisions.
In this game-tree analysis, bold-faced arrows indicate the best decision for the agent at each decision node, given that play has reached that state and the game has not terminated.
Each of these longer paths involves a ‘testing’ of the opponent, offering her a chance to make a mistake, to become trapped in a less desirable (for her) state.
Formal analysis of this possibility requires using an incomplete information framework, which we do not pursue here.
Russia then either passes, if in SN-DS, or moves to SN-DS ending the game.
If Russia openly invades , the West’s optimal decision is to ‘pass’, to maintain sanctions, realizing that Russia would rather destabilize Ukraine than engage in an on-going costly and unnecessary invasion.
Finally, the simplest equilibrium path arises when Russia, looking ahead at all possible moves and countermoves. realizes that it can do no better than SN-DS, and so ‘passes’, maintaining its destabilization policy.
Similarly the West also comes to the same realization and ‘passes’, maintaining its sanctions.
The West might be tempted to draw back in the hope that Russia would do the same, but the optimal Russian continuation forces to become the terminal state, a far worse outcome for the West.
Thus the ToM game tells fully coherent stories of how the equilibrium UO could be achieved, and each story can be checked against the historical record as it unfolds.
In this framework, we can also ask what keeps both Russia and the West from achieving their most preferred states.
The answers lie in the threats and counterthreats inherent in the interacting structure of preferences laid out in the game tree.
While the paths followed, and the stories told, would be different, reflecting the differences in the driving preference orderings, the qualitative characteristics and reasoning supporting the UO would remain the same.
Scenario 8 analysis Another, increasingly plausible, preference structure for Russia is captured in Scenario 8, where Russia ranks IN generally higher as more necessary to achieve its strategic objectives.
So we can see that, as in Scenario 1, there are multiple paths to the UO, each telling a coherent story of how the Ultimate Outcome of this strategic interaction, SN-IN, is reached, and why no other outcome is plausible given the preferences of the protagonists.
The answer again lies in the threats and counterthreats inherent in the interacting structure of preferences laid out in the game tree.
Thus the West can do no better than “pass” after the second move by Russia , whatever that move is.
Any attempt to subsequently set up a move to s5 by “passing” leads Russia to invade, or destabilize followed by invasion on the last move.
Moreover Russia’s remaining at s2 is deterred by the West’s credible threat to move to s5.
Thus each party has credible threats, or optimal preemptive moves, that block the attainment by the other of its favored outcomes.
The UO reflects their balance, as can be seen by tracing out the recursive rationality of its generation.
That process also guarantees that the UO is Pareto undominated, a situation which cannot be improved for either player without hurting the other.
The analysis presumes consequentialist rationality by the actors, and the ability to look ahead through some finite sequence of moves and countermoves , although the agents need not be especially foresighted.
This allows recursive rationality, “dynamic programming” recursion, to determine the optimal strategies, given the assumed preferences of each of the agents and hence the equilibrium path and termination state (“Ultimate Outcome” – UO) of the strategic interaction.
Our analysis shows that there are only three potential equilibria in this strategic interaction, despite the broad range of potential preference configurations studied.
Another possible UO is BU-DS, where the West believes that preserving a democratic, Western-oriented Ukraine is not worth the cost, again allowing Russia to achieve its geopolitical objectives through successful destabilization.
These West preferences shy away from any kind of military assistance to Ukraine and from the costs of sustained sanctions in the face of ongoing destabilization of Ukraine by Russia.
Hence the West returns, ultimately, to Business as Usual, despite ongoing Russian destabilization of Ukraine.
A final, and apparently increasingly plausible, configuration of preferences, reflects a Russian unwillingness to allow Ukraine to overcome the destabilization by defeating Russia’s proxies in eastern Ukraine militarily.
Such preferences are given in Scenarios 8 and 13, and lead to the UO SN-IN, where the West maintains sanctions, but Russia openly invades to insure the failure of Ukrainian military actions and the division of the Ukraine through the creation and support of an “autonomous” Novorossiya.
The open invasion of Ukraine at the end of August 2014 may reflect the achievement of this UO, if the West maintains its resolve for sanctions, or may reflect a strategic “move” on the path to SN-DS as we see in the game-tree analysis of some scenarios above.
Within the limits of the framework of this model, Ukrainian preferences are clear.
This highlights the divergence between the interests of Ukraine from those of the main protagonists, and thus the irrelevance of Ukrainian preferences for the strategic decisions being made about Ukraine’s future by both Russia and the West.
However, our analysis shows that the key to attaining the best of the three potential UOs, SN-DS, lies in persuading the West to prefer MA-IN to SN-IN,e., to be willing to provide serious military assistance.
As the events of July and August, 2014, have shown, Ukrainian actions can change the perceptions of the players, their understanding of the consequences of different policies, and hence their rankings of those consequences.
Ukraine’s slow but steady military success in those months cast doubt on the viability, the sustainability, of “freezing” the conflict in eastern Ukraine, without an overt Russian invasion in support of their proxies and agents in Donbas.
This threatened the Russian geopolitical objective of leaving Ukraine divided and under strong Russian influence; “Destabilization” as described above was becoming inadequate for that purpose.
Thus we may have seen a shift in Russian preferences from those reflected in Scenarios 1, 2, and 4 to those in Scenario 3 or Scenario 8.
Indeed, by the beginning of September 2014, it became clear that Russia was pursuing the Invasion policy discussed above, rescuing her agents and covert armed elements in eastern Ukraine from what appeared to be an impending military defeat.
This invasion has quickly reversed U ­ krainian successes, strengthening the military and bargaining position of Russia’s proxies in Eastern Ukraine, thereby all but ensuring that a “frozen conflict” is the best Ukraine can hope for.
By February 2015, with another cease-fire solidifying Russian/insurgent gains, the next move remains up to the West.
It will reveal more of the fine structure of West preferences by indicating the equilibrium path being followed.
Political divisions in Ukraine would be addressed through some form of decentralization of the unitary state through constitutional reform, new parliamentary elections, and greater local control over local finances.
Thus Russia would face diminishing influence in Ukraine, the loss of a geopolitical buffer and of a manipulable, friendly border state with an economy substantially dependent on, indeed symbiotic with, the Russian economy.
Ukraine is also considered by Russia a critical member of the Eurasian Customs Union and free trade zone, an organization that is seen as an important part of rebuilding Russian international influence.
Relative to the pre-crisis situation, this outcome is negative in both dimensions, economic and geopolitical, with the latter being far more serious, there being worse economic conditions that might be generated in other possible outcomes.
Ukraine westernizes its institutions and politics and moves toward Europe, international norms (modulus the Crimean annexation) are upheld, bloodshed is minimized, and there is no need to suffer the large economic costs associated with economic sanctions and/or military actions.
But Crimea is lost to Russia without any lasting resistance from the West. –– BU-DS Here the West pursues “ business as usual,” with the EU states in particular profiting from continuing business relationships with Russia, while Russia pursues active destabilization of the Ukrainian polity and economy, and the Crimean annexation falls from the agenda.
Thus Russia gives active assistance, including military equipment and personnel (“volunteers” many with GRU military backgrounds), to armed groups seizing gov21 Before the crisis, over 83% of Russian weapons systems depended on critical Ukrainian inputs/components.
This sustains crisis conditions in Ukraine, preventing consolidation of the central state and democratic institutions, and undercutting recovery from the ongoing recession/depression in the economy.
Embargoes of critical Ukrainian products, limitations on energy supplies, and demands for a price substantially above European for natural gas supplies, all constitute aspects of the destabilization policy, as does a continuing, high intensity propaganda campaign stirring fear in eastern Ukraine and hate in Russia for the new Ukrainian government.
Propaganda and disinformation, both internal and external, provide a shield against Western influences and information.
In this situation, Ukraine struggles to consolidate a functional national government, while waging a prolonged war, without significant Western assistance, on its own territory against Russian proxies.
Economic and institutional reform toward European norms remains extremely difficult and slow, if not absolutely impossible.
If, despite active Russian support for the insurrection, Ukraine achieves a military victory, it will be at the cost of vast devastation in its east, with little prospect of support from the “business as usual” West.
More likely is a “frozen conflict” as in Moldova , Azerbaijan , and Georgia (Ossetia and Abkhazia), with Russia controlling the situation with “police forces” as the leading “peacekeeper” under OSCE auspices.
This situation is perhaps the best of all for Russia, as it maintains the benefits of integration in the world economy while blocking the movement of Ukraine toward Europe.
For the West, while economically lucrative, this situation poses challenges to its core values and understanding of how the world should work – conceptions of human rights, respect for national boundaries, and the diplomatic resolution of disputes are all egregiously violated. –– BU-IN In this state, the West’s “business as usual” strategy is maintained in the face of an open Russian cross-border military incursion into Ukraine.
Responding to calls for help from its armed agents in eastern Ukraine , and claiming a “humanitarian crisis,” Russia sends its military forces with full air cover across the border, destroying the Ukrainian air force and driving the Ukrainian army out of at least those two provinces, liberating the “Russian people” who live there.
This sets the stage for the creation of an independent state, Novorossiya, which will petition for admission into the Russian Federation, just as Crimea and Sevastopol successfully did in March 2014.
At a minimum, it creates a “frozen conflict” state on the Ukrainian border, splitting off a piece of Ukraine that can only survive under Russian protection.
The politi184 Richard E Ericson and Lester A Zeager cal and economic consequences for independent Ukraine are even more dire than under BU-DS, with major portions of industry (in particular coal, metallurgy, and machine building) lost, and Russian economic warfare undercutting the viability of much of the rest of the economy.
With the Western BU strategy indicating an abandonment of independent Ukraine, Ukraine is apt to reverse its recent orientation and return to the Russian orbit in the hope of regaining its industrial east, if not Crimea.
For Russia, this is a near ideal scenario, achieving all Putin’s strategic goals, albeit at a high cost in terms of military operations, support for the destroyed eastern Ukraine, and international reputation, influence, and ability to use international institutions in the future.
For the West, this is one of the worst possible outcomes, although arguably better than being involved in active combat with Russia.
While economic costs to the West are low, geopolitical costs are extremely high.
Fundamental principles of the post-WW2 international order are violated, Western promises shown worthless, and international institutions of dispute resolution and peacekeeping meaningless. –– SN-LG This is a state in which the West is imposing costly (to itself as well as Russia) sanctions, while Russia has “let go” of independent Ukraine, if not Crimea, allowing the consolidation of the new, weak, pro-European government attempting to steer Ukraine toward the European Union.
The sanctions, were this to be the final outcome, would be a continuing response to the annexation of Crimea by Russia.
This policy pair may seem more plausible as an interim state, rather than as the final outcome.
This is a desirable outcome for Ukraine, having all the advantages of BU-LG plus the albeit small hope of getting back Crimea.
As Ukraine “Europeanizes,” reforming both politically and economically, Russia will lose influence in Ukraine, will lose a geopolitical buffer, and will lose a manipulable border state with an economy substantially interdependent with the Russian economy.
This is one of the worst outcomes possible for Russia, compounding the direct economic and geopolitical costs of “losing” Ukraine with the costly sanctions imposed by the West.
Those costs, in any “sanctions” state, will be compounded by Russia’s “counter-sanctions” implemented to maintain face.
Although its geopolitical objectives are met, it suffers from the not insubstantial costs of imposing sanctions on Russia and bearing Russian counter-sanctions.
These sanctions naturally cause costly counter-sanctions by Russia, magnifying the negative economic impact on both parties.
Russian actions, and the negative consequences for Ukraine in this state are outlined above.
While Russia suffers aggravated economic costs, it achieves its primary geopolitical objective of preventing a successful, Western oriented, democratically united and led Ukraine on its border, as well as keeping the militarily significant strategic province of Crimea.
Thus, despite the economic and international reputational costs, this situation ranks high in the Russian preference ordering.
For the West, this is a state in which it consistently pursues its geopolitical imperatives while limiting its sacrifice in doing so.
Thus it ranks high in the West preference ordering. –– SN-IN In this state Russia has launched, and maintains an active military intervention in eastern Ukraine – “peacekeeping” to prevent a Ukrainian military victory over the Russian led, equipped, and financed separatist insurrection in Donetsk and Lukhansk provinces – as well as economic warfare against the Ukrainian state.
The West’s response is further hand-ringing and lamentation and some strengthening of economic sanctions, answered in kind by Russia.
Geopolitically, the West does marginally better in maintaining commitment to the sanctity of international borders (no seizure of territory by force), while Russia suffers all the geopolitical costs, outlined above, of “letting go” of Ukraine.
And these costs are cemented in place by the Ukrainian hostility generated by the loss of tourismand energyrich Crimea.
Thus the costs to Russia are raised in both dimensions, while the West gains geopolitically (seriousness of intentions, commitment to the established international order, credibility of commitments, etc.), if at a substantial increase in economic costs, including those from Russian counter-sanctions.
The direct cost of such assistance to both sides is apt to be rising as Russia increases its provision of military support to the insurrection, even if refraining from direct military intervention across the border. –– MA-IN This is a “brink of war” state of the conflict.
Russia has launched a cross border invasion of Ukraine, albeit with limited objectives as described above, while the West has added direct military support, short of combat forces , to Ukraine while continuing to impose significant economic sanctions on Russia.
Ukraine will suffer as described above, but will be able to put up much stiffer resistance to the Russian invasion, imposing substantially higher costs on Russia.
The West will bear the same costs and benefits as in MA-DS, while substantially raising the costs to Russia which will now include military losses.
While Russia can win militarily, separating out an independent Novorossiya, or annexing it like Crimea, that would be incredibly costly and have potentially extremely serious other consequences, beyond what we consider here.
Thus Russia seeks to achieve, albeit at higher cost, what it could achieve from destabilization without West’s military assistance to Ukraine.
This state rises dramatically in the West preference ordering as Russia’s invasion justifies military assistance and the costs it imposes.
These illustrate the robustness of the ToM equilibria that we find and their significant differences from standard Nash equilibria.
These games capture, in our view, all of the plausible and some interesting, if less plausible, configurations of Western and Russian preferences over final outcomes in this crisis.
They illustrate a remarkable robustness of the Ultimate Outcome to variations in Russia preferences, and its dependence on the willingness of the West to confront Russian aggression with direct military assistance to Ukraine.
Computing UO in ToM The ultimate outcomes in the 2-player, sequential-move strategic game of revised ToM are calculated using a Gauss Language program, “Willson_ToM.prg,” adapted from a Pascal program written by Steven J Willson, and shared with us.
At each stage (i.e., number of “moves” remaining) it compares the the ultimate payoffs for the moving player from each branch to which she might move; those payoffs are known recursively from the prior stage , calculated in turn from the results of its prior stage , etc., going back to the zero-moves-remaining state, which gives the players the payoffs of the current state.
The program tracks the state-matrix index of the optimal move at each stage and the payoffs associated with that optimal state.
Thus the program determines the best policy for the player whose turn it is to move, and the ultimate payoff to that policy choice , given subsequent optimal play by both players on their sequential turns at each stage.
Convergence to the UO is seen when, after some finite number of moves, the optimal decision leaves the state unchanged for every longer horizon.
The program and its computational modules, which will run in GAUSS 6 through GAUSS 16, are available on request from the authors.
Williams, P., Goldstein, D., and Shafritz, J , Classic Readings in International Relations, 2nd Ed.
