JACQUES BAUD The Military Situation in the Ukraine—An Update April 11, 2022 Jacques Baud The Operational Situation As of March 25, 2022, our analysis of the situation confirms the observations and conclusions made in mid-March.
This offensive follows, to the letter, the objectives defined by Vladimir Putin on February 24.
But, listening only to their own bias, Western “experts” and politicians have gotten it into their heads that Russia’s objective is to take over the Ukraine and overthrow its government.
Applying a very Western logic, they see Kiev as the “center of gravity” of Ukrainian forces.
According to Clausewitz, the “center of gravity” is the element from which a belligerent derives his strength and ability to act, and is therefore the primary objective of an adversary’s strategy.
This is why Westerners have systematically tried to take control of capitals in the wars they have fought.
Trained and advised by NATO experts, the Ukrainian General Staff has, predictably enough, applied the same logic, focusing on strengthening the defense of Kiev and its surroundings, while leaving its troops helpless in the Donbass, along the axis of the main Russian effort.
If one had listened carefully to Vladimir Putin, one would have realized that the strategic objective of the Russian coalition is not to take over the Ukraine, but to remove any threat to the Russian-speaking population of the Donbass.
According to this general objective, the “real” center of gravity that the Russian coalition is trying to target is the bulk of the Ukrainian armed forces massed in the southsoutheast of the country , and not Kiev.
Convinced that the Russian offensive is aimed at Kiev, Western experts have quite logically concluded that the Russians are stalling, and that their offensive is doomed to failure because they will not be able to hold the country in the long term.
That being said, the Western narrative about a Russian offensive that is bogged down, and whose successes are meager, is also part of the propaganda war waged by both sides.
Thus, on February 23rd, on France 5 , the journalist Elise Vincent evaluated the territory taken by the Russian coalition as the equivalent of Switzerland or the Netherlands.
Thus, if the map of the French Ministry of Armed Forces gives a slightly more honest picture of reality, it also carefully avoids mentioning the Ukrainian forces encircled in the Kramatorsk cauldron.
RN [ ve: | Gros de l'armée ukrainienne — Poussée de l'armée russe 3 Poussée des forces du Donbass s* Avance maximale de la coalition russe The Situation as of March 25, 2022.
The red dotted line shows the maximum advance of Russian coalition forces.
Moreover, Ukrainian forces are never indicated on our maps, as this would show that they were not deployed on the Russian border in February 2022, but were regrouped in the south of the country, in preparation for their offensive, the initial phase of which began on February 16th.
This confirms that Russia was only reacting to a situation initiated by the West, by way of the Ukraine, as we shall see.
At present, it is these forces that are encircled in the Kramatorsk cauldron and are being methodically fragmented and neutralized, little by little, in an incremental way, by the Russian coalition.
The vagueness maintained in the West about the situation of the Ukrainian forces, has other effects.
Thus, instead of encouraging a negotiation process, the West seeks to prolong the war.
This is why the European Union and some of its member countries have sent weapons and are encouraging the civilian population and volunteers of all kinds to go and fight, often without training and without any real command structure—with deadly consequences.
We know that in a conflict, each party tends to inform in order to give a favorable image of its actions.
However, the image we have of the situation and of the Ukrainian forces is based exclusively on data provided by Kiev.
It masks the profound deficiencies of the Ukrainian leadership, even though it was trained and advised by NATO military.
Thus, military logic would have the forces caught in the Kramatorsk cauldron withdraw to a line at the Dnieper, for example, in order to regroup and conduct a counteroffensive.
Even back in 2014 and 2015, a close examination of the operations showed that the Ukrainians were applying “Western-style” schemes, totally unsuited to the circumstances, and in the face of a more imaginative, more flexible opponent who possessed lighter leadership structures.
In the end, the partial view of the battlefield given to us by our media has made it impossible for the West to help the Ukrainian general staff make the right decisions.
And it has led the West to believe that the obvious strategic objective is Kiev; that “demilitarization” is aimed at the Ukraine’s membership in NATO; and that “denazification” is aimed at toppling Zelensky.
This legend was fueled by Vladimir Putin’s appeal to the Ukrainian military to disobey, which was interpreted as a call to overthrow the government.
However, this appeal was aimed at the Ukrainian forces deployed in the Donbass to surrender without fighting.
The Western interpretation caused the Ukrainian government to misjudge Russian objectives and misuse its potential of winning.
Thus, the Russian coalition was never “on the run” or “stopped” by heroic resistance—it simply did not attack where it was expected.
We did not want to listen to what Vladimir Putin had explained to us very clearly.
This is why the West has thus become—volens nolens—the main architect of the Ukrainian defeat that is taking shape.
Paradoxically, it is probably because of our self-proclaimed “experts” and recreational strategists on our television sets that the Ukraine is in this situation today.
The Conduct of Battle As for the course of operations, the analyses presented in our media come most often from politicians or so-called military experts, who relay Ukrainian propaganda.
The problem here is that our strategists in neckties are clearly trying to overdramatize the situation in order to exclude any negotiated solution.
This development, however, is prompting some Western military personnel to speak out and offer a more nuanced judgment.
While the West likes to “soften up” the battlefield with intensive and prolonged strikes, before sending in ground-troops, the Russians prefer a less destructive, but more troop-intensive approach.
On France 5, the journalist Mélanie Tarvant presented the death of Russian generals on the battlefield as proof of the destabilization of the Russian army.
But this is a profound misunderstanding of the traditions and modes of operation of the Russian army.
This explains the high losses in the upper echelons of command, already observed in Afghanistan—but it also tells of the much more rigorous selection of staffpersonnel than in the West.
Furthermore, the DIA analyst noted that “the vast majority of the airstrikes are over the battlefield, with Russian aircraft providing ‘close air support’ to ground forces.
In fact, Russian operations differ fundamentally from the Western concept of the same.
The West’s obsession with having no fatalities in their own forces leads them to operations that are primarily in the form of very lethal air strikes.
This is why, in Afghanistan or in the Sahel, Westerners killed more civilians than terrorists did.
This is why Western countries engaged in Afghanistan, the Middle East and North Africa no longer publish the number of civilian casualties caused by their strikes.
One only has to look at a map of linguistic zones to see that the Russian coalition operates almost exclusively in the Russian-speaking zone; thus, among populations that are generally favorable to it.
Conversely, it is for the same reason—but in a different way—that the Ukraine has deployed its ultra-nationalist paramilitary fighters in major cities, such as Mariupol or Kharkov—without emotional or cultural ties to the local population, these militias can fight even at the cost of heavy civilian casualties.
The atrocities that are currently being uncovered remain hidden by the French-speaking media, for fear of losing support for the Ukraine, as noted by media close to the Republicans in the United States.
After “decapitation” strikes in the first minutes of the offensive, the Russian operational strategy was to bypass the urban centers, and to envelop the Ukrainian army, “pinned down” by the forces of the Donbass republics.
It is important to remember that the “decapitation” is not intended to annihilate the general staff or the government , but to sunder the leadership structures so as to prevent the coordinated maneuver of forces.
On the contrary, the aim is to preserve the leadership structures themselves in order to be able to negotiate a way out of the crisis.
On March 25, 2022, after having sealed the cauldron of Kramatorsk which denied any possibility of retreat to the Ukrainians and having taken most of the cities of Kharkov and Marioupol, Russia has practically fulfilled its objectives—all that remains is to concentrate its efforts on reducing the pockets of resistance.
Thus, contrary to what the Western press has claimed, this is not a reorientation or a resizing of its offensive, but the methodical implementation of the objectives announced on February 24.
The Role of the Volunteers A particularly disturbing aspect of this conflict is the attitude of European governments that allow or encourage their citizens to go and fight in the Ukraine.
Volodymyr Zelensky’s call to join the International Legion for the Territorial Defense of Ukraine, which he recently created, has been greeted with enthusiasm by European countries.
Encouraged by the media that present a routed Russian army, many of these young people head off, imagining they are going—literally—on a hunting trip.
Testimonies show that these “amateurs” often end up as “cannon fodder,” without having any real impact on the outcome of the conflict.
The experience of recent conflicts shows that the arrival of foreign fighters brings nothing to a conflict, except to increase its duration and lethality.
Moreover, the arrival of several hundred Islamist fighters from the Idlib region, an area under the control and protection of the Western coalition in Syria (and also the area in which two Islamic State leaders were killed by the Americans) should arouse our concern.
Indeed, the weapons we are very liberally supplying to the Ukraine are already partly in the hands of criminal individuals and organizations and are already beginning to pose a security problem for the authorities in Kiev.
Not to mention the fact that the weapons that are being touted as effective against Russian aircraft could eventually threaten our military and civilian aircraft.
The volunteer proudly presented by the RTBF on the 7:30m. news of March 8, 2022 was an admirer of the “Corps Franc Wallonie,” Belgian volunteers who served the Third Reich; and he illustrates the type of people attracted to the Ukraine.
Distributing weapons indiscriminately could well make the EU—volens nolens— a supporter of extremism and even international terrorism.
The result—we are adding misery to misery, in order to satisfy the European elites more than the Ukraine itself.
Western Intelligence, Ignored by Policymakers Military documents found in Ukrainian headquarters in the south of the country confirm that the Ukraine was preparing to attack the Donbass; and that the firing observed by OSCE observers as early as February 16 heralded an imminent outbreak in days or weeks.
Here, some introspection is necessary for the West—either its intelligence services did not see what was happening and they are thus very bad, or the political decision-makers chose not to listen to them.
We know that Russian intelligence services have far superior analytical capabilities than their Western counterparts.
We also know that the American and German intelligence services had very well understood the situation, since the end of 2021, and knew that the Ukraine was preparing to attack the Donbass.
This allows us to deduce that the American and European political leaders deliberately pushed the Ukraine into a conflict that they knew was lost in advance —for the sole purpose of dealing a political blow to Russia.
The reason Zelensky did not deploy his forces to the Russian border, and repeatedly stated that his large neighbor would not attack him, was presumably because he thought he was relying on Western deterrence.
This is what he told CNN on March 20th—he was clearly told that the Ukraine would not be part of NATO, but that publicly they would say the opposite.
The objective was the closure of the North Stream 2 gas pipeline, announced on February 8th, by Joe Biden, during the visit of Olaf Scholz; and which was followed by a barrage of sanctions.
Broken Diplomacy Clearly, since the end of 2021, no effort has been made by the West to reactivate the Minsk agreements, as evidenced by the reports of visits and telephone conversations, notably between Emmanuel Macron and Vladimir Putin.
However, France, as guarantor of the Minsk Agreements, and as a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, has not respected its commitments, which has led to the situation that the Ukraine is experiencing today.
There is even a feeling that the West has sought to add fuel to the fire since 2014.
Thus, Vladimir Putin’s placing of nuclear forces on alert on February 27 was presented by our media and politicians as an irrational act or blackmail.
What is forgotten is that it followed the thinly veiled threat made by Jean-Yves Le Drian, three days earlier, that NATO could use nuclear weapons.
It is very likely that Putin did not take this “threat” seriously, but wanted to push Western countries— and France in particular—to abandon the use of excessive language.
The Vulnerability of Europeans to Manipulation is Increasing Today, the perception propagated by our media is that the Russian offensive has broken down; that Vladimir Putin is crazy, irrational and therefore ready to do anything to break the deadlock in which he supposedly finds himself.
Yet there is absolutely no indication that the Russians are using such weapons.
Besides, the Russians finished destroying their stockpiles in 2017, while the Americans have not yet destroyed theirs.
Jacques Baud is a former colonel of the General Staff, ex-member of the Swiss strategic intelligence, and specialist on Eastern countries.
As a UN expert on rule of law and security institutions, he designed and led the first multidimensional UN intelligence unit in the Sudan.
He has worked for the African Union and was for 5 years responsible for the fight, at NATO, against the proliferation of small arms.
Within NATO, he followed the 2014 Ukrainian crisis and later participated in programs to assist the Ukraine.
He is the author of several books on intelligence, war and terrorism, in particular Le Détournement published by SIGEST, Gouverner par les fake news, L’affaire Navalny.
This article appears through the gracious courtesy of Centre Francais de Recherche sur le Renseignement, Paris.
The Road To War For years, from Mali to Afghanistan, I have worked for peace and risked my life for it.
It is therefore not a question of justifying war, but of understanding what led us to it.
I notice that the “experts” who take turns on television analyze the situation on the basis of dubious information, most often hypotheses erected as facts—and then we no longer manage to understand what is happening.
The problem is not so much to know who is right in this conflict, but to question the way our leaders make their decisions.
It starts with those who for the last eight years have been talking about “separatists” or “independentists” from Donbass.
The qualifier “pro-Russian” suggests that Russia was a party to the conflict, which was not the case, and the term “Russian speakers” would have been more honest.
Moreover, these referendums were conducted against the advice of Vladimir Putin.
In fact, these Republics were not seeking to separate from Ukraine, but to have a status of autonomy, guaranteeing them the use of the Russian language as an official language.
For the first legislative act of the new government resulting from the overthrow of President Yanukovych, was the abolition, on February 23, 2014, of the Kivalov-Kolesnichenko law of 2012 that made Russian an official language.
A bit like if putschists decided that French and Italian would no longer be official languages in Switzerland.
At the end of summer 2014, only the selfproclaimed Republics of Donetsk and Lugansk remained.
At this stage, too rigid and engrossed in a doctrinaire approach to the art of operations, the Ukrainian general staff subdued the enemy without managing to prevail.
The examination of the course of the fighting in 2014-2016 in the Donbass shows that the Ukrainian general staff systematically and mechanically applied the same operative schemes.
With a more flexible and less doctrinaire approach, the rebels were able to exploit the inertia of Ukrainian forces to repeatedly “trap” them.
In 2014, when I was at NATO, I was responsible for the fight against the proliferation of small arms, and we were trying to detect Russian arms deliveries to the rebels, to see if Moscow was involved.
The information we received then came almost entirely from Polish intelligence services and did not “fit” with the information coming from the OSCE—despite rather crude allegations, there were no deliveries of weapons and military equipment from Russia.
The rebels were armed thanks to the defection of Russian-speaking Ukrainian units that went over to the rebel side.
As Ukrainian failures continued, tank, artillery and anti-aircraft battalions swelled the ranks of the autonomists.
But just after signing the Minsk 1 Agreements, the Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko launched a massive anti-terrorist operation (ATO/AHTuTepopucTru4Ha orrepariis) against the Donbass.
It is essential to recall here that Minsk 1 and Minsk 2 (February 2015) Agreements did not provide for the separation or independence of the Republics, but their autonomy within the framework of Ukraine.
Those who have read the Agreements (there are very, very, very few of those who actually have) will note that it is written in all letters that the status of the Republics was to be negotiated between Kiev and the representatives of the Republics, for an internal solution to the Ukraine.
That is why since 2014, Russia has systematically demanded their implementation while refusing to be a party to the negotiations, because it was an internal matter of the Ukraine.
On the other side, the West—led by France—systematically tried to replace the Minsk Agreements with the “Normandy format,” which put Russians and Ukrainians face-to-face.
Moreover, OSCE observers have never observed the slightest trace of Russian units operating in the Donbass.
For example, the United States intelligence map published by the Washington Post on December 3, 2021 does not show Russian troops in the Donbass.
In October 2015, Vasyl Hrytsak, director of the Ukrainian Security Service , confessed that only 56 Russian fighters had been observed in the Donbass.
This was exactly comparable to the Swiss who went to fight in Bosnia on weekends, in the 1990s, or the French who go to fight in the Ukraine today.
In fact, the army was undermined by the corruption of its cadres and no longer enjoyed the support of the population.
According to a British Home Office report, in the March/April 2014 recall of reservists, 70 percent did not show up for the first session, 80 percent for the second, 90 percent for the third, and 95 percent for the fourth.
In October/November 2017, 70% of conscripts did not show up for the “Fall 2017” recall campaign.
This is not counting suicides and desertions (often over to the autonomists), which reached up to 30 percent of the workforce in the ATO area.
Young Ukrainians refused to go and fight in the Donbass and preferred emigration, which also explains, at least partially, the demographic deficit of the country.
Having already worked on similar projects within the framework of the United Nations, I was asked by NATO to participate in a program to restore the image of the Ukrainian armed forces.
But this is a longterm process and the Ukrainians wanted to move quickly.
So, to compensate for the lack of soldiers, the Ukrainian government resorted to paramilitary militias.
They are essentially composed of foreign mercenaries, often extreme right-wing militants.
In 2020, they constituted about 40 percent of the Ukrainian forces and numbered about 102,000 men, according to Reuters.
They were armed, financed and trained by the United States, Great Britain, Canada and France.
Western countries have thus clearly created and supported Ukrainian far-right militias.
In October 2021, the Jerusalem Post sounded the alarm by denouncing the Centuria project.
These militias had been operating in the Donbass since 2014, with Western support.
Even if one can argue about the term “Nazi,” the fact remains that these militias are violent, convey a nauseating ideology and are virulently anti-Semitic.
Their anti-Semitism is more cultural than political, which is why the term “Nazi” is not really appropriate.
Their hatred of the Jew stems from the great famines of the 1920s and 1930s in the Ukraine, resulting from Stalin’s confiscation of crops to finance the modernization of the Red Army.
This genocide—known in the Ukraine as the Holodomor—was perpetrated by the NKVD , whose upper echelons of leadership were mainly composed of Jews.
This is why, today, Ukrainian extremists are asking Israel to apologize for the crimes of communism, as the Jerusalem Post notes.
These militias, originating from the far-right groups that animated the Euromaidan revolution in 2014, are composed of fanatical and brutal individuals.
The best known of these is the Azov Regiment, whose emblem is reminiscent of the 2nd SS Das Reich Panzer Division, which is revered in the Ukraine for liberating Kharkov from the Soviets in 1943, before carrying out the 1944 Oradour-sur-Glane massacre in France.
Among the famous figures of the Azov regiment was the opponent Roman Protassevitch, arrested in 2021 by the Belarusian authorities following the case of RyanAir flight FR4978.
On May 23, 2021, the deliberate hijacking of an airliner by a MiG-29—supposedly with Putin’s approval—was mentioned as a reason for arresting Protassevich, although the information available at the time did not confirm this scenario at all.
But then it was necessary to show that President Lukashenko was a thug and Protassevich a “journalist” who loved democracy.
However, a rather revealing investigation produced by an American NGO in 2020 highlighted Protassevitch’s far-right militant activities.
The Western conspiracy movement then started, and unscrupulous media “air-brushed” his biography.
Finally, in January 2022, the ICAO report was published and showed that despite some procedural errors, Belarus acted in accordance with the rules in force and that the MiG-29 took off 15 minutes after the RyanAir pilot decided to land in Minsk.
Protassevitch, cruelly tortured by the Belarusian police, was now free.
Those who would like to correspond with him, can go on his Twitter account.
The characterization of the Ukrainian paramilitaries as “Nazis” or “neo-Nazis” is considered Russian propaganda.
But that’s not the view of the Times of Israel, the Simon Wiesenthal Center or the West Point Academy’s Center for Counterterrorism.
But that’s still debatable, because in 2014, Newsweek magazine seemed to associate them more with... the Islamic State.
But while the Swiss government has been very quick to take sanctions against Russia, it has not adopted any against the Ukraine, which has been massacring its own population since 2014.
In fact, those who defend human rights in the Ukraine have long condemned the actions of these groups, but have not been supported by our governments.
Because, in reality, we are not trying to help the Ukraine, but to fight Russia.
The integration of these paramilitary forces into the National Guard was not at all accompanied by a “denazification,” as some claim.
A militia group Made regiment; from the Red Army; Declared a neo-Nazi that emerged integrated into army later responsible organization by the World from Svoboda. by the Minsiter of the for the massacre, Jewish Council; deemed contrary Its members form Interior.
It is organized into 3 army corps and composed of maneuver formations (tanks, heavy artillery, missiles, etc.). e The National Guard, which depends on the Ministry of the Interior and is organized into 5 territorial commands.
The National Guard is therefore a territorial defense force that is not part of the Ukrainian army.
It includes paramilitary militias, called *volunteer battalions"" , also known by the evocative name of “reprisal battalions,"" and composed of infantry.
Primarily trained for urban combat, they now defend cities such as Kharkov, Mariupol, Odessa, Kiev, etc.
The War As a former head of the Warsaw Pact forces in the Swiss strategic intelligence service, I observe with sadness—but not astonishment—that our services are no longer able to understand the military situation in Ukraine.
The self-proclaimed ""experts"" who parade on our screens tirelessly relay the same information modulated by the claim that Russia—and Vladimir Putin—is irrational.
The Outbreak Of War Since November 2021, the Americans have been constantly threatening a Russian invasion of the Ukraine.
On that day, Volodymyr Zelensky issued a decree for the recapture of the Crimea, and began to deploy his forces to the south of the country.
At the same time, several NATO exercises were conducted between the Black Sea and the Baltic Sea, accompanied by a significant increase in reconnaissance flights along the Russian border.
Russia then conducted several exercises to test the operational readiness of its troops and to show that it was following the evolution of the situation.
Things calmed down until October-November with the end of the ZAPAD 21 exercises, whose troop movements were interpreted as a reinforcement for an offensive against the Ukraine.
However, even the Ukrainian authorities refuted the idea of Russian preparations for a war, and Oleksiy Reznikov, Ukrainian Minister of Defense, states that there had been no change on its border since the spring.
In violation of the Minsk Agreements, the Ukraine was conducting air operations in Donbass using drones, including at least one strike against a fuel depot in Donetsk in October 2021.
The American press noted this, but not the Europeans; and no one condemned these violations.
On February 7, during his visit to Moscow, Emmanuel Macron reaffirmed to Vladimir Putin his commitment to the Minsk Agreements, a commitment he would repeat after his meeting with Volodymyr Zelensky the next day.
Vladimir Putin noted that Macron had made empty promises and that the West was not ready to enforce the agreements, as it had been doing for eight years.
The Russian Parliament became alarmed; and on February 15 asked Vladimir Putin to recognize the independence of the Republics, which he refused to do.
On 17 February, President Joe Biden announced that Russia would attack the Ukraine in the next few days.
But since the 16th, the artillery shelling of the population of Donbass increased dramatically, as the daily reports of the OSCE observers show.
Naturally, neither the media, nor the European Union, nor NATO, nor any Western government reacts or intervenes.
In fact, it seems that the European Union and some countries have deliberately kept silent about the massacre of the Donbass population, knowing that this would provoke a Russian intervention.
On 18 January, Donbass fighters intercepted saboteurs, who spoke Polish and were equipped with Western equipment and who were seeking to create chemical incidents in Gorlivka.
They could have been CIA mercenaries, led or “advised” by Americans and composed of Ukrainian or European fighters, to carry out sabotage actions in the Donbass Republics.
The massive increase in shelling against the population of Donbass on February 16 told the Russians that a major offensive was imminent.
This is what led Putin to recognize the independence of the Republics and to consider an intervention under Article 51 of the UN Charter.
But he knew that whatever its nature or scale, the intervention would trigger a storm of sanctions.
Therefore, whether Russian intervention were limited to the Donbass or went further to put pressure on the West for the status of the Ukraine, the price to pay would be the same.
On that day, he agreed to the request of the Duma and recognized the independence of the two Donbass Republics and, at the same time, he signed friendship and assistance treaties with them.
The Ukrainian artillery bombardment of the Donbass population continued, and, on 23 February, the two Republics asked for military assistance from Russia.
On 24 February, Vladimir Putin invoked Article 51 of the United Nations Charter, which provides for mutual military assistance in the framework of a defensive alliance.
In order to make the Russian intervention totally illegal in the eyes of the public we deliberately hid the fact that the war actually started on February 16.
The Ukrainian army was preparing to attack the Donbass as early as 2021, as some Russian and European intelligence services were well aware.
So, it is not a question of taking over the Ukraine, nor even, presumably, of occupying it; and certainly not of destroying it.
But fairly quickly, the course of the operation allows us to understand how the strategic objectives were translated on the operational level.
Demilitarization The Russian offensive was carried out in a very “classic” manner.
Initially—as the Israelis had done in 1967—with the destruction on the ground of the air force in the very first hours.
In the north, the Chernobyl power plant was occupied immediately to prevent acts of sabotage.
The images of Ukrainian and Russian soldiers guarding the plant together are of course not shown.
The idea that Russia is trying to take over Kiev, the capital, to eliminate Zelensky, comes typically from the West—that is what they did in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, and what they wanted to do in Syria with the help of the Islamic State.
Instead, Russia seeks to keep him in power by pushing him to negotiate, by surrounding Kiev.
Many Western commentators were surprised that the Russians continued to seek a negotiated solution while conducting military operations.
The explanation lies in the Russian strategic outlook since the Soviet era.
This allows one to create pressure on the adversary and push him to negotiate.
The bulk of the Ukrainian army was deployed in the south of the country in preparation for a major operation against the Donbass.
This is why Russian forces were able to encircle it from the beginning of March in the “cauldron” between Slavyansk, Kramatorsk and Severodonetsk, with a thrust from the East through Kharkov and another from the South from Crimea.
Troops from the Donetsk and Lugansk Republics are complementing the Russian forces with a push from the East.
At this stage, Russian forces are slowly tightening the noose, but are no longer under time pressure.
Their demilitarization goal is all but achieved and the remaining Ukrainian forces no longer have an operational and strategic command structure.
The “slowdown” that our “experts” attribute to poor logistics is only the consequence of having achieved their objectives.
Russia does not seem to want to engage in an occupation of the entire Ukrainian territory.
In fact, it seems that Russia is trying to limit its advance to the linguistic border of the country.
Our media speak of indiscriminate bombardments against the civilian population, especially in Kharkov, and Dantean images are broadcast in a loop.
However, Gonzalo Lira, a Latin American who lives there, presents us with a calm city on March 10 and March 11.
It is true that it is a large city and we do not see everything—but this seems to indicate that we are not in the total war that we are served continuously on our screens.
As for the Donbass Republics, they have “liberated” their own territories and are fighting in the city of Mariupol.
Denazification In cities like Kharkov, Mariupol and Odessa, the defense is provided by paramilitary militias.
They know that the objective of *denazification"" is aimed primarily at them.
This is why Russia is seeking to create humanitarian corridors to empty cities of civilians and leave only the militias, to fight them more easily.
Conversely, these militias seek to keep civilians in the cities in order to dissuade the Russian army from fighting there.
This is why they are reluctant to implement these corridors and do everything to ensure that Russian efforts are unsuccessful— they can use the civilian population as “human shields.
Videos showing civilians trying to leave Mariupol and beaten up by fighters of the Azov regiment are of course carefully censored here.
It was therefore forbidden to glorify it, and “posts” that were favorable to it were systematically banned.
But on February 24, Facebook changed its policy and allowed posts favorable to the militia.
In the same spirit, in March, the platform authorized, in the former Eastern countries, calls for the murder of Russian soldiers and leaders.
It is this image that led the European Union to finance the distribution of arms to the civilian population.
In my capacity as head of peacekeeping doctrine at the UN, I worked on the issue of civilian protection.
We found that violence against civilians occurred in very specific contexts.
In particular, when weapons are abundant and there are no command structures.
By arming citizens in a haphazard manner, as is currently the case, the EU is turning them into combatants, with the consequential effect of making them potential targets.
Moreover, without command, without operational goals, the distribution of arms leads inevitably to settling of scores, banditry and actions that are more deadly than effective.
This is what happened in Tawarga from 11 to 13 August 2011, where 30,000 black Africans were massacred with weapons parachuted by France.
By the way, the British Royal Institute for Strategic Studies does not see any added value in these arms deliveries.
Moreover, by delivering arms to a country at war, one exposes oneself to being considered a belligerent.
The Russian strikes of March 13, 2022, against the Mykolayev air base follow Russian warnings that arms shipments would be treated as hostile targets.
The EU is repeating the disastrous experience of the Third Reich in the final hours of the Battle of Berlin.
War must be left to the military and when one side has lost, it must be admitted.
But we are doing exactly the opposite—we are pushing citizens to go and fight and at the same time, Facebook authorizes calls for the murder of Russian soldiers and leaders.
Some intelligence services see this irresponsible decision as a way to use the Ukrainian population as cannon fodder to fight Vladimir Putin's Russia.
This kind of murderous decision should have been left to the colleagues of Ursula von der Leyen's grandfather.
It would have been better to engage in negotiations and thus obtain guarantees for the civilian population than to add fuel to the fire.
The Maternity Hospital At Mariupol It is important to understand beforehand that it is not the Ukrainian army that is defending Marioupol, but the Azov militia, composed of foreign mercenaries.
On March 8, the independent Russian media Lenta.ru, published the testimony of civilians from Marioupol who told that the maternity hospital was taken over by the militia of the Azov regiment, and who drove out the civilian occupants by threatening them with their weapons.
They confirmed the statements of the Russian ambassador a few hours earlier.
The hospital in Mariupol occupies a dominant position, perfectly suited for the installation of anti-tank weapons and for observation.
According to CNN, 17 people were wounded, but the images do not show any casualties in the building and there is no evidence that the victims mentioned are related to this strike.
This does not prevent the leaders of the EU from seeing this as a war crime.
But the sequence of events tends to confirm that Russian forces struck a position of the Azov regiment and that the maternity ward was then free of civilians.
The problem is that the paramilitary militias that defend the cities are encouraged by the international community not to respect the customs of war.
It seems that the Ukrainians have replayed the scenario of the Kuwait City maternity hospital in 1990, which was totally staged by the firm Hill & Knowlton for $10. million in order to convince the United Nations Security Council to intervene in Iraq for Operation Desert Shield/Storm.
Western politicians have accepted civilian strikes in the Donbass for eight years, without adopting any sanctions against the Ukrainian government.
We have long since entered a dynamic where Western politicians have agreed to sacrifice international law towards their goal of weakening Russia.
Conclusions As an ex-intelligence professional, the first thing that strikes me is the total absence of Western intelligence services in the representation of the situation over the past year.
In Switzerland, the services have been criticized for not having provided a correct picture of the situation.
In fact, it seems that throughout the Western world, intelligence services have been overwhelmed by the politicians.
The problem is that it is the politicians who decide—the best intelligence service in the world is useless if the decision-maker does not listen.
That said, while some intelligence services had a very accurate and rational picture of the situation, others clearly had the same picture as that propagated by our media.
In this crisis, the services of the countries of the “new Europe” played an important role.
Second, it seems that in some European countries, politicians have deliberately ignored their services in order to respond ideologically to the situation.
It should be noted that all the documents that were presented to the public during this crisis were presented by politicians based on commercial sources.
In the United States, the attack scenarios presented by Anthony Blinken to the Security Council were only the product of the imagination of a Tiger Team working for him—he did exactly as Donald Rumsfeld did in 2002, who had thus “bypassed” the CIA and other intelligence services that were much less assertive about Iraqi chemical weapons.
In other words, we can naturally deplore and condemn the Russian attack.
We show compassion for the Ukrainian people and the two million refugees.
But if we had had a modicum of compassion for the same number of refugees from the Ukrainian populations of Donbass massacred by their own government and who sought refuge in Russia for eight years, none of this would probably have happened.
For years, the West remained silent about the massacre of Russian-speaking Ukrainians by the government of Kiev, without ever trying to bring pressure on Kiev.
Whether the term “genocide” applies to the abuses suffered by the people of Donbass is an open question.
But the definition given by the Genocide Convention is probably broad enough to apply to this case.
Sanctions seem to have become the preferred tool of our foreign policies.
If we had insisted that Ukraine abide by the Minsk Agreements, which we had negotiated and endorsed, none of this would have happened.
However, neither Emmanuel Macron , nor Olaf Scholz, nor Volodymyr Zelensky have respected their commitments.
The European Union was unable to promote the implementation of the Minsk agreements—on the contrary, it did not react when Ukraine was bombing its own population in the Donbass.
Absent from the diplomatic phase, the EU distinguished itself by fueling the conflict.
On February 27, the Ukrainian government agreed to enter into negotiations with Russia.
From then on, the Ukrainians felt that they did not need to reach an agreement.
In the Ukraine, with the blessing of the Western countries, those who are in favor of a negotiation have been eliminated.
This is the case of Denis Kireyev, one of the Ukrainian negotiators, assassinated on March 5 by the Ukrainian secret service because he was too favorable to Russia and was considered a traitor.
The same fate befell Dmitry Demyanenko, former deputy head of the SBU’s main directorate for Kiev and its region, who was assassinated on March 10 because he was too favorable to an agreement with Russia—he was shot by the Mirotvorets militia.
The UN and some European countries have demanded the closure of this site—refused by the Rada.
In the end, the price will be high, but Vladimir Putin will likely achieve the goals he set for himself.
China is emerging as a mediator in the conflict, while Switzerland is joining the list of Russia’s enemies.
The Americans have to ask Venezuela and Iran for oil to get out of the energy impasse they have put themselves in—Juan Guaido is leaving the scene for good and the United States has to piteously backtrack on the sanctions imposed on its enemies.
Thus, we recognize that Russia is a democracy since we consider that the Russian people are responsible for the war.
Let us remember that collective punishment is forbidden by the Geneva Conventions.
The lesson to be learned from this conflict is our sense of variable geometric humanity.
The integrity of the media is measured by their willingness to work within the terms of the Munich Charter.
They succeeded in propagating hatred of the Chinese during the Covid crisis and their polarized message leads to the same effects against the Russians.
The more the sanctions against Russia are disproportionate, the more the cases where we have done nothing highlight our racism and servility.
Jacques Baud is a former colonel of the General Staff, ex-member of the Swiss strategic intelligence, specialist on Eastern countries.
