By Elizabeth Pond When the Russian inquest finally comes, the answer will be clear.
French Election 2022 Emmanuel Macron falls to earth This analysis is plausible.
Subscribe to The Crash View all newsletters The New Statesman's weekly newsletter that helps you make sense of the economic slowdown.
The Crash A weekly newsletter helping you fit together the pieces of the global economic slowdown.
Morning Call Quick and essential guide to domestic and global politics from the New Statesman's politics team.
World Review The New Statesman’s global affairs newsletter, every Monday and Friday.
The New Statesman Daily The best of the New Statesman, delivered to your inbox every weekday morning.
Green Times The New Statesman’s weekly environment email on the politics, business and culture of the climate and nature crises in your inbox every Thursday.
The Culture Edit Our weekly culture newsletter – from books and art to pop culture and memes – sent every Friday.
Weekly Highlights A weekly round-up of some of the best articles featured in the most recent issue of the New Statesman, sent each Saturday.
Ideas and Letters A newsletter showcasing the finest writing from the ideas section and the NS archive, covering political ideas, philosophy, criticism and intellectual history sent every Wednesday.
Events and Offers Sign up to receive information regarding NS events, subscription offers & product updates.
He called the collapse of the Soviet Union the “greatest geopolitical catastrophe” of the 20th century.
Content from our partners How data can help revive our high streets in the age of online shopping Les Dolega and Alex Singleton Why digital inclusion is a vital piece of levelling up Spotlight How to help ethnic minority-led firms succeed Andrew Harrison *** Most agonising of all, in his first term as Russia’s president in the 21st century, Putin had to listen to American triumphalism about the series of pro-democracy “colour revolutions” in the streets of ex-communist Serbia in 2000, Georgia in 2003 and Ukraine in 2004.
Akhmetov, the son of a coal miner who rose to become the “godfather” of the Donetsk clan – and the owner of Shakhtar Donetsk football club – has his coal and iron base in the war-ravaged Don Basin and relies on Moscow’s goodwill there.
Firtash, who under President Yanukovych controlled the lucrative distribution of Russian gas through Ukrainian pipelines to Europe, is also dependent on Russia.
In spring 2014, he asked the Russian oligarch Vasily Anisimov to pay a record Austrian bail of €125m in cash to get him out of jail.
Under the bail terms, Firtash is barred from leaving Austria as he awaits the final legal decision on a United States extradition request on charges of international bribery.
Yet from Vienna he still wields his political clout, funds several Ukrainian parties across the political spectrum and, it is widely reported, brokered a division of power between Poroshenko and Vitaly Klitschko in the run-up to the May 2014 presidential election, in which Klitschko stood down as a candidate.
They returned to tell journalists that their greatest wish was simply for the fighting to stop.
The war there had caused 8,000 deaths and forced 2. million people from their homes.
But how ironic it will be if he manages to melt their urgency into complacency by easing the pressure on Ukraine, thus paving the way for that final loss of the Revolution of Dignity.
Elizabeth Pond is based in Berlin and is the author of several books about Germany, Europe and the Balkans.
