Presidential candidate Roman Bessmertny and editor-in-chief of Charter97.org Natallia Radzina spoke about it on air of Vitaly Portnikov's program ""The Road of Freedom"" on Radio Svoboda.
Radio Svoboda has invited the Ukrainian politician, former Ambassador of Ukraine to Belarus Roman Bessmertny and Belarusian journalist, editor-in-chief of the opposition edition ""Charter 97"" Natallia Radzina to discuss it.
The topic of possible annexation of Belarus by Russia appeared at the end of 2018.
The approval by Russian President Vladimir Putin of the military doctrine of the ""union state"" and the establishment of an integration working group at the initiative of Moscow served as the reason.
The Framework Union Treaty between the two countries was signed more than twenty years ago.
The document implies the creation of a confederated state with a common currency, market, judicial system, foreign policy, common energy, transport and communication systems.
Discussions on the possible accession of Belarus to the Russian Federation have recently resumed against the background of economic contradictions between Minsk and Moscow related to new oil and gas duties.
The Kremlin refutes the fact that Russia intends to annex the neighboring state.
Nevertheless, the Russian capital increasingly calls for the creation of a real ""union state,"" and Putin's goal, experts believe, is to head it.
Thus, Putin, without violating the Russian Constitution, will be able to retain power for another presidential term.
Responding to the Kremlin's plans and increased economic pressure, the Belarusian ruler Aliaksandr Lukashenka called Russia not a brotherly state, but only a partner.
Lukashenka has recently stated that he does not oppose a common currency in the ""union state"", if it is not the Russian ruble.
In the fall of 2017, during Russian-Belarusian exercises, analysts started talking about Moscow's plans to turn the neighboring country into its military outpost.
There were suggestions that Russia might prepare an invasion into Ukraine through the Belarusian territory.
If the annexation occurs, the Russian troops will deploy on the border with Poland, and it will worsen the strategic position of Ukraine.
But I know that the Belarusians will defend their independence, they will not turn into one of republics of the Russian Empire.
For 25 years the Belarusians have been fighting for their freedom and democracy.
A great number of people were in prisons, many people lost their lives and health, but they did not give up.
Let me remind you that one of the leaders of the Belarusian opposition, presidential candidate for upcoming elections Mikalai Statkevich, has recently declared that it will be the second Afghanistan, if Russia attempts to occupy Belarus.
One should remember the history: Belarus has always suffered bloody battles spurred by independence, ethnic or territorial issues.
And Putin does not need a Belarusian, because he needs to be worried about, he needs support.
In this situation Putin needs military bases, outpost to attack Europe and to pose a threat.
After all, he needs just the territorial dependence of Belarus on Russian policy in order to govern the world.
Remember the Warsaw NATO memorandum, which mentions Belarus as a weak territory in terms of security for Europe.
No matter how NATO creates the security system in Central Europe, this gap has always been a historical one.
This is the ground for a breakthrough either in one or another direction, and an information or an armed sense does not matter here.
Even from the point of view of the two air bases delpoyed in Belarus, it is a huge threat to the European Union.
Since 2014 Minsk has maintained conditional neutrality in the Russian-Ukrainian conflict.
On the other hand, Kiev hopes for no military actions against Ukraine to be carried out from the Belarusian territory.
The Ukrainian leadership is trying to preserve this idea by constant contacts with the Belarusian leadership, starting from the visit of the acting President of Ukraine Oleksandr Turchynov in Minsk in 2014 to the visit of the President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko in 2018.
It proves that Lukashenka himself does not control his territory today.
Today NATO declares expressly that the Belarusian Army is a part of the Russian one and the Belarusian special services are a part of the Russian ones.
In fact, Belarus under Lukashenka is a potentially hazardous territory for both Ukraine and the West.
It is alleged that this is for cross-border cooperation, but it's ridiculous.
The Ukrainian security services are already concerned about the construction of the road.
Of course, Lukashenka is a guarantor neither for Belarus' independence nor his own word.
He will not be able to survive without it and will collapse in a moment.
On the other hand, we are talking about the risk of some military actions from the territory of Belarus, as if Russia and Ukraine do not have a vast common border, as if the Russian direction is closed.
One should always remember that whatever Putin and the Russian army are, it's just the Redland.
And the use of foreign territories is what the Redland used to suffer from.
Pay attention to actions in Syria, in the Caucasus, even in Crimea the way the operation was carried out there.
To strike a blow from the northern territories through Belarus is the Redland's classics.
Therefore, starting with tactical instruments and ending with a strategy, it's crucial to hook up Belarus as a participant of this process.
At first, the Ukrainian military command paid attention to this direction.
So much so, that in the last two years the Kremlin has literally and figuratively twisted hands, starting with Lukashenka and ending with the government, to deploy either troops, or equipment, or to carry out other exercises.
Of course, there is civil society, but there are also armed forces, which are almost the key element to preserve or not preserve statehood under authoritarian regimes.
I think that the leadership of the armed forces is now directly tied to the Russian generals, and they can follow orders from the Kremlin.
As for the middle class, I belong to the family of military intellectuals and can say that neither my relatives nor my father will support invaders in this situation.
Russia spends much money on its war against Ukraine and the Syrian adventure, and it is necessary to support satellite formations such as South Ossetia, Abkhazia, Transnistria and Crimea.
If Belarus is seized now, then, of course, it will inflict a heavy financial and political damage to Russia.
I would offer not only to discuss the probability of possible seizure of Belaru by Putin, but also to finally say that only a free democratic Belarus can be a major element to ensure security in the region.
Absence of free democratic Belarus means absence of free democratic Ukraine and Russia.
After all, the geopolitical influence of Belarus in the region is enormous.
Assistance to the Belarusian democratic forces, independent media, civil society, which have been resisting Lukashenka's dictatorship for 25 years and today also resisting Putin's aggression should be discussed.
Roman, you were an ambassador to Belarus under President Viktor Yushchenko: he actually appointed you.
President Yushchenko kept in touch with Belarus, which is neither democratic nor European.
Moreover, then they said that Ukraine could become a Belarusian lawyer in Europe, just as Poland served as a Ukrainian lawyer then.
There were no relations between Yanukovych and Lukashenka at all, because the opposition candidate Sannikov was like a Belarusian Yanukovych.
Today we know who Yanukovych is, but at that moment the situation differed.
The assistance to the opposition is the issue Europe and Ukraine should focus on today if they want to help defend Belarus.
Lukashenka travels everywhere, but over 25 years he has never been to these districts.
If Ukrainian archives can add information to Belarusian ones, the history will tell us much.
One should try to take an unbiased look at capabilities and forces of Belarusian democrats, the Belarusian opposition and the Belarusian statehood in general.
And then some countries or some players suddenly sit down at the table, as it was many times in history and decide a lot without our involvement.
Many decisions on Ukraine are made without involvement of the Ukrainian leadership.
Putin, Merkel and Macron, to say nothing of Putin and Trump, have their own issues to discuss.
I'm afraid that many decisions related to Belarus, if this country becomes a subject, can be made without taking into account the opinion of an official Minsk.
You are right to notice that no matter who comes to power, democrats or authoritarian leaders in Ukraine, they still keep in touch with the dictator and ignore the Belarusian democratic forces.
Ties between Poroshenko and Lukashenka are getting closer and still democratically-focused citizens of Belarus are still completely ignored.
As a result, we are discussing the fact that tomorrow or the day after tomorrow Ukraine will be attacked from the territory of Belarus.
We should finally start to think strategically and build some kind of policy towards the neighboring state, which is potentially dangerous today.
But, unfortunately, such policy does not exist, and this is what should be discussed.
You may have forgotten that Mr Yanukovych had been trying to prove to us several years before Maidan that he was about to sign an association agreement with the European Union and that he was the hope of many Europe-focused Ukrainians.
Today Ukraine should do something, a really assistance to democratic forces of Belarus is needed.
We expected waves of freedom would spread on the region, but, unfortunately, it did not happen.
Given the military-technical cooperation, it seems to me that Belarus is the only source from the point of view of providing separate fragments.
And it's what can be objectively considered as a reason for cooperation.
But I do not understand why today Ukraine is 70% dependent on Lukashenka's fuel and lubricants.
Medvedchuk has not appeared in the Minsk process at all since last spring.
We remember how he was integrated into Russian politics, but he was once banned from visiting Russian regions.
May he be more integrated into Ukrainian politics and business than we think.
Lukashenka is first of all integrated into the Ukrainian business it is completely obvious.
It's possible that the Ukrainian leadership has some corrupt ties with the Belarusian dictator, and Ukrainian oligarchs have their own interests and contacts.
It's quite clear Belarus is the ground to bypass sanctions and tensions between Russia and Ukraine, and Russia and Western countries.
Today we can see that, among other things, Ukraine prefers to keep silent, not to criticize Lukashenka's regime, precisely because there are certain interests, primarily economic ones.
I am very grateful to Roman Petrovich for raising this topic all the time.
I will always be grateful that you ignored the inauguration of the dictator in 2010, when we were all in prisons, and that you called and supported me when I was released.
Many diplomats, including European ones, were afraid to do it, but Roman Petrovich was not.
This gesture reminds us that in politics, especially in the post-Soviet space, a deed always matters between uprisings.
