But when it happens in a former part of Russia, as a direct consequence of Obama’s own conquest of Russia’s next-door-neighbor Ukraine , Obama exhibits the audacity to call this Putin’s “conquest of land,” and to say that Russia must suffer for it.
Obama should be prosecuted for it , by the International Criminal Court, but instead he ‘prosecutes’ Russia.
That the coup was a bloody false-flag United States coup, was obvious to Petro Poroshenko even as early as when the coup had ended on February 26th of 2014 — and Poroshenko acknowledged it at that time, to the European Union’s investigator who had been sent in to find out how this blatantly illegal overthrow of Ukraine’s democratically elected President, had, in fact, occurred.
Nuland was there telling the United States Ambassador to Ukraine whom he should get placed in charge of Ukraine after the democratically elected President would be gone.
Even Russia’s newsmedia play-down the extent and significance of this problem.
But actually, America’s coup in Ukraine did a lot worse to Ukraine than just harm to Ukrainian agriculture.
Subsequently, polling by Ukraine’s Sofia Center for Social Studies showed similarly low approval-ratings for the Obama-stooge regime.
And all of these polls — Gallup’s and Sofia’s — excluded the two breakaway regions, one of which had voted 90% for Yanukovych, and the other of which had voted 75% for him, both of which knew the Obama-stooge regime only as bombing them, and so would have had 0% approval for its current leader Poroshenko.
In other words, even without the two most pro-Russian, anti-U.S., regions, being reflected in these post-coup polls, the approval-rating for the U.S.-stooge regime, within the more-proUnited States part of the remaining rump Ukraine, was even lower than the lowest-ever approval-rating for the Yanukovych government had been over all of Ukraine.
Obama — and his vassal-aristocracies in Europe and elsewhere — are imposing economic sanctions against Russia for Russia’s having allowed the people of Crimea to rejoin Russia, after the hell that Obama’s team had imposed upon Ukraine.
But all of this is really about whether the plan that George Herbert Walker Bush initiated on the night of 24 February 1990, for the United States aristocracy to take over Russia, will now — and finally — end.
No one can understand current history, without understanding that plan, the United States aristocracy’s double-cross of Russia, which left only a one-sided end of the Cold War, while the other side continued it, sub-rosa, right up until the present.
The NYT’s lies are in service to the forces that are still trying to continue — and to intensify — the Cold War.
And Paul Craig Roberts stated accurately whom those forces actually represent.
