The head of the Ukrainian Navy, Admiral Berezovsky, defected, later followed by half of the Ukrainian military stationed in the region.
The Council of Ministers of Crimea was dissolved and a new pro-Russian Prime Minister installed.
The Supreme Council declared the Republic of Crimea an independent, self-governing entity, then held a controversial referendum on the status of Crimea on 16 March, which resulted in a majority vote to join the Russian Federation.
Treaty signed between the Republic of Crimea and the Russian Federation at the Kremlin on 18 March to formally initiate Crimea's accession to the Russian Federation.
The Ukrainian Armed Forces were evicted from their bases on 19 March by Crimean protesters and Russian troops.
Ukraine subsequently announced the withdrawal of their forces from Crimea.
The Russian State Duma officially passed the Federal Law Admitting to the Russian Federation the Republic of Crimea on 21 March.
This event took place in the aftermath of the Revolution of Dignity and is part of the wider Russo-Ukrainian War.
On 23 February, pro-Russian demonstrations were held in the Crimean city of Sevastopol.
On 27 February, masked Russian troops without insignia took over the Supreme Council of Crimea and captured strategic sites across Crimea.
This led to the installation of the pro-Russian Sergey Aksyonov government in Crimea, the Crimean status referendum and the declaration of Crimea's independence on 16 March 2014.
Russia formally incorporated Crimea as two Russian federal subjects—the Republic of Crimea and the federal city of Sevastopol on 18 March 2014.
The annexation led to the other members of the then-G8 suspending Russia from the group and then introducing a first round of sanctions against the country.
The UN resolution also ""underscores that the referendum having no validity, cannot form the basis for any alteration of the status of "" and called upon all states and international organizations not to recognize or to imply the recognition of Russia's annexation.
The Russian government opposes the ""annexation"" label, with Putin defending the referendum as complying with the principle of the self-determination of peoples. .mw-parser-output .toclimit-2 .toclevel-1 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-3 .toclevel-2 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-4 .toclevel-3 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-5 .toclevel-4 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-6 .toclevel-5 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-7 .toclevel-6 ul{display:none}Contents 1 Names 2 Background 2.
Crimean public opinion 5 Ukrainian response 6 Russian response 7 International response 7.
Mapping 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Names The names of the Crimean conflict vary.
In Russia, it is known as the accession of Crimea to the Russian Federation , the return of Crimea , and the reunification of Crimea.In Ukraine, annexation is known as the Temporary occupation of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol by Russia , the illegal occupation of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, the fall of Crimea, and the invasion of Crimea.
In October 1921, the Bolshevik Russian SFSR gained control of the peninsula and instituted the Crimean Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic.
Moscow joined the RSFSR with three other republics to form the Soviet Union the following year.
In 1954, the Crimean Oblast was transferred from the Russian SFSR to the Ukrainian SSR by decree of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union to commemorate the 300th anniversary of Ukraine's union with Russia.
By that time, though, the dissolution of the Soviet Union was well underway.
The Crimean ASSR was restored for less than a year as part of Soviet Ukraine before Ukrainian independence.
Newly independent Ukraine maintained Crimea's autonomous status, while the Supreme Council of Crimea affirmed the peninsula's ""sovereignty"" as a part of Ukraine.
In September 2008, the Ukrainian Foreign Minister Volodymyr Ohryzko accused Russia of giving Russian passports to the population in Crimea, and described it as a ""real problem"", given Russia's declared policy of military intervention abroad to protect Russian citizens.On 24 August 2009, anti-Ukrainian demonstrations were held in Crimea by ethnic Russian residents.
Sergei Tsekov said then that he hoped that Russia would treat Crimea the same way as it had treated South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
Crimea is populated by an ethnic Russian majority and a minority of both ethnic Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars, and thus demographically possessed one of Ukraine's largest ethnically Russian populations.As early as in 2010, some analysts already speculated that the Russian government had irredentist plans.
Yanukovych won the 2010 presidential election with strong support from voters in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and southern and eastern Ukraine.
Percentage of people that indicated Russian as their native language in the 2001 Ukraine census.
On 4 February 2014, the Presidium of the Supreme Council considered holding a referendum on the peninsula's status, and asked the Russian government to guarantee the vote.
The Security Service of Ukraine responded by opening a criminal case to investigate the possible ""subversion"" of Ukraine's territorial integrity.
On 20 February 2014, during a visit to Moscow, Chairman of the Supreme Council of Crimea Vladimir Konstantinov stated that the 1954 transfer of Crimea from the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic had been a mistake.The Euromaidan protests came to a head in late February 2014, and Yanukovych and many of his ministers fled the capital on 22 February.
This new government was recognised internationally, though the Russian government said that these events had been a ""coup d'état"" and that the caretaker government was illegitimate.
The Verkhovna Rada of Crimea members called for an extraordinary meeting on 21 February.
Crimean prime minister Anatolii Mohyliov said that his government recognised the new provisional government in Kyiv, and that the Crimean autonomous government would carry out all laws passed by the Ukrainian parliament.
In Simferopol, a pro-Euromaidan rally of between 5,000 and 15,000 was held in support of the new government, and demanding the resignation of the Crimean parliament; attendees waved Ukrainian, Tatar, and European Union flags.
Meanwhile, in Sevastopol, thousands protested against the new Ukrainian government, voted to establish a parallel administration, and created civil defence squads with the support of the Russian Night Wolves motorcycle club.
Russian military convoys were also alleged to be seen in the area.In Kerch, pro-Russian protesters attempted to remove the Ukrainian flag from atop city hall and replace it with the flag of Russia.
Mayor Oleh Osadchy attempted to disperse the crowd and police eventually arrived to defend the flag.
Here's a flag of Crimea,"" but was accused of treason and a fight ensued over the flagpole.
On 24 February, more rallied outside the Sevastopol city state administration.
Volodymyr Yatsuba, head of Sevastopol administration, announced his resignation, citing the ""decision of the city's inhabitants"" made at pro-Russian rally, and while caretaker city administration initially leaned towards recognition of new Ukrainian government, continued pressure from pro-Russian activists forced local authorities to concede.
Consequently, Sevastopol City Council illegally elected Alexei Chaly, a Russian citizen, as mayor.
Under the law of Ukraine, it was not possible for Sevastopol to elect a mayor, as the Chairman of the Sevastopol City State Administration, appointed by the President of Ukraine, functions as its mayor.
On 25 February, several hundred pro-Russian protesters blocked the Crimean parliament demanding non-recognition of the central government of Ukraine and a referendum on Crimea's status.
On the same day, crowds gathered again outside Sevastopol's city hall on Tuesday as rumours spread that security forces could arrest Chaly, but police chief Alexander Goncharov said that his officers would refuse to carry out ""criminal orders"" issued by Kyiv.
Viktor Neganov, a Sevastopol-based adviser to the Internal Affairs Minister, condemned the events in the city as a coup.
Sevastopol City State Administration chairman Vladimir Yatsuba was booed and heckled on 23 February, when he told a pro-Russian rally that Crimea was part of Ukraine.
Tatars created self-defence groups, encouraged collaboration with Russians, Ukrainians, and people of other nationalities, and called for the protection of churches, mosques, synagogues, and other important sites.
New Security Service of Ukraine chief Valentyn Nalyvaichenko requested that the United Nations provide around-the-clock monitoring of the security situation in Crimea.
Russian troops took control of the main route to Sevastopol on orders from Russian president Vladimir Putin.
A military checkpoint, with a Russian flag and Russian military vehicles, was set up on the main highway between the city and Simferopol.
Russian takeover On 27 February, Russian special forcesseized the building of the Supreme Council of Crimea and the building of the Council of Ministers in Simferopol.Russian flags were raised over these buildings and barricades were erected outside them.
Whilst the ""little green men"" were occupying the Crimean parliament building, the parliament held an emergency session.
It voted to terminate the Crimean government, and replace Prime Minister Anatolii Mohyliov with Sergey Aksyonov.
Aksyonov belonged to the Russian Unity party, which received 4% of the vote in the last election.
According to the Constitution of Ukraine, the Prime Minister of Crimea is appointed by the Supreme Council of Crimea in consultation with the President of Ukraine.
Both Aksyonov and speaker Vladimir Konstantinov stated that they viewed Viktor Yanukovych as the de jure president of Ukraine, through whom they were able to ask Russia for assistance.The parliament also voted to hold a referendum on greater autonomy set for 25 May.
The troops had cut all of the building's communications, and took MPs' phones as they entered.
No independent journalists were allowed inside the building while the votes were taking place.
Donetsk People's Republic separatist Igor Girkin said in January 2015 that Crimean members of parliament were held at gunpoint, and were forced to support the annexation.
These actions were immediately declared illegal by the Ukrainian interim government.On the same day, more troops in unmarked uniforms, assisted this time by what appeared to be local Berkut riot police , established security checkpoints on the Isthmus of Perekop and the Chonhar Peninsula, which separate Crimea from the Ukrainian mainland.
Shortly afterwards, Ukrainian TV channels became unavailable for Crimean viewers, and some of them were replaced with Russian stations.
The blockade of military units of the Armed Forces of Ukraine during the capture of Crimea by Russia in February–March 2014 On 1 March 2014, Aksyonov said that he would exercise control of all Ukrainian military and security installations on the peninsula.
He also asked Putin for ""assistance in ensuring peace and tranquility"" in Crimea.
Putin's swift manoeuvre prompted protests of some Russian intelligentsia and demonstrations in Moscow against a Russian military campaign in Crimea.
By 2 March, Russian troops moving from the country's naval base in Sevastopol and reinforced by troops, armour, and helicopters from mainland Russia exercised complete control over the Crimean Peninsula.
On 4 March, Ukrainian General Staff said there were units of the 18th Motor Rifle Brigade, 31st Air Assault Brigade and 22nd Spetsnaz Brigade deployed and operating in Crimea, instead of Russian Black Sea Fleet personnel, which violated international agreements signed by Ukraine and Russia.
At a press conference on the same day, Russian president Vladimir Putin said that Russia had no plans to annex Crimea.
He also said that it had no plans to invade Ukraine, but that it might intervene if Russians in Ukraine were threatened.
This was part of a pattern of public denials of the ongoing Russian military operation.Numerous media reports and statements by the Ukrainian and foreign governments noted the identity of the unmarked troops as Russian soldiers, but Russian officials concealed the identity of their forces, claiming they were local ""self-defence"" units over whom they had no authority.
As late as 17 April, Russian foreign minister Sergey Lavrov said that there were no ""excessive Russian troops"" in Ukraine.
Putin later acknowledged that he had ordered ""work to bring Crimea back into Russia"" as early as February.
He also acknowledged that in early March there were ""secret opinion polls"" held in Crimea, which, according to him, reported overwhelming popular support for Crimea's incorporation into Russia.Russia eventually admitted its troops' presence.
Ukraine complained that by increasing its troop presence in Crimea, Russia violated the agreement under which it headquartered its Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol and violated the country's sovereignty.
According to Ukraine usage of navigation stations and troop movements were improperly covered by the treaty and were violated many times as well as related court decisions.
Such a law was adopted in 2001, and it postulates that admission of a foreign state or its part into Russia shall be based on a mutual accord between the Russian Federation and the relevant state and shall take place pursuant to an international treaty between the two countries; moreover, it must be initiated by the state in question, not by its subdivision or by Russia.On 28 February 2014, Russian MP Sergey Mironov, along with other members of the Duma, introduced a bill to alter Russia's procedure for adding federal subjects.
The declaration directly referred to the Kosovo independence precedent, by which the Albanian-populated Autonomous Province of Kosovo and Metohija declared independence from Russia's ally Serbia as the Republic of Kosovo in 2008—a unilateral action Russia staunchly opposed.
Many analysts saw the Crimean declaration as an overt effort to pave the way for Crimea's annexation by Russia.Crimean authorities' stated plans to declare independence from Ukraine made the Mironov bill unnecessary.
This referendum, unlike one announced earlier, contained no option to maintain the status quo of governance under the 1998 constitution.
Ukraine's erstwhile President, Oleksander Turchinov, stated that ""The authorities in Crimea are totally illegitimate, both the parliament and the government.
On 14 March, the Crimean status referendum was deemed unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court of Ukraine, and a day later, the Verkhovna Rada formally dissolved the Crimean parliament.
With a referendum looming, Russia massed troops near the Ukrainian eastern border, likely to threaten escalation and stymie Ukraine's response.
The referendum was held despite the opposition from the Ukrainian government.
Official results reported about 95.5% of participating voters in Crimea were in favour of seceding from Ukraine and joining Russia.
The results of referendum were questioned; another report by Evgeny Bobrov, a member of the Russian President's Human Rights Council, suggested the official results were inflated and only 15% to 30% of Crimeans eligible to vote actually voted for the Russian option.The means by which the referendum was conducted were widely criticised by foreign governments and in the Ukrainian and international press, with reports that anyone holding a Russian passport regardless of residency in Crimea was allowed to vote.
OSCE refused to send observers to the referendum, stating that invitation should have come from an OSCE member state in question , rather than local authorities.
Russia invited a group of observers from various European far-right political parties aligned with Putin, who stated the referendum was conducted in a free and fair manner.
Declaration of Independence of the Republic of Crimea The Republic of Crimea was short lived.
On 17 March, following the official announcement of the referendum results, the Supreme Council of Crimea declared the formal independence of the Republic of Crimea, comprising the territories of both the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, which was granted special status within the breakaway republic.
The Crimean parliament declared the ""partial repeal"" of Ukrainian laws and began nationalising private and Ukrainian state property located on the Crimean Peninsula, including Ukrainian ports and property of Chornomornaftogaz.
Parliament also formally requested that the Russian government admit the breakaway republic into Russia.
On same day, the de facto Supreme Council renamed itself the State Council of Crimea, declared the Russian ruble an official currency alongside the hryvnia.Putin officially recognised the Republic of Crimea 'as a sovereign and independent state' by decree on March 17.
On the 21 March the Republic of Crimea became a federal Subject of Russia.
Republic of Crimea, Crimean Federal District, and Political status of Crimea President Putin with Vladimir Konstantinov, Sergey Aksyonov and Alexey Chaly at the Kremlin, 18 March 2014 The Treaty on Accession of the Republic of Crimea to Russia was signed between representatives of the Republic of Crimea and the Russian Federation on 18 March 2014 to lay out terms for the immediate admission of the Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol as federal subjects of Russia and part of the Russian Federation.
On 19 March, the Russian Constitutional Court decided that the treaty is in compliance with the Constitution of Russia.
The treaty was ratified by the Federal Assembly and Federation Council by 21 March.A Just Russia's Ilya Ponomarev was the only State Duma member to vote against the treaty.During a controversial incident in Simferopol on 18 March, some Ukrainian sources said that armed gunmen that were reported to be Russian special forces allegedly stormed the base.
This was contested by Russian authorities, who subsequently announced the arrest of an alleged Ukrainian sniper in connection with the killings, but later denied the arrest had occurred.The two casualties had a joint funeral attended by both the Crimean and Ukrainian authorities, and both the Ukrainian soldier and Russian paramilitary ""self-defence volunteer"" were mourned together.
As of March 2014 the incident was under investigation by both the Crimean authorities and the Ukrainian military.In response to shooting, Ukraine's then acting defense minister Ihor Tenyukh authorised Ukrainian troops stationed in Crimea to use deadly force in life-threatening situations.
This increased the risk of bloodshed during any takeover of Ukrainian military installations, yet the ensuing Russian operations to seize the remaining Ukrainian military bases and ships in Crimea did not bring new fatalities, although weapons were used and several people were injured.
The Russian units involved in such operations were ordered to avoid usage of deadly force when possible.
Morale among the Ukrainian troops, which for three weeks were blockaded inside their compounds without any assistance from the Ukrainian government, was very low, and the vast majority of them did not offer any real resistance.On 24 March, the Ukrainian government ordered the full withdrawal of all of its armed forces from Crimea.
Approximately 50% of the Ukrainian soldiers in Crimea had defected to the Russian military.
On 26 March the last Ukrainian military bases and Ukrainian Navy ships were captured by Russian troops.
On the same day, he signed a decree formally rehabilitating the Crimean Tatars, who were ousted from their lands in 1944, and the Armenian, German, Greek, and Bulgarian minority communities in the region that Stalin also ordered removed in the 1940s.
Until 2016 these new subjects were grouped in the Crimean Federal District.
On 8 August 2016, Ukraine reported that Russia had increased its military presence along the demarcation line.
In response to this military buildup Ukraine also deployed more troops and resources closer to the border with Crimea.
The Pentagon has downplayed a Russian invasion of Ukraine, calling Russian troops along the border a regular military exercise.
On 10 August, Russia claimed two servicemen were killed in clashes with Ukrainian commandos, and that Ukrainian servicemen had been captured with a total of 40 kg of explosives in their possession.
Ukraine denied that the incident took place.Russian accounts claimed that Russian FSB detained ""Ukrainian saboteurs"" and ""terrorists"" near Armiansk.
A number of individuals were detained, including Yevhen Panov, who is described by Russian sources as a Ukrainian military intelligence officer and leader of the sabotage group.
The group was allegedly planning terror attacks on important infrastructure in Armiansk, Crimea.Ukrainian media reported that Panov was a military volunteer fighting in the east of the country, however he has more recently been associated with a charitable organization.
Russia also claimed that the alleged border infiltration was accompanied by ""heavy fire"" from Ukrainian territory, resulting in the death of a Russian soldier.
In 2017, a survey performed by the Centre for East European and International Studies showed that 85% of the non-Crimean Tatar respondents believed that if the referendum would be held again it would lead to the same or ""only marginally different"" results.
Crimea was fully integrated into the Russian media sphere, and links with the rest of Ukraine were hardly existent.On 26 November 2018, lawmakers in the Ukraine Parliament overwhelmingly backed the imposition of martial law along Ukraine's coastal regions and those bordering Russia in response to the firing upon and seizure of Ukrainian naval ships by Russia near the Crimean peninsula a day earlier.
Economic history of the Russian Federation and Russian financial crisis Initially after the annexation, salaries rose, especially those of government workers.
This was soon offset by the increase in prices caused by the depreciation of the ruble.
Wages were cut back by 30% to 70% after Russian authority became established.
Tourism, previously Crimea's main industry, suffered in particular, down by 50% from 2014 in 2015.
Crimean agricultural yields were also significantly impacted by the annexation.
Ukraine cut off supplies of water through the North Crimean Canal, causing the 2014 rice crop to fail, and greatly damaging the maize and soybean crops.
The annexation had a negative influence on Russians working in Ukraine and Ukrainians working in Russia.The number of tourists visiting Crimea in the 2014 season was lower than in the previous years due to a combination of ""Western sanctions"", ethical objections by Ukrainians, and the difficulty of getting there for Russians.
The Russian government attempted to stimulate the flow of tourists by subsidizing holidays in the peninsula for children and state workers from all Russia which worked mostly for state-owned hotels.
In 2015, overall 3 million tourists visited Crimea according to official data, while before annexation it was around 5.5 million on average.
The shortage is attributed mostly to stopped flow of tourists from Ukraine.
Hotels and restaurants are also experiencing problems with finding enough seasonal workers, who were most arriving from Ukraine in the preceding years.
Tourists visiting state-owned hotels are complaining mostly about low standard of rooms and facilities, some of them unrepaired from Soviet times.According to the German newspaper Die Welt, the annexation of Crimea is economically disadvantageous for the Russian Federation.
Russia will have to spend billions of euros a year to pay salaries and pensions.
Moreover, Russia will have to undertake costly projects to connect Crimea to the Russian water supply and power system because Crimea has no land connection to Russia and at present gets water, gas and electricity from mainland Ukraine.
This required building a bridge and a pipeline across the Kerch Strait.
The then first Deputy to Minister of Finance of Russian Federation Tatyana Nesterenko said that the decision to annex Crimea was made by Vladimir Putin exclusively, without consulting Russia's Finance Ministry.The Russian business newspaper Kommersant expresses an opinion that Russia will not acquire anything economically from ""accessing"" Crimea, which is not very developed industrially, having just a few big factories, and whose yearly gross product is only $4 billion.
The newspaper also says that everything from Russia will have to be delivered by sea, higher costs of transportation will result in higher prices for everything, and to avoid a decline in living standards Russia will have to subsidise Crimean people for a few months.
In total, Kommersant estimates the costs of integrating Crimea into Russia in $30 billion over the next decade,e. $3 billion per year.Western oil expertsestimate that Russia's seizing of Crimea, and the associated control of an area of Black Sea more than three times its land area gives it access to oil and gas reserves potentially worth trillions of dollars.
Moscow's acquisition may alter the route along which the South Stream pipeline would be built, saving Russia money, time and engineering challenges.
It would also allow Russia to avoid building in Turkish territorial waters, which was necessary in the original route to avoid Ukrainian territory.
Vladimir Putin and his close confidant Arkady Rotenberg before the opening of the Crimean Bridge in May 2018 The Russian Federal Service for Communications warned about a transition period as Russian operators have to change the numbering capacity and subscribers.
Codes in Crimea start with 65, but in the area of ""7"" the 6 is given to Kazakhstan which shares former Soviet Union +7 with Russia, so city codes have to change.
In the area that now forms the border between Crimea and Ukraine mining the salt lake inlets from the sea that constitute the natural borders, and in the spit of land left over stretches of no-man's-land with wire on either side was created.
The adopted decisions create a legal basis for the functioning of a checkpoint system at the Russian state border in the Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol.In the year following the annexation, armed men seized various Crimean businesses, including banks, hotels, shipyards, farms, gas stations, a bakery, a dairy, and Yalta Film Studio.
Russian media have noted this trend as ""returning to the 90's,"" which is perceived as a period of anarchy and rule of gangs in Russia.In 2015, the Investigative Committee of Russia announced a number of theft and corruption cases in infrastructure projects in Crimea, for example; spending that exceeded the actual accounted costs three times.
A number of Russian officials were also arrested for corruption, including head of federal tax inspection. after Russia's annexation 10% of Security Service of Ukraine personnel left Crimea; accompanied by 6,000 of the pre-annexation 20,300 people strong Ukrainian army.As result of the disputed political status of Crimea, Russian mobile operators never expanded their operations into Crimea and all mobile services are offered on the basis of ""internal roaming,"" which caused significant controversy inside Russia.
Telecoms however argued that expanding coverage to Crimea will put them at risk of Western sanctions and, as result, they will lose access to key equipment and software, none of which is produced locally.The first five years of Crimean occupation cost Russia over $20 billion, roughly equal to two years of Russia's entire education budget.
Human rights situation According to the United Nations and multiple NGOs, Russia is responsible for multiple human rights abuses, including torture, arbitrary detention, forced disappearances and instances of discrimination, including persecution of Crimean Tatars in Crimea since the illegal annexation.
The UN Human Rights Office has documented multiple human rights violations in Crimea.
Noting that minority Crimean Tatars have been disproportionately affected.
In December 2016, the UN General Assembly voted on a resolution on human rights in occupied Crimea.
In March 2014, Human Rights Watch reported that pro-Ukrainian activists and journalists had been attacked, abducted, and tortured by self-defense groups.
Some Crimeans were simply ""disappeared"" with no explanation.On 9 May 2014, the new ""anti-extremist"" amendment to the Criminal Code of Russia, passed in December 2013, came into force.
The Crimean Tatar television station was also shut down by the Russian authorities.
Russian President Putin meeting with representatives of the Crimean Tatars, 16 May 2014 On 16 May the new Russian authorities of Crimea issued a ban on the annual commemorations of the anniversary of the deportation of the Crimean Tatars by Stalin in 1944, citing ""possibility of provocation by extremists"" as a reason.
Previously, when Crimea was controlled by Ukraine, these commemorations had taken place every year.
The pro-Russian Crimean authorities also banned Mustafa Dzhemilev, a human rights activist, Soviet dissident, member of the Ukrainian parliament, and former Chairman of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatars from entering Crimea.
The Tatar community eventually did hold commemorative rallies in defiance of the ban.
In response Russian authorities flew helicopters over the rallies in an attempt to disrupt them.In May 2015, a local activist, Alexander Kostenko, was sentenced to four years in a penal colony.
His lawyer, Dmitry Sotnikov, said that the case was fabricated and that his client had been beaten and starved.
Sotnikov responded that ""There are fabricated cases in Russia, but rarely such humiliation and physical harm.
In June 2015, Razom released a report compiling human rights abuses in Crimea.
In its 2016 annual report, the Council of Europe made no mention of human rights abuses in Crimea because Russia had not allowed its monitors to enter.In February 2016 human rights defender Emir-Usein Kuku from Crimea was arrested and accused of belonging to the Islamist organization Hizb ut-Tahrir although he denies any involvement in this organization.
Amnesty International has called for his immediate release.On 24 May 2014 Ervin Ibragimov, a former member of the Bakhchysarai Town Council and a member of the World Congress of Crimean Tatars went missing.
CCTV footage from a camera at a nearby shop documents that Ibragimov had been stopped by a group of men and that he is briefly speaking to the men before being forced in their van.
Amnesty International and Front Line Defenders demand his immediate release.On 12 June 2018, Ukraine lodged a memorandum weighing about 90 kg, consisting of 17,500 pages of text in 29 volumes to the UN's International Court of Justice about racial discrimination by Russian authorities in occupied Crimea and state financing of terrorism by Russian Federation in Donbas.Between 2015 and 2019 over 134,000 people living in Crimea applied for and were issued Ukrainian passports.
Crimean public opinion Concert to mark the fifth anniversary of annexation in Simferopol, Crimea, 18 March 2019 Prior to Russian occupation, support for joining Russia was 23% in a 2013 poll, down from 33% in 2011.
A joint survey by American government agency Broadcasting Board of Governors and polling firm Gallup was taken during April 2014.
The survey found that 82.8% of those polled believed that the results of the Crimean status referendum reflected the views of most residents of Crimea, whereas 6.7% said that it did not..9% of those polled said that they thought that the annexation would have a positive impact on their lives, whereas 5.5% said that it would not..6% said that they did not know.A comprehensive poll released on 8 May 2014 by the Pew Research Centre surveyed local opinions on the annexation.
Despite international criticism of 16 March referendum on Crimean status, 91% of those Crimeans polled thought that the vote was free and fair, and 88% said that the Ukrainian government should recognise the results.In a survey completed in 2019 by a Russian company FOM 72% of surveyed Crimean residents said their lives have improved since annexation.
At the same time only 39% Russians living in the mainland said the annexation was beneficial for the country as a whole which marks a significant drop from 67% in 2015.
Immediately after the treaty of accession was signed in March, the Ukrainian Ministry of Foreign Affairs summoned the Provisional Principal of Russia in Ukraine to present note verbale of protest against Russia's recognition of the Republic of Crimea and its subsequent annexation.
The Rada called on the international community to avoid recognition of the ""so-called Republic of Crimea"" or the annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol by Russia as new federal subjects.
On 15 April 2014, the Verkhovna Rada declared the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol to be under ""provisional occupation"" by the Russian military and imposed travel restrictions on Ukrainians visiting Crimea.
The territories were also deemed ""inalienable parts of Ukraine"" subject to Ukrainian law.
Among other things, the special law approved by the Rada restricted foreign citizens' movements to and from the Crimean Peninsula and forbade certain types of entrepreneurship.
The law also forbade activity of government bodies formed in violation of Ukrainian law and designated their acts as null and void.
Following Russia's annexation of Crimea, Ukraine blocked the North Crimean Canal, which provided 85% of Crimea's drinking water.
In December 2014, Ukraine halted all train and bus services to Crimea.On 16 September 2015 the Ukrainian parliament voted for the law that sets 20 February 2014 as the official date of the Russian temporary occupation of Crimean peninsula.
On 7 October 2015 the President of Ukraine signed the law into force.The Ministry of Temporarily Occupied Territories and IDPs was established by the Ukrainian government on 20 April 2016 to manage occupied parts of Donetsk, Luhansk and Crimea regions affected by Russian military intervention of 2014.
By 2015, the number of IDPs registered in Ukraine who had fled from Russian-occupied Crimea was 50,000.
Later Slutsky announced that he was misunderstood by the Crimean press, and no decision regarding simplifying the process of acquiring Russian citizenship for people in Crimea had been made yet.
On 25 February, in a meeting with Crimean politicians, he stated that Viktor Yanukovych was still the legitimate president of Ukraine.
Despite media speculation that this was in reaction to the events in Ukraine, Russian Defence Minister Sergei Shoigu said it was for reasons separate from the unrest in Ukraine.
On 28 February, according to ITAR-TASS, the Russian Ministry of Transport discontinued further talks with Ukraine in regards to the Crimean Bridge project.
In Moscow, on 2 March, an estimated 27,000 rallied in support of the Russian government's decision to intervene in Ukraine.
The rallies received considerable attention on Russian state TV and were officially approved by the government.Meanwhile, on 1 March, five people who were picketing next to the Federation Council building against the invasion of Ukraine were arrested.
On 2 March, about eleven protesters demonstrated in Yekaterinburg against Russian involvement, with some wrapped in the Ukrainian flag.
The Professor of the Department of Philosophy at the Moscow State Institute of International Relations Andrey Zubov was fired for his article in Vedomosti, criticising Russian military intervention.On 2 March, one Moscow resident protested against Russian intervention by holding a ""Stop the war"" banner, but he was immediately harassed by passers-by.
A woman came forward with a fabricated charge against him, of beating up a child; however, her claim, due to lack of a victim and obviously false, was ignored by the police.
Andrei Zubov, a professor at the Moscow State Institute of International Relations, who compared Russian actions in Crimea to the 1938 Annexation of Austria by Nazi Germany, was threatened.
Alexander Chuyev, the leader of the pro-Kremlin Spravedlivaya Rossiya party, also objected to Russian intervention in Ukraine.
Boris Akunin, a popular Russian writer, predicted that Russia's moves would lead to political and economic isolation.
Russian President Vladimir Putin speaks to the press on 4 March 2014, denouncing the Revolution of Dignity as an ""unconstitutional coup"", and insisting that Moscow has a right to protect Russians in Ukraine.
President Putin's approval rating among the Russian public increased by nearly 10% since the crisis began, up to 71.6%, the highest in three years, according to a poll conducted by the All-Russian Center for Public Opinion Research, released on 19 March.
Additionally, the same poll showed that more than 90% of Russians supported unification with the Crimean Republic.
On 4 March, at a press conference in Novo-Ogaryovo, President Putin expressed his view on the situation that if a revolution took place in Ukraine, it would be a new country with which Russia had not concluded any treaties.
He offered an analogy with the events of 1917 in Russia, when as a result of the revolution the Russian Empire fell apart and a new state was created.
Around 100,000 people gathered in Crimean Sevastopol at Victory Day parade Russian politicians speculated that there were already 143,000 Ukrainian refugees in Russia.
The Ukrainian Ministry of Foreign Affairs refuted those claims of refugee increases in Russia.
At a briefing on 4 March 2014, the director of the department of information policy of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine Yevhen Perebiynis said that Russia was misinforming its own citizens as well as the entire international community to justify its own actions in the Crimea.On 5 March, an anchor of the Russian-controlled TV channel RT America, Abby Martin, criticized her employer's biased coverage of the military invervention.
The retiree, who lived on a 6,500-ruble monthly pension, was fined 10,000 rubles.Prominent dissident Mikhail Khodorkovsky said that Crimea should stay within Ukraine with broader autonomy.Tatarstan, a republic within Russia populated by Volga Tatars, has sought to alleviate concerns about the treatment of Tatars by Russia, as Tatarstan is a gas-rich and economically successful republic in Russia.
On 5 March, President of Tatarstan Rustam Minnikhanov signed an agreement on co-operation between Tatarstan and the Aksyonov government in Crimea that implied collaboration between ten government institutions as well as significant financial aid to Crimea from Tatarstan businesses.
On 11 March, Minnikhanov was in Crimea on his second visit and attended as a guest in the Crimean parliament chamber during the vote on the declaration of sovereignty pending 16 March referendum.
Mustafa Dzhemilev, a former leader of the Crimean Tatar Majlis, believed that forces that were suspected to be Russian forces should leave the Crimean peninsula, and asked the UN Security Council to send peacekeepers into the region.On 13 March, Russian President Vladimir Putin made a comparison between Crimea and Kosovo in a phone call with United States President Barack Obama.
Hotel in Kerch, Crimea, 2015 On 15 March, thousands of protesters in Moscow marched against Russian involvement in Ukraine, many waving Ukrainian flags.
In February 2015, the leading independent Russian newspaper Novaya Gazeta obtained documents, allegedly written by oligarch Konstantin Malofeev and others, which provided the Russian government with a strategy in the event of Viktor Yanukovych's removal from power and the break-up of Ukraine, which were considered likely.
The documents outline plans for annexation of Crimea and the eastern portions of the country, closely describing the events that actually followed after Yanukovych's fall.
In a move supported by the Lithuanian President, the United States government imposed sanctions against persons they deem to have violated or assisted in the violation of Ukraine's sovereignty.
The European Union suspended talks with Russia on economic and visa-related matters, and is considering more stringent sanctions against Russia in the near future, including asset freezes. while Japan announced sanctions which include suspension of talks relating to military, space, investment, and visa requirements.
The European Commission decided on 11 March 2014 to enter into a full free-trade agreement with Ukraine within the year.
On 12 March, the European Parliament rejected the upcoming referendum on independence in Crimea, which they saw as manipulated and contrary to international and Ukrainian law.
The G7 bloc of developed nations made a joint statement condemning Russia and announced that they would suspend preparations for the planned G8 summit in Sochi in June.
NATO condemned Russia's military escalation in Crimea and stated that it was a breach of international law while the Council of Europe expressed its full support for the territorial integrity and national unity of Ukraine.
The Visegrád Group has issued a joint statement urging Russia to respect Ukraine's territorial integrity and for Ukraine to take into account its minority groups to not further break fragile relations.
A spokesman restated China's belief of non-interference in the internal affairs of other nations and urged dialogue.The Indian government called for a peaceful resolution of the situation.
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad said that he supports Putin's efforts to ""restore security and stability in the friendly country of Ukraine"", while Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro condemned Ukraine's ""ultra-nationalist"" coup.
United States deputy national security advisor Tony Blinken said that the Russian troops massed on the eastern Ukrainian border may be preparing to enter the country's eastern regions.
Russian officials stated that Russian troops would not enter other areas.
Philip M Breedlove, NATO's supreme allied commander in Europe, warned that the same troops were in a position to take over the separatist Russian-speaking Moldovan province of Transnistria.President of Moldova Nicolae Timofti warned Russia with not attempting to do this to avoid damaging its international status further.On 9 April, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe deprived Russia of voting rights.On 14 August, while visiting Crimea, Vladimir Putin ruled out pushing beyond Crimea.
He undertook to do everything he could to end the conflict in Ukraine, saying Russia needed to build calmly and with dignity, not by confrontation and war which isolated it from the rest of the world.
Voted in favour of the resolution Abstained Vetoed the resolutionUN General Assembly vote on the resolution condemning the 2014 Crimean referendum.
In favour of considering the referendum illegal Abstained Absent when the vote took place Against adopting the resolution For a more comprehensive list, see List of vetoed United Nations Security Council resolutions.
On 15 March 2014, a US-sponsored resolution that went to a vote in the UN Security Council to reaffirm that council's commitment to Ukraine's ""sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity"" was not approved.
Though a total of 13 council members voted in favour of the resolution and China abstained, Russia vetoed the resolution.On 27 March 2014, the UN General Assembly approved a resolution describing the referendum leading to annexation of Crimea by Russia as illegal.
The resolution tried to underscore that 16 March referendum held in Crimea and the city of Sevastopol has no validity and cannot form the basis for any alteration of the status of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea or of the city of Sevastopol.
A fourth, Transnistria, sent a request on 18 March 2014 to join the Russian Federation following the Crimean example and in compliance with the Admission Law provisions.
The regional councils of Italy's northern regions Lombardy and Veneto have adopted a non-binding resolution on recognizing Crimea as part of Russia.
International sanctions during the Ukrainian crisis and List of individuals sanctioned during the Ukrainian crisis Sanctions were imposed to prevent Russian and Crimean officials and politicians from travelling to Canada, the United States, and the European Union.
These include suspension of talks relating to military, space, investment, and visa requirements.In response to the sanctions introduced by the United States and EU, the Russian Duma unanimously passed a resolution asking for all members of the Duma to be included on the sanctions list.
Russian companies started pulling billions of dollars out of Western banks to avoid any asset freeze.Three days after the lists were published, the Russian Foreign Ministry published a reciprocal sanctions list of United States citizens, which consisted of 10 names, including House Speaker John Boehner, Senator John McCain, and two advisers to President Obama.
Several of those sanctioned responded with pride at their inclusion on the list, including John Boehner,John McCain,Bob Menendez,Dan Coats,Mary Landrieu, and Harry Reid.On 24 March, Russia imposed retaliatory sanctions on 13 Canadian officials including members of the Parliament of Canada, banning them from entering Russia.
Expanded Western sanctions in mid-March coursed through financial markets, hitting the business interests of some of Russia's richest people.
The Americans centred on the heart of Moscow's leadership, though the EU's initial list shied from targeting Putin's inner circle.
As ratings agencies Fitch and Standard & Poor's downgraded Russia's credit outlook, Russian banks warned of a sanctions-induced recession, the country braced for capital outflows for the first three months of 2014 to reach $70 billion, more than the entirety of outflows for 2013, and Russian government-bond issues plummeted by three-quarters compared with the same period the previous year.
Novatek, Russia's second-largest gas producer, saw $2.5bn in market value wiped out when its shares sank by nearly 10%, rendering Putin's close friend Gennady Timchenko, who has a 23% stake in the company, $575m poorer.
In response to having its voting rights revoked, Russia in June 2017 suspended its budget payments to the Council of Europe, with Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov stating payments would not resume until all rights of Russia's delegation were fully restored.
Council Secretary General Thorbjørn Jagland has suggested lifting the sanctions to avoid the impact of mounting budgetary restraints.
National Geographic Society stated that their policy is ""to portray current reality"" and ""Crimea, if it is formally annexed by Russia, would be shaded gray"", but also further remarked that this step does not suggest recognising the legitimacy of such.
As of April 2014, Google Maps displays Crimea as a disputed territory to most viewers.
Yandex displays Crimea as part of Russia for .ru and .com domains since the end of March 2014.
As of March 2014, Bing Maps,OpenStreetMap and HERE displayed Crimea as belonging to Ukraine.
In particular, OpenStreetMap requested its users to refrain from editing borders and administrative relations of subdivisions located in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol until 31 May 2014.
On 5 June 2014, OpenStreetMap switched to a territorial dispute option, displaying Crimea as a disputed territory belonging to both countries.
Shortly after, Larousse corrected the mistake on the Atlas on their internet version, and confirmed that Crimea is a region of Ukraine.
The Italian-language magazine of geopolitics Limes maps Crimea as a part of Russia since December 2015.
Following protests from the Ukrainian embassy in Italy, the magazine editor Lucio Caracciolo wrote that ""the map reflects reality.
Russian version of Apple's App Store began to show Crimea as part of Russia on 27 November 2019.
Ukraine claims 20 February 2014 as the date of ""the beginning of the temporary occupation of Crimea and Sevastopol by Russia"", citing timeframe inscribed on the Russian medal ""For the Return of Crimea"", and in 2015 the Ukrainian parliament officially designated the date as such.
The document entered into force on 1 April 2014, but pending that was applied provisionally since very signing.
In addition, the statement said that certain lawmakers of every level have begun separatist negotiations with representatives of foreign nations.
OCLC 909325250. ^ ""7683rd meeting of the United Nations Security Council.
In that regard, I have to remind the Council that the official medal that was produced by the Russian Federation for the so-called return of Crimea has the dates on it, starting with 20 February, which is the day before that agreement was brought to the attention of the Security Council by the representative of the Russian Federation.
Therefore, the Russian Federation started – not just planned, but started – the annexation of Crimea the day before we reached the first agreement and while President Yanukovych was still in power.
By March 26, the annexation was essentially complete, and Russia began returning seized military hardware to Ukraine.
Before dawn on Feb. 27, at least two dozen heavily armed men stormed the Crimean parliament building and the nearby headquarters of the regional government, bringing with them a cache of assault rifles and rocket propelled grenades.
A few hours later, Aksyonov walked into the parliament and, after a brief round of talks with the gunmen, began to gather a quorum of the chamber's lawmakers.
One Marine's Story Jesse Granger 29 January 2015 www.army.mil, accessed 27 February 2022 ^ ""Bitter Crimean Anniversary – Victims of Russian Annexation"". khpg.org.
Retrieved 17 January 2022. ^ ""media24_files2F15.pdf "" . www.taraskuzio.net.
Retrieved 24 March 2015. ^ a b c ""Joint Statement by the United States and Ukraine"". mfa.gov.ua.
September 2015 ^ Rada names 20 Feb.14 as official date of Crimea, Sevastopol occupation by Russia.
September 2015 ^ President recognised 20 February as the official date of Crimean occupation.
German entities have invested roughly €20bn in Russia and some 6,200 companies – mostly small and medium-sized Mittelstand businesses – are active there.
Deputy economy minister Andrei Klepach estimates that Russian capital outflows will total up to $70bn in the first quarter, more than the $63bn that left the country during the whole of 2013.
In the short-term Crimea shall remain in both the Ukraine and Russia administrative relations, and be indicated as disputed.
We recognize that being in two administrative relations is not a good long-term solution, although the region is likely to be indicated as disputed for some time.
