On December 23rd, Gallup headlines “Ukrainians Disillusioned With Leadership,” and reports that “nearly nine in 10 Ukrainians say corruption is widespread in their government, and about eight in 10 see the same widespread problem in their country’s businesses.” 8% of Ukrainians now say they “have confidence … about the national government.” 17% approve of the job-performance of their President, Petro Poroshenko.
While the pre-coup President, Viktor Yanukovych, was in office, 2010-2014, that figure had been averaging about 23%, and was never as low as Poroshenko’s is now.
Gallup reports, “fewer Ukrainians now say their leadership is taking them in the right direction than before the revolution,” but that statement calling this coup a ‘revolution’ embodies the propaganda-lie of one of Gallup’s main clients, the United States government itself, which calls the United States coup in Ukraine in February 2014 a “revolution,” when every honest and knowledgeable person now knows that this United States government claim — that it had helped install democracy instead of having ended it in Ukraine on 20 February 2014 — to have been a lie.
It had been that because it was the first coup to be videoed by numerous people from many different angles with their cellphones and by TV cameras, uploaded to the Web by even anti-Yanukovych countries such as the UK’s BBC; and those videos, the best compilation of which is here, make clear that this was, indeed, a coup d’etat, no authentic revolution at all, such as the United States government claims.
Furthermore, the EU’s investigator who had been assigned to report to their Foreign Affairs Minister Cathy Ashton about the overthrow, reported to her that it had been a coup, and that even Petro Poroshenko himself said that “our” side — meaning the anti-Yanukovych people, had done it.
That area of Ukraine was called Donbass, and it had no say whatsoever in determining Ukraine’s President after the coup, because the new coup-imposed Ukrainian government was already bombing it, starting on 9 May 2014.
Here is the man whom the United States Ambassador in Kiev, Geoffrey Pyatt, worked with to organize the coup , the co-founder of one of the two racist-fascist, or ideologically nazi, political parties in Ukraine.
But Pyatt’s appointee left the coup’s gun-play and military planning to that man’s paramilitary friend who had founded the other of the two Ukrainian nazi parties.
And then, right after the coup, America’s stooge who now was running Ukraine for the United States regime, Arseniy Yatsenyuk, installed leaders of Ukraine’s two rabidly anti-Russian racist fascist or nazi parties into all of the top internal security and military positions, in order to carry out what they called the ‘Anti Terrorist Operation’ , or program to exterminate and drive out the residents of Donbass.
The prestigious fascist United States think tank, the Brookings Institution, urged Obama to increase the firebombings of Donbass, but he decided not to follow that advice, at that particular time.
Obama wants ultimately to base American nuclear missiles in Ukraine on Russia’s border , and this coup and ethnic-cleansing is how he goes about achieving his goal.
The entire plan had started under United States President George Herbert Walker Bush, in 1990; and every United States President since then has advanced it further.
The United States, ever since around 1980, hasn’t been a democracy; it’s a dictatorship.
United States President Obama imposed the economic sanctions against Russia for Russia’s having accepted the pleas of Crimeans to rejoin Russia, and for Russia’s opposition to the Obama-imposed government’s ethnic-cleansing program to exterminate and/or expell from Ukraine the residents of the Donbass region of Ukraine.
The same European Union that accepted Obama’s bloody February 2014 Ukrainian coup have also been accepting his ethnic-cleansing campaign there; and Obama insists upon its being ultimately continued, notwithstanding his Secretary of State, John Kerry’s, internal opposition to it.
