Adam Eberhardt The Eurasian Union is Russia’s flagship project, by use of which it aims to institutionally subordinate the post-Soviet states to itself using political ties and the projected common economic space.
The Kremlin has so far managed to persuade Belarus and Kazakhstan, and tentatively also Armenia, to join this integration project, which on the surface looks like a multilateral initiative but in reality conceals a network of bilateral relations centred on Russia.
That still seemed feasible even in 2013, but the Maidan and the Russian-Ukrainian war have undone this possibility.
However, they also opened up an alternative scenario for Russia, one in which the Western states recognise the Eurasian Union as a legitimate partner in discussions about a new order in Europe with a view to restoring peace in Ukraine.
It is worth taking into account the strategic consequences of that scenario.
Russia’s plan to progressively vassalise Ukraine openly anti-Russian sentiments.
Russia’s response to the Ukrainian revoarmed conflict develops and how the political lution,e. the annexation of Crimea and the orsituation changes in Ukraine, integration with chestration of the armed conflict in Donbass ofRussia will remain a politically discredited idea fered Moscow a false sense of triumph, but will in Ukraine for the foreseeable future, as was make it even more difficult for Russia’s strategic the case with Russian-Georgian relations after objective to be attained.
In the case of Ukraine, this of foreign trade, but because it was concerned tendency will be strengthened by the exclusion about the long-term geopolitical consequences of pro-Russian populations of Crimea and Donof the possible modernisation of the participatbass from the Ukrainian political space. ing states.
Similarly, the main problem does not currently concern the trade sanctions imposed The fact that Russia’s efforts to attract Ukraine by Russia on Ukraine or those by the EU and to the Eurasian Union ended in failure does not Russia on each other, but the Russian tanks mean that the project will no longer serve as in Crimea and Donbass.
In such circumstances, an instrument in Russia’s policy towards Ukraine the proposal of economic dialogue between in its attempt to derail Ukraine’s European aspithe EU and the EEU is a veiled invitation to seek rations and ultimately re-position it firmly in the a political compromise with Russia in a new forRussian sphere of influence.
And it is an invitation that is psychologithe Russian leaders have been trying in recent cally understandable, given the abysmal failure weeks to persuade the Western states to develattempts made so far to normalise the situaop a mechanism for constant dialogue between tion; it is, however, also, politically naïve. the EU and the EEU, with a view to contributing to a de-escalation of tension in the region.
Given the inefficacy of other peace formats, the initiaThe prospects of any constructive diative has had a welcome reception from some Eulogue about European economic integraropean politicians, including the German Ministion between the EU and the EEU are curter for Foreign Affairs Frank-Walter Steinmeier. rently non-existent.
What it is interested triggered by Russia is strictly political in nature, in is transforming Ukraine into a permanently and the alleged contradictions of economic unstable and inefficient state that will serve as interests are a mere excuse.
Europäische Friedensordnungsteht auf dem the current policy turns out to be too costly in Spiel, Die Welt, 16.11.2014, h t t p : / / w ww e l t . d e / p o l i t i k / d e u t s c h l a n d / a r t i relation to the gains it generates.
It is therecle134378688/Europaeische-Friedensordnung-stehtfore in the West’s interest to increase the price auf-dem-Spiel.html 3 Cf.
This is especially conflict, obliged to make and deliver on comthe case since concessions and a willingness to mitments.
It was Russia, not the Eurasian Uncompromise are regarded as signs of weakness ion, that annexed Crimea and started the war in in the Russian political culture and only encourDonbass by sending troops and arms and shellage more offensive action. ing Ukraine’s border areas from its own territory.
Therefore, restoring peace will require a change Accepting Russia’s proposal to recognise the in the policy of Russia, not of the Eurasian Union Eurasian Union as a partner to the EU would which is a façade entity anyway when it comes appear to be a symmetric step while in fact to foreign policy competences. it would not be.
Unlike the democratic and pluralistic European Union, which is Furthermore, bringing the EEU to the negotiatthe collective voice of a larger part of the coning table would offer Russia a convenient argutinent, the EEU would be a mouthpiece of the ment to force Belarus and Kazakhstan to align regional hegemon whose aim is to force its their positions with that of Russia.
The ability of neighbours into an integration project. those states to distance themselves from Russia is limited already, but it is beneficial from the point of view of the West that they still retain Making the EEU a party to the negotiations some margin of autonomy in matters concernwould offer Russia a convenient argument ing Ukraine – it was because of this margin that to force Belarus and Kazakhstan to align Minsk could serve as a compromise location for their positions with that of Russia. the ceasefire negotiations in September 2014.
It is likely that any peace process implemented Transforming the format of negotiations by inin the EU-EEU format would gradually reduce cluding the EEU would have no impact on the Ukraine’s role from an active member of talks actual decision-making process on the Rusto a mere subject of discussion.
As a structure controlled by Russia, already has a military advantage over Ukraine, the EEU would fully represent the Kremlin’s pogreater economic potential and a stronger insition in any negotiations, especially since the ternational position, would be additionally talks would concern subjects that are of funstrengthened in the institutional dimension damental importance for Russia, but not for as a representative of the region.
There are no reaformat Ukraine would find itself under more sons to believe that Mr Putin or Mr Lavrov pressure and it would be forced to accept sowould be more inclined to make concessions lutions agreed by two organisations which it if they were speaking “on behalf of the EEU”. does not participate in.
An additional Union in the East, since the EEU has been conadvantage Russia would gain from the impleceived as an alternative to the EU, and not as mentation of the above scenario would concern a complementary structure. a further marginalisation of American influence on the emerging new The very recognition of the Eurasian Union as European security architecture. a party to the talks by the Western states would set a precedent with significant consequences for European security.
Conducting talks with Russia would not limit itself to establishRussia in the format of two competing inteing a kind of “condominium” of the EU gration blocs would be conducive to a new and the EEU, but would use the dispropordivision of Europe.
It would make it easier for tion in determination and the resources Russian diplomacy to move away from discuscommitted in order to quickly reduce any sions about the international order in Europe agreement reached over the heads of the and towards negotiations about where to draw Ukrainians to a strategic abdication made the line which splits Europe into two parts. by the European Union in the East.
That is Russia would claim not only to represent the because the EEU has been conceived as EEU member states, which it cannot practically an alternative to the EU, and not as a combe prevented from doing, but also to be the plementary structure. spokesperson for the interests of a more broadly understood region.
The Russian side has been unsuccessfully lobbying for an arrangement If the EU today agrees to enter inter-bloc conof this kind in previous years, as it advocated sultations on Ukraine, tomorrow it will face an institutionalisation of NATO’s dialogue with Russia’s attempts to impose a similar format for the Collective Security Treaty Organisation, all issues in the EU’s policy towards the Eastern the Russia-led military alliance.
The Kremlin’s reaction to the gesture of good will on the If Russia managed to impose a discourse cenpart of the EU,e. the postponement of provitred on the rivalry between geopolitical blocs, sional application of the association agreement that would be a prelude to the Western states with Ukraine to 2016, may serve as an example recognising the post-Soviet area as a Russian of the Kremlin’s progressing geopolitical offensphere of influence not only de facto, but also sive.
This is the risk ing Russia is costly, and the West’s ability to exinvolved in allowing Russia to take part in the tract concessions from the Russian leadership at negotiations on behalf of the Eurasian Union. this stage is still limited.
However, in this war, which is also a war of nerves, strategic patience Over the course of this year Ukrainians have is necessary.
The fact that the set of effective sopaid a high price for their European aspirations lutions is limited cannot serve as an argument in and their objection to being incorporated into favour of solutions which are clearly detrimental.
