The aggressive actions of the Kremlin are unprecedented in the modern era.
All these offensive incidents are accompanied by a massive, persistent, ongoing, brutally aggressive disinformation campaign.
It has been building a wide range of communication structures in most of the EU Member States, platforms that have already been functioning for a long time and have reached considerable results that cannot be erased without significant long-term counter-effort.
The thought that Trump might cede Crimea for piffle in debts or other trade.
I could wag the finger all day in the direction of Putin and his inner circle and the Phantoms of the Cold War , and I would still have to deal with the resistance posed by 15 years of the greater population dwelling on “Islamic Terrorism” with nary a look back at the Cold War, much less a look forward to Russia’s transformation into an ultra-national neo-imperial state.
It really underestimates how well the American professional political community — analysts, scholars, politicians — see Moscow as Putin has rebuilt it and sustained so much Soviet Era baggage and its inability to chart a middle course anywhere — but it may please those less engaged in politics.
This morning, I glanced at a Foreign Policy headline on how democracies fall apart.
I should get to that article, but the official state remains quite robust.
Trump may do the right great American things despite himself and, to lay in Churchill’s observation, without having to try all the wrong ones first.
This is a dangerous period for everyone as Putin with Khamenei and through Assad has chosen to demonstrate a depth in callousness, cruelty, dishonesty, and madness in Syria beyond anything witnessed anywhere else in the world in recent memory.
For five years or so I have seen repeated in untold visual analogs the image of a child’s hand gripping a mother’s forearm — no bodies — in relation to the indiscriminate bombing of noncombatants in Syria.
Such murderers seem to be begging to be stopped — and maybe that would be a mercy — but the just poking along western response has been to watch the Russian economy wither while Assad burns Syria into an unsustainable nothing — except, perhaps, as a base for Russian military presence — and neither Moscow nor Tehran get anywhere with horrifying the world.
It has in it the prayer that the state prove stronger than its leading statesman, and I think the odds fair that it will do that if a President — any at any time — embarks on a dictator’s mission.
Several small extremist groups are active in Hungary, but MNA is unique in that it has extensive ties with Russian military intelligence.
It was in connection with a lesser-known right-wing portal called Hídfő , which broke the story that Hungary was secretly supplying tanks to the Ukrainian army.
For some time it has served as a vehicle of Russian disinformation, a growing concern in Europe and elsewhere.
In fact, by now, at least according to national security officials, Hídfő is entirely under Russian direction, either directly or indirectly.
The best summary of the history of MNA and its activities can be found in an investigative piece written by András Dezső and Veronika Munk of Index.
The National Bureau of Investigation was Supposed to search Stephen Györkös’s house Earlier this week, but When The officers Showa up at his home the 76-years-old man opened fire at THEMIS , and the 46-years-old police officer died in the shooting immediately.
This started well before the eruption of the Russian-Ukrainian conflict.
Russian military formations and their surrogates, including advanced weapons systems, continue to pour into the Donbas region, in eastern Ukraine.
Ukrainian defense forces and the civilian population along the war zone are subjected to incessant shelling – over 10,000 have died, thousands more wounded and over 1. million have been driven from their homes.
Therefore, we appeal to President Obama and to the international community to force Putin to stop the killing.
NATO appears so far reactive as regards the Russian investment in low-level fighting with artillery in Crimea.
It has met the Russian presence with its own presence, but it has left to Ukrainian forces the mounting of resistance to Russian aggression.
What follows is simply the morning’s compilation of background source material in reverse chronological order.
They are creeping across all of Europe; for the time being, they wear suits and, instead of sinking of boats, they use propaganda and espionage, money and servants who help them destroy democracy and freedom.
It is not possible to overlook the dangers and ignore the crimes committed by Putin.
It is not possible to forget the thousands of dead Chechnyans and Georgians, the theft of Crimea and the thousands of dead Ukrainians; it is not possible to ignore the war crimes committed in Syria.
It isn’t possible to ignore the despotism exercised against the political prisoners in Russia, be they committed against Russian citizens or against abducted foreigners, such as Nadezhda Savchenko and Oleg Sentscov.
Hundreds of thousands of dead, with some – like Nemtsov or Litvinenko – known by their name, but others just grey dead faces on photographs documenting the crimes of Putin, Kadyrov and al-Assad.
Putin, take your little green men back, stop waging wars and occupying territories, supporting other dictators and oppressing your own nation.
Read more at Czech intelligence alarmed by Russian ‘threat’, EUObserver, September 2, 2016.
Crimean Tatars had just ended their Friday prayers and were rounded up en masse.
With no suggestion that anybody was suspected of an offence, the raid, by men with machine guns, can only be called an overt attempt to terrorize Crimean Muslims.
This is not the first such act of primitive intimidation, with at least one of the previous occasions making it quite clear that the Russian occupation regime is targeting Crimean Tatars in general.
Russia steps up terror offensive with armed raid on mosque in Occupied Crimea :: khpg.org – Reported May 7, 2016.
The new caliphate would unify the Muslim community in a unitary “superstate” of unified Muslim-majority countries spanning from Morocco in West Africa to the southern Philippines in East Asia.
If Russia and the Tatars are to get along, they will have to overcome not only the bitter legacy of the 1944 deportations, but also centuries of conflict.
Russian Tsar Catherine the Great’s conquest of the Crimean Khanate in 1774 led to a mass emigration of Tatars to the Ottoman Empire that was encouraged by the new Russian authorities.
Catherine then proceeded to distribute vast lands that had been used by Tatars for grazing to Russian, Ukrainian, German, and foreign nobles and farming communities.
The Crimean war of 1853-56 spurred another mass emigration of Crimean Tatars.
During the three centuries when the Crimean Tatar Khanate was part of the Ottoman Empire , one of its primary activities was seizing captives from Russia, Ukraine, and the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and selling them as slaves in the Ottoman Empire and Middle East.
In the present, Putin’s Era, labeling Russia’s overt investigation of the Crimean Tatar community and the brushing away of the Islamist taint linked to Hizb ut-Tahrir perhaps signals that disingenuous writing that would promote chaos, at least, if not evil outright under the guise of concern with liberation and human rights.
Suspicion of within-mosque association with Hizb ut-Tahrir might rightly call any number of authorities, Ukrainian no less than Russian, to alert and to action.
The same may not condone The Bear’s hamfisted and often suspect methods, but it may excuse them in the interest of further explicating political drifts and their strength within so many conflicted and conflict-creating communities within Russia and within the Russian “sphere of challenge” — defined by annexations, frozen conflicts, infiltrations, information warfare, etc. — redeveloped KGB-style by Vladimir Putin.
As Halya Coynash’s writing makes the rounds, the example of that with which this post was started and titled, one may wish to keep in mind post-Soviet Russia’s deeply feudal revanch under Putin’s guidance.
As with the delinquent fireman who sets the fire that he can put out, Russia’s state game appears to involve creating the problem that its own “heroic” self might solve — an evil design, for sure, but if it has worked so far, and for Russia, so well, lol, in Syria, may God let it not take off in Crimea.
If the symbolic attributes of Mejlis are banned, uncertainty will prevail concerning the use of the flag of Crimean Tatars.
