This article goes beyond RT’s branding to explore the broadcaster’s nation branding of Russia.
By analysing RT’s coverage of the Republic of Crimea in 2016, and using a framing approach, the article explores RT’s branding of Russia and the online audience’s engagement with this within the contemporary transnational, convergent media environment.
This article forms part of the Theorizing Media in Nation Branding special issue.
Keywords Crimea, framing, nation branding, online audience, post-broadcast, RT (Russia Today), strategies Introduction Nation branding means presenting a country as a brand, a ‘product’ to an external audience through forms of strategic communication.
It relies on a set of ‘shared’ values and experiences , although the ongoing media convergence adds a new twist to this relatively new phenomenon.
This article strives to re-orient the discussion more towards Russia’s nation branding strategies.
It is generally understood as aiming to coopt or ‘shape preferences of others’ by projecting an attractive image of a country.
A country’s favourable image is pragmatically believed to enhance its diplomatic efforts, economic advantages, cultural and symbolic capital.
Furthermore, Grix and Lee’s definition of soft power as ‘a discursive mechanism for increased agency in global affairs through the performative politics of attraction’ brings soft power and nation branding closer together.
A nation’s brand is also created via discursive mechanisms, via the re-circulation of images, symbols and meanings.
However, an exploration of these different components of nation branding is beyond the scope of this article.
What is more important here is the dynamic, processual nature of branding, which implies incompleteness , fluidity and ongoing re-construction.
For instance, the more horizontal architecture of participatory digital media means that audiences engage in ‘hollowing out’ a nation’s image through their diverse and multiple readings of the brand, leaving it open to further alteration and experimentation.
This article explores RT’s branding of its founding nation, questioning the dimensions of the nation brand it promotes and the strategies it uses in the post-broadcast era.
RT provides an examplary case study because it represents a straightforward case of nation branding with clearly identified actors and branding strategy.
Its remit, discussed below, aligns with a specific, recent and evolving nation branding strategy.
RT was launched in English first, and then in other foreign languages , revealing that it was created for an external, international, multilingual and media-savvy audience.
The post-broadcast era is characterised by the re-shaped media landscape, which transcends national boundaries, media channels, communication platforms and types of authorship.
In this context, to appeal to a wide audience diverging in demographics, interests, locations and modes of access, the broadcasters need to ensure that they strike a chord with the audience.
However, the marketing and production side of RT’s broadcasts is beyond the scope of this article.
Instead, I focus on RT’s nation branding strategies as identified in its content.
The article starts with an overview of RT’s broadcasting philosophy, and then outlines the methodology and data analysis used in my research.
Framing analysis (Entman, 1993) and Gitlin’s interpretation of ideological hegemony help deconstruct RT’s media coverage and examine its specific components in the context of the Ukraine– Russia conflict with Russia’s re-unification with/annexation of Crimea2 in March 2014.
RT’s evolution and its broadcasting ‘philosophy’ This section traces the key moments that established RT – an international multi-language broadcaster founded with the direct support of the Russian government in 2005.
RT first began broadcasting in English and then launched channels in Arabic in 2007 and Spanish in 2009.
However, the station’s original approach proved rather rigid and lacked broader appeal.
RT interwove global news with Russian-based ones to draw attention to the country’s affairs and its regional influence.
As a result, the audience viewed it as a direct mouthpiece of Russian propaganda.
RT’s new tagline reflects its positioning, aiming to appeal to audiences who have a natural anti-establishment, anti-corporation and anti-western predisposition.
This ‘counter-hegemonic struggle’ presupposes the absence of any ‘objectivity’ and sanctions an eclectic and opportunistic approach.
As a result, ‘all means are acceptable’ and there is an ‘excuse’ for RT’s inconsistent and, at times, unreliable reporting.
It also enables RT to refute any criticism of its output, since it can be framed within the suppression of a ‘free speech’ argument.
This tactic is similar to the ‘information war’, or what journalist Petr Pomerantsev calls the ‘weaponization’ of information, whereby some Russian media no longer produce straightforward propaganda but diverse, and occasionally contradictory, accounts which cannot easily be verified, to create confusion and doubt.
This notion of RT’s information counter-flow is very broad and encompasses anti-western views, conspiracy theories and a particular type of journalistic practice.
Reports focus on issues such as racial unrest or growing social inequality in the United States, the surge of migrants during the Syrian crisis, and problems with multiculturalism in Western Europe.
By challenging the key broadcasters’ monopoly, it also alludes to Russia’s global ambitions.
Its remit is to challenge the framework within which it operates (i.e. the broadcasting practice of well-established western news organisations such as CNN and BBC) and demonstrate its difference from other providers.
This ‘cool-ness’ might be appealing to a more rebellious audience that wants to be trendy.
These initial insights into RT will be expanded on in the analysis section below, which explores RT’s framing of Russia’s brand and the audience’s related prosumption practices.
Methodology The study reviewed 1 year’s coverage of developments asociated with Crimea’s ‘re-unification’ with Russia.
As the conflict in eastern Ukraine is ongoing and Crimea’s new status has only partially been accepted by the world community, it is important for Russia to maintain the post-Sochi Olympic Games’ momentum in broadcasting a positive image.
To ensure my sample’s representativeness, I ran a number of word searches for ‘Ukraine’, ‘Crimea’, ‘crisis’, ‘conflict’ and ‘annexation’ and monitored key concepts and themes in relevant media reports.
The overall framework used to trace RT’s nation branding strategies includes examining direct statements and assertions, inferential assumptions and critical omissions or absences.
The study looks at the most commonly used frames, shifts in emphasis, tone and voices present.
I then cross-referenced these with other relevant reports and previous studies to inform my analysis.
The online searches were conducted using the English language version of RT available in the United Kingdom.
The number of articles in each set shows that politico-economic issues are the priority, followed by legal and security issues and then socio-cultural matters.
RT’s techniques and tactics for promoting Russia’s brand (direct and indirect strategies, as well as omissions) become more sophisticated and consider the post-broadcast media environment.
Events to mark the second anniversary of Crimea’s ‘re-unification’ provided an obvious occasion to boost Russia’s profile via direct positive branding.
However, foregrounding other aspects, such as the ‘perverted’ western media coverage, diverts attention from those considerations.
A miscellaneous report about Russia providing gas supplies to a freezing Ukrainian border town is a clear case of explicit positive branding.
A more indirect strategy includes mainstreaming a theme across time, use of imagery and shifts of emphasis.
For instance, set II consistently shows that Russia is abiding by the Minsk agreements , and even the reports about EU’s sanctions are used to reinforce this idea.
Eleven of 21 stories assert that Russia is fulfilling the agreements, so sanctions should therefore be lifted – or they declare that various EU states, like France, are challenging the need to prolong the sanctions.
Set I includes a large number of reports accompanied by picturesque and tranquil scenes of Crimea, incidentally promoting a positive image of Russia’s attractive new asset and reaffirming the peace and stability ‘granted’ via re-unification.
Set II shifts the emphasis from a negative perception to a more nuanced delineation of attitudes towards Russia.
Merkel says Russia key to European security but defends NATO build up’, 7 July.
Above all, the report indirectly asserts Russia’s stance as an important and equal global player.
There are two Crimea-centric articles on the economy , three on human rights (its openness to external ‘inspections’, which implies democracy and transparency), one on human rights violations in Ukraine and one on public support for Russia.
Russia’s agency is clear in five reports about security (NATO; terrorist threat from Ukraine; installing radars in Crimea and banning a Tatar extremists’ organisation in Crimea), and three stories about celebrating the second anniversary of re-unification, with related opinion polls.
So although ‘Crimea’ is featured in the reports, it is generally ‘spoken about on behalf of’ Russia.
The stories directly concerning Russia have the most urgency, importance and weight.
Indirect branding occurs by mixing news with entertainment and involving social media.
In this sample, RT used the story of a Crimean-born chess player winning an international competition to incidentally remind the audience about Crimea and boost Russia’s international reputation.
However, a sensitive issue like Crimea does not lend itself to extensive use in entertainment and tabloidisation.
The logic of incorporating social media in the reports largely follows the idea of direct or indirect support of the framing.
Thus, the Deterrence and Dialogue report in set II uses RT’s own tweet about a survey of German attitudes to NATO alongside previous RT footage of Kosovo, linking this to Crimea and a report on the Tatars.
Set III criticises ‘so-called’ experts on Ukraine, citing Twitter correspondence between two users.
They seem to have been chosen at random and, interestingly, the popularity of online resources is not the main factor for their selection.
Thus, the framing here is mostly clustered around Russia as a global player advancing a multipolar world (Russia’s involvement in Crimea, Syria, challenging EU sanctions and NATO), as a powerful protector of its region and Putin as the embodiment of Russia.
RT’s reporting within this stream echoes the Russian saying that defence is the best form of attack.
While recognition of Russia’s re-absorption of Crimea is important, so too the Kremlin will press for Washington to pressure Ukraine to fully implement the Minsk Agreement, which was supposed to resolve the Donbas conflict … RT frequently uses a mirroring technique.
Similarly, set II reports portray Ukraine in a negative light (e.g. radicals commemorating the anniversary of Euromaidan, or attacking Russian banks in Kiev), maintaining Russia’s stance that the Ukrainian conflict was instigated by radicals and extremists.
These kinds of direct attack are supplemented with other techniques, such as discrediting an opponent.
Thus, depicting Ukraine negatively entails invoking a contrast – frequently alongside a positive branding of Russia.
All these paint Ukraine in an adverse light, for instance, its destabilising relationships (preannexation), repression of its citizens, ‘looting’ resources after the fall of the USSR and masterminding an energy blocade.
In this way, Russia’s actions are consistently framed positively as pro-democratic and legitimate.
The final strategy involves other indirect ways of framing, for instance, omitting certain issues or facts.
O’Sullivan states that RT’s overall trend for silence involves either downplaying or omitting stories that are unfavourable for the country, such as economic recession, budget cuts and sanctions – there are no reports of the economic impact of the sanctions on Russia, for example.
The Crimean Tatars example reveals that RT chose to factually report the issue (Stalin’s deportation of Tatars) instead of ignoring it.
This aimed to demonstrate a certain objectivity and unbiased coverage and show that RT/Russia was not afraid of controversial issues.
In doing so, RT uses an incoherent, ambivalent and contradictory framing.
Decades after Tatar deportation, the situation is far from black and white’ in set III mentions the Tatars’ deportation in 1944 , it constructs a historical narrative which highlights certain aspects, such as Stalinism and the deportation of other ethnic groups, while downplaying other significant facts, for example, the Tatars’ involvement with Nazi Germany.
This article depicts Crimean Tatars positively, in complete contrast to a report less than a month apart , which accused their top legislative body, the Mejlis, of extremism and banned it.
This kind of inconsistency and ambiguity remains unchallenged, as RT’s ‘counter-hegemonic’ remit means that it has no obligation to develop the topic further or follow it up.
RT reporting also uses meta-discursivity and performativity informed by the post-broadcast multi-platformativity.
A case in point is a high-profile scandal of the on-air resignation of two journalists – newsreader Liz Wahl and reporter Sara Firth – in the wake of Russia–Ukraine conflict amplified by the annexation of Crimea.
In turn, RT released a statement that ‘ when someone makes a big public show of a personal decision, it is nothing more than a self-promotional stunt.
Then, Simonyan’s LiveJournal blog alleged that Firth had received another job offer a fortnight before her ‘spontaneous’ resignation.
This inference of RT’s high standards of journalistic practice via Martin’s ‘performative authentication’ strengthens the frame that Russia supports freedom of speech.
It strengthens the frame of ‘raising the standards of reporting’, ‘uncovering truth’ and challenging the western establishment, as well as reasserting Russia’s confidence.
Before analysing how RT’s online audience perceive the projected image of Russia, I will situate RT’s coverage of Crimea within global information flows.
By moving such incidents from the periphery to a core narrative of information flows and positioning them on a par with other global events and linking them to a wider EU/NATO agenda, Russia subtly attempts to shape perceptions of its sphere of influence, in both the ‘near’ and more distant abroad.
This is especially evident in set II, where the Minsk agreements are used as a tool to reiterate Russia’s position as a powerful, modern state, criticising sanctions and highlighting western bias towards Russia.
However, in reality, postannexed Crimea is generally ignored by mainstream broadcasters, who are preoccupied with world affairs such as Trump’s election and post-Brexit Europe.
Thus, this narrative remains in the margins of the global media environment.
Russia’s framing and online audience This section examines how participants in networked cross-media practices engage with RT’s framing.
However, one comment which included Russian swearwords and asserted the irreversible nature of re-unifying Crimea remained (F … off our Crimea (‘Xui tebe v rot a ne Krim’)), calling into question the level of scrutiny the posts are subjected to, and the moderation rules.
Because the comments are anonymous (submitted under arbitrary usernames), some of them are probably online trolls, so the findings should be treated with caution.
The social media figures were checked on 1 February 2017, and there was no obvious correlation between the number of tweets and comments under an article.
Some articles were re-tweeted more than 2000 times, but hardly any comments were posted, while others did not trend on social media at all.
Possibly, Minsk agreements’ reports with a more formulaic themes and dominant experts’ voices were less suited to extensive online discussions.
The most popular reports in set III were on Eurovision and the ‘secret’ Ukrainian terror plot; the two least popular were about Crimean Tatars.
Patterns of tweets and comments largely overlap, reflecting more genuine public support of this topic with a rapid increase in interest immediately after the Eurovision media event.
There were instances of flaming , trolling behaviour (a user posting one-liners, for example, ‘Americans are surprised that in Russia people have their own children’, ‘USA are crazy about Crimea.
The users often stated where they were from , for instance, ‘I’m in Australia and believe Crimea is part of Russia’ , which again raises questions about who is behind this and what their agenda is.
At the same time, ‘supporters’ of the Russian brand can interpret the broadcaster’s framing in their own ways.
For instance, there are multiple readings of anti-westernism, as users conflate various groups and post xenophobic outpourings on RT’s online platform.
The report from set I contains claims such as ‘Crimea is Russia and Russia is Crimea.
Nothing the United States and West can do about that is going to change the reality!’, ’Crimea is part of Russia.
RT’s framing of Russia undergoes certain permutations once exposed to an even more diverse online audience.
At the same time, RT’s framing of Russia as ‘not afraid of criticism’ reduces the weight of opposing comments.
Thus, RT’s reliance on the logic and shared practices of digital participatory media cultures is problematic.
This is especially true at a time when the new mediascape lacks clarity on self-governance, mutual governance and regulation.
Users’ motivations for participating in social media are also extremely varied, ranging from affirmations of national identity (for instance, by a member of the Russian transnational diaspora), to others who depend on a technologically conditioned and mediated selfhood.
While some of the groups are attracted to RT by its remit, others are driven by a ‘consumer culture’, their identities shaped by online prosumption and self-commoditisation.
Some individuals strive to achieve some sort of narrative closure from RT’s deliberately contradictory coverage; while others are attracted by the ‘gamification’ principle, in which they compete to score the highest number of re-tweets, followers, popularity based on ironic observations on RT’s coverage and so on.
RT’s favouring of conspiracy theories adds another stimulus to encourage audiences to engage in this ‘game’ and assemble various pieces of the puzzle into a different, coherent narrative.
The broadcasters’ reputation and reporting are contributing elements of a nation’s brand.
So the BBC contributes to the nation branding by broadcasting in line with its ethos of neutrality, objectivity and balance as reflected in the Charter.
As an emerging broadcaster with a less established status, RT is unable to capitalise on its reputation in a similar vein.
Instead, it strives to enhance the country’s image in a less subtle and consistent way as part of its ‘counter-hegemonic’ agenda.
RT’s strategies in promoting Russia’s image have become more complex and sophisticated.
The research showed that RT’s nation branding efforts involve both positive and negative direct and indirect strategies, as well as omissions, ‘partial’ reporting and performativity.
These strategies result in incongruencies and contradictions in framing, such as Russia being depicted as both an assertive global player and a victim of western bullying.
Despite a percieved lack of coherent framing, RT’s counter-hegemonic agenda ensures sustainability of the key narratives.
It also forms part of the strategic principle driving its nation branding communication.
By continously challenging a ‘corrupt and hypocritical western establishment’, RT implies the existence of an alternative power centre – Russia – ‘holding it to account’, acting as a guardian of conservative values and an equal actor in global affairs, thereby promoting a positive image of Russia.
Thus, the politics of attraction are based on a counterintuitive principle, with nation branding being predominantly based on a counter-hegemonic position and negation implying positive attributes through the ‘deconstruction’ of an opponent.
This analysis also revealed that RT’s nation branding strategies tread a fine line between freedom of expression and subversive manipulation of information.
It reflects Russia’s instrumental approach to its reputation management.
As this research shows, there is a certain level of support for RT’s strategies, while audience comments display a low level of internalisation, with users crudely repeating key messages and frames within their own competing agendas.
A further longitudinal inquiry into digital re-imagination of Russia’s nation brand from ‘below’ via, for instance, users’ news-driven digital storytelling on other social platforms (including Russian-speaking audience of RT) is needed.
Indeed, issues around controlling the message and the logic of co-producing a shared narrative via new media-enabled platforms remain open to negotiation and exploitation.
Audiences’ virtual engagement via social media platforms entails an integral tension between consuming, subverting and appropriating broadcasters’ narratives for their own ends.
It remains to be seen how RT’s move to repackage its content for contemporary networked cross-media practices will play out.
Funding The author received no financial support for the research, authorship and/or publication of this article.
Minsk agreements involved two summits in Minsk (first in September 2014 and then January 2015, also known as Minsk II) between the leaders of Russia, Ukraine, Germany and France to develop measures to alleviate the conflict in eastern parts of Ukraine.
Halliday J BBC World Service fears losing information war as Russia Today ramps up pressure.
Jackson J RT sanctioned by Ofcom over series of misleading and biased articles.
RT English RT English surpasses 2bn views on YouTube, entire network reaches 4.5bn mark, 22 May.
Sitdikov R МИА ‘Россия сегодня’ возглавило рейтинг цитируемости СМИ в соцсетях, 13 April.
Stahlberg P and Bolin G Nation branding, identity and cosmopolitan imagination.
Suslov M and Bassin M Eurasia 2.0: Russian Geopolitics in the Age of New Media.
Galina has extensively published in peer-reviewed journals and co-authored several monographs on media representations of Islam and multiculturalism; post broadcast media and democracy in post-communist Europe; gender, media and emergent forms of post-Soviet identity.
Galina is a co-convenor of a BASEES Media and Cultures group, as well as a recipient of a number of national and international research grants.
