IMPLICATIONS FOR THE POST-SOVIET STATES Sarwat Rauf Abstract The study probes into the causes and effects of Ukrainian crisis and merger of Crimea into Russia.
It is pointed out that external forces' competition of power combined with internal political conflicts have triggered the Ukrainian crisis and resulted into the fragmentation of Ukraine.
Here, the entrenched causes of hostility between Russia and Ukraine are studied in the context of Eurasianism.
An effort is made in addition to highlight Russia's foreign policy towards the post-Soviet republics in which Moscow seeks the support of the latter in the wake of the Ukraine crisis.
Moscow’s grand strategy to exert influence on the ex-Soviet Union states and protect the Russian-speaking population in and around Russia was a prima facie case to merge Crimea.
Therefore, the logic of Responsibility to Protect approach serves as a good pretext to cover Russia’s action in Ukraine.
Subsequently, the former Soviet states have come to adopt wary approach towards Russia.
Finally, the paper will offer a futuristic outlook of Russian relations with the post-Soviet states.
Merger, Eurasianism, Russia, R2P, Post-Soviet States, Crimea, Ukraine, Russia.
Yet Eurasian conception is still popular within Russia where its new worldview is justified in Russia but criticized in the West.
In this backdrop, Ukraine crisis has appeared as a showground between Eurasianists and anti-Eurasianists.
The paper aims to investigate the causes and effects of the merger of Crimea with Russia.
Moreover, it delves into emanating challenges and prospects of Russia's annexation of Crimea are under review.
The effects of the crisis are strong in the post-Soviet states and the region.
East-West rivalry is changing the contour of the foreign policies of these states.
Moreover, realpolitik is an important part of Kremlin’s policy in pursuit of the great power status.
Russia's interventions in Georgia and later in Ukraine were rationalized as acts of protecting the minority groups in these states.
However, both intrusions were internationally construed as driven by strategic impulses than humanitarian considerations.
The Russian intervention in Ukraine has not only undermined the territorial integrity of adjacent states but also signalled imperialist approach for reviving influence in these states.
Nevertheless, this development has elicited strong reaction leading to angst in the post-Soviet region.
Besides, some states have strongly leaned towards the West for guarding their territorial integrity and containing Russian influence.
Moscow’s stance over the merger of territories of Georgia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia had led to a division between Russia and the West and a friction has appeared between Russia, China and other members of Shanghai Cooperation Organization too.
Despite the desire of some countries and opposition party of Russia to propagate a negative image, it was observed that United Russia got more cohesion and that was visible in Duma's elections , when United Russia secured the highest turnout.
In this way, Moscow internationally conveyed its stance that it has a right to defend Russian nationals beyond its own territory and that use of force was legitimate and needed to protect ethnic Russians.
On the other hand, the Western perspective of Ukraine crisis is that it has exposed resurgence of imperial Russia and sensitizes post-Soviet states as they have sizeable Russian population.
This paradox is ominous of a new rivalry in which West is trying to make Russia economically and politically weak.
Implications for the Post Soviet States such as Central Asian Republics , dependent on Russia with their economies, are directly affected due to its imposed economic embargoes.
Although CARs loyalty to Russia is due to the economic interests, yet the use of force has made them, as other post-Soviet republics, apprehensive.
Some scholars pronounce Russia will make another move to further redraw the map of post-Soviet republics by incorporating other Russianspeaking regions.
Whereas others believe that Russia's mission has more or less ended with the annexation of Crimea and its ambitions will be limited.
Further, Putin's actions find new worldview in the post-imperial complex of Russia, first; rebuilding of Russia by binding together the lost territories.
Thus, this paper endeavours to analyse Russia's changing political dynamics and its effects on the post-Soviet region.
Theoretical Framework In the words of J Mankoff, Russia wanted to establish itself as a powerful state of the world.
Nevertheless, due to contested politics of Eurasia, Russia faces a lot of problems in the pursuit of this coveted great power status.
As the central state of the Eurasian region, it considers itself a responsible security guarantor to many regional weak states.
This selfpositioning of Russia in the heart of Eurasia provides some degree of logic to Russia's Eurasianist ideology.
The Eurasianists rely on a powerful Russia will bring about the multipolar world they want.
Eurasianism is mean to thwart Atlanticism4 which signifies another type of union of European and American nations.
It was based on a historical Eurasian movement of Russian émigré community which opposed forces of modernity and stood for Eurasian traditionalism.
In order to maintain its centrality, Russia always prefers to be a hegemon.
The Eurasianists envision Russia’s re-emergence as a world power, by influencing the post-Soviet region, in opposition to liberal views of West.
Russia acted according to the assumptions in its self-defined philosophye.
Eurasianism and moved to rebuild the former Soviet area is headed by the Crimea's merger with Russia7.
This hypothesis is widely discussed by Aleksandr Dugin in his work The Fourth Political Theory.
Eventually, his ideas galvanized politics of Russia and termed West its main opponent.
Russian Political figures, incumbent head of state and ruling Duma party United Russia, are all inspired by the Eurasianists.
Ostensibly, Eurasianism motivated Russia to pursue its objectives through the use of force.
Moreover, Russia calls the military action of 2013, a legal move to protect the Russian speaking minority in Ukraine and used the justification of the principle of Responsibility to Protect .10 Causes of the Merger of Crimea Russia remained politically dormant in post-Soviet space from independence until 2000 due to its internal problems.
NATO’s enlargement and later coloured revolutions in Georgia and Ukraine persuaded Kremlin to reassert itself in the traditional area of interest.
Russia eventually started to warm its relations with its old republics to dislodge the United States influence in the post-Soviet area.
Implications for the Post Soviet States expand its influence, Moscow confronted opposition groups in many parts of the post-Soviet states such.
In case of the merger of Crimea, Ukraine sought to hinder the Russian influence by using its diplomatic power however, troubled region eventually became part of Russia.
As Russia wants to acquire sphere of influence in its neighbourhood for security reasons, it appears that several factors had been involved in the merger of Crimea into Russia.
Economic, ideological and political confrontation triggered the Ukrainian crisis and manifest causes of the Crimean merger.
Geopolitical Importance of Ukraine and Crimea The geopolitical salience of Ukraine is its geography; it is situated in the southwest of Russia and strongly linked geographically as well as historically with Russia.
Apart from ethnic identity linkages, their interdependence helped forge strong ties.
Ukraine provided energy transit routes to Russia for the supply of oil and gas to Europe and its territory had been used for creating nuclear weapons.
As a matter of fact, the geopolitical importance of this region was largely due to Crimea where two-thirds of the population called themselves Russians.
The Crimean Peninsula located on the north-eastern coast of the Black Sea with approximately 70% to 75% of the population identifying as Russian, it had the maximum number of Russian speakers in Ukraine.
Historical Overlay Being a homeland of Russians, Crimea is regarded as an integral part of Russia.
As a consequence of century's long history, Russian as a lingua franca and ethnic commonalities could not separate the two republics.
The territory was given the name of ‘New Russia' because it was never part of old Kiev Rus.
Catherine II had conquered the area in the late 1700s Sarwat Rauf 36 Crimea had been part of Russia, geographically linked with Ukraine and all land transportation to Crimea was through Ukraine.
After World War-II, Crimea was declared as an Oblast within the Soviet Union.
In 1954 Crimea was transferred to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic by Nikita Khrushchev and considered as a natural extension of Ukraine which left its inhabitants baffled.
Even Khrushchev had suggested to Stalin as early as 1944 that transferring Crimea to Ukraine would help Moscow in securing the support of Ukrainian's elites.
To be more exact the two sides approved the division of the fleet's assets and to lease port to the Russian Navy in Sevastopol.
Ironically, not a single protest was made over the transfer of Crimea to Ukraine in 1954, but after sixty years, the new justifications were marshalled to get over Crimea.
Actually, the overwhelming influence of Russia on Ukraine and cultural ties of the people persuaded leaders of Russia and Ukraine to normalize ties.
Putin and Leonid Kuchma in 2000 successfully transformed a decade-long bitterness to amiable mutual relations.
The period of 2005 to 2009 was irritable as Ukraine attempted to integrate itself into the Western institution which had sown the seeds of anti-Russian movements and facilitated foreign involvement.
Afterwards, during the time of Viktor Yankovich , Ukraine has started to make efforts to improve its relations with Russia. and the Russian Empire held it until 1917-1920.
The territory of Novorossiya encompasses some other areas, such as Rostov, Stavropol, and Krasnodar.
Grounds for the Use of Force Historical records, especially wave of coloured revolutions (the early 2000s) in Georgia, Ukraine, Kyrgyzstan and the Russo-Georgian war of 2008, demonstrated bitter relations between the West and Russia because in all incidents West supported anti-Russian campaigns.
There was an emphasis on non-intervention of Russia in these states and a severe Western response was observed during Russia's war against Georgia in 2008.
H Gardner maintained that Moscow’s decision to seize Crimea in February-March, 2014 was an act of reactive or preclusive imperialism;20 however, Kremlin rejected this narrative.
Legally, Russia legitimizes its use of force refereeing R2P to control the post-Soviet republics.
At the time of the merger of Crimea into Russia, President Putin termed intervention in Ukraine as a humanitarian project.
According to President Putin in a press conference, the question of the use of force was a humanitarian mission and in the interest of Russia's national interest.
Competition with European Union The geo-economic and geopolitical positioning of Ukraine has enticed both East and West, however, the strategic partnership of Russia with Ukraine is crucial for European security.
Russia's competition with European Union to exert influence over Eastern Europe provides a basic understanding of the Ukrainian crisis.
The formation of single economic space has been President Putin's priority since his entry into Kremlin.
Russia was also then struggling to make Ukraine and other old republics of Soviet Union to join the Customs Union.
The organization was formed to build a Russian-led community of the postSoviet states to create economic benefits and get a better bargaining position vis-a-vis continental neighbours,e. the EU to the West and China to the East.
The formation of Eurasian Economic Union in 2015 was the 20 Hall Gardner, Crimea, Global Rivalry, and the Vengeance of History ….30.
Sarwat Rauf 38 continuation of the Russian efforts to diffuse tension between Russia and the EU relations.
However, subtle divergences gradually morphed dichotomies and clamour against Russia got louder in the western part of Ukraine and lead to a referendum in Crimea.
East-West Rivalry A long-term East-West tense relation was a prominent factor in precipitating the Ukraine crisis.
At the time of disintegration of Soviet Union, it was expected that the ex-Soviet space would remain under the influence of Russia due to geographical, ideological and historical linkages.
Yet because of involvement of the West, the anti-Russian huddles occurred.
The 9/11 event was a turning point in West-Russia's relations, as Russia and the West tried to establish cordial relations in face of the common threat of terrorism.
Despite the fact that NATO's expansion had always been a threat to Russia in extending military cooperation; the latter gave consent for setting up the NATO-Russia Council,24 to reduce tension.
All presidents of the Russian Federation namely, Mr Yeltsin, Mr Medvedev and President Putin, had tried to set better relations with the US and Europe but these expectations did not materialize as Moscow continued to be a target of frantic criticism by the West.
President Putin denounced the inequities of the post-Cold War settlement and promised that he would pristine Western injustices during the Cold War and restores the glory of Russia.
The West, on its part, propagated that Russia was violating human rights in Chechnya, had used force against Georgia and unlawfully annexed Crimea.
The Group of industrialized states cancelled the membership of Russia, NATO and terminated cooperative links with Moscow, and the EU cut off its ties with Moscow.
Thus, a tug of war emanated in which Russia was trying to get close with Ukraine whereas EU wanted to bring it in its orbit of influence.
Triple set of initiatives viz Western policies, NATO enlargement and EU expansion all added fuel to fire,25 and caused tense relations of Ukraine with Russia.
The strategic dissonance between Russia and the West intensified over the Ukrainian issue.
As the new Cold War between East and West re-appeared, the secessionist movements also got strengthened due to internal instability and external involvement in Crimea.
The situation became worse when Malaysian Airline Flight MH-17 was targeted while flying over the conflict zone and a blame game started between Ukraine and Russia.
Indeed, these crises seemed to be a turning point in ending the brief honeymoon of friendship between Russia and the West.
The Russian Language Former Soviet republics are home to significant ethnic Russians; they have the close affiliation with the Russian populace in terms of language, culture and ideology.
Similarly, large numbers of ethnic Russians are residing in Ukraine, particularly in southern and eastern areas.
As a Slavic state, it has close ties with Russia, however, the use of Russian language had become a serious political matter soon after independence, and many ethnic Russians residing in Ukraine were pressurized to quit using the language.
The Ukrainization or the separate identity of Ukrainians appeared as a popular nationalist campaign.
Efforts were made to close schools where the Russian language was used as a medium of instruction.
According to a survey from 1989 to 2001, many schools closed down because they were teaching in the Russian language.
The Ukrainian language was made compulsory and was seen by Kremlin as a violation of minority rights.
In 2012, Verkhovna Rada announced a new state language policy, allowed government offices to use any other language in case of 10% local population speaks that language, and this would get status of the second official language.
As Dmitri Trenin, director of Carnegie Endowment Moscow Centre expounded; 26 BBC News Europe, September 9, 2014.
Analysis from WashingtonLanguage Policy and National Integration” Radio Free Europe: Radio Liberty, , www.rferl.org/a/1097361.html.
Sarwat Rauf 40 ""The rallies of Russian speakers, residing in eastern and southern Ukraine, raised the demand of autonomy of region and for Russian language.
Afterwards, these rallies were followed by revolutionary groups, grabbing government buildings.
Kremlin took Ukraine as a subdivision of the Russian people or ‘Little Russians’ and Russia is their ' та ш й б ат' (older brother).31 During Ukraine crisis, pro-Russian protests were held and resentment gradually converted to a demand of referendum in March 2014.
The authorities in Crimea set a referendum to get people’s response on the issue of joining Russia or Ukraine.
Surprisingly, the majority of population cast their votes for joining of Russia over which President Putin asserted, ""a union with Russia was approved by almost 96% of the Crimean voters, as they spoke in favour of Russia.
Conversely, Western Ukraine along with mainstream West criticized the referendum as an illegal enactment and questioned the fair voting.
Crimea formally merged into Russia on March 18, 2014, and signed a treaty which was presented in Duma for approval.
A bill, related to Crimea and Sevastopol’s addition as federal units of Russia, was also presented.
Henceforth, the referendum proved to be the immediate cause of the merger of Crimea into Ukraine.
Wider Europe Europe is divided ideologically, politically, linguistically and frequent conflicts are largely affecting its economy.
There are three existing arrangements in Europe; first, the established Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe emphasizes political links to integrate states; second, urge in bringing together the NATO members; and third, European 30 Dmitri Trenin, “The Ukraine Crisis and the Resumption of Great Power Rivalry”, Carnegie Moscow Centre, , 14.
Implications for the Post Soviet States Union in which states courteously accept each other’s differences and yet cooperate.
These three blocks, EU, NATO and OSCE try to cope up with security threats and create models to manage challenges.
Russia wants to establish a different platform for the post-Soviet states to resolve their matters.
In theory and practice, Russia views NATO and EU as the threat to its interests because it is a Western bloc.
Both West and Russia consider their stance justified and mutual tension appears as the natural occurrence.
Admittedly, geopolitical interests are guiding foreign policies of the two rivals of the Cold War era.
Despite strong opposition, Russia and the West are not yet in a full-fledged defiance mode and prospects of Russia’s limited compromises exist with the West.
Similarly, the West tends to reinforce Article 5 of NATO (promises that each member of NATO defends fellow member states).35 In this backdrop, geopolitical differences over Ukraine are intensifying and posing challenges to mutual relations.
Over the military actions of Russia in Ukraine, the Baltic States did not respond in favour of Russia.
Baltic states, particularly Estonia and Latvia, are home to significant Russian-speaking people and ethnic Russians are not satisfied there and are seeking rights of citizenship in the Baltic States.
So they fear that such situation may invite another aggressive reaction of Russia and may cause a regional friction.
Nevertheless, the Ukraine crisis did not affect much change in the Baltic States' policies towards Russia rather they have started to seek Western support to counter Russia.
Effects on Ukraine Certainly, there was a strong internal support to Russia for its action towards Ukraine; yet it is assumed in Kiev that decision to annex Crimea was limited to a small circle.
In addition, Ukraine has neither accepted Crimea as part of Russia, nor it is taking necessary steps to tide over the situation.
Implications for European Security”, Task Force on United States Policy Toward Russia, Ukraine, and Eurasia, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, ,1.
Ukraine is publicizing Russia's intervention illegal and deliberating its violation of international law.
Yet Ukraine has to pick out its association with EU-NATO and improve its economy.
Impact on Russia Russian-Ukrainian ties have been fluctuating since 2013 with serious effects for Moscow.
Among the consequences are Western-led economic sanctions; the cost of Russia's perceived support to separatists in Eastern Ukraine.
The rapid decline in rouble's exchange rate and intense opposition has occurred between Russia and the West.
Russia has moreover acquired a status of somewhat ‘unpredictable’ state in world politics.
Kremlin is seeking cooperation with former territories, including Ukraine, but facing problems in establishing good links with old territories, including Ukraine.
Moscow nowadays is the target of allegations too, such as transgressor of the international law, a violator of Budapest conference, 1994, and breach of Ukraine constitution.
Besides, the UN non-binding resolution proclaimed merger of Crimea into Russia and subsequent referendum as ‘illegal actions'.38 The Syrian crisis has further deteriorated the situation and transpired in the form of declining oil prices in international market, an economic shock to Russia.
Russia’s heavy dependence on hydrocarbons and current cuts in export is leading to challenging situationg.
Europe has reduced its demand for natural gas which is an economic setback for Russia.
Crimea Annexation Important Milestone”, Aljazeera, , www.aljazeera.com, 43 Merger of Crimea into Russia: Implications for the Post Soviet States amplify nationalist, separatist and military adventurism, within Russia and across the post-Soviet periphery.
Moreover, there are emerging signs of forthcoming economic blow in terms of liquidity and economic recession is rising as are domestic interest rates; yet, Russia still wields leverage over post-Soviet states due to their energy demands and dependence.
It appears that Ukraine’s entry into EU and Western-led bloc would be difficult at least for now.
Despite prevailing economic stress in Russia, overall national cohesion is palpable.
Historical records are a witness that Russia has always been resilient and strengthened itself after waging war against other states.
Thus, it can be safely inferred that Kremlin's forceful strategy might buttress Russia's internal position; nevertheless, it might be dangerous for the global economy to maintain long-term economic sanctions against Russia; being a crucial part of the global economy.
The chances of further dissonance are imminent and potential ramifications are suggestive of likely future civil wars in Europe and Russia.
In short, the Ukrainian crisis has proved a turning point for Russia; theatrically it gave birth to domestic and regional tensions which were simmering before the Ukraine crisis.
The domestic unrest, led by the opposition including Alexei Navalny, was earlier extant in moderate form; however, the decreased oil prices and uncertainty has made the opposition more vocal.
In this manner, Moscow is sending overtures of support to ethnic Russians in its old territories.
The present nationalist leadership of Russia is focusing more on the post-Soviet reintegration in Central Asia and Eastern Europe, formation of Eurasian Economic Union is a validation of Russian efforts.
Meanwhile, Russia has taken a big step toward restoring its dominance in the Black Sea region.
Its geopolitical position has become stronger by attaching Crimea and Sevastopol as now it uses its naval fleet without much inhibition.
Certainly, this also affects Turkey which, since the Soviet Union collapse, has been projecting power in the Black Sea.
Now the Turkish fleet can be challenged after the control of Sevastopol base.
Caucasus Region The Caucasus connects Europe with Asia; therefore, it is attached to the European and Asian political dynamics.
Since the Ukraine crisis has created ripple effects on the Caucasian region, the national security has become a top priority of Caucasus states.
Apparently, for example, Georgia remained unaffected but being a signatory of EU Association Agreement, it pushes Moscow to get close to Georgia's neighbours to curb Western influence.
Moreover, Georgia has been staunchly supporting Ukraine and fighting a common battle against Russian hegemony in the post-Soviet region.
Hence, it condemned Russia’s action in Crimea as it had also passed through the same experience in 2008.
Despite the significant presence of Armenians in Ukraine and strong relations with each other, Armenia proved to be pro-Russian.
In this setting, Azerbaijan had opted to remain impartial in the escalating tug-of-war between West and Russia and state-owned media in Azerbaijan stayed away from harsh criticism of Russian actions.
Moscow, in order to restore customary relations, is trying to engage Baku in the energy sector and has promised to find some solutions to the tense NagornoKarabakh issue.
Impact on the CARs Many analysts are concerned that Kremlin's takeover of Crimea could set a similar model of intervention against the post-Soviet states particularly CARs.
Home to substantial ethnic Russians, the CARs are distant from the direct range of the EU; but geographical voids cannot fully isolate the region as the tussle between Moscow and EU backed by NATO is upsetting the regional states.
The Soviet-style governments of the CARs are different from the EU and geographically proximate to Asia.
So, Kremlin has found fertile political grounds in Central Asia for the resurgence.
Yet, Russia is also aware that if it uses identical means as employed in Ukraine, anti-Russian sentiments could rise as revulsion against Moscow.
Moreover, destabilization in Russia and economic dislocation could affect the CARs which are still beholden to Russia.
Implications for the Post Soviet States states, could hit bottom with it.
Interestingly, any outright condemnation of Russia has been rare in Central Asia due to the latter’s dependency on Russia.
CARs are not only close to Russia but are also interacting with China and the Western domain of economy and security is also present in/directly.
However, geographical location of Russia is a prime factor for CARs dependence on the former.
The CARs are concerned due to the strain on Russia's economy caused by sanctions.
Especially, Tajik and Kyrgyz workers in Russia are directly affected as they make the substantial contribution to the GDPs of their states.
In this regard, Russia’s Federal Migration Service highlights 2% to 4% decline of Kyrgyz, Tajik, and Uzbek workers in Russia.
Moscow maintains the major military presence in Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan which acts as its influence and determines domination in the region.
The Sevastopol naval base of Russia is analogous to the CARs military bases.
No wonder, Kyrgyzstan initially hesitated in supporting Russia's action to merge Crimea into its territory.
Despite heavy dependence on Moscow, Bishkek opposed Russian advocacy for Viktor Yanukovych.
Yet it became the member of EEU and Russian actions in Ukraine were substantiated as Russia provides Kyrgyzstan assistance in the field of migration.
Economic crisis leads Russia to cut its goods and services, particularly, in 2015; Russia started to curtail its gas imports from CARs due to economic strains.
Yet it is hinted that separatist movement within Karakalpakstan could be a triggering factor of Russia’s intervention in Uzbekistan in future.
Sarwat Rauf 46 Collective Security Treaty Organization which it joined and later left.
With strong linkage to Russia due to strategic interests, it cannot afford tense relations with Moscow.
Astana has refrained from recognizing Crimea as a part of Russia and hoped that Moscow will not be capitalizing on ethnic affinities and linguistic nexus as a tool for any future intervention.
In addition, Astana desired in de-escalating of the conflict but might not have the control.
Its political bonds are however intact even after the crisis and any economic sanctions on Russia cannot rupture their close relations.
Given all reservations, it seems wellnigh impossible for CARs to detach themselves completely from Moscow for there is no replacement of a traditional partner.
The Western Response The merger of Crimea into Russia has led to some punitive policies of the Westg. purposeful indirect economic sanctions, causing adverse effects to the Russian economy.
The Cold war enmity between East and the West has appeared once again; it is not just short-term bad weather but an essential change in Russia-West relations.
Mearsheimer claimed that Putin worked to destabilize Ukraine until it abandoned its efforts to join the West.
Reciprocally, the United States had challenged the legality of the referendum held in Crimea and became anxious due to the control of Russia over the naval base in Sevastopol.
With the aim to isolate Russia, Western tactics are operating steadfastly, resulting in depreciation of rouble, capital flight and decreased investment.
Implications for the Post Soviet States Energy diversification is taking place in Europe to lessen dependency of Europe on Russian goods and resources.
The boycott of Russian companies, particularly of Rosneft, is a serious economic blow for Russia.
Further, explicit warnings are coming in with the emerging US-EU energy relationship which reflects further isolation of Russia.
Hence, Also, following the referendum in Crimea in 2014, several Western delegates declined to attend the conference on security in Russia same year.
Sensing diplomatic decline in relations and discerning that Washington is preparing its allies for the enactment of sanctions Moscow is inclined to now back non-Western nations and non-US allies.
Further, NATO's basing rights for prolonged stay is seen as validating the East-West divide more clear and stark.
In this backdrop, the Crimean case can be taken as testing waters for Russia; it caused ripples of destabilization in the region bringing moral pressure on Russia and the West found an opportunity to accelerate assistance to the neighbouring states of Russia to get their support.
However, it should not be considered an absolute economic decline rather it is a relative decline of the Russian economy.
Conclusion and Some Reflections The Crimean merger into Russia has introduced new fixtures for the post-Soviet region where old fault lines of the Cold War era are reactivated and the Western-led anti-Russian campaign has started.
The Western interpretation on Russia’s military action in Ukraine is based on allegations such as violation of international law for which it must be punished.
Russia declared its action in Ukraine on the principle of “responsibility to protect”, Slavic people residing in Ukraine and vented crisis were an incitement engineered by West.
Although Russian leaders earned the modicum of popularity internally a phase of East-West hostility had started, the economic system disturbed internally and NATO-EU alliance got the fresh impetus to check Russia’s return to the great power status.
Moscow’s aggressive actions have been causative to the economic instability in the post-Soviet republics.
It saw NATO-EU’s involvement in the post-Soviet states as a part of encirclement policy.
As a result, Kremlin started focusing on forging alliances on its periphery as geography has always been an asset for Russia.
In order to develop politico-economic ties, the EEU is designed to accomplish Russia’s interests.
Moreover, some non-traditional partners are also in Russia’s spotlight.
Interestingly, vagaries of global politics are bringing regional changes and forming unexpected alliances.
Besides, the wave of terrorism is infecting the periphery of Russia and the emergence of the so-called Islamic State in the Middle-East with conceivable links to militants in Central Asia is becoming a headache for Russia.
Economic sanctions and falling oil prices are causing internal and external ramifications for Russia and negatively affecting Putin’s policies as the opposition is becoming more vocal by leaning on the Western propaganda of democracy, human rights and accountability.
Interestingly, Russia's Eurasianist identity that is being focused most by the Putin administration; show that Russia has a greater role in the post-Soviet space.
Under Eurasianism, Russia tries to forge ties with its neighbours that would in effect expand Russia’s influence.
In order to avoid global isolation, Russia is gravitating towards the post-Soviet states for fresh alliances.
Russia has succeeded in its goals by incorporating Crimea; however, it seems problematic for Russia to annex other post-Soviet states as circumstances are quite different there.
Albeit conventional military success may have been achieved yet seeds of parochial conflicts are germinating.
The Ukrainian parliament considers this a temporary phase and has professed/predicted that Crimea would revert to it soon.
Difficult for Ukraine to handle the issue alone being a vulnerable state yet it seems that it needs farsighted and strong leaders.
Therefore, it is likely that this might lead to increased military spending in Europe.
Russia, on its part, is already spending heavily on military and Ukraine has also recently ramped up its military budget.
As a consequence, it could imperil the security architecture of the Eurasian region.
An Overwhelming Victory for the Kremlin” The Moscow Times, September 19, 2016 Bugajski, Janusz and Margarita Assenova, Eurasian Disunion: Russia’s Vulnerable Flanks.
The Jamestown Foundation, 2016 Cancelled Language Law in Ukraine Sparks Concern among Russian and EU diplomats” RT News.
An Introduction to Neo-Eurasianism Arktos Media, 2014 Dugin, Alexander.
Movement without Change, Change without Movement (Amsterdam Overseas Publishers Associations, 2000 Gardner, Hall.
Crimea, Global Rivalry and the Vengeance of History (Palgrave Macmillan, 2015 Goble, Paul.
Analysis from WashingtonLanguage Policy and National Integration” Radio Free Europe: Radio Liberty, September 11, 2001 Hill, Fiona and Steven Pifer, “Dealing with a simmering Ukraine-Russia conflict” Brookings.
October 06, 2016 www.brookings.edu/research/dealing-with-a-simmering-ukraine-russiaconflict.
The liberals Delusions that Provoked Putin”, Foreign Affairs (September/October 2014 Joroev, Emil.
Implications for European Security”, Task Force on United States Policy toward Russia, Ukraine, and Eurasia, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, March 13, 2017 51 Merger of Crimea into Russia: Implications for the Post Soviet States Stoicescu, Kalev.
