The aim of the current article is to provide analysis of information operations of the Russian Federation performed against the Ukrainian state and defence forces from 1 April until 31 December 2014.
Russia uses ideological, historical, political symbols and narratives for justifying and supporting their military, economic and political campaigns not only in Donbass but in the whole of Ukraine.
The article concentrates on the various means of meaning-making carried out by Russian information operations regarding the Ukrainian state and military structures.
Thus it is befitting that we explore the procedures of modern hybrid war in Ukraine1 that is characterised by the plurality of features of 1 About the Ukraine crisis, see more Pabriks & Kudors 2015.
Russia uses information as a tool to destabilise the situation not only on the front in the Donbass region, but in Ukraine as a whole.
Denis McQuail explains that increasing power and internationalisation of media institutions, the idea of access of reporters to war and the perception that war requires effective public communication can be seen as part of raising the importance of media in war situations.
Andrew Hoskins and Ben O’Loughlin see that war is transformed and reconstructed so that all aspects of war need consideration of media.
This also means that war, critical exploration of war and conflict coverage have gained the attention of media scholars.
The process of mediatisation of war has several directions – on the one hand, media can be considered an important player in depicting war, but at the same time, fighting war means deploying media as an informational and psychological weapon.
This paper focuses on the latter part and looks at how Russia uses its media outlets, linguistically available to most Ukrainians, to support military operations.
Many recent studies are focused on different topics related to Russian politics, hybrid warfare in Ukraine or Russian information warfare against the Ukrainian state generally (e.g.
The aim of the given article is to contribute to filling the gap regarding the representation of the Ukrainian state and military structures in the Russian media.
This paper analyses information operations of the Russian Federation performed against Ukraine from April until December 2014.
It examines and systematises the representation of Ukraine, its authorities and armed forces during their anti-terrorist operation in Eastern Ukraine, with the aim to provide empirical evidence about the varied nature of Russian propaganda.
The media analysis presented is based on content analysis, which examines three Russian news outlets – Komsomolskaya Pravda, Regnum and TV Zvezda.
Ukraine in Russia’s geopolitical and informational sphere of influence Before defining the aspects of modern information warfare, it is essential to understand the underlying reasons for the outbreak of the current Ukrainian crisis.
Ukraine’s independence in 1991 was a shock too hard to swallow for the patriotically-minded Russian political groups as it meant a major defeat for Moscow’s historical strategy, which attempts to exercise control over the geopolitical space around Russia's borders.
The return of geopolitics has always been an important factor for Russia in performing its international politics after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
According to Brzezinski , losing Ukraine decreases Russia’s possibilities to rule over the Black Sea region, where Crimea and Odessa have historically been important strategic clues to the Black Sea and even to the Mediterranean.
Throughout history, Ukraine has always been an essential part of narratives related to Russian nation-building (e.g.
Therefore, Ukraine does not only play a pivotal role in Russian geopolitical strategic thinking but also holds a symbolic value hard to underestimate as the homeland of the Russian civilization (seeg.
After the fall of the pro-Russian President Yanukovich on 22 February 2014, the Kyiv government set on a more determined path towards integration with the West.
In Moscow, the possibility of losing Ukraine from its geopolitical sphere of influence was seen as a catastrophic defeat , probably even more than the collapse of the Soviet imperial system in 1991.
Russia has not taken any initiative favouring international or regional crisis management, though it would have had good tools for mediating between the Ukrainian government, recognised by Russia, and unrecognised People’s Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk, had it wished so.
During the course of the Ukraine crisis in 2014, the role of actual military interventions has remained low in comparison to different tools of asymmetric warfare (information warfare, economic measures, cyber war and psychological war on all levels) – often referred to as hybrid warfare.
According to Andras Rácz (2015, p.-89), in hybrid war, “the regular military force is used mainly as a deterrent and not as a tool of open aggression” in comparison to other types of war.
However, hybrid war as such is not a new phenomenon, as its principles were also characteristic to Soviet military thinking.
The current empirical research focuses on one part of the hybrid war – information warfare.
According to Ulrik Franke , information warfare is about achieving goals,g. annexing another country, by replacing military force and bloodshed with cleverly crafted and credibly supported messages to win over the minds of the belligerents.
However, for Russia, information warfare is not simply an accidental choice of instruments in a diverse toolbox of weapons.
The new Russian military doctrine from December 2014 explicitly states that in the modern war, information superiority is essential to achieve victory on the physical battlefield.
Russian scholars Chekinov and Bogdanov use the term strategic information warfare, which forms a vital part of supporting different military and non-military measures (e.g. disrupting military and government leadership, misleading the enemy, forming desirable public opinions, organising antigovernment activities) aimed at decreasing the determination of the opponent to resist.
Starodubtsev, Bukharin and Semenov (2012, p.) point out that it is already in peacetime when successful information war can result in decisions favouring the initiating party.
Compared with the 2008 war in Georgia, where Russian information operations were not so successful (seeg.
In 2008, Russia misjudged the importance of information warfare and lost the war of narratives to the West.
The extensive use of special operation forces that produce public discontent in the crisis area and manipulate public opinion can be clearly identified during the Ukrainian crisis.
Russia stimulates a proxy war in Eastern Ukraine, where the local pro-Russian separatists have been used as military tools of Russia's political goals.
Russia offers them its extensive support, but this support is thoroughly calculated and tied to Russia's national interests.
Nevertheless, it is important to note that the Russian information operations against Ukraine are not of new origin.
Vitalii Moroz , Head of New Media Department at Internews Ukraine, and Tetyana Lebedeva , Honorary Head of the Independent Association of Broadcasters, point to the years 2003-2004, when Russian propagandists started to create the idea of dividing Ukraine into two or three parts.
Moroz associates it with the events in Russia at the same time – oppression of the NTV news channel and the appearance of political technologists in the Russian media space.
According to Lebedeva , Russian information activities started to creep in already during the presidency of Leonid Kuchma, but the impact of the “first Maidan” – the Orange Revolution of 2004 – made the Russian rulers uneasy to maintain their influence over Ukraine.
Back then, the Russian information operations were not as massive, aggressive, influential and visible as they are now.
Dmytro Kuleba , Ambassador-atLarge at the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry, considers a more aggressive wave of Russian information campaigns to have started approximately one year before the annexation of Crimea, in 2013.
The overtake-process indicates that this was a well-prepared action and Russia was militarily ready to conduct the operation in Crimea.
The Russian information operations in 2014 were carried out at all levels starting with the political level up to the military level.
In these circumstances, the image of the Ukrainian army, as put forward by the Russian information operations, portrays them as murderers, criminals and Nazi perpetrators.
Methodology To find answers to the questions on how Russia uses the media as part of information warfare, integrated content analysis was used.
Qualitative benefits of content analysis allowed for systematising the meaningmaking regarding the different target groups – the Ukrainian government, army and its leadership.
After that, the quantitative aspect of the analysis provided statistical output to depict various trends in using different keywords and narratives.
The empirical material was gathered from three Russian news outlets – Komsomolskaya Pravda, Regnum, TV Zvezda – during the research period from 1 April until 31 December 2014.
The period after the annexation of Crimea by Russia was chosen because it includes the intensification of Russian-backed military activities in the self-proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics against the Ukrainian civil authorities and Defence Forces in Eastern Ukraine.
Although not representative of the entire media landscape of Russia, these three outlets were of interest to us due to various aspects.
Komsomolskaya Pravda is one of the most widely circulated newspapers, which is targeted not only at the Russian audience but also has many readers in Ukraine , Moldova, Belarus, and in other countries with large Russian diasporas, including the Baltic States.
The coding manual was developed based on qualitative analysis and expert discussions with the attempt to investigate the variety of themes and tools of information warfare.
We focused on historical narratives and the use of them in the modern context as the preliminary qualitative analysis indicated that Russia often tries to undermine the historical nation-building process with re-utilising important narratives as part of the propaganda.
Secondly, we examined what kind of attitudes the articles conveyed about the Ukrainian defence forces, the army leadership and the Kyiv government.
By doing this, we intended to investigate how negative propaganda is used as a tool in information warfare.
For example, the texts could also be conveying a positive image of Ukraine, either by the author himself saying something supportive towards Ukraine or referring to someone doing that,g.
If not positive, the articles could have also taken a justifying stance not being directly supportive of the Ukrainian army or the government but nevertheless giving an explanation or excuse,g.
An important category was that of neutrally presented articles which simply stated events or facts , but without explicit judgements –g.
The analysis did not include and aim at examining the share of true and fake stories. 9g.
From each day two relevant news stories – the first and the last – were analysed by using the coding manual.
The final coding was done by three people, using GoogleForms in a survey mode where each of the three coders filled out a “coding survey” for each article in the sample.
Formal intra-coder validation was not used, with several seminars and discussions including joint coding sessions being used instead.
Results of media analysis The analysis of the three online news channels under investigation – Komsomolskaya Pravda, Regnum and TV Zvezda – brought out a range of approaches how Russian information campaigns construct a predominantly negative image of Ukraine.
Although the three channels under scrutiny are not representative of the entire spectrum of Russian media, the study revealed how the antiUkrainian approach can take different forms and relies on various nuances.
Comparative overview of news channels Different target groups – Ukrainian soldiers, army leadership and the government – received the most judgemental treatment by Komsomolskaya Pravda.
For example, 86% of the articles in Komsomolskaya Pravda conveyed a negative attitude towards the Ukrainian army, while the same figures for Regnum and TV Zvezda were 23% and 43% respectively.
The Ukrainian government was approached in a critical way in 62% of the articles in Komsomolskaya Pravda, 43% in Regnum and 31% in TV Zvezda.
The Ukrainian army leadership got significantly less attention than the army as a whole or the government.
While 44% of the articles in Komsomolskaya Pravda criticised the command authorities of the army, then only 14% and 6% of the articles did the same in Regnum and TV Zvezda respectively.
Therefore, when reporting the Ukraine crisis, the focus was mostly on the army as a whole and from the leadership point of view it was the government not the military command authorities that received the most attention.
On average, almost two-thirds of the articles in Regnum and more than one-third in TV Zvezda did not include explicit judgements, while the same figure was only 12% for Komsomolskaya Pravda.
Regarding its treatment of the Ukrainian army leadership, TV Zvezda was percentage-wise more similar to Komsomolskaya Pravda but this is explained by the overall significantly lower level of importance of this topic in TV Zvezda.
It was only 10% of the articles in TV Zvezda that referred to the command authorities of the Ukrainian army, while the same figure was 54% for Komsomolskaya Pravda and 55% for Regnum.
The share of positive or justifying references to any of the three target groups was marginal and therefore negligible.
The latter mostly took the form of quoting statements, speeches etc. of different politicians, officials and institutions; thus attempting to gain additional credibility by relying on external authority of prominent figures.
The share of opinion pieces in Regnum was less than 5% and non-existent in TV Zvezda.
Komsomolskaya Pravda, on the other hand, used the greatest variety of different journalistic genres.
While about 40% of the articles were news stories and 23% were statements, the rest divided relatively equally between opinion pieces, interviews and reportages, thus allowing for a greater extent of offering their readers the “full package” of events, facts and explicit judgements.
Although the present analysis did not go in-depth with textual and discourse analysis, differences in stylistic means also folded out when conveying, for example, critical attitudes.
It was Komsomolskaya Pravda that relied more on emotional and even aggressive rhetoric when describing the crisis and its counterparts.
However, when it comes to portraying different groups of adversaries – Ukraine, its military and government institutions – attention must be paid to the subtler ways that, for example, TV Zvezda has adopted to convey its anti-Ukrainian approach.
The stories that simply describe events but do not carry explicit judgements (50% of the stories in TV Zvezda regarding the Ukrainian government and almost 40% of those regarding the Ukrainian army) seemingly leave it to the readers to independently draw conclusions.
Nevertheless, when looked upon as a whole, the anti-Ukrainian stance becomes apparent as TV Zvezda does have its ways of “helping” the reader to reach that viewpoint.
As a result, the article can easily succeed in giving a discrediting impression of Ukraine – whether targeted specifically at the military supplies of the army, the ability of Poroshenko or the Ukrainian government to provide that to the troops, or contributing generally to the overall negative tonality.
Main topics of the articles In our research, we focused on different military aspects of the crisis.
In all cases, the list of main topics of the articles is dominated by different war-related events – combat activities, violence and terrorism.
Nevertheless, in Komsomolskaya Pravda and TV Zvezda , the Ukrainian armed forces are still the third most frequent main topic.
These two outlets pay considerably less attention to the separatist armed forces.
In Regnum , on the other hand, the armed forces, whether Ukrainian or separatist, figure to equally little extent.
Out of the three outlets it is Regnum that focuses the most on the political aspects of the conflict by including stories that deal with the Ukrainian government, the West’s interference in Ukraine, and Russia as the main topics.
These main topics are also present in TV Zvezda but to a lesser extent.
Importantly, topics related to separatists – the so-called Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics , so-called Novorossiya, and Crimea – are present to only a very small degree as main topics across all three outlets.
This shows that while reporting the military aspects of the crisis, even if the articles deal with Eastern Ukraine, the main focus was rather on specific events than on broader questions regarding the separatist entities.
All in all, it is Komsomolskaya Pravda that stands out with the narrowest range of main topics, concentrating largely on the events on the ground, leaving the political level of the crisis in the background.
During phases II and III, the relative share of topics related to combat activities and terrorism is the highest across all outlets, which expectedly coincides with the most acute phases of the military conflict.
In TV Zvezda, it was 70% for Phase II and 40% for Phase III when other main topics started to enter the scene, such as the Ukrainian government, Russia and the so-called humanitarian convoys.
This illustrates how the Russian information campaigns against Ukraine have become broader in their scope.
This is evident by the highest share of non-judgemental articles (Komsomolskaya Pravda, Regnum – 60% and 55% of the stories respectively) and the lowest share of articles mentioning the Ukrainian armed forces (TV Zvezda – 40% of the articles) in comparison to the later phases.
After April, during phases II-IV, the share of articles critical towards the Ukrainian armed forces is always at least half of the data sample.
There are virtually no articles presenting anyone’s positive or justifying viewpoints of the army.
Therefore, the Russian information campaigns intensified only during phase II, together with the escalation of the actual military conflict.
Karateli is the most frequent association with the Nazis and their crimes.
More explicit associations with the Nazis, such as parallels with the Kyiv junta and fascists, are always present to a lower level.
The share of articles arguing for Russophobia stays the lowest throughout all the four phases.
When it comes to portraying the Ukrainian armed forces, it is also Komsomolskaya Pravda that offers the most colourful and explicitly negative approach.
A great deal of articles concentrates on executions, killings and torturing of civilians, including Russianspeaking people, by Ukrainian forces.
For example, an article describes how “One of the videos, published by militia, shows fresh burials.
More than 10% of the data sample in Komsomolskaya Pravda portrayed the Ukrainian armed forces as fascists or Nazis.
Moreover, about 40% of the articles in Komsomolskaya Pravda show the Ukrainian soldiers as karateli who also kill and rape people, among them women and children.
Humiliation and belittling of the Ukrainian soldiers is also common – authors of Komsomolskaya Pravda often portray the army and its volunteers as criminals, rapists, drug addicts, alcoholics, robbers and cowards, who taunt and torture children, women and old people.
Ukrainian armed forces are shown as revolting due to miserable conditions in the army and not wanting to shoot civilians.
Komsomolskaya Pravda claims that the “Moral condition of the Ukrainian army makes us worry more and more.
As opposed to the overwhelming approach of Komsomolskaya Pravda, the Russian information operations can also take a more reserved approach to portray the Ukrainian army.
For example, the style used by Regnum and TV Zvezda was more restrained by putting emphasis on facts and not playing directly on emotions.
There were no colourful metaphors for labelling the Ukrainian armed forces – siloviki (“persons of force”, representatives of the security or military services) was probably most frequently used strongest negative label for indicating the Ukrainian fighters in the Eastern Ukraine.
Despite the Russian information campaigns often relying on drawing parallels between Ukraine and Nazi Germany, the respective associations were largely missing in Regnum and TV Zvezda, whether in the form of referring to past events or describing the Ukrainian government, army or its leadership.
Although the term karateli was sometimes used, it remained rather low-profile in terms of frequency.
While in Komsomolskaya Pravda about 40% of the articles referred to the Ukrainian soldiers as karateli, the respective term was used only in 7% of the articles in TV Zvezda and only in one article in Regnum.
TV Zvezda, compared to Komsomolskaya Pravda, also relies on subtler ways of constructing a negative image of the Ukrainian army.
Technically the article does not accuse anyone but it does require an effort of critical thinking on behalf of the readers not to associate these two separate statements with each other, which might not become the case.
All throughout the four phases, the share of articles that does not mention the army leadership is always the highest.
While during phases I and II, the share of non-judgemental articles was slightly higher than those conveying a negative approach, then during phases III and IV it is the other way round.
The share of articles presenting positive or justifying opinions is, similarly to the armed forces, practically nonexistent.
Overall, the Russian information operations tend to take a more lukewarm stance on the military leaders. the Prime Minister of the self-proclaimed People's Republic of Donetsk Alexander Zakharchenko.
The share of various other unspecified negative attitudes is the highest.
The stance on the Ukrainian army leadership also depends on the outlet.
TV Zvezda, despite presenting a varied selection of narratives, nevertheless mentions the Ukraine army leadership significantly less than Regnum and Komsomolskaya Pravda.
Similarly to the Ukrainian army and its leadership, there are hardly any positive or justifying references.
In absolute terms the government gets associated with violence the most all throughout the phases.
However, in relative terms its share decreases as the usage of other narratives increases.
Similarly to the army, different outlets also target the government differently.
This also becomes evident when comparing the first phase with the later ones.
While TV Zvezda remained relatively modest about the Ukrainian armed forces in April when compared to the other outlets, then it is in April when TV Zvezda associates the government the most with violence.
TV Zvezda argues less for acts of violence during the later phases while Komsomolskaya Pravda, on the other hand, increases the usage of this narrative.
Interestingly, while the Ukrainian army leadership was quite visibly associated with following the Kyiv junta, then the level of labelling the government itself as junta, except for the rise in phase II, remains rather low-profile.
On the contrary, it is the government that gets associated with Russophobia more than the army and its leadership, and the usage of this narrative also increases with time.
The share of portraying the Ukrainian state and people as “false Russians” remains the lowest all throughout the four phases.
Similarly to other categories, the Russian information campaigns against the government take different forms in different outlets.
The selection of narratives used by Komsomolskaya Pravda widens with time, while Regnum and TV Zvezda display more fluctuation.
Regnum turns to Ukrainian and Western analysts that have critical views against the Ukrainian authorities or experts from other CIS countries that may produce opinions favourable for Russia.
However, in its opinion-building Regnum usually avoids direct disparagement of opponents.
Indirect belittling can be found, which makes the Ukrainian authorities responsible for the violence and human catastrophe in Eastern Ukraine and describes the Ukrainian crisis as a battlefield between Western and Russian civilization, where the Ukrainian authorities are the puppets of the West.
At the same time, Regnum avoids calling the Ukrainian authorities and armed forces fascists, criminals or using other extreme expressions to describe them.
While in Komsomolskaya Pravda there are altogether 30 articles that refer to the Ukrainian government as fascists or junta, the respective figures for Regnum and TV Zvezda are only 7 and 3 articles, thus marginal.
Conclusion The analysis of Russian media confirms that media plays an important role in the management of conflict in Ukraine.
Russia uses the influence and accessibility of Russian media outlets to undermine Ukrainian efforts with a variety of approaches that have intensified over time.
Russian behaviour during the crisis has always been rational and calculated – there is no ""mysterious Russia"", which acts in an untold manner.
While the Georgian campaign of 2008 focused principally on the demonstration of Russia's military power, then information warfare is besides the military activities a clue term for the current Ukrainian crisis and the military activities often just support the main battles conducted through media channels.
There is much evidence that Russia tests its new military strategy, in which different non-military actions, popularly called hybrid wars or nonlinear wars, are often used for achieving military goals.
The current study focused on outlets that represent the Russian mainstream media – Komsomolskaya Pravda, Regnum and TV Zvezda.
Komsomolskaya Pravda tends to be more aggressive against Ukraine as the majority of news, statements, reportages, and interviews are given with a strong judgement.
Regnum, contrariwise, usually puts emphasis on facts and avoids provoking emotions.
This can be explained by its specific role as an information agency, while newspapers are more oriented to opinion pieces.
The majority of news is given without judgement, but at the same time it does not provide any criticism towards the Russian government.
Similarly to Regnum, TV Zvezda is rather restrained in terms of portraying the crisis and its counterparts.
In building negative images, TV Zvezda targets mostly the Ukrainian armed forces and the government.
The Russian information operations have as many faces as Russia has different media channels.
These mass media channels are generally critical against the Ukrainian government and armed forces, and tend to support the political goals of the Russian authorities.
In their information building, Komsomolskaya Pravda, Regnum and TV Zvezda often refer to soft propaganda mechanisms and methods.
Influences on Ukrainian Defence Forces” (Estonian National Defence College, leader of the project Vladimir Sazonov) and NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence.
Vene meisterspioon külma sõja järgses Ameerikas paljastab oma rääkimata saladused.
How It Works, and How It Doesn’t’ in Agnieszka PikulickaWilczewska & Richard Sakwa, eds.
School of Advanced Military Studies, United States Army Command and General Staff College.
Russia’s Foreign Policy and Media Coverage of the Conflict in South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
