ERIKA HARRIS Abstract The article explores the Russia–Ukraine crisis of 2014 in the context of post-communist nationalism and the disintegration of the post-Soviet space.
The focus is on the politicisation of the ethno-linguistic divide and historical narratives in the interplay between Russia’s determination to control Ukraine’s political future and Ukraine’s resolve to free itself from Russian inﬂuence.
In highlighting the incompatibility between Russian and Ukrainian nationalising projects, it is argued that while the Ukrainian crisis is not an ethnic conﬂict per se, nationalism was a signiﬁcant contributory factor in fuelling the conﬂict and remains a relevant obstacle to its resolution.
THE RUSSIA– UKRAINE CRISIS IN THE SPRING OF 2014 STANDS for a series of interconnected and violent events.
The ﬁrst occurred between government forces under the pro-Russian then president, Viktor Yanukovych, and pro-reform demonstrators in Kyiv demanding the signing of the Association Agreement with the European Union, which Yanukovych reneged on under Russian pressure.
The second event, the annexation of Crimea, the ‘ﬁrst formal annexation of territory in Europe since 1945’ , was not particularly marked by violence but, rather, by a blatant disregard for international law and Ukraine’s sovereignty.
The subsequent pro-Russia mobilisation in eastern Ukraine, with military support from Russia, culminated in the armed conﬂict in Donbas, unresolved to this day.
If the promise of the fall of the Berlin Wall for a united, democratic and peaceful Europe was shattered by the wars on the territory of the former Yugoslavia, the Ukrainian crisis was evidence of a whole new disillusionment.
In the process, Russia not only exploited the weaknesses of the Ukrainian state and extended its own territory but exposed the fragility of the post-Cold War order in Europe.
This crisis is the culmination of a number of internal and wider geopolitical factors connected to both Russia and Ukraine.
Wilson on the other hand, while acknowledging Ukraine’s many internal problems, sees Russia’s aggression towards and interference in Ukraine as the preponderant cause of the crisis.
As it presents a considerable challenge to the existing order in Europe and calls into question the ability of the international community to shape events, the Russia–Ukraine crisis does indeed appear to have different origins than other postcommunist conﬂicts, such as the Yugoslav wars.
However, assessing this crisis through the lens of Russia’s role in it and ‘what it means for the West’, to quote the subtitle of Wilson’s book Ukraine Crisis , may obscure the analysis of some of the more prosaic identity-related dynamics aggravated by the conﬂict.
Such dynamics could have been observed in earlier conﬂicts in post-Soviet space, the Balkans and, less dramatically, in the rest of post-communist Europe.
Within these identity-related interpretations, the dismantling of the Soviet institutional legacy of ethnofederalism as part of state-building by Ukraine (Hughes & Sasse 2001; Sakwa 2014; Wilson 2016) and the role of ethnic kin abroad (Melvin 1995; Saideman & Ayres 2008; Shevel 2011; Harris 2012) should also be taken into consideration.
The premise here is that the fast growing literature on this crisis does not analyse the huge impact of post-communism on identity—personal, ethnic and national—and consequently statehood (Verdery 1993, 1996; Brubaker 1996, 2011; Harris 2002, 2009, ch.
Hence, my research question centres on the role and nature of nationalism and ethnicity in the Russia–Ukraine conﬂict.
The core contribution of this article is in debating the role of conﬂicting Russian and Ukrainian nationalisms and each countries’ respective use of the ethno-linguistic divide and manipulation of historical memory, an approach the author believes provides a more comprehensive interpretation of this conﬂict.
I apply theories of nationalism and ethnicity within the broader context of the post-communist disintegration of multinational federations generally; speciﬁcally, in relation to nationand state-building processes in Russia and Ukraine.
In the world divided into nationstates, ethnic and national identities serve as a measure of political legitimacy and therefore, remain important categories for political analysis as well as powerful tools for political elites to exploit and manipulate.
The particularity of post-communism is the simultaneity and speed of social, political and economic transformation at the same time as the new nation-states were forming.
The formation and establishment of a nation-state is a mammoth bureaucratic and ideational undertaking, which by its very nature increases the contestation of identities and general level of national mobilisation in highly uncertain political and economic conditions.
While this was the situation in all post-communist states, only in some cases, namely the Balkans, did it lead to armed conﬂict.
I do not argue that there is a direct causal link between nationalism and ethnicity and the Russia–Ukraine conﬂict; rather, I seek to show that political disagreements about the future of the state, a change of regional dynamics related to the disintegration of the Soviet Union and incompatible interpretations of historical memory when expressed in identity-relevant terms, do release the conﬂict potential of ethnicity.
Ethnicity is affected by political developments and vice versa ; thus, in this article, the focus is on the politicisation of ethnicity, which in this case has become interchangeable with ethnolinguistic divide, and its exploitation and distortion into political afﬁliations in circumstances of divergent and mutually incompatible nationalising projects by Ukraine and Russia.
In essence, Ukraine is seeking to extricate itself from the Russian sphere of inﬂuence, and Russia, given its ‘nationalist reluctance’ to recognise the permanent loss of Ukraine , is trying to subvert that process by exploiting the loyalties and identities of the population in eastern Ukraine.
The next section clariﬁes the terms of reference and establishes the link between nationalism/ethnicity and regime type within the Soviet Union and within postcommunist transformation processes.
This debate about the ethnicisation of postcommunist transition processes is followed by a discussion of what appears to be the continuing disintegration of the post-Soviet space, including the cases of Crimea and Donbas, and the gradual positioning of Russia as an ethnic ‘homeland’ pursuing the reversal of its diminished territorial and political status.
The argument then moves to the political and regional fragility of the new Ukrainian state, which culminated in the popular uprising against the Yanukovych government and the role of Russia in the ensuing conﬂict.
In presenting nation-building processes in Russia and Ukraine as being oriented towards incompatible objectives, I then focus on the politicisation of the linguistic divide as a proxy for ethnicity in the conﬂict between Ukrainians and ‘Russian speakers’, and the manipulation of this divide through contradictory interpretations of historical memory by both Russia and Ukraine.
I conclude that, while the Ukrainian crisis is not an ethnic conﬂict as such , the number of factors driving the conﬂict between Russia and Ukraine and between Ukrainians requires the interpretation of this crisis from a perspective of nationalism and ethnicity and justiﬁes the analytical framework employed here.
This process engendered further re-evaluations of historical narratives, leading to more questioning of people’s loyalties, more anxiety by ethnic groups ﬁnding themselves on the ‘wrong side’ of the border, more opportunities for more territory and, consequently, more politicised ethnic identity parading as political identity.
Two extreme cases where the disintegration led to wars are the territories of the former Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union.
Further down the line, this resulted in the mobilisation of paramilitary units with conﬂicting loyalties to different actors and the presentation of the current crisis in the light of past conﬂicts by respective governments.
The similarities between these two post-communist conﬂicts, however, do not extend to wider geopolitical impact of Russia in its near abroad and globally.
After the fall of the Soviet Union, the Russian nation became divided by numerous borders with a huge Russian-speaking diaspora in Ukraine.
As the Russia–Ukraine crisis contains many aspects relating to the changes in position of ethnic groups within the newly reformed post-Soviet space, the analysis here refers to it, but only within the scope of this article.
I will return to Russia’s attempts to recover its diminished post-Soviet status in more detail below, but for now it is enough to say that this issue continues to fuel Russian nationalism, as the annexation of Crimea and the intervention in the overwhelmingly Russian-speaking Donbas region in eastern Ukraine have demonstrated.
Drawing on theories of nationalism, the following paragraphs set out the analytical framework through which the relevance of ethnicity in the Russia–Ukraine crisis is argued in this article.
Given the contestation and changeability of social, physical and symbolic boundaries among groups, it is the self-ascription and ascription by others that contributes to the persistence of ethnicity and implies collective action.
In the present context there are three important characteristics pertaining to ethnicity.
First, as a cultural trait, ethnicity transcends the physical boundaries of states and is not necessarily deﬁned by state citizenship.
The second point is particularly relevant to the context of postSoviet space.
In this respect, ‘language is an important vehicle of ethnicity’ and expands the concept of ethnicity ‘beyond traits which are descent-based’ or historically determined.
The fundamental principle of federalism in the Soviet Union (also in Yugoslavia and, after 1968, in Czechoslovakia), was ‘national–territorial autonomy’ ; that is, the linkage of ethnicity, territory and political administration, thus institutionalising ethnicity by placing it at the base of the federal structure.
In the USSR, more than 50 putatively autonomous national ‘homelands’ were established in a four-tiered ethno-federal hierarchy , each deﬁned as the territory of and for a particular ethno-national group.
The Soviet institutional legacy for managing ethnicity within a controlled authoritarian system created inherent tensions among ethnic groups that were bound to resurface following the demise of the system within which they existed.
The reassembling of disintegrating states unavoidably focused on the communist legacy of the national question , which in too many cases left unresolved antagonisms going back to World War II, as is the case in the Russia–Ukraine relationship.
Nationalism—a ‘political principle that holds that cultural and political units should be congruent’ —is crucial to the politics of nation-states that present themselves as a state for and of one nation.
When new political identities are forming, ‘the people’ need to be demarcated and so it is their ethnic afﬁliation that tends to ﬁll the legitimacy gap left by the disintegration of previous political ties.
Its policies are rooted in a deliberate effort to construct an overarching collective identity based on a putative common national sentiment.
The imbalance between those two parallel processes when nation-building takes precedence over state-building suggests a nationalising state, which is roughly what tended to happen in post-communist states, including Ukraine and, importantly, in Russia , for reasons I have indicated already and will elaborate on later.
While this list of key elements leaves the question of hierarchy of these elements open, I am suggesting that both Russia and Ukraine subscribe to some of these key elements, if not necessarily to all of them.
By the same token, in Ukraine, where ethno-national and linguistic boundaries are blurred, nationalisation meant reshaping and enlarging the core nation within the state and the need to redress the oppression suffered by the core nation.
So far, I have presented theoretical arguments for why, when space, politics and people’s identities are being reconﬁgured, ethnicity assumes a political role, and suggested that this analytical framework is equally valid with reference to the crisis in Ukraine.
While this is precisely the time when the political process would beneﬁt from the absence of politicised ethnicity and history , the contrary appears to be the case.
Before I turn to the Russia–Ukraine conﬂict and show the volatility of this practice in its full magnitude, however, an important qualiﬁcation is in order.
In such regimes, formal democratic institutions are used to obtain and maintain political authority by the abuse of state resources and by preventing the opposition from equal electoral competition.
The Freedom House report ‘Nations in Transit 2018’ gives Ukraine a democratic score of 4.64/7, making it a ‘transitional government’ or ‘hybrid regime’; Russia’s score is 6.61/7, signifying a ‘consolidated authoritarian regime’.2 The next sections focus on the construction of the Russian and Ukrainian nations, in particular, on the use of historical memory in that process and on Russia’s continued effort to expand its geopolitical inﬂuence in the region at the cost of Ukrainian territory.
Russia in the role of nationalising state After the initial break-up of the Soviet Union and the establishment of 15 successor states on its former territory, there were and continue to be many regional and ethnic conﬂicts among and within the successor states.
The following examples draw attention to a number of dynamics relevant to secessionism and interethnic conﬂicts in the post-Soviet space.
The dynamic between South Ossetian separatists seeking reuniﬁcation with Northern Ossetia in Russia and the pursuit of guarantees by the Abkhaz minority against the Georgian majority led to the military conﬂict in 1992.
In the conﬂict in Transnistria, where the Russian-speaking population in post-independence Moldova felt marginalised by the newly privileged Romanian language and the new Romanian-speaking economic elite , separatists were also supported by Russia.
In this case irredentist politics garnered much support not only from Armenia proper but also from the Armenian diaspora.
Given the ‘frozen’ status of these all too brieﬂy mentioned conﬂicts, they continue to fester and provide ground for new conﬂicts to re-emerge.
In this ‘reframed’ scenario, the newly reconﬁgured states and their elites promote the core self-determining national group in whose name and on behalf of which the state came into existence.
The promotion of the language, culture, demographic position and political hegemony of the state-forming ethno-cultural group alienates minorities; in turn, their resistance and growing nationalism galvanises their ‘external’ homeland to protect their co-ethnics in the new states.
Thus, there are three different mutually interacting nationalisms around the borders of nearly all new states.
In this sense, Russia, which is seeking the reversal of its diminished status by pursuing regional dominance, is a kin-state of considerable importance.
When Putin stated, at the NATO 2008 summit, that Ukraine was not a ‘real state’, that it ‘received huge territories from Russia in the east and the south’, and that ‘17 million Russians living in Ukraine’ gave Russia a legitimate interest there (Kuzio 2015b, p.),3 he was making the case for his domestic audience that the Russian nation was greater than its borders.
He was also warning the international community about Russia’s future foreign policy trajectory.
In that sense, the 2014 annexation of Crimea on the ﬂimsy pretext of alleged discrimination against Russian speakers there should not have been a surprise after Russia’s preceding interventions in Georgia and Chechnya.
On 17 March 2014, the Republic of Crimea proclaimed its independence and sovereignty on the basis of the referendum.
Explaining Russia’s part in the annexation, Putin listed the right to selfdetermination of Crimean people, the protection of Russians living there and regional stability.
Crimea’s economy was highly Sovietised, dominated by the military–industrial complex and Soviet tourism, and it remained one of the most conservatively ‘Soviet’ regions in the newly independent Ukraine.
This resulted in demands for territorial autonomy, which culminated in the Russian nationalist and separatist movement in 1994.
Given its multi-ethnic and multilingual character (58.3% Russian, 24.3% Ukrainian and 12.1% Tatar, according to the 2001 census),5 the Crimean constitution contains language rights, specifying that ‘alongside Ukrainian, the application and development and use and protection of Russian, Crimean Tatar and other ethnic groups’ languages are guaranteed’.6 The ousting of the pro-Russian Yanukovych and his replacement by a pro-European administration sparked off demonstrations in Crimea and precipitated the Russian intervention.
While the Ukrainian government and media and their Western counterparts characterised Crimean separatism as having minority support and the referendum as illegal, the ofﬁcial polls of the referendum claimed 97% support among Crimean voters for joining Russia.
In 1989, the Donbas miners, ‘the least nationally conscious group’, staged the ‘ﬁrst major strike in Soviet history’ and continued to strike until the mid-1990s.
Political mobilisation for regional autonomy was linked to the combination of socio-economic, ideological and identity factors, only some of which were mutually reinforcing.
The anger and dissatisfaction in Donbas sparked off the separatist movement, which was exacerbated and manipulated by the rivalries among, often ethnically based, local business clans.
The fall of the Yanukovych government was a serious threat to local oligarchs who had relied on Russian business as much as Donbas industry had relied on the Ukrainian gas and subsidies.
Russian military involvement in eastern Ukraine was approved by the Russian Duma in March 2014.
There is little doubt that, in both Crimea and Donbas, the long-standing, historically evolved ‘social distance’ from Kyiv did not diminish in the context of the new post-Soviet Ukraine but had grown, particularly after 2004.
A movement for regional autonomy is not the same as separatism, let alone an escalation into an armed conﬂict.
In each case, the existing tensions and grievances were manipulated by both Ukrainian and Russian elites, but war in Donbas was unlikely to happen without Russian military support.
The ﬁrst is the construction of the postSoviet Russian nation in ethno-linguistic and ethno-cultural terms which, while somewhat delayed, conﬁrms what we have already observed in the early 1990s in all post-communist states, and with particular violence on the territory of the former Yugoslavia.
Shevel has described the dilemmas of post-Soviet Russian nation-building elites in constructing a new Russian identity that needed to reﬂect its new ‘successor state’ status and the diversity of ethnohistories and cultures within the Russian Federation.
It is viewed with suspicion by Russian nationalists, who see it as discriminatory against ethnic Russians, as well as by non-Russian groups, who fear Russiﬁcation.
The increasingly irredentist terminology of the Kremlin thus augments the cultural and linguistic underpinnings of the Russian nation by identifying it with the former Soviet Union.
The annexation of Crimea, the distribution of Russian passports in frozen conﬂict zones and the military support for eastern Ukrainian ‘self-identifying’ compatriots are all typical actions for a nationalising kin-state.
The second point is that the demarcation of the Russian nation, whereby the Russian nation is becoming interchangeable with Russian speakers, is an elastic concept; the borders of this geographically disengaged ‘wherever nation’ stretches to wherever it can serve as a remedy for territorial loss or aid the recovery of regional dominance and geopolitical inﬂuence.
Laruelle argues that Russian nationalism rests on the concept of Novorossiya , which dates back to the eighteenth century and envisages a redesigned Black Sea region, in which southern Ukraine from Crimea to Odessa secedes from Kyiv and joins Russia.
The term re-emerged in 1994 among Transnistrian separatists as a way of substantiating their rights to join the Russian Federation.
The notion of Novorossiya, the fact of Russian majorities remaining in Ukrainian territories, has been also much promoted by the separatists of the self-proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics.
The corruption of the Ukrainian ruling elite and the military involvement and resources provided by Russia to divert Ukraine from its intended political path towards the West and the EU make the extent to which this crisis can be interpreted from a nationalist perspective debatable.
My aim throughout and in the next section is to show that nationalism and ethnicity, while not decisive explanatory factors, play a signiﬁcant contributory role, if at times indirectly.
Identity and historical factors have been instrumentalised and mobilised by Russia for the purpose of polarising Ukrainian society, thus diverting attention from political reform and demonstrating to the Russian public that Russia’s interests override international law and Ukrainian independence.
On the other hand, the mobilisation of ethnicity and language by Ukrainian elites—both reformers and those supporting the status quo—draws on existing divisions and earlier struggles and creates new narratives that project past events and fears onto present concerns.
Hence, underestimating the role of identity and history in an analysis of the Ukrainian crisis does represent a failure to grasp its full complexity.
It is beyond the scope of this article to delve into the origins and details of the Russia– Ukraine conﬂict.
At the heart of this conﬂict is the fragility of independent, postcommunist Ukraine as a state comprising a number of regions that had never before been united within one independent state.
The new Ukraine faced potential territorial challenges from its regions—mostly from the Sovietised Crimea, the western region of Transcarpathia and the eastern Donbas region, as became obvious in 2014.
Studies in Ideology, Memory and Politics’ , Communist and Post-Communist Studies, 48, 2–3.
As in 2004, Maidan in 2013–2014 was a response to the failure of the political establishment and persistent corruption and reﬂected frustration at the thwarting of integration into Euro–Atlantic structures.
The Yanukovych government, which was supposed to guarantee that Kyiv was ﬁrmly within Russia’s ‘zone of privileged interests’ , was failing both sides.
Moreover, the popular uprising threatened the oligarchic pro-Russian elite beyond Ukraine, which suggests that Russia’s annexation of Crimea and backing of separatists in the east may have had less to do with territorial expansion and more to do with the restoration of Russia’s economic and security inﬂuence over Ukraine, at any cost.
Contemporary Ukrainian nationalism, like the nationalisms of other eastern and central European peoples, originates in nineteenth-century national movements (Harris 2009, p.8), but with added complications.
This Soviet identity put down deep roots, particularly in the Donbas region, because ‘nothing much came before it’ (Wilson 2016, p.6), and there was little on which to base a coherent identity divorced from Soviet times.
Given the security situation in Luhansk and Donetsk oblasti, recent opinion surveys do not include them.
However, eastern and western Ukrainians indeed appear to differ on issues, such as integration into Euro–Atlantic structures and solutions to the conﬂict in eastern Ukraine and Russia.
The Public Opinion Survey of Residents of Ukraine (April– May 2017),12 shows that support for the EU in western Ukraine was 83% and only 27% in eastern Ukraine, while support for NATO membership in eastern Ukraine was 21% and 71% in western Ukraine.
With regard to the separatist regions an overwhelming majority of Ukrainians would prefer Ukraine to remain one country, but there is less agreement on how separatist Luhansk and Donetsk regions should remain within Ukraine.
Regardless of these regional divides, the support for independence of separatist regions in Ukraine is minimal .14 In independent Ukraine, the nation-building process of constructing an overarching national identity became inevitably focused on the past and on the difference between eastern and western versions of Ukrainian identity.
The perception of Ukrainians as ‘almost the same’ as Russians was much more internalised in eastern Ukraine than in the western part of the country where contemporary Ukrainian nationalism originated.
The difference in attitude toward Russia between the more compliant east and more rebellious west became reduced to ‘pro-Russian’ and ‘anti-Russian’ Ukrainians.
The assumed division of Ukraine between the ‘nationalistic’ west and ‘pro-Russian’ east obscures the fact that Ukraine is not sharply divided along ethnic or even linguistic lines, and that both east and west are heterogeneous regions.
What should concern us here is the radicalisation of the ethnic and linguistic divide.
Popular uprisings tend to unleash nationalist forces of various intensity and intentions, which then invoke past struggles and fears.
Notwithstanding, whether as a result of Russian propaganda or politicised historical memory, the east–west divide descended into the stereotyping of a ‘fascist’ west and ‘anti-Ukrainian, pro-Russian’ east.
Nation-building elites engage in shaping a state’s identity, which reﬂects a speciﬁc vision of the state and corresponds best with its political aspirations.
The quest for a new identity is particularly important to new nationalising states with an insecure identity, such as Ukraine, or Putin’s Russia, which is seeking to restore its regional and international status amidst economic crisis at home and continuing conﬂicts in its neighbourhood.
In times of crisis and threats to the state, an objective historical account is not the aim of historical narrative.
The following illustrates that, while nationalist elites manipulate historical memory, they do not necessarily fabricate the whole story but rather, promote a particular section of the story until the revised version emerges as a dominant narrative for many sections of the population.
In times of societal unrest and confusion, the main contributor to tension is the politicisation of historical memory, a story of victimisation, injustice and unresolved conﬂicts told in identityrelevant terms.
The new national identity in post-Soviet Ukraine, seeking to extricate itself from Russia and its sphere of interest and leave its ‘little Russian’ status behind, predictably rejects Ukraine’s Soviet past and embraces the nationalist historical narrative originating in western Ukraine and promoted by its Western oriented-leadership.
The statements these two narratives make about the identity of their respective nations are incompatible and, in both countries, lead to extremes.
Attempts to rehabilitate such organisations and their leaders have occurred in other post-communist states, where interwar national movements, in the belief that their collaboration would be rewarded by national independence, undertook extreme violence against ethnic or religious groups they perceived as the enemy of the nation.
The Yanukovych government, which came to power in 2010, abandoned these policies.
Predictably, support for these organisations was minimal in the eastern regions, which corroborates the regional division of Ukraine as discussed above.
Wilson argues that the inclusion of Svoboda in the new government was ‘disastrous’, because its presence fed the Russian narrative of nationalist takeover.
The legitimation of violence by ‘ﬁghters for independence’ is thus matched by the criminalisation of the communist regime—the suggestion here being that the communist regime prevented Ukrainian independence.
The timing of these laws during the ongoing crisis with Russia is difﬁcult to ignore—historical memory was politicised and exacerbated nationalist rhetoric, which in turn fed into Russian aggression and contributed to the ideological divide on both fronts, between Ukrainians, and between Russia and Ukraine.
The Russia–Ukraine conﬂict cannot be explained sufﬁciently without accounting for the ever intensifying instrumentalisation of historical narrative, which is translated into fear of its possible repetition in the present.
Political regimes create a context in which a ‘crisis framed’ narrative becomes acceptable, as well demonstrated in both major post-communist conﬂicts—by the wars on the territory of the former Yugoslavia and by the conﬂict in Ukraine.
The second dynamic concerns the invocation of victimhood, which was crucial to the commencement of hostilities in the Russia–Ukraine conﬂict.
The story of the victimisation of Ukraine during the Soviet era was exacerbated by the pro-Russian Yanukovych government, which failed to prevent corruption taking hold in the newly independent state and to counter the inﬂuence of ever rising Russian nationalism and authoritarian practices.
Russia tried to hold onto Ukrainian assets and denied the country the right to choose its allies by exploiting Ukraine’s weaknesses and divisions and emphasising its role as the protector of pro-Russian speakers against rising Ukrainian nationalism.
Regardless, of the ratio of the far right to the rest of the Maidan popular revolt, the involvement of radicals against the proRussian government was used by Russia to invoke the memory of atrocities committed by Ukrainian ‘ﬁghters for independence’ against Russians living in Ukraine.
Equally, Russia’s attempt to block Ukraine’s independence did not contradict historical facts about Ukraine’s subordination to Russia.
The Russia–Ukraine crisis started as a popular uprising for democratisation and the Europeanisation of Ukraine, but very soon historical memory of earlier struggles became conﬂated and manipulated into ever sharper division between ‘us’ and ‘them’ and escalated the narrative of crisis.
I have shown that from a theoretical perspective, there are a number of reasons for the assertion of ethnicity in post-communist conﬂicts, which can be summed up as ranging from the political legitimacy it provides in conditions of new state formation, through historical legacies, to its inherent contestability and changeability.
Theoretical perspectives on the role of ethnicity in post-communism led me to analyse the politicisation of ethno-linguistic identity that, in the post-Soviet space, is increasingly used as a proxy for ethnicity.
My focus was on the exploitation and distortion of this identity into political afﬁliations in circumstances of competing and mutually incompatible nationalising projects of Russia and Ukraine.
I explained the construction of the postSoviet Russian nation in ethno-linguistic and ethno-cultural terms that aids its positioning as a kin-state in an ongoing and ever more aggressive quest to reassert Russia’s regional dominance and its great power status, most acutely demonstrated by the annexation of Crimea and the armed conﬂict in Donbas and, furthermore, by the manipulation of historical memory, particularly the events of World War II and the projection of the divisions of that time into the present conﬂict.
The much exploited Nazi collaboration in western Ukraine is set against the anti-fascist heroism of Russia; similarly, the gloriﬁcation of wartime ‘ﬁghters for independence’ in the newly independent Ukraine serves the narrative of victimhood and arrested national development under the Soviet regime.
Ukraine is seeking to extricate itself from the Russian sphere of interests while Russia is determined to re-establish this relationship, if necessary, by breaching international law.
This fact tends to eclipse the role of nationalism and ethnicity in this conﬂict, but it does not negate the analytical framework presented here.
This role was signiﬁcant enough to escalate the conﬂict between Russia and Ukraine.
The conﬂict between those two long-entwined nations, both in the process of reformulating their identities within their respective nationalising projects, has huge consequences and is not limited to armed confrontation over borders.
Beissinger, M ‘A New Look at Ethnicity and Democratization’, Journal of Democracy, 19, 3.
Projects and Processes of Nationalization in Post-Soviet States’, Ethnic and Racial Studies, 34, 11.
Brubaker, R & Cooper, F ‘Beyond “Identity”’, Theory and Society, 29, 1.
Connor, W ‘Nation-Building or Nation-Destroying?’, World Politics, 24, 3.
Review of Thomas D Grant’s “Aggression Against Ukraine: Territory, Responsibility and International Law”’, Israel Law Review, 50, 2.
Goble, P ‘Russian National Identity and the Ukrainian Crisis’, Communist and Post-Communist Studies, 49, 1.
Harris, E ‘What is New About “Eastern Nationalism” and What are the Implications for Studies of Ethnicity Today?’, Nationalism and Ethnic Politics, 18, 3.
Harris, E ‘Paradoks, kontroverza i nacionalno samoodređenje’, Politička Misao, 52, 1.
Hughes, J & Sasse, G ‘Comparing Regional and Ethnic Conﬂicts in Post-Soviet Transitions States’, Regional & Federal Studies, 11, 3.
Nationalist Discourse on the Homeland War in Contemporary Croatia’, Sudoest Europe Mitteilungen, 52, 3.
Politics and Perceptions of the OUN and the UPA in Ukraine’, Communist and Post-Communist Studies, 48, 2–3.
Kropp, S & Schuhmann, J ‘Governance Networks and Vertical Power in Russia—Environmental Impact Assessment and Collaboration Between State and Non-State Actors’, East European Politics, 32, 2.
Kulyk, V ‘Language and Identity in Ukraine After Euromaidan’, Thesis Eleven, 136, 1.
Kuzio, T ‘John A Armstrong’s Contribution to the Study of Nationalism and Ukrainian Nationalism’, Nations and Nationalism, 21, 1.
Kuzio, T ‘European Identity, Euromaidan, and Ukrainian Nationalism’, Nationalism and Ethnic Politics, 22, 4.
Laruelle, M ‘The Three Colours of Novorossiya, or the Russian Nationalist Mythmaking of the Ukrainian Crisis’, Post-Soviet Affairs, 32, 1.
Levitsky, S & Way, L ‘The Rise of Competitive Authoritarianism’, Journal of Democracy, 12, 2.
The Behaviour and Role of Radical Nationalists in the Ukrainian Political Crisis of Late 2013–Early 2014’, Communist and Post-Communist Studies, 48, 2–3.
The Resurrection of a Ukrainian National Hero’, Europe-Asia Studies, 58, 4.
Language and the Disintegration of the Soviet Union’, Comparative Political Studies, 51, 7.
A Transitional Justice Perspective’, International Journal of Transitional Justice, 11, 1.
From Ethnic Cooperation to Violence and War in Yugoslavia’, Ethnic and Racial Studies, 23, 6.
How the Past Shaped Russia’s Political Discourse Regarding Crimea’, Europolity: Continuity and Change in European Governance, 12, 1.
The “Internal–Identitarian” Nexus in Russian–European Relations and its Signiﬁcance Beyond the Ukraine Crisis’, Politics in Central Europe, 12, 1.
The End of Ukrainian Ambivalence?’, Studies in Ethnicity and Nationalism, 15, 1.
Verdery, K ‘Nationalism and National Sentiment in Post-Socialist Romania’, Slavic Review, 52, 2.
Verdery, K ‘Nationalism, Postsocialism and Space in Eastern Europe’, Social Research, 63, 1.
Explaining Civil Conﬂict Perhaps, but not Civil War’, Europe-Asia Studies, 68, 4.
Ethnic Fractionalization, Public Goods Provision, and the Historical Legacies of Stateness’, Comparative Political Studies, 49, 11.
