Flashpoint in Russia's escalating crisis By Khalid Hameed Farooqi Wednesday Feb 23, 2022 US and the UK continue to supply Ukraine with heavy weaponry in the name of Ukraine's defence.
ReutersThe eastern Ukraine region of Donbas has been a flash point in Russia's escalating crisis with Ukraine, which is centered around land borders and strategic influence.The Donbas region of eastern Ukraine declared independence in 2014 following Russia's reintegration of Crimea.
Related itemsBiden announces ‘first’ sanctions on Russia over UkraineRussia-Ukraine tensions and PM Imran Khan's visit to RussiaNATO chief sees 'every indication' Russia still planning full-scale assault on UkraineThe region turned volatile on Monday, when Russian President Vladimir Putin recognised the independence of two Moscow-backed breakaway enclaves known as the Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics.
Additionally, the Russian president issued decrees directing military forces to enter the region for ""peacekeeping"" purposes.
The formal recognition is a significant escalation that signals the end of the seven-year-old Minsk peace agreement.Tatiana, a resident of Lviv, a large Ukrainian city on the eastern border with Poland, told Geo News that it's better if people don't want to live together; there's no reason to fight.
A senior journalist, Dr Mujahid Mirza, who is based in Moscow, told Geo News that in his speech, President Vladimir Putin particularly focused on the last decade, by stating that the Luhansk and Donetsk republics were formed independently from eastern Ukraine in May 2014.
Since then, Russia has provided a variety of humanitarian, financial, and covert military assistance to the Russian-speaking population.
Ukraine between Russia vs United States and alliesThe United States and the UK continue to supply Ukraine with heavy weaponry in the name of Ukraine's defence.
He warned that if Russia invaded Ukraine, the repercussions would be ""extremely serious"" for Russia.
Yanukovych then fled to Russia and remained there throughout his presidency, preferring Russia to the West in order to improve the country's economic situation.
He accepted a $15 billion aid package from Russia despite Russia's refusal to join the European Union.In the same year of 2014, Russia stepped forward and annexed the Crimea Peninsula on the Black Sea, where 75% of the population is Russian.
Crimea is home to 12% of Tatar Muslims.The majority of Ukrainians living in Eastern Ukraine are of Russian ancestry and oppose the central government of Ukraine; they want their own country or to join Russia.
However, NATO later violated this understanding and expanded eastward into Europe.
Not only has NATO expanded, it has also installed modern artillery in Estonia capable of attacking Russia's St.
The commission has been attempting to prepare Ukrainians for NATO membership, but NATO'S expansion to the eastward is contentious.
NATO has stepped up its efforts to enlist Ukraine in the alliance once again in the aftermath of the NATO bloc's presence on Russia's border and Russia's occupation of Crimea during the crisis.On the one hand, Russia has halted the supply of cheap gas to Ukraine; on the other hand, Russia has ignored Poland and Ukraine.Pipeline Nord StreamRussia and Germany have invested €10 billion in the Nord Stream 2 pipeline in order to supply gas directly to Western countries.Poland is adamantly opposed to this gas pipeline due to Germany's and Russia's neglect of Poland.
On the other hand, relations between Europe and the United States have been strained on several occasions in recent years.
Under United States President Donald Trump, relations between Germany and the United States deteriorated, and Germany built the $10 billion Nord Stream 2 despite strong United States opposition.
In this context, the United States seeks to contain Europe's growing economic cooperation with Russia, as well as the central government of Ukraine.
While a majority of Ukrainians desire membership in the European Union, the country is divided over NATO membership.Eastern Ukraine is home to the majority of Russian speakers.
These Russian backers have instigated a revolt against Ukraine's central government.
Meanwhile, Russia wishes to include Odessa, a Russian-speaking city with a population of 75% Russian speakers.Relations between Russia and ChinaRussia has a long-term strategy for cooperation with China, which concerns the United States in particular.
More so, President Putin of Russia recently visited China and signed a number of agreements strengthening relations between the two countries.
However, China issued a critical statement in response to Russia's recent incursion into eastern Ukraine's Donbas region.In the context of Ukraine, tensions between Russia and the United States energy prices have been increasing in Europe, which has created unease among the populace.
