UC Berkeley scholars present diverse viewpoints on the conflict between Russia and Ukraine.
Then, under pressure from Russian President Vladimir Putin, Ukrainian leader Viktor Yanukovych backed out.
For Ukrainians fed up with the corruption of their government—and seeking closer ties with Europe—it was a breaking point.
In response to the invasion—the first forcible change to European borders since the end of World War II—the United States and the EU imposed sanctions on Russia.
In the ensuing months, Russian-backed separatists have continued to fight for autonomy in parts of Eastern Ukraine, and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization moved troops into Baltic countries on Russia’s border.
In a post on his blog, Eurasian Geopolitics, Walker describes how the United States policy of NATO expansion, in place since the fall Clinton administration, has been perceived in Russia as especially provocative, and as a result has become destabilizing to the entire region.
There is also an internal political logic to Putin’s actions, writes Berkeley political scientist M Steven Fish.
Times, and have engaged in public forums and lectures on topics from the wider Eurasian context to the role of the European Union to a discussion of the Ukrainian perspective, as one led by Berkeley macroeconomist and VoxUkraine blogger Yuriy Gorodnichenko.
Jeffery Pennington, the Executive Director of Berkeley’s Institute for Slavic, East European and Eurasian Studies , notes that there is “always a good amount of interest in events in Russia on this campus,” but the Ukraine situation has increased interest significantly.
As a result, ISEEES has “been able to do more activities, more events that are focused” on the region.
It unlikely that Berkeley’s interdisciplinary scholars will turn away from Russia and the Ukraine anytime soon.
Violence between pro-Russian separatists and the Ukrainian army continues to erupt in Ukraine’s Donbas region.
The pressure of international sanctions and falling oil prices has caused the ruble’s value to tumble.
What this means for internal Russian politics and foreign policy is not yet clear.
Walker notes that the impact of the western sanctions would have been high “even if oil was at $100 a barrel,” as they cut Russia off from Western technology, as well as from large parts of the financial sector.
The stakes of ongoing tensions are high, in the Ukraine and between NATO and Russia, as Putin’s Russia funds far right parties from France to Hungary.
With the economic situation in Europe far worse than in the US, he’s concerned that these political movements will find more participants.
Either way, the new status quo does not bode well for the European Union’s goals of extending its political and economic influence toward the East, for example by bringing in new member states and extending trade agreements.
Karen Barkey, a sociologist joining UC Berkeley in Fall 2016, directs the Shared Sacred Sites initiative, which uses digital humanities methods to present information about sacred sites that are shared by different religious communities.
