The Battle for Historical Memory in Postrevolutionary Ukraine OXANA SHEVEL T he triumph of the 2014 Euromaidan proPost-Euromaidan Ukraine has undergone sharp tests in Ukraine raised many hopes both shifts in public opinion, leading commentators domestically and internationally.
Yet toto talk about a process of rapid consolidation of day, two and a half years since the pro-European Ukrainian national identity.
This process, as well uprising in Kiev’s central Maidan Nezalezhnosti, as the end of the Ukrainian government’s geopoor Independence Square, led to the overthrow of litical and cultural-historical oscillation between President Viktor Yanukovych, many goals of the Russia and the West was ironically aided by Rusprotesters remain unrealized.
Some progress has sia itself in its quest to keep Ukraine in Moscow’s been made on issues such as the prosecution of orbit in the wake of the Euromaidan protesters’ corrupt politicians, judicial reform, and other victory in February 2014.
Russia’s annexation of measures to establish transparency and accountCrimea the following month and subsequent inability for the powerful.
But the overall results to stigation of and continued support for a separatdate from efforts to curb corruption, overhaul the ist insurgency in eastern Ukraine led to a sharp economy, and integrate with Europe are disapdecline in pro-Russian public sentiment, includpointing for both Ukrainian citizens and supporting in the Russian-speaking southern and eastern ers of the reform movement abroad.
In a September 2014 survey conducted by four so-called decommunization laws adopted in Gallup on behalf of the International Republican May 2015 sharply parts ways with the frames and Institute, 59 percent of respondents favored memassessments of the common Soviet past in an effort bership in the EU, compared with just 17 percent to reorient historical memory.
According to a May 2016 poll by the President Viktor Yushchenko to recognize the Kiev International Institute of Sociology , 49 1932–33 massive famine that killed millions of percent of Ukrainians favor membership in the EU, Ukrainians as a genocide of the Ukrainian people versus 16 percent who prefer the Customs Union. orchestrated by Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, attiUkrainian attitudes toward Russia, and espetudes toward the famine (known as the Holodocially Russia’s leadership, have also become much mor, or death by hunger, in Ukraine) had changed more negative since the Crimea annexation.
Pollalready by the late 2000s, and this tendency coning by the KIIS found that from February 2014 to tinued post-Euromaidan.
According to an October May 2015, the share of those holding positive at2010 poll by the Raiting Group, 60 percent natitudes toward Russia dropped from 78 percent tionwide regarded the Holodomor as a genocide to 30 percent nationwide.
By September 2015 was a partial rebound by the middle of 2016, to 42 this figure had risen to 81 percent, and it was a percent viewing Russia positively in August 2016 majority view in every region of Ukraine (though (possibly due to the “routinization” of the conflict it ranged from 64 percent in the eastern regions to in eastern Ukraine, as the KIIS institute director 98 percent in the west). hypothesized), just 8 percent of Ukrainians felt Ukraine’s experience within the USSR is another positively about the Russian leadership in August issue on which regional differences persist.
Negative views of the Kremlin prevail in evformation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Repubery region of Ukraine, even the Russian-speaking lic as part of the Soviet Union is viewed positively south and east. in all areas except in the two western regions of Polls showing a jump in support for Ukraine’s Galicia and Volyn, according to a December 2014– independence further illustrate the change in atJanuary 2015 poll by the Democratic Initiatives titudes in the south and the Foundation.
Since before the Detime, attitudes toward some cember 1991 referendum Advocates of decommunization other key aspects of the Soon declaring independence viet past remain largely unfrom the Soviet Union, KIIS link the process to the war effort changed.
Stalin, for examhas been tracking popular against Russia-backed separatists. ple, continues to be viewed attitudes on Ukrainian indepositively as a “great leader” pendence if another referenby a significant minority dum were to be conducted.
In 2011, for example, nationwide (28. percent, according to a March 53 percent in the east would have voted for inde2016 KIIS poll), while a plurality of respondents in pendence in a hypothetical referendum and 47 perthe eastern regions hold such a view (45 percent cent against; in the south, 47 percent would have agreeing compared with 30 percent disagreeing). voted for independence and 53 percent against.
By This is not so different from attitudes in 1991, August 2016, the same pollster found that 71.5 when 26 percent of Ukrainians considered Stalin percent in the east, and 78. percent in the south, a great leader. would have voted for independence.
Nationwide, Historical figures who are being rehabilitated 87 percent would have voted for independence in by the new decommunization laws, such as the August 2016, compared with 67 percent in 2011. wartime Ukrainian nationalist leader Stepan Bandera, continue to be viewed unfavorably by maREGIONAL VARIATIONS jorities everywhere except in the west of Ukraine, Changes in popular attitudes, profound as they even though negative attitudes have subsided over are, have not erased regional differences.
Bandera has long been a highly controversial east , support figure in Ukraine and has inspired much hatred in for membership in the Russia-led Customs Union Russia.
Many of his tudes toward different aspects of the Soviet past followers participated in killings of Jews and Poles also vary substantially by region. during the war, and after Germany was defeated, On the one hand, in part as a result of a camnationalists in western Ukraine waged large-scale paign undertaken during the 2005–10 tenure of partisan warfare against Soviet forces.
For the genuine decommunization. chives of repressive bodies of first time in Ukraine’s postthe communist totalitarian reSoviet history, elections had gime from 1917–1991.” produced a pro-Western and pro-market majority The laws were adopted without public or parrather than a parliament more or less evenly dividliamentary debate.
Votes were held just a few days ed between broadly pro-Russian and pro-Western after the drafts were submitted to the parliament. forces.
This swift passage was in stark contrast with the Changes in popular preferences contributed to fate of similar measures just a few years before. this electoral outcome, but so did Russia’s annexaDuring Yushchenko’s presidency there were multion of Crimea and the war in Donbas.
Because of tiple failed attempts to pass draft laws recognizthe armed conflict, voting did not take place in 27 ing nationalist organizations from the interwar electoral districts located in the territories no lonand World War II period as fighters for Ukrainian ger controlled by the Kiev government.
The law on of support were additional contributing factors remembering the victory over Nazism replaced the in the dramatic change in the legislative political Soviet term “Great Patriotic War” with the internalandscape.
The First, critics have noted that the laws have the law on the condemnation of totalitarian regimes potential to stifle open debate over history by inequated communism with Nazism, and banned the troducing legal punishments for publicly expresspropagation of their symbols except for scientificing “wrong” opinions about the communist period educational activities, military-historical reenor about fighters for Ukraine’s independence.
One major law’s “falsification of history” language is strongly practical consequence of these measures was a ban reminiscent of infamous measures adopted in Ruson, and mandated removal of, many Soviet-era sia several years earlier, leading one commentator symbols and monuments.
Disseminating honorable recognition bestowed on organizations such propaganda and symbols of the totalitarian whose members committed war crimes against ciregimes was made an offense punishable by 5 to vilian populations. 10 years’ imprisonment.
Critics also warned of the laws’ potential to agPerhaps the most controversial of the decomgravate domestic divisions by alienating the south munization laws was the one on recognition of and east of the country, given that most of the lofighters for Ukrainian independence in the twencalities to be renamed were concentrated in those tieth century.
Nostalgia for the Soviet era is stronger members of Bandera’s Organization of Ukrainian there, and greater resistance to decommunization Nationalists and the Ukrainian Insurgent was to be expected.
Donetsk, dence, their members also committed war crimes with 99 localities; Kharkiv, 97; Dnipropetrovsk, by participating in the Holocaust and in the exter84; Crimea, 66; Odessa, 55; and Luhansk, 54. mination of Polish civilians.
Despite these aspects of their history, the law forbade “public display of LOCAL RESISTANCE disrespectful attitudes” toward recognized indeThe decommunization laws entered into force pendence fighters, as well as “public denial of the in May 2015, and by now several consequences legitimacy of the struggle for Ukraine’s indepenof their implementation have dence in the twentieth century.” become apparent, some of them unexpected.
For one, the laws so far do not seem to have aggravatDEFENDING DEBATE ed polarization in Ukraine.
Of 54 loCouncil of Europe’s Venice Commission, an expert calities to be renamed in Luhansk, for example, body on constitutional law, opined that a mere disonly 19 are in Ukrainian-controlled territory.
In play of symbols should not result in imprisonment. other words, in areas where resistance to decomThe commission more generally criticized the law munization measures was likely to have been the for its potential to infringe on the rights of freedom strongest, the process has not taken place. of expression and association, and for not being Another reason behind the limited local op“precise enough to enable individuals to regulate position to decommunization is the nonideologitheir conduct according to the law and to prevent cal nature of much of the resistance.
Polls, media arbitrary interference by public authorities.” interviews with citizens, and records of town hall meetings show that people often oppose decomPROVOKING THE POLES munization not for ideological reasons (because Advocates of the laws seem to view decommunithey have positive views of Soviet-era leaders or are zation as nothing less than a security issue, and link committed to the preservation of Soviet-era symthe process to the war effort against Russia-backed bols) but because of the perceived financial costs separatists.
In the words of the deputy director of of renaming places and removing monuments, and the Institute of National Memory, “Where there are the feeling that decommunization will not result in no monuments [to Lenin and other Soviet leadany socioeconomic improvements.
Stalin’s orders, in the 1930s. the Kremlin prevail in However, the decommuniPolls showed that Kirovohrad every region of Ukraine. zation process as it has been residents overwhelmingly preimplemented could actually ferred to retain the name.
But weaken Ukraine’s security by once the renaming process at the local level endoffending some long-term allies such as Poland. ed in a stalemate, the national parliament got inThe glorification of wartime Ukrainian nationalist volved and changed the name to Kropyvnytsky in groups and leaders implicated in the mass murder honor of the author and playwright Marko Kroof Polish civilians has already led to friction with pyvnytsky —the option favored by Warsaw.
In April 2015, the decommunization laws just 8 percent of local residents, according to an were approved by the Ukrainian parliament right April 2016 KIIS poll.
Otherwise, the renaming of after Polish President Bronislaw Komorowski ad1,021 localities prodressed the legislature.
The provocative renaming ceeded largely uneventfully, and in many cases the of Kiev’s Moscow Prospect as Stepan Bandera Aveprocess had an unintended positive side effect of nue was also ill-timed, occurring on the eve of the spurring public activism and discussion in mandaanniversary of the 1943 Volyn massacre of Poles tory local hearings. by Ukrainian nationalists.
The decommunization laws nevertheless did After Komorowski lost a presidential election produce some troubling consequences.
In July 2016, started a criminal investigation of marchers who both chambers of the Polish parliament voted unfurled a communist-era red flag during the to make June 11 a day of memory for the PolVictory Day march.
So European standards of memorialization policies far the frictions have not lead Poland to lessen whereby freedom of expression is upheld, honorits support for Ukraine against Russia, but future ing civilian victims of political violence is a central relations may depend on whether more radical priority, and murder and brutalization of the civilor more conciliatory voices come to steer each ian population are condemned, regardless of the country’s domestic politics on these issues. goals for which they were carried out.
Whether Ukraine will revise its decommunizaHEROES AND VILLAINS tion laws to actually move closer to Europe and The fundamental dilemma in Ukraine’s decomaway from its Soviet and authoritarian past remunization process is how to undo the legal, inmains to be seen.
Poroshenko promised to introstitutional, and historical legacy of the Soviet era duce amendments to address the criticisms when without repeating the Soviet approach of mandathe signed the laws into force, but so far he has not ing one “correct” interpretation of the past and submitted any.
However, a pair of amendments to punishing the public expression of dissenting the law on the recognition of independence fightviewpoints.
This dilemma is further complicated ers, proposed by two members of parliament in by the fact that criticism of the decommunization July 2016, are pending.
One of them would exlaws has come both from intellectual circles in the clude “persons whose actions qualify as a crime West and in Ukraine that are genuinely concerned against humanity” from eligibility for the status with upholding freedom of expression and fosterof independence fighters.
It would also explicitly ing free historical inquiry, and from retrograde exempt “historical research and publication of its forces in Ukraine and Russia concerned first and results” from those unlawful actions that constiforemost with keeping Ukraine in the Russian tute a “disrespectful attitude” toward the fighters sphere of influence and preserving the Soviet-era or “public denial of the rightfulness of the struggle memory regime with its assessments of events, for independence.” groups, and individuals.
If these amendments are adopted, it would be a At an intellectual and normative level it may step in the right direction.
As a matter of politics, maidan victory and by Russia’s aggression have however, this course of action is not so easy, since led to a consolidation of Ukrainian national idenit could be readily construed as bowing to pressure tity and opened new horizons for Ukrainian lawfrom Russia, the aggressor state, which itself is all makers to legislate major reforms in the sphere of too ready to falsify history and silence opponents memory and identity politics.
The legacy this new reality and to firmly reorient Ukraine toof past fighters for Ukrainian independence also ward Europe, Ukrainian leaders need to be aware has particular appeal in the context of today’s terthat a true break from the authoritarianism of the ritorial aggression and serves as an inspiration for “Russian world” and the communist era cannot be defense efforts. accomplished by neo-Soviet methods.
