How wild, harsh and impenetrable that wood was, so that thinking of it recreates the fear.
I had been living in a rented apartment in Kiev while a revolution unfolded on the streets, writing a diary for Radio Liberty and other publications about the extraordinary events that were freeing a people and propelling the world to a new crisis.
Despite the fascination of events in Ukraine, I was anxious to bring the Russian bureaucratic process to an end.
I had been waiting three weeks for the approval and wanted to return to Moscow where, after years of traveling back and forth from the United States, I hoped to settle for at least a few years.
With the news of approval, all I had to do was go to the Russian consulate and present the number, along with a completed application and photograph.
On Christmas Eve, I went to the consulate and was buzzed in by staff members.
The consul greeted me cordially and asked me to wait while he retrieved the approval letter.
After an hour and a half, he returned and said that he had found my number in the consular log but that there was no letter.
Back in my apartment, I called the Foreign Ministry in Moscow and explained the situation to Lev Lvovich, a diplomat in the press department.
A half hour later, he told me to call the embassy the following day and ask for Alexei Gruby, a first secretary.
Something had gone wrong, he said, but Gruby would make sure I received my visa.
That night, my documentary film, Age of Delirium, about the fall of the Soviet Union, was shown in the Maidan Nezalezhnosti (Independence Square), the epicenter of Kiev’s antiregime revolt.
About a hundred people stood for an hour and forty minutes in subzero cold in an improvised outdoor cinema watching the story of the fate of ordinary people in the Soviet collapse.
The next morning, I was interviewed by Kiev’s Espreso TV, an internet television network that covers the Maidan.
Ukraine celebrates the Orthodox Christmas, so all offices, including the Russian embassy, were open on December 25.
My previous stay in Moscow had been only three months, during which time I had been able to do little more than open a bank account, familiarize myself with the operations of the Radio Liberty Russian Service, where I was to serve as an adviser, and organize an apartment.
The only significant article I had written concerned Yeltsin’s destruction of the Russian parliament twenty years before, in 1993.
When I first began working in Russia, in 1976, as a correspondent for the London Financial Times, I quickly concluded that Russia was an alternate universe that could be understood only through the details of individual Russians’ lives.
It was this book that became the film shown on Christmas Eve in the Maidan.
During the 1980s, I was refused visas to the Soviet Union and was able to enter the country on reporting trips just twice, after the United States State Department threatened retaliation against Soviet correspondents if I was barred.
But Reader’s Digest, for which I was writing pieces about Russia, threatened to cancel plans for a Russian-language edition of the magazine.
The Soviet authorities were encouraging Western institutions to set up in Moscow and, faced with the Digest ultimatum, decided to give in.
For the next two decades, I traveled freely to Russia, writing two books and hundreds of articles.
In 1999, after four apartment buildings in Russia were blown up, killing hundreds of residents in their sleep and providing the pretext for starting the second Chechen war, which brought Vladimir Putin to power, I contended that the bombings were carried out by the FSB, not by Chechen rebels.
Despite these stories, I regularly received visas, and persons connected to the Russian authorities pointed to me as an example of the regime’s tolerance of free expression.
In fact, this tolerance was based on the authorities’ confidence in their ability to manipulate Western opinion.
The picture of contemporary Russia sent back by Western journalists and academics was far from favorable, but it hardly conveyed how morally damaged Russia really was.
An example of the Russian success in manipulating Western observers was the Valdai Discussion Club, organized as a means of influencing the world’s leading experts on Russia, both journalists and academics.
One of the great attractions of the meetings was the opportunity to question Putin and other Russian officials in a supposedly informal setting.
Russian officials were unfailingly generous with their time and hospitality, but they tightly controlled the proceedings, providing detailed answers to prepared questions and ignoring or giving short shrift to those that were even mildly critical.
The participants, anxious not to offend their hosts for fear of not being invited back, engaged in self-censorship, as the Russian authorities knew they would.
The story described Putin’s criticism of the West, in his opening speech, for losing touch with its Christian roots.
Instead, he said, the Valdai participants “felt the evolution, the self-confidence of this country, its consolidation,” inadvertently demonstrating the effectiveness of that brainwashing.
Russia’s ability to manipulate foreign opinion, however, is limited by external circumstances.
In December 2013, as I was waiting for my Russian visa to be renewed, the crisis in Ukraine was changing the calculus.
The mask of liberalism had effectively misled the world about the true nature of the regime, but if the regime began to be directly threatened, as it was by events in Ukraine, it would have to take steps that would make the illusion harder, or impossible, to sustain.
I owed my continued presence in Moscow to the regime’s desire to protect the masquerade.
Russian officials liked to point out that no American journalist had been expelled since the end of the Cold War.
With the Ukraine crisis, however, the authorities apparently decided that the show was over.
Understanding Russia is actually very easy, but one must teach oneself to do something that is very hard—to believe the unbelievable.
Westerners become confused because they approach Russia with a Western frame of reference, not realizing that Russia is a universe based on a completely different set of values.
If a Westerner takes it for granted that the individual has inherent worth and is not just raw material for the deluded schemes of corrupt political leaders, he may not realize that in Russia this outlook is not widely shared.
To grasp the reality of Russia, it is necessary to accept that Russian leaders really are capable of blowing up hundreds of their own people to preserve their hold on power.
They really are capable of ordering an attack with flamethrowers on a gymnasium full of defenseless parents and children.
Once one accepts that the impossible is really possible, the degradation of the Yeltsin years and Vladimir Putin’s rise to power make perfect sense.
Acknowledgments In my effort to describe what went wrong in Russia after the fall of the Soviet Union, I was supported by a number of institutions without which this work would not have been possible.
I would like to express my deep appreciation to the Sarah Scaife Foundation, the Smith Richardson Foundation, the William H Donner Foundation, and the Earhart Foundation, and to Michael Gleba, Nadia Schadlow, Marin Strmeki, Ingrid Gregg, Montgomery Brown, and Curtin Winsor.
I would also like to mention my longtime benefactor and friend Daniel McMichael, who died September 23, 2013.
My sons, Raphael and Mark, read early versions of the manuscript and provided helpful suggestions and comments.
My thanks also to the Henry Jackson Society, which sponsored me for a British residency permit after I was expelled from Russia in December 2013.
Abbreviations and Administrative Delineations FSB Federal Security Service KGB Committee for State Security MVD Ministry of Internal Affairs Oblast Often similar in size to an American state, an oblast is a territorial subdivision of the Russian Federation.
Since 2004, the governors of oblasts have been appointed by the president.
SBU Security Service of Ukraine 1 The 1999 Apartment Bombings In the summer of 1999, with the Boris Yeltsin era coming to an end, those at the pinnacle of power in Russia feared for their freedom and even their lives.
There were signs of an economic recovery, but most citizens were still living in poverty and waiting months to be paid.
The Yeltsin entourage was increasingly isolated and widely hated for its role in pillaging the country.
According to Russians and Westemers with access to the Kremlin leadership, the leading members of the Yeltsin “family’— Tatyana Dyachenko, the president’s daughter; Boris Berezovsky, her close adviser and the country’s richest man; and Valentin Yumashev, a member of the Security Council and Dyachenko’s future husband—lived in fear of a cruel reckoning.
In the twelve days from September 4 to the 16th, however, everything changed.
Four apartment buildings were blown up in Moscow, Buinaksk, and Volgodonsk, and the controversies that wracked the country over corruption and privatization were suddenly forgotten.
Eight years of postSoviet Russian history was telescoped into the shocking images of bodies being carried out of the rubble of bombed buildings.
Newly appointed prime minister Vladimir Putin expressed perfectly the country’s desire for revenge.
But Russian forces were already fighting Chechen rebels in Dagestan, and the country was looking desperately for someone to blame.
Russians had been opposed to further involvement in Chechnya, but in the wake of the apartment bombings, sentiment shifted.
The mystery of who bombed the apartment houses in 1999 has never been solved.
When I was told on Christmas Day 2013 that the “competent organs” had determined that my presence in the territory of the Russian Federation was “undesirable,” I was certain that my role in the investigation of the 1999 apartment bombings was the most important reason.
The Rise of the Russian Criminal State, in which I accused the FSB of responsibility for the explosions.
They did this, I believe, because my expulsion would have drawn attention to an episode the rest of the world seemed to have forgotten.
But by the time I worked in Moscow in late 2013, Putin’s hold on power was weakening.
Mass protests had taken place in Moscow and a popular revolution had broken out in Ukraine.
The question of the apartment bombings had never quite gone away in Russia, and now the whispers were becoming louder.
In the new conditions, raising the topic freely was not going to be allowed.
Yeltsin’s Russia in the spring of 1999 was a nation traumatized by impoverishment and criminalization, and it was far from certain that the presidential elections set for June 2000 would take place.
The popular approval ratings of both Yeltsin and his newly appointed prime minister and heir apparent, Vladimir Putin, were at 2 percent.
But there was a widespread fear that Yeltsin would find a pretext for declaring a state of emergency so that the elections would not take place.
The plan was referred to as Storm in Moscow and was to include attacks on the headquarters of the FSB, the Interior Ministry , and the Federation Council, kidnappings by Chechen rebels, and a war between criminal gangs.
Also in June, Russia began a steady military buildup on the Chechen border.
Significant numbers of artillery and aircraft were transferred to the region, followed in early July by the arrival of multiple-rocket launchers capable of destroying entire areas.
The slow increase of forces continued until the equivalent of a Russian division, about seven thousand men, was on the border.
But in late spring, the Russian authorities surprised local law enforcement by withdrawing internal troops stationed on the border, clearing a route for would-be invaders.
An Islamic force of twelve hundred armed men, commanded by the Chechen leader Shamil Basaev and an Arab extremist named Khattab, entered Dagestan from Chechnya without meeting any resistance.
The invaders occupied territory in the Botlikh region and were fought mostly by local self-defense units.
On August 23, the invaders withdrew, again without encountering resistance.
A Russian commander told a correspondent for Time magazine that during the retreat, he had Basaev in his sights but was ordered to hold his fire.
Aslan Maskhadov, the Chechen president, tried to reach Yeltsin on a hotline installed after the first Chechen war, but no one answered.
After the rebels had withdrawn, Russia bombed the Botlikh region for several days and then began a punitive operation against KaramakhiChabanmakhi, an enclave that a year earlier, with official permission, had proclaimed Islamic law.
Russian forces surrounded villages and bombed them, killing up to one thousand civilians.
There was no obvious connection between the Botlikh events and Karamakhi-Chabanmakhi, which is in a different part of Dagestan.
In response to the bombing of Karamakhi-Chabanmakhi, on September 4, Basaev’s forces reinvaded Dagestan, leading to fighting that continued for almost three weeks.
The timing of the bombings coincided with the fighting in Dagestan, creating the impression that the bombings were revenge for the attacks by the Russian military on Islamic insurgents in Dagestan.
The invasion of Dagestan was treated by the Russian government as a sign that the Chechens wanted to take over the entire North Caucasus.
In August, however, the investigative weekly Versiya published a report indicating that Basaev’s invasion of Dagestan had been organized with Russian complicity.
According to the weekly, Alexander Voloshin, the head of the presidential administration, had met with Basaev on July 4 in the town of Beaulieu, between Nice and Monaco, at a villa belonging to the international arms merchant Adnan Khashoggi.
This information was said to come from a source in French intelligence.
On September 13 and 14 the newspaper Moskovsky Komsomolets published parts of the transcript of a friendly conversation between a man with a voice similar to that of Boris Berezovsky—Yeltsin’s daughter’s close adviser—and Movladi Udugoyv, the unofficial spokesman for the radical Chechen opposition, which included Basaev and Khattab.
When I met him, he told me about the growing fear in the Kremlin about the possibility of the Yeltsin government’s losing power and the rumors that Moscow would be the scene of a huge provocation.
He said that the issue was the security of Yeltsin and his family in the case of a handover of power.
I sensed the uneasiness but did not know how to assess my friend’s prediction.
I had no illusions about Yeltsin and his cronies, but it was hard to imagine that a man who came to power through a_ peaceful anticommunist revolution with massive public support would murder his own people to hold on to power.
At 9:40 Pm on September 4, a truck bomb exploded in Buinaksk, Dagestan’s second-largest city.
It destroyed a five-story apartment building that housed soldiers from the 136th Motor Rifle Brigade.
The explosion occurred while many residents were at home, watching a televised soccer match between France and Ukraine, and dozens of persons were buried under the rubble.
The eventual death toll was sixty-four, with nearly one hundred people injured.
Hours after the first explosion in Buinaksk, a second bomb was discovered in a ZIL-130 truck near the military hospital.
Sappers stopped a watch mechanism twelve minutes before the bomb was set to explode.
There was almost six thousand pounds of explosives in the truck, enough to have leveled the central part of the city.
The events in Buinaksk, although major, did not stun the nation because the victims were Dagestani, not Russian, and Dagestan was a war zone.
On September 9, however, the terrorists struck again, this time in Moscow.
Shortly after midnight, a bomb exploded in the basement of a building at 19 Guryanova Street, in a working-class area in the southeast part of the city.
The central section of the building was obliterated, leaving the left and right stairwells standing on each side of a gaping hole.
The Moscow FSB announced that items removed from the scene showed traces of TNT and hexogen, a powerful military explosive.
Four days later, on September 13, an explosion at 6 Kashirskoye Highway in Moscow flattened a nine-story brick apartment building, turning it into a pile of rubble.
To add to the horror, the explosion took place at 5 AM, when almost all of the residents were asleep.
Muscovites awoke to graphic television footage showing emergency workers feverishly going through the debris.
There were thousands of calls to the police reporting suspicious activity.
On the morning of the explosion on Kashirskoye Highway, Gennady Seleznev, the speaker of the State Duma, announced at a meeting of the Duma Council that on the previous night, an apartment house had been blown up in the city of Volgodonsk.
The significance of this announcement would not become clear until later.
With funerals of the Moscow victims still going on, a truck bomb exploded in Volgodonsk.
The dead bodies of eighteen people, including two children, were pulled from the rubble.
This explosion, like the one on Kashirskoye Highway, took place at 5 am.
The psychological shock was so great that afterward hundreds of people were unwilling to sleep in their homes and insisted on spending the night outdoors.
He noticed a white Lada parked in front of the building at 14/16 Novoselov Street with a male passenger in the back seat.
The last two numbers on the car’s license plates were covered with pieces of paper that had “62,” the code for Ryazan, written on them.
His daughter, Yulia, a twenty-three-year-old medical intern, went out onto the balcony and watched as a man emerged from the basement, checked his watch, and got into the car, where two people were waiting.
In the meantime, another resident, Vladimir Vasiliev, returned and also noticed the car.
The piece of paper with “62” on the rear license plate had now fallen off so that the number on the car’s rear plate was different from the number on the front.
The basement had been used as a toilet by local derelicts, so they did not want to go down there.
People took babies out of bathtubs, grabbed documents, and threw on overcoats.
As residents watched on the street, the police, including Yuri Tkachenko, the head of the local bomb squad, entered the basement.
Tkachenko disconnected a detonator and timing device and then tested three sacks of a white crystalline substance with a portable gas analyzer.
The contents of the sacks tested positive for hexogen, the same substance used in the previous apartment bombings.
There now was no question that someone had tried to blow up the building.
But the FSB agents forgot to take away the highly professional military detonator, which was left in the hands of the bomb squad.
On the basis of descriptions by Kartofelnikov, his daughter, and Vasiliev, the police prepared identikit portraits of the suspects.
The railroad Stations and airport were cordoned off, and roads leading out of the city were blocked.
A short time later, a call to Moscow was made from a public telephone in Ryazan, and the operator who connected the call caught a fragment of the conversation.
The terrorists were soon arrested, and to the stupefaction of the police, produced FSB identification.
On Friday, September 24, FSB director Nikolai Patrushev came out of a Kremlin meeting and announced that the evacuation of the building had been part of a training exercise.
Patrushev’s statement contradicted what the authorities had been saying for two days.
On the morning of the 23rd, Alexander Sergeev, the head of the Ryazan FSB, had appeared on television and congratulated residents on being saved from a terrorist attack.
Vladimir Rushailo, the interior minister, announced on national television that an attempted terrorist act had been foiled.
The sacks found by the bomb squad contained sugar, and the reading that indicated hexogen was a mistake.
There were similar exercises in other cities, Patrushev said, but only in Ryazan did the people react promptly.
These events provoked anger in Ryazan, where people had spent the night of September 23 sleeping outdoors.
The day after the bomb was discovered, Russian aircraft began bombing the Grozny airport, in Chechnya, and on October 1, Russian troops moved across the border, launching the second Chechen war.
It was anger over Hitler’s “treacherous attack” on the Soviet Union that helped mobilize the Soviet people in the first days of World War II, and since then that attack has been a touchstone in the Russian popular consciousness.
For the vast majority of Russians, the Chechens had carried the war to the Russian people and now had to pay a price.
The Ryazan episode, though disturbing, was forgotten in the rush of fast-moving events.
Five years earlier, the first Chechen war had begun with the slaughter of Russian troops trapped in their tanks in the narrow streets on Grozny on New Year’s night, 1994-95.
This time, the invasion of Chechnya was carried out methodically and seemingly with success.
Only 2 percent of the population had favored him for the presidency in August, and in September just 4 percent.
It was now clear that there would be no need to introduce emergency rule and postpone the elections.
Russian forces easily advanced over the Chechen lowlands to the Terek River.
In December, they crossed the Terek, surrounded Grozny, and began a massive bombardment that left the city looking like Stalingrad.
In early October, I met again with the operative who had warned me of a Massive provocation coming in Moscow; he said the apartment bombings were that provocation.
Many Russians newspapers were making the same charge, especially the mass circulation Moskovsky Komsomolets, the newspaper Novaya Vremya, and the weekly newspaper Obshchaya Gazeta.
It was characteristic of Moscow’s mood under Yeltsin that after eight years in which the country had been run for the benefit of gangsters and oligarchs, the idea that the authorities had organized a terrorist act against their own people seemed not only plausible but likely.
If the perpetrators were Chechens and the purpose was to make a political point, blowing up ordinary people was senseless.
On three sides is the Moscow River and the only way out is Ryazansky Prospekt.
The second blast was on the Kashirskoye Highway, also among the cheapest, flimsiest houses in Moscow.
This is the reactive agent for a new generation of artillery shells in Russia.
The bombings had created terror in Russia and then, having provided a justification for a new war in Chechnya, they abruptly stopped.
At the same time, the sites were cleared of debris, including body parts, within three or four days, effectively destroying the crime scenes.
I was almost certain that my friend’s information was coming from disaffected members of the security services.
I asked him to arrange for me to talk to his informants, and he promised to arrange a meeting.
We went to a nearby department store, got into an elevator, and got off at an upper floor.
It was already dark, the columns of the Bolshoi were illuminated, and streetlamps were burning in the square.
They said there was indeed something strange about the apartment bombings.
Nonetheless, I glanced around continuously for the appearance of an interested onlooker.
They said that the idea that the bombings were carried out by Chechen terrorists did not make sense.
All four bombings had the same “handwriting,” attested by the nature of the destruction, the way the buildings’ concrete panels collapsed, and the volume of the blasts.
The explosive in each case was said to be hexogen, and all four bombs were timed to go off at night to assure the maximum number of casualties.
To have carried out such a campaign, Chechen terrorists would have needed a major logistical operation.
They would have had to prepare nine explosions (four that took place and five that the Russian authorities claimed to have prevented) in widely distant cities in the space of two weeks.
This would have had to be done, moreover, while the Chechen Islamists, the preferred suspects, were engaging Russian forces in Dagestan and the official Chechen government was bracing for a Russian invasion.
The two men elaborated on my friend’s statement that the bombers had to have been highly trained specialists.
In Moscow, they told me, the first bomb caused the entire central section of the building to collapse.
On Kashirskoye Highway, an eight-story brick building was reduced to rubble.
To produce this kind of result, it was necessary to identify and destroy the critical structural elements.
The bombings were explained as a response to the Russian attacks in Dagestan after the Chechen-led Islamist invasion of Dagestan in August.
But a careful model of events showed that it would have taken four to four and a half months to organize the bombings.
The bombers had to select and visit the targets, make corrections, determine the optimum mix of explosives, order their preparation, make final calculations based on the makeup of the explosives, rent space in the targeted buildings, and transport the explosives to the targets.
Planning would have had to begin in the spring, well before the Chechen invasion of Dagestan.
The attacks might, however, have been part of a bigger plan that included the Chechen invasion of Dagestan, the Russian bombing of the Islamist villages in “retaliation,” and the bombings in Buinaksk, Moscow, and Volgodonsk, which could then be depicted as the revenge of the Chechens.
In addition to the obstacles Chechen terrorists would have faced in carrying out the bombings, it was hard to see how the explosions could serve their purposes.
Their only real result would have been to justify a new invasion of Chechnya.
But the bombings clearly served the interests of the Yeltsin entourage, which was hoping to control the presidential succession and, in that way, stay out of prison.
On September 30, General Alexander Lebed, who had run for president in 1996, said in an interview with the French newspaper Le Figaro that he was Virtually certain the Yeltsin family was behind the apartment bombings.
He would have struck at the buildings of the Ministry of Internal Affairs or the FSB or at weapons storage areas or at atomic electric power stations.
I had lost contact with United States editorial pages after the fall of the Soviet Union, and those relations had only been partially restored.
I was also uncertain who would be willing to publish an article suggesting that the leading candidate for the Russian presidency was a terrorist.
But I had recently established contact with the Washington Times, which, under Clinton, was widely read in Washington for its oppositionist coverage.
I was also leaving for the city of Krasnoyarsk, the scene in the 1990s of the bloody battles for control of the aluminum industry in which dozens of people were murdered.
I knew that I would later travel by car from Krasnoyarsk to Sayansk, a journey of five hours on a road that went through miles of snow-covered taiga, where cars were easily stopped and people sometimes disappeared without a trace.
Thinking over what to do, I studied the October 22, 1999, issue of Moskovsky Komsomolets, which had entire pages filled with pictures of the bombings’ victims.
At the top of one page was a photo of the building on Guryanov Street with lights burning in all the windows.
I looked at the picture of the Mikhailin family, Sergei and Tatyana and their two children, Zhanna, twenty-four, and Alexander, sixteen.
In the photo, Zhanna is leaning with her head on the head of her brother.
The next page showed victims of the explosion of the building on Kashirskoye Highway.
Felix Misharin, fifty-eight, of apartment 74, had been snapped in a celebratory mood.
He stood with his right arm extended and his left arm around his wife, Vera, fifty.
On the same page was a photo of the debris in which the Misharins were buried when the bomb that had been hidden in the basement went off.
I wrote an email to the editorial page of the Washington Times, attached my article, and pressed send.
Such an article would not have been unusual in the Russian press at the time, but despite a flurry of initial reports about the strange events in Ryazan, attention in the West to the apartment bombings soon all but disappeared.
For the next fifteen years, the policies of the Western powers were based on the assumption that questions about the Putin regime’s legitimacy did not exist.
On September 14, the day after the first Moscow bombing, Putin said that the security services were certain of the participation of Osama Bin Laden in the bombings.
Critical to the credence given in the West to official Russian explanations was an inability to accept the idea that the Yeltsin regime would murder hundreds of its own citizens and terrify the nation to hold on to power.
It crippled Western policy toward Russia, rendering it naive and ineffectual.
From the moment Putin took power, the West maintained an image of Russia that bore no relation to reality.
The groundswell of support for Putin and the new war in Chechnya transformed the political landscape.
Yeltsin, as president, had confronted an oppositional parliament, but the pro-Putin forces achieved a strong parliamentary majority, leaving the opposition without a political base in the national government.
On New Year’s Eve, Yeltsin resigned and Putin was named acting president, giving him the advantages of incumbency.
In accordance with the Constitution, elections were moved up from June to April, and the presidential campaign was launched.
While this was going on, Russian journalists began to reexamine the incident in Ryazan.
Pavel Voloshin, a thirty-year-old reporter for Novaya Gazeta, went to the Ryazan Ministry of Internal Affairs in early February and met with Yuri Tkachenko, the sapper who had tested the bomb.
Tkachenko would later be barred from contact with journalists, but on this occasion he gave a detailed interview in which he insisted that the bomb found in the basement at 14/16 Novoselov Street was real.
He said it had a genuine military detonator, and the state-of-the-art gas analyzer used by the Ryazan police clearly indicated the presence of hexogen.
Voloshin also talked to the police officers who answered the original call from Kartofelnikov.
They too insisted that the incident was not an exercise, and that the substance in the bags did not look anything like sugar.
In addition to reporting the views of Tkachenko and others, Voloshin suggested that the FSB publish the order for the exercise and give journalists access to the agents who had placed the bomb in the basement and to the material evidence.
One afternoon shortly after it was published, however, Voloshin received a call at the office of Novaya Gazeta from a teacher who said that one of her female students had a girlfriend who met a soldier who bragged about guarding sacks of hexogen.
The soldier, Alexei Pinyaev, was based in NaroFominsk, outside of Moscow.
Voloshin drove to the base, entered secretly, and succeeded in meeting with the soldier.
Pinyaev said that in the autumn of 1999, he was sent from a base in the Moscow oblast to the base of the 137th Ryazan paratroop regiment, twenty miles from Ryazan, where paratroopers were prepared for fighting in Chechnya.
After a period of shooting and parachute jumping, he was assigned to guard a warehouse that supposedly contained arms and ammunition.
Guard duty was tedious, and Pinyaev and another soldier decided to look inside.
Pinyaev said that they were puzzled as to why it was necessary to stand guard over bags of sugar, but not wanting to leave empty-handed, they stuck a bayonet into one of the bags and poured out some of the sugar into a plastic packet.
Pinyaev said the taste was revolting and they feared they had poisoned themselves.
He called a bomb expert, who tested it and told the commander that the substance in the bag was hexogen.
Almost immediately, Pinyaev and the other soldier were relieved of their normal duties and began to be called regularly for interrogations.
Their fellow soldiers advised them to prepare for long prison sentences.
Pinyaev’s story was published in the March 13 issue of Novaya Gazeta under the headline “Hexogen.
The deputies also suggested that the Duma demand that the general prosecutor check the facts published in Novaya Gazeta about the storing of hexogen in the guise of sugar in an arms warehouse at a training camp for paratroopers.
The misgivings raised by the Novaya Gazeta articles, however, grew so widespread that they led the FSB to agree to participate in a televised meeting between its top officials and residents of the building in Ryazan.
Nikolai Nikolaev, the host of the program, asked Alexander Zdanovich, the spokesman for the FSB, how it was possible that Sergeev had mistaken a dummy for a real bomb.
Sergeev, however, was only communicating what had been told him by Tkachenko.
Zdanovich was therefore suggesting that the bomb squad was incompetent.
Nikolaev asked Raphael Gilmanov, an independent explosives expert in the hall, whether it was possible to mistake sugar for hexogen.
Pavel Astakhov, a lawyer representing a group of residents of the building, said that the law on investigative activities covering military exercises did not give the FSB the right to mine a residential building and endanger the lives and health of Russian citizens.
Moreover, article 5 of the law explicitly mentions the necessity of observing civil rights while carrying out exercises.
A military man in the audience called the circumstances extremely suspicious.
He said that the organization of military exercises is always accompanied by the preparation of ambulances, medicine, bandages, and warm clothing, and even the important exercises are always agreed upon with the local authorities.
Nikolaev asked why the investigation into the incident was continuing six months later.
As the meeting ended, however, and Ryazan residents and FSB officials filed out of the hall, it was clear that the FSB had suffered a major setback.
People everywhere were struck by the ineptitude of the FSB representatives’ attempts to defend the organization’s actions, and the program left the overwhelming impression that the incident in Ryazan resembled not a military exercise but a failed provocation.
With Putin’s election, the authorities seemed to feel that they need no longer be concerned about the apartment bombings.
The voices in the press that had raised the issue gradually fell silent, and it began to appear that the bombings would become just the last in the long list of unsolved crimes that defined the history of twentieth-century Russia.
Although I feared it was an exercise in futility, in April, a week after Putin’s election, I decided to go to Ryazan.
The residents of 14/16 Novoselov Street suffered from heart problems and depression as a result of what happened, and their children were afraid to go to sleep at night.
Those walking in and out of the building on the rainy night when I arrived there were completely convinced that the previous September’s events were not a training exercise.
The residents of 14/16 Novosyelov Street resemble the working-class residents of any Russian city.
The building was built in 1987 by the Ryazan radio factory and still houses many of its employees.
But the “exercise” and the events that followed it left them plagued by questions that would not go away.
They wanted to know why, if the incident was a test, they were not allowed to return to their apartments after the bomb was successfully neutralized, and why they were not told of the real nature of the incident for two days.
They also wanted to know what right the FSB had to make them guinea pigs in an exercise—if, indeed, it was an exercise.
I remarked that the victims of the bombings in Buinaksk, Moscow, and Volgodonsk also probably could not have imagined that they would be killed in their sleep.
Vasiliev said that the residents considered suing the FSB but gave up in the face of the daunting paperwork.
The building on Novoselov Street was an odd choice for a test of vigilance because there was an all-night grocery store in the building and residents could have assumed that someone unloading sacks of sugar was doing so for the store.
At the same time, the impact of the test would have been minimal because the building was at the edge of the city.
But it was very well suited to be the target for a terrorist attack, especially if the goal was the maximum number of victims.
Like the building on Kashirskoye Highway in Moscow, 14/16 Novosyelov Street was a brick building of standard construction.
In an explosion there would have been little chance for anyone to survive.
Because the building was also on an elevation, an explosion would have caused it to hit the adjacent building with the force of an avalanche, probably toppling it too.
In February 2002, a motion to investigate the Ryazan events failed in the State Duma for the third time.
With the realization that no official body was going to demand the truth about the bombings, a group of Duma deputies and human rights activists organized an independent commission to seek answers.
The chairman was Sergei Kovalyev, a Duma deputy and former Soviet dissident who had once been Yeltsin’s human rights chief.
The commission had no official standing, but it included prominent people, and the Duma deputies could direct questions to the government in their individual capacity.
But the commission members were fighting a rising tide of indifference.
Putin gave the impression of prosecuting the second Chechen war successfully, and an economic boom that started before he took office was gaining momentum.
Shortly after the independent commission began its work, however, an incident occurred that reminded Russians of just how mysterious the apartment bombings were.
On September 16, however, the building in Volgodonsk really was blown up, and on the 17th, Zhirinovsky demanded an explanation.
Seleznev avoided responding, and when Zhirinovsky persisted, his microphone was turned off.
Now the newspaper succeeded in getting the transcript of what Seleznev had said on the 13th.
The newspaper asked Seleznev who had told him about the Volgodonsk bombing three days before it happened.
He answered, “Believe me, not Berezovsky,” thus indicating that he was well aware who had given him the information.
This explosion was confirmed by the local Volgodonsk press, but Seleznev’s explanation raised more questions than it answered.
It was hard to understand why, at a time when apartment buildings were being blown up with hundreds of casualties, it was necessary to inform the speaker of the Duma about such an insignificant incident.
It was also odd that Seleznev did not mention the “routine” explosion in September 1999, when questions about his knowledge of the Volgodonsk bombing were first raised.
And even if the note that he read concerned a genuine criminal conflict in Volgodonsk, he was still reporting on September 13 about an event on the 15th.
Alexander Litvinenko, a former FSB officer who had fled to London and was raising questions about the apartment bombings, offered a more plausible explanation.
The note to Seleznev, in Litvinenko’s opinion, was the result of “the usual ‘Kontora’ mess-up.
Boris Berezovsky, who had been instrumental in facilitating Putin’s rise to power but then went into exile after being deprived of influence, held a press conference on March 5, 2002, in which he accused the FSB of carrying out the bombings with Putin’s complicity in order to justify the second Chechen war.
He presented the testimony of Nikita Chekulin, a former acting director of the Russian Explosives Conversion Center, a scientific research institute under the Ministry of Education, who was recruited by the FSB as a secret agent.
Chekulin stated, and confirmed with documents, that in 1999-2000 a large quantity of hexogen was purchased by the institute from various military units and then, under the guise of gunpowder or dynamite, shipped all over the country to unknown destinations.
Berezovsky also showed a documentary film, Assassination of Russia, made by two French producers who had originally worked with NTV to expand the program in which Nikolai Nikolaev questioned FSB spokesman Alexander Zdanovich.
But the planning for such a complex operation would have had to have begun much earlier, before Putin became prime minister, at a time when Berezovsky was one of the most powerful members of the leadership.
Berezovsky played a critical role in advocating Putin’s ascent and was also instrumental in promoting the new Chechen war, which made it possible for Putin to win the presidency.
But the new Chechen war could not have happened without the apartment bombings.
It is therefore hard to imagine that Berezovsky was not involved in them.
Berezovsky’s attitude toward Putin changed only when Putin acted to remove him from power.
Berezovsky started to hint and then in December 2001, two years after the explosions, to state openly that the apartment bombings were carried out by the FSB with Putin’s complicity.
This level of cynicism, though shocking by Western standards, is perfectly plausible for Russian leaders.
Putin was not in a position to respond to the accusations by saying that Berezovsky was the real initiator and that he was merely a passive participant.
He would later accuse Berezovsky of responsibility for every major political murder and terrorist act that took place in Russia, but on the apartment bombings he had to remain silent.
Instead, his odious reputation made it easier for the authorities to avoid discussing the issue.
FSB officials, when they commented on the bombings at all, said that they did not intend to enter into polemics with Berezovsky.
The independent commission began its work in February 2002 but could not get answers to its questions.
Russian officials simply refused to respond even though, in the case of inquiries from deputies, responding was a legal obligation.
This came about after it had all but ceased to function, as a result of the activities of its investigator, a former FSB agent and orthodox communist, Mikhail Trepashkin.
Despite most commission members’ distrust of Berezovsky, Yushenkov and Yuli Rybakov, a Duma deputy from St.
Petersburg, flew to London to attend the March 5 press conference and watch the film.
Trepashkin had been fired by the FSB after investigating the links between FSB officers and Chechen organized crime figures.
After this meeting, Trepashkin began cooperating with the public commission.
In April, Yushenkov traveled to the United States and met Alena and Tanya Morozov, whose mother was killed in the explosion on Guryanov Street.
This meant that they could gain access to the investigation and participate in court proceedings.
The person who rented the basement storage area where the bomb was placed had presented the passport of Mukhid Laipanov, a resident of a village in the Karachaevo-Cherkesiya republic in the North Caucasus.
It turned out, however, that the real Laipanov had been killed in an auto accident in February 1999.
The police asserted that the person using his passport was Achemez Gochiyaev, an ethnic Karachai and the director of a Moscow construction firm whose warehouses were used as a transfer point for shipments of hexogen disguised as bags of sugar.
He owned a home in Moscow, lived not far from where the bombing took place, and had many relatives in the city.
If he had committed an act of terror against innocent civilians, he would have been putting his relatives at risk.
In the immediate aftermath of the Guryanova Street bombing, Mark Blumenfeld, the building superintendent, gave a description of the person who had rented the basement.
The FSB released a composite photo of the suspect based on that description.
It was briefly allowed to circulate, but then quickly replaced with one of Gochiyaev, who looked completely different.
When Gochiyaev saw that he was being accused of blowing up a building, he immediately went into hiding.
At the end of April, the two authors handed a courier a list of questions for the person claiming to be Gochiyaev.
Several days later, in another European country, an intermediary turned over a videotape and several photographs establishing Gochiyaev’s identity, along with his handwritten testimony.
In the statement, Gochiyaev insisted that he had been set up and had fled only because he knew that the FSB was getting ready to kill him.
Trepashkin found Gochiyaev’s testimony convincing and decided to concentrate on locating the original composite photo.
By this time, he was working closely with the independent public commission.
On the night of April 17, 2003, I was working in my Moscow apartment when I received a call that Sergei Yushenkov had been shot dead in front of the entrance to his apartment building.
My book Darkness at Dawn, in which I argued that the FSB was responsible for the apartment bombings, was due out in the United States in May.
Now Sergei, who held the same view and was trying to prove it, had been murdered.
He was one of the most active members of the public commission on the bombings and had been full of enthusiasm when I saw him in a hallway of the State Duma only a few months earlier.
He had told me of plans to circulate the French documentary and make people aware of the real story behind the bombings.
I went to the window and looked at the surrounding buildings, the streetlamps, and the nearly empty street.
For the first time in twenty-seven years of writing about Russia, I felt afraid to leave my apartment.
Yuri Shchekochikhin, another member of the public commission, died three months later, the victim of a mysterious illness that caused his skin to peel off and his internal organs to collapse.
The Russian authorities refused to allow an autopsy, but his relatives managed to send tissue samples to London, where Shchekochikhin was tentatively diagnosed as having died from thallium poisoning.
Thallium is also believed to have been used in the poisoning of Roman Tsepov, Putin’s former bodyguard, in September 2004.
With the deaths of Yushenkov and Shchekochikhin, Trepashkin was the only person still actively investigating the apartment bombings.
So he began going through old newspaper archives in the hope that a picture had been published somewhere before the FSB pulled it from circulation.
Vladimir Romanovich, an FSB agent who in the mid-1990s had been responsible for ties with Chechen criminal organizations.
In those years Trepashkin had worked for the department of the FSB that protected officers, their sources, and their families.
This gave him indirect knowledge of the operations of Chechen extremists who were being sheltered by Russian law enforcement.
In 1995, he learned that a Chechen criminal band was engaged in shaking down banks in Moscow, including the Soldi Bank.
Romanovich, who specialized in banks and had helped the Chechens rent a number of premises in Moscow for extortion and money laundering, had been a member of this group.
Trepashkin set up an ambush at the Soldi Bank, but the Chechens did not appear.
He later learned that on the day of the failed ambush, a special vehicle ordered by Romanovich was monitoring the bank.
Trepashkin wanted to interrogate Romanovich, but the investigation was halted by Nikolai Patrushev, the head of his unit, who blocked further work on the case.
Patrushev later became the head of the FSB and held that post at the time of the apartment bombings.
Blumenfeld said that on the moming of the bombing, he described the man who had rented the basement space to local police.
Two days later, he was brought to the Lefortovo, where FSB officers pressured him to change his story and “recognize” another photo, that of Gochiyaev.
Under his leadership were two demolition instructors, the Arabs Abu Umar and Abu Zharaf.
He added that according to their information, Gochiyaev had received $500,000 from Khattab.
But if the original sketch of the person who reserved the basement storage area was not of Gochiyaev, it was hard to see on what basis he was a suspect.
At this time, a trial was being prepared in the case of Yusuf Krymshamkhalov and Adam Dekkushev, two members of what the authorities were calling the “band of Gochiyaev” who had allegedly transported explosives to Volgodonsk.
Trepashkin was preparing to present this new and dramatic evidence in court, but, aware of the risk he was taking, he first shared Blumenfeld’s name and telephone number with Igor Korolkov, an investigative reporter for Moskovskiye Novosti.
In a taped statement in the editorial office, Blumenfeld described what happened.
Korolkov asked Blumenfeld whether Gochiyaev and the person who came to him resembled each other.
Blumenfeld said, “On the photo there was depicted a man with a simple face but the person who had come to me and to whom I had rented the premises looked externally like an intellectual.
He was charged with possession of an unlicensed gun, but a judge immediately dismissed that charge.
He was then accused of improper use of classified material and was sentenced to four years in a labor camp in the Ural Mountains.
After his arrest, Trepashkin was able to transmit to Moskovskiye Novosti notes that described the secret document he had supposedly improperly handled.
He explained that he gave his former colleague, Colonel Shebalin, the transcript of an eavesdropped conversation among members of the Golyanovsky criminal organization in which it was said that past and present FSB agents were members of the group and took part in killings.
Trepashkin said that the documents he was charged with publicizing could not bear the stamp “secret” because the law on state secrets prohibits classifying information about illegal acts committed by officials.
With Trepashkin’s arrest, the investigation of the apartment bombings entered a lull.
Those who wanted to raise the issue lacked investigative tools such as subpoena power and knew that too active an interest could cost them their lives.
Against this background, I unexpectedly emerged in Russia as one of the Putin regime’s principal accusers.
Darkness at Dawn was published in May 2003, and a month later, I presented the book in Washington at the Hudson Institute.
The day before that event, I received an email from Alexander Goldfarb, an émigré whom I knew from Soviet dissident circles in Moscow in the 1970s, who was now working as an aide to Berezovsky.
He asked whether I had any objection to the presence of a “German film crew” at my talk.
I said I did not, and Goldfarb arrived with a husband-andwife filmmaking team, Andrei Nekrasov and Olga Konskaya, and Alena Morozova, whose mother had died in the bombing on Guryanova Street and whose sister had given Trepashkin power of attorney to investigate the case.
In my presentation, I explained why I believed the apartment bombings were a provocation intended to assure Putin’s accession to power.
My remarks became part of a film, entitled Disbelief, which premiered in 2004 at the Sundance Film Festival.
A Russian-language version was put on YouTube and circulated on DVDs in Russia.
Darkness at Dawn was also translated into Russian, with long excerpts published in the press.
Unfortunately, the people capable of helping to make the bombings a serious political issue were disappearing.
In 2004, Anna Politkovskaya, Russia’s leading investigative journalist, called on the Russian presidential candidates to answer the outstanding questions surrounding the apartment bombings.
Alexander Litvinenko continued to update his book and speak out on the case in London.
Politkovskaya was shot dead in the elevator of her apartment block on October 7, 2006.
Litvinenko died of radiation poisoning on November 23 after ingesting radioactive polonium, which was put into his tea in a London sushi restaurant.
The deaths of so many persons who had investigated the apartment bombings, all of them with the exception of Litvinenko my personal friends, left me as one of the few people still arguing that this monumental provocation could not be ignored.
On May 17, 2007, testifying before the House Foreign Relations Committee on Russia’s foreign policy, I explained the role played by the apartment bombings.
With Yeltsin and his family facing possible criminal prosecution, a plan was put into motion to put in place a successor who would guarantee that Yeltsin and his family would be safe from prosecution and the criminal division of property in the country would not be subject to reexamination.
For “Operation Successor” to succeed, however, it was necessary to have a massive provocation.
In my view, this provocation was the bombing in September 1999 of the apartment buildings in Moscow, Buinaksk and Volgodonsk.
In the aftermath of these attacks, which claimed three hundred lives, a new war was launched against Chechnya.
Putin, the newly appointed prime minister who was put in charge of that war, achieved overnight popularity.
Putin was elected president and his first act was to guarantee Yeltsin immunity from prosecution.
In the meantime, all talk of re-examining the results of privatization was forgotten.
When Russia’s First Channel screened a “documentary” alleging the September 11 attacks in the United States were orchestrated by the United States government, the station invited me to appear on air to comment on the film.
When I moved back to Russia in September 2013 to work as an adviser and contributor to Radio Liberty, I had no immediate plans to raise the issue of the apartment bombings.
In fact, the apartment bombings are impossible for a conscientious observer to ignore.
The circumstantial evidence that the bombings were carried out by the FSB is overwhelming.
The only reason there is no direct evidence is that the Putin regime has concealed it.
The rubble from the bombings was cleared almost immediately, despite the objections of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Emergency Situations.
The haste with which the crime scenes were destroyed is all the more striking when one considers that after United States embassies were bombed in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998, suspects were identified and eventually arrested as a result of the careful sifting of the rubble from the explosion, a process that went on for months.
In the case of the Ryazan incident, the authorities have sequestered the people who put the bomb in the basement, records of the exercise, and the “dummy” bomb itself.
By any standard, murdering hundreds of randomly chosen civilians in order to hold on to power shows a cynicism that cannot be comprehended in a normal human context.
But it is fully consistent with the kind of country that Russia, in the wake of communism, has become.
During the anti-Putin protests in 2011 and 2012, demonstrators carried signs referring to the attacks.
The evidence that the bombings were a provocation means that Russia is carrying a burden that will weigh on it for years to come.
Until the truth about the apartment bombings is known, the true nature of Russia’s postcommunist history cannot be established.
At the same time, failing to react to the evidence that the bombings were a governmentplanned mass crime leaves such provocation as a standing temptation for government leaders.
If those responsible are not identified and punished, it will be assumed by those fighting for power in Russia that provocations are a legitimate way to win elections.
Of all the dangers that hang over Russia, none is more menacing than the failure to demand answers to the mystery of how Putin came to power.
Chaos and Criminality Many things changed after the fall of the Soviet Union.
But as society was rapidly transformed, it became obvious that there had been no moral revolution in Russia.
Communist society had taken it for granted that the individual was expendable; postcommunist Russia did as well, often to an even greater degree.
Yeltsin was a hero to many Russians after he successfully led the resistance to the August 1991 pro-communist coup.
But neither Yeltsin nor the “young reformers” whom he put in charge of Russia’s transformation showed any understanding of the need to establish the rule of law and the habits of respect for the individual.
For Yeltsin and the reformers, the goal was to reach a “point of no return,” beyond which it would be impossible to restore socialism regardless of the will of the people.
Property had to be put into private hands as quickly as possible, and this was done with little regard for who received the property or on what basis.
But by carrying out the largest peaceful transfer of property in history without the benefit of law, the reformers created the conditions for the criminalization of the whole country.
Their interaction set the stage for Russia’s drift into a regime of aggression and terror.
If one were to choose a date for the beginning of the reforms, it would be January 2, 1992.
On that day, just nine days after Mikhail Gorbachev’s resignation marked the end of the Soviet Union, the government of the newly emerged Russian Federation, led by deputy prime minister Yegor Gaidar, abruptly freed prices.
Gaidar predicted that prices would increase by a factor of three to five and then begin to fall.
By April, almost all the money in people’s savings accounts—money saved for decades—had disappeared.
One night in Moscow in March 1993, there was a knock at the door of my apartment.
I opened the door to a haggard old woman I had occasionally seen in the elevator.
Surprised by the request and stunned by the implications, I reached for my wallet for money to help bury this unfortunate, unknown woman.
The wiping out of citizens’ savings was followed by the appearance of numerous pyramid schemes that promised to help Russians survive the spiraling inflation.
With no experience of the capitalist world, Russians were subjected to deceptive advertising campaigns that explained how their investments would grow.
At first, as share prices rose steadily, the firms allowed investors to cash out their earnings, the better to attract new gamblers.
Long lines formed as people fought to take advantage of the new opportunities.
Soon, however—sometimes in as little as three months—the pyramid schemes stopped honoring their commitments.
With the first decline in the volume of share purchases, the organizers took the investors’ money and disappeared.
While hyperinflation drove millions into poverty, the well connected found numerous ways in the chaos to amass vast unearned wealth.
Inflation created a shortage of turnover capital, which paralyzed production.
To rescue the economy, credits were issued to industry at rates of 10 to 25 percent even though the inflation rate was 2,500 percent.
The intent was to help factories pay salaries and purchase supplies, but instead of being used for this purpose, the credits were deposited in banks at commercial rates of interest.
A second path to wealth was to obtain permission to export raw materials.
Although most prices had been freed, energy prices, which at first were less than 1 percent of world market prices, continued to be regulated.
The government, having abandoned the Soviet-era monopoly on foreign trade, allowed anyone to export who could get a license.
Since raw materials were bought at the internal price, for rubles, and sold abroad at the world price, for dollars, export licenses were a license to print money.
The Ministry of Foreign Economic Ties granted them in return for bribes.
The fee for the license was insignificant next to the size of the bribe.
In the winter of 1991, fearing a famine, the government sold permits for the importation of food products at 1 percent of their real value, with the difference subsidized with the help of Western commodity credits.
The products were sold at normal market prices, with the result that the attempt to relieve the country’s food crisis led to the enrichment of a small group of traders.
The value of import subsidies in 1992 came to 15 percent of the gross domestic product.
After hyperinflation, the second factor that facilitated the rise of Russia’s criminal oligarchy was the process of privatization.
The placing of State assets in private hands actually began during perestroika, as officials took over government agencies and reorganized them as private businesses.
In place of the state distribution system, they created commodity exchanges, and in place of state banks, they created commercial banks.
Officially, privatization started in October 1992 with the widespread distribution of vouchers.
Beginning that month, any Russian citizen could receive a State privatization check denominated at ten thousand rubles.
Each voucher supposedly represented a citizen’s share of the national wealth.
Factories were converted into joint stock companies, and citizens were invited to exchange their vouchers for shares in any enterprise.
Others invested them in supposed voucher funds that advertised widely and promised dividends.
Many vouchers were sold on the street, often for as little as ten dollars or a bottle of vodka.
Their deliberately shabby appearance was meant to create the impression that the vouchers had no real value.
Watching this spectacle in 1993 and 1994, I also formed the impression that the vouchers were worthless.
But corrupt business and organized crime groups were behind the vagrants, and through them the first private property was created legally in Russia—and the first fortunes.
When auctions were held for shares in industrial enterprises, members of these groups arrived with packs of vouchers.
In one of the first major investment auctions in 1993, a 4.88 percent ownership stake in the Sayansk Aluminum Factory was obtained by the firm Aluminproduct.
It was run by Oleg Deripaska, who would become one of Russia’s richest men.
He presented 130,000 vouchers ten minutes before bidding was closed, obtaining 18 percent of the shares.
As for the rest of the population, in most cases their investments produced nothing.
Many of the newly rich set up banks, and these banks began to be “empowered” to handle government accounts.
The official rate of return on the government’s money was not high, but what mattered was that empowered banks, ignoring instructions that were not enforced anyway, treated budgetary funds as free capital that was available for investment.
Meanwhile, nonpayment of salaries became the reality of millions of Russians’ lives.
It was this new group of millionaires and billionaires who, in the second stage of privatization, were able to buy up Russia’s mines and factories for a fraction of their value.
During cash privatization, enterprises were officially sold at auction, but the auctions frequently took place only on paper.
In cases where they were actually held, officials of the State Property Committee often eliminated bidders or provided information about competing offers to the predetermined winner.
Only rarely was there true competitive bidding, and if a powerful group was outbid by an insistent competitor, the winner could easily pay for his tenacity with his life.
In late 1994, in response to pressure from the World Bank to reduce inflation, the Russian government ceased printing money.
In order to meet its obligations, it launched the “loans for shares” program, which made possible the creation in Russia of companies comparable in size to the largest American corporations.
Under the program, the government mortgaged shares in the most desirable nonprivatized enterprises in return for loans.
In practice, the shares went to powerful banks with the best “informal” connections to the government.
The banks organized auctions in which they participated and which they inevitably won.
Once an enterprise had been mortgaged, the proprietary bank was free to exploit it, and when the government failed to repay the bank loans , the enterprise became the lending bank’s property.
Once the auction began, a previously unknown firm would offer a bid that was almost identical to the starting price, which had been set by the bank that was named to organize the bidding.
It thereby effectively set the price at which it would buy the enterprise.
Norilsk Nickel, the giant metals combine, was offered at a starting price of $170 million.
The scheme, however, provided very little in badly needed revenue to the government.
A letter signed by thirteen oligarchs and published in leading Russian newspapers issued a veiled threat that appeared to be directed against the communists, who were gaining in the public opinion polls.
Russia became a classic third world country, selling raw materials to import consumer goods.
Millions were forced to spend weekends in the countryside, growing their own food in order to survive.
By mid1998, the government was spending $1 billion a week simply to meet its obligations.
People returned from summer vacations to find that the cash machines of their banks were locked.
Currency exchange points posted new ruble-dollar exchange rates every hour.
People began to scoop up everything in the stores, including salt, sugar, matches, and flour.
Many small businesses collapsed, and there was a rash of contract killings of borrowers who could not repay their debts.
Many had hoped that the economy was getting better, but it now seemed to have irrevocably collapsed.
This, in turn, created extreme uneasiness among the oligarchs and others who made fortunes during the 1990s, and brought on the succession crisis that led to the bombing of the Russian apartment buildings in 1999.
Like privatization, the modern era of criminalization in Russia began during perestroika.
The Gorbachev era reforms started with the legalization of “cooperatives,” which became the only privately run businesses in the Soviet Union.
The cooperatives quickly prospered, but because the police protected only state enterprises and it was illegal to hire private guards, gangs sprang up all over the country to extort money from them.
By 1992, nearly every kiosk and store owner and every trader in the markets was making payoffs to gangsters.
In addition to protection, primarily from themselves, the gangs also provided other services.
Most gangs were organized on the basis of an ethnic group or a region; the most important ones developed highly sophisticated structures.
They had their own analytical departments, staffed with veterans of the KGB and the police, who were responsible for planning murders and setting up wiretapping, including wiretapping the gang’s own members.
They were supplied with the latest weapons and equipment from the armed forces.
Initially, the gangs’ most lucrative targets, in addition to gas stations and casinos, were markets where transactions were carried out in cash.
Many of these had a turnover of billions of dollars in unregistered revenues.
According to various estimates, the financial flows of one Moscow market, the Cherkizovskaya, came to $8 billion a year.
When the criminal gangs saw “businessmen” using their connections to acquire vast unearned wealth, they began to use terror to take over the new enterprises.
In the early 1990s, hundreds of bankers, businessmen, and government personnel became the victims of contract murders.
Soon the gangsters, businessmen, and corrupt officials began to work together.
The gangsters needed the businessmen because they required places to invest their capital but lacked the expertise to run large enterprises.
The businessmen needed the gangsters to enforce contracts and collect debts.
And both needed crooked officials to provide licenses and permissions on a noncompetitive basis and to shield them from the law.
The criminals’ behavior was typically brutal and aggressive at first, but it improved over time.
Many gangsters, wishing to be seen as “businessmen,” learned to negotiate and to keep their word.
They began buying suits from leading European tailors and patronizing the best Moscow hair stylists.
Their identity was betrayed only by their weakness for gold chains and a tendency to lose control and revert to threats when encountering resistance.
For their own safety, Russian businessmen learned which companies were most closely connected to gangsters or were fronts for organized crime.
The situation was more complicated for a foreigner doing business in Russia.
He frequently found that his dealings with a commercial partner led directly to contact with criminals demanding money for protection or for permission to do business.
If he turned to the authorities to defend him, he often found that the criminals seeking to “protect” him had connections going to the very top.
Besides a criminalized economy, the new society developed an authoritarian political system.
Yeltsin was lionized for his role in the overthrow of communism, but he quickly demonstrated that he had no understanding of genuine democracy or the separation of powers.
The system he sought to create in Russia was designed to serve only his own drive for power.
In October 1993, the two most important branches of government in Russia, the executive branch and the parliament, went to war.
In November 1991, it voted Yeltsin special powers, and after the Soviet Union’s collapse, it approved his radical reform program.
Yeltsin, however, wanted full control over the economic reform process and was not ready to share power with anyone.
The first twenty-one months of Yeltsin’s postcommunist rule was marked by rising tension between the two branches of government.
In January 1992, the sudden removal of price controls unleashed hyperinflation.
Yeltsin had forecast lower prices within half a year and economic recovery by the fall.
By the end of December, however, prices were rising at a rate of 2,318 percent.
In this situation, the deputies expressed opposition to aspects of the reforms.
He did not lobby the deputies, and he paid no attention to their debates.
On March 15, 1992, Ruslan Khasbulatov, the speaker of the parliament, demanded the resignation of Yegor Gaidar and his team, whose predictions regarding inflation had proved completely unrealistic.
In June, Khasbulatov and Alexander Rutskoi, the vice president, intensified their attacks on the government.
Having been supported by two-thirds of the parliament in November 1991, Yeltsin found himself opposed by two-thirds of the deputies six months later.
As the cold weather approached, with about half the population living below the poverty line, the conflict between the two sides intensified.
On March 20, 1993, Yeltsin announced that he was signing a decree banning any activities by the parliament that limited the powers of the president.
A short time later, a new referendum was set for April 25 on the subjects of trust in the president and his economic policies.
It was achieved in part with the help of George Soros, the American financier whose secret contributions to offshore accounts controlled by Anatoly Chubais, the head of privatization, funded a massive advertising campaign that overwhelmed the opposition.
Buoyed by the results, Yeltsin continued to rule by decree even though his November 1991 grant of special powers had run out.
The parliament sent Yeltsin’s decrees to the Constitutional Court, freezing their implementation.
When, in the summer of 1993, the Supreme Soviet recalculated the budget submitted by Yeltsin, raising pensions and increasing the salaries of teachers, doctors, and others paid out of state funds, the confrontation reached its apogee.
At the same time, he made preparations to break the parliament’s resistance.
He visited the bases of army units in the Moscow oblast to shore up support and doubled or tripled the salaries of officers.
The original proposal called not only for the dissolution of the parliament but for the banning of the Constitutional Court and the subordination of the general prosecutor to the president.
In September, Yeltsin and Khasbulatov each invited the other to resign.
Finally, speaking before a meeting of deputies on September 18, Khasbulatov raised the subject of Yeltsin’s alcoholism.
The gesture and Khasbulatov’s remarks were promptly reported to Yeltsin, who decided that the time had come to finish with the parliament once and for all.
Rutskoi took the oath of office, declared decree 1400 invalid, and said he was taking responsibility for the security of the state.
Russia now had two heads of state and the beginnings of two separate governments.
In August 1991, Yeltsin had defied the leaders of the pro-communist coup from the same White House where the deputies were now preparing to resist the abolition of the parliament.
In 1991, the coup leaders did not shut off the telephones and electricity to Yeltsin and the other members of the Russian government.
Yeltsin, however, apparently had no intention of repeating that mistake.
The Moscow city authorities then cut off the building’s heat and hot water, and sent large numbers of police to the approaches to the White House.
The leaders of the parliament, fearful that the building would be easily cleared if it were left undefended, started arming the volunteers.
The defenders included members of the Union of Officers, a communist group, the fascist Russian National Unity group, and veterans of ethnic conflicts in Abkhazia and Trans-Dniester.
Once armed, they formed units that ceased to be under the control of the deputies.
Meanwhile, communist demonstrators rallied on the street in support of the parliament and were beaten by the police.
As preparations for a possible armed confrontation grew, there was increasing support for the parliament in the provinces.
By the afternoon of the 22nd, twenty-three regional soviets had voted to support the Supreme Soviet and to treat decree 1400 as invalid on their territory.
On September 23, Valery Zorkin, the head of the Constitutional Court, suggested new elections of both the president and the parliament as a way of resolving the crisis.
The proposal, which became known as the “zero option,” gained popularity but was rejected by Yeltsin and his supporters, ostensibly because this would lead to a power vacuum but actually because acceptance would mean recognizing the existence of the parliament that Yeltsin had just abolished.
Yeltsin nonetheless promised that he would not use force against the White House.
At 10:03 Pm on September 23, the electricity in the White House was cut off and the already unheated building was plunged into darkness.
The deputies lit candles and continued to meet, but there was a change in the psychological atmosphere.
They set up posts on all landings and staircases and began to check IDs and shine lights in faces.
It was now obvious that they intended to answer only to their own commanders.
At the same time, false rumors of military and worker support for the deputies led many to expect a popular revolt and inspired continuous radicalization.
On September 28, up to ten thousand demonstrators gathered in front of police roadblocks to support the White House.
The police attacked in force, beating people of all ages indiscriminately.
Shortly afterward, steps were taken to seal off the White House completely.
It was surrounded with barbed wire, and thousands of heavily armed troops cut off access to the part of the city center where it was located.
The next day, Alexei I, the Russian Orthodox patriarch, called for talks, and negotiations began a day later in the Danilovsky Monastery under Alexei’s sponsorship.
The presidential side could not refuse to take part in talks called by the patriarch, but the talks were not to Yeltsin’s advantage.
They implicitly recognized parliament as an equal branch of government, and as they progressed, the pressure on Yeltsin increased.
Representatives of regional soviets in Moscow called for an end to the blockade of the White House.
In Novosibirsk, representatives of fourteen Siberian oblasts and republics threatened that if Yeltsin did not agree to the “zero option,” they would stop paying taxes, cut the trans-Siberian railroad, and announce the creation of an independent Siberian republic.
In this situation, attention focused on the armed defenders of the White House and the communist demonstrators on the street.
Yeltsin’s promise not to use force against the White House seemed to commit him to a standoff during which his support in the armed forces could weaken while support for the deputies in the regional soviets grew.
On October 3, thousands of communist demonstrators gathered in front of the police lines on the Krymsky Bridge.
The police cordon had been set up not in front of the bridge but in the middle, depriving the police of strategic depth.
Moreover, there were only two lines of police, which meant that they were vastly outnumbered.
For nearly a week, protestors had been beaten by the police, and many of those victims were now in the front line of the demonstrators, armed with bricks and clubs.
Suddenly there was a hail of rocks and the marchers threw themselves on the police lines.
Police were manning a barricade of fire engines and trucks in their path, but as the crowd approached, they also withdrew.
The crowd took over nearly twenty trucks, many with the keys in the ignition.
Demonstrators drove the seized trucks to the square behind the White House, with the crowd following.
When they arrived, Rutskoi, Khasbulatov, and the rest of the parliamentary leadership emerged on the balcony facing the square.
Rutskoi told the demonstrators to take over the Mayoralty, which was next to the White House, and then the Ostankino Television Tower.
The crowd and armed defenders of the White House stormed the Mayoralty and seized it.
In the parking lot, they found more buses and trucks, also with keys in the ignitions.
These vehicles were added to the fleet that now left for the Ostankino Tower, with thousands more heading to the tower on foot.
Those who had walked arrived later, but by 7 pm, there was a crowd of nearly four thousand in the square.
General Albert Makashov, the leader of the White House defense, who arrived at Ostankino with a group of armed fighters, demanded that the guards open the doors.
A young man began preparing the grenade launcher while the troops inside the building positioned themselves behind concrete parapets on the first floor.
At that moment, two trucks of the pro-parliament forces crashed into the entrance to the television tower and the plate glass windows next to it.
This was followed by a powerful explosion at the entrance as the grenade launcher was fired at the door, and by another explosion inside the building.
It was the latter explosion that killed Nikolai Sitnikov, a member of the Interior Forces Vytyas unit.
Suddenly, a solid sheet of fire from inside the building raked the demonstrators in the square.
Most of the armed fascists were shielded by a roof over the entryway, but the unarmed protestors, onlookers, and journalists were hit by a torrent of orange-yellow tracer bullets.
The square was quickly littered with the bodies of the wounded and dead.
As the wounded called out, “Don’t shoot” and “Please, help us,” their bodies were repeatedly riddled with automatic weapons fire.
Civilians dived for cover as the troops fired at anyone who lifted his head.
One of them, Yuri Mikhailov, a thirty-five-year-old Moscow resident, called to the soldiers and asked if he could rescue Duncan.
Nonetheless, Russian television announced that Ostankino had been seized by an armed mob.
At 8:45 pm, Gaidar appeared on television and called on Muscovites to take to the streets to show support for the president.
At a meeting in the ministry of defense, the commanders of the military districts announced their support for Yeltsin.
By 9 pM, euphoria in the White House over the apparent easy victory had given way to horror as deputies returned from Ostankino in shock.
Internal troops shot defenders of the White House, including teenagers who were outside the building.
At 8 AM they opened fire on the building itself, shattering rows of windows.
In response to defensive fire from the White House, the attackers directed large-caliber machine guns and tank artillery at the twelfth and thirteenth floors, which were quickly consumed in flames.
Tanks on the Novy Arbat Bridge blew out sections of the deserted upper floors.
Finally, with resistance having all but ceased, members of the Alpha antiterrorist unit entered the building and accepted the deputies’ surrender.
Whatever the true death toll, I became convinced that Yeltsin owed his victory to a provocation.
For days before the events of October 3—4, the center of Moscow was sealed off by thousands of riot troops and police.
Yet on October 3, after the demonstrators broke through the police lines on the Krymsky Bridge, the police had all but disappeared.
The police abandoned one checkpoint after another, leaving behind trucks and buses with keys in the ignition.
The demonstrators were able to take over the Mayoralty and proceed to the Ostankino Television Tower without hindrance.
When they arrived at Ostankino, Makashov and his twenty or so fighters organized a meeting and began issuing ultimatums, but they had no chance of taking the building.
When a grenade exploded in the entrance to Ostankino, the internal troops opened fire not on the armed attackers but on the unarmed crowd in the square.
The conflict at Ostankino was used to persuade the army to attack the White House.
It is possible that a high death toll, which could be blamed on the demonstrators, helped make the case for intervention.
An investigation into the October events by a team from the office of the general prosecutor rapidly uncovered inconsistencies in the story presented by the presidential side.
The deaths of Sitnikov and of Sergei Krasilnikov, a video editor in Ostankino, were used by the presidential side to justify the order to attack the demonstrators.
The investigation, however, showed that neither of these killings was the responsibility of the proparliamentary forces.
Sitnikov died not from grenade fire by the proparliament forces but from the explosion of a device inside the building.
The shot that killed Krasilnikov was fired in a corridor full of Interior Ministry troops.
They were released from prison, and the investigation of Yeltsin’s own actions came to a halt.
After his victory in the October confrontation, Yeltsin presented the country with a new draft constitution that gave the president near-dictatorial powers.
Under the proposed constitution, the Supreme Soviet would be replaced with a smaller body, the State Duma, which would have virtually no control over the executive branch.
The president would have the power to appoint without interference all ministers except the prime minister, who would have to be confirmed by the Duma.
If the Duma rejected three of his candidates for prime minister, the president would be able to dissolve the Duma.
The president would have control over the budget and appoint the director of the Central Bank and the justices of the Constitutional Court.
Removing the president would require a two-thirds majority of the parliament as well as approval by the Supreme Court and the Constitutional Court.
Laws would be passed by the Duma, but they could be vetoed by the president, and the veto could be overridden only by a two-thirds vote of the Duma, a near impossibility in a parliament expected to contain numerous factions.
The draft constitution was put to a vote simultaneously with elections to the new parliament on December 12, 1993, only a month after the publication of the text.
In the referendum, 54. percent of eligible voters were Said to have participated, with 58. percent voting for and 41. percent against the new constitution.
Yeltsin had established a rule whereby only 25 percent of eligible voters had to vote yes for the constitution to become law.
The presidential team never explained the origin of the extra ballots and ignored all demands for an investigation.
It is highly likely that the 1993 Constitution was never approved by the population.
Yeltsin needed a war because since the events of October 1993, he could no longer blame the parliament for his failures.
Oleg Lobov, the secretary of Yeltsin’s Security Council, told Sergei Yushenkov, the chairman of the Duma Defense Committee, that a war in Chechnya was coming.
But on November 26, 1994, the volunteers were routed by Chechen troops loyal to Djofar Dudayev, the Chechen leader.
Despite the deadline, the Russian military began air strikes on December 2, and on the 11th, three columns of Russian army units moved into Chechnya.
Democrats, including Gaidar, who had supported Yeltsin’s suppression of the parliament, now found that giving unchecked power to Yeltsin came at a price.
He had unilaterally committed the army to a war against Russian citizens on Russia’s own territory.
The destruction of the Supreme Soviet also assured Yeltsin an apparently undeserved second term in office.
After the parliament was disbanded by force, the communists were apparently too intimidated to seriously contest an election.
Yeltsin was believed to have won the 1996 presidential election, albeit with the help of massive violations of the campaign financing rules.
But in February 2012, at a meeting with four members of the opposition, President Dmitri Medvedev said that this was not the case.
Viktor Ilyukhin, a communist who in 1996 was the head of the Duma Security Committee, said in an interview with the site Gazeta.ru that Zyuganov did not protest the theft of the election because in light of the events in October 1993, he was afraid of triggering a civil war.
There were fifty thousand armed guards in Moscow, many of them Afghan veterans who were on Yeltsin’s side, and “This force could have been used and that was more terrible than an open confrontation.
When tanks move, they are visible but this could be used to attack from behind.
Ironically, it was then that his health began to fail, making him unable to wield the power he had taken such pains to accumulate.
He surrendered authority to his daughter, Tatyana Dyachenko, and Valentin Yumashev, the journalist who in the 1980s had helped him write his first volume of memoirs.
It was this dilemma, imposed by Yeltsin’s drive to monopolize power, that made it necessary to ensure that he was succeeded by someone who would not hold him and his family accountable for their abuse of power.
The result was “Operation Successor,” which led directly to the apartment bombings and Russia’s final transition from a failing democracy to a full-fledged dictatorship.
In 1998, in the wake of the Russian financial crisis, Yeltsin nominated Yevgeny Primakov, the former head of the Foreign Intelligence Service, to be prime minister.
The crisis had destroyed much of Yeltsin’s remaining support, and the appointment of Primakov was a compromise with the political opposition after the Duma twice voted down Yeltsin’s attempt to reappoint former prime minister Viktor Chernomyrdin to the post.
Once appointed, he authorized an investigation of the Yeltsin family and some of the oligarchs, starting with Berezovsky.
In the fall of 1997, Carla del Ponte, the Swiss prosecutor general, was given police reports showing that Russian organized crime controlled more than three hundred firms in Switzerland and that a Swiss businessman of Albanian origin, Behgjet Pacolli, who headed Mabetex, a construction company that was doing reconstruction work on the Kremlin, was providing unexplained funds to Yeltsin and his daughters.
These documents were forwarded to Yuri Skuratov, the Russian general prosecutor, in September 1998.
On January 22, 1999, a raid on the Mabetex office in Lugano turned up records showing payments of $600,000 on the credit cards of Yeltsin’s daughters.
Pacolli also seemed to have paid kickbacks to Pavel Borodin, the director of the presidential administration, for the contracts to work on the Kremlin.
Skuratov, meanwhile, intensified his investigation into Berezovsky’s activities.
On February 2 and 4, heavily armed FSB agents raided Aeroflot and the private security firm Atoll, which was also associated with Berezovsky.
It came, moreover, at a time when Yeltsin was reportedly suffering blackouts and periods of disorientation, and many important decisions were reportedly being made by Dyachenko.
The Yeltsin entourage was not slow to react to the efforts of Skuratov, who, with Primakov’s blessing, was seriously investigating them.
The FSB, under its director at the time, Vladimir Putin, secretly filmed Skuratov in a sauna having sex with two prostitutes.
The film was shown on the state television channel, RTR, and Skuratov was forced to resign.
Eliminating Skuratov, however, could not eliminate the long-term threat to the Yeltsin family in the event of a future loss of power.
He took no role in either the daily political struggle or the running of the economy.
His aides decided that he was more suited to the role of guarantor of the Constitution.
But Yeltsin handled even this role poorly, avoiding decisions and limiting himself to generalities.
Sensing Yeltsin’s weakness, the opposition in the State Duma scheduled an impeachment vote.
On May 12, the day before the opening of the hearings, Yeltsin fired Primakov and installed the interior minister, Sergei Stepashin, as acting premier.
Yeltsin’s readiness to fire Primakov, the most popular politician in the country, was taken as a signal to the deputies that in the event of impeachment, he was ready to suppress the parliament by force.
Of the five charges, only the one concerning the war in Chechnya had a good chance of gaining the two-thirds vote necessary for impeachment.
Accordingly, Kremlin agents circulated through the State Duma, bribing deputies not to vote for impeachment on this count.
They even offered to pay deputies who voted for impeachment on other counts if they would refrain from supporting it on this count.
With the failure of the impeachment motion, Luzhkov began to organize the opposition to Yeltsin in anticipation of the 2000 elections.
He recruited Primakov for his Fatherland—All Russia movement and said that if Primakov chose to run for president, he would stand aside and support him.
At first, Yeltsin’s allies hoped that Stepashin would be able to defeat Primakov in an election.
It soon became clear, however, that Stepashin was unenthusiastic about attacking Primakov and Luzhkov, and there were reports that he rejected schemes for introducing a state of emergency and canceling the presidential elections out of fear of igniting a civil war.
Moscow News reported that one of the schemes discussed among insiders, known as “Storm in Moscow,” called for acts of terror in Moscow.
On August 9, Stepashin was dismissed and Putin was named prime minister, and between September 4 and 16, Russia was wracked by the apartment bombings that completely changed the course of political events.
The shock of the bombings allowed Putin, with the help of state television, to project the image of a tough leader avenging an attack on innocent civilians.
At noon on December 31, 1999, Yeltsin announced in a televised address that he was resigning three months early as president.
In the early afternoon, Vladimir Putin was appointed acting president at a Kremlin ceremony.
His first act was to issue a decree granting Yeltsin immunity from prosecution.
The decree shielded Yeltsin from searches, arrest, and interrogation and protected his cars, telephone calls, documents, luggage, and correspondence.
Putin eschewed serious campaigning and avoided even explaining where he stood on the issues facing the country.
The Russian people had elected someone about whom they knew nothing except that he was avenging the apartment bombings.
The rise of a criminal oligarchy and the reliance on violent and illegal methods to create an authoritarian political system inevitably affected the public consciousness.
They led to a blurring of moral distinctions, a growth of irrationality, and a disregard for the value of human life.
The blurring of moral distinctions was a natural consequence of a transition process that rewarded criminality.
Success in Russia was so closely associated with crime that it surprised no one when gangsters became civic leaders.
Otari Kvantrishvili, who emerged as one of the capital’s leading socialites, began his criminal career in the 1980s, when he organized his own gang to engage in currency speculation, gambling, and extortion of prostitutes working in Moscow’s leading hotels.
To manage these enterprises, Kvantrishvili founded a holding company, Association Twenty-first Century, which then sought to engage in the export of oil, timber, and nonferrous metals.
He developed these with the help of Iosif Kobson, a singer with ties to political leaders.
He also arbitrated criminal disputes and soon became the unofficial emissary of organized crime to society and_ society’s representative to the criminal world.
Criminals turned to Kvantrishvili for help with the authorities, and businessmen turned to him for help with the gangs.
To bolster his respectability, Kvantrishvili organized the Yashin Fund for the Social Defense of Sportsmen.
He was invited on television to discuss the living conditions of athletes, and he became a frequent guest at beauty pageants, sporting events, and celebrity parties.
At the end of 1993 he decided to enter politics and created his own political party, Sportsmen of Russia.
On April 5, 1994, however, he was shot by a sniper as he left a bathhouse surrounded by bodyguards.
The crowd at his funeral consisted equally of members of the political and cultural elite and organized crime leaders.
Among those attending were Luzhkov, Gusinsky, Shamil Tarpishchev, Yeltsin’s tennis coach, and Alexander Rosenbaum, a popular singer.
Bykov was implicated in the killings of Krasnoyarsk’s criminal leaders and of businessmen who had paid protection money to the recently deceased criminal authorities and did not want to pay Bykov as well.
In late July and early August 1994, five leading Krasnoyarsk businessmen were killed in ten days.
Also killed were assassins sent to kill Bykov and four businessmen whom Bykov mistook for hired killers.
Bykov’s gunmen not only mowed down their victims in full public view, they also shot anyone who got in the way.
While running for a seat on the Krasnoyarsk Krai Legislative Assembly, Bykov acknowledged that he had taken “some illegal chances” but said he had broken the law only to establish order and rid the region of criminals.
Solonik became the boyfriend of one of Russia’s most glamorous women, Svetlana Kotova, a former Miss Russia.
They met in a Moscow nightclub on New Year’s Eve, 1997, and Kotova traveled to Greece on January 25 at his invitation.
She was met at the plane with armloads of flowers and taken to Solonik’s villa in a chauffeur-driven Mercedes.
She told her mother by phone that what she was living was not life but a miracle.
The miracle ended on January 30, when gangsters from the Kurgan criminal organization arrived at the villa.
While they were talking to Solonik, someone threw a thin cord around his neck and strangled him from behind.
Members of the group then found Svetlana on the second floor, where they strangled her to eliminate a possible witness.
Without the discredited communist ideology to make sense of what was happening around them, people turned to witches, sorcerers, and fortune-tellers.
In the early 1990s, Russia’s most popular public personality was Anatoly Kashpirovsky, a psychiatrist and trained hypnotist who conducted televised healing sessions in which he treated everything from high blood pressure and hip injuries to emotional distress.
At his live appearances, crowds writhed and sobbed at his command, thinking they were experiencing the casting out of devils.
Also popular was Allan Chumak, a former journalist with flowing white hair, who after a brief introduction slowly moved his hands across the television screen, supposedly charging with healing energy the saucepans full of water that millions of people had placed in front of their sets.
Wives appealed to witches to help return their husbands or cast the evil eye on their rivals.
Sometimes a client asked a witch to change the behavior of her partner.
To achieve this, the witch used a photograph to make a wax figure of the person whose behavior was to be changed, inserted a needle into the figure’s sexual parts, and then removed it.
Businessmen consulted sorcerers before making decisions, to identify enemies, to predict the results of upcoming cases, and to select targets for contract killings.
Instead of resisting these tendencies, the Russian Orthodox Church itself became a kind of cult, with priests blessing businesses, banks, homes, automobiles, and even a tank, and exorcising “unclean powers” for a fee.
Aum Shinrikyo’s leaders established contact with high Russian officials, including Oleg Lobov, the secretary of the Security Council.
With his help, members of the sect trained at Russian military bases and shopped for advanced weapons.
At that time, according to some accounts, Aum Shinrikyo had eight times more followers in Russia than in Japan.
In the 1990s, the number of murders reached forty thousand a year, three times as many as in 1990.
Compared to an Englishman, a Russian was five times as likely to die in a traffic accident, twenty-five times as likely to accidentally poison himself, seven times as likely to commit suicide, and fifty-four times as likely to be murdered.
One night in October, I left my apartment in the Kolomensky district in Moscow to go for a walk.
I walked past the impromptu market near the metro station where Russians were selling their possessions, the booths where Georgians displaced by the war in Abkhazia were cooking khachapuris, and the kiosks reinforced with iron bars where the owners sold cigarettes, vodka, and Snickers bars through a small window located well below eye level, forcing the customer to bend over to talk to them.
Russia had never had many automobiles, but now there was traffic on Andropov Prospect and a lot of foreign cars.
I turned down Sudostroitelnaya Street, walked past rows of concrete panel apartment blocks, and stopped at a metal notice board full of notes from people seeking accommodation or proposing an exchange.
It proposed lifetime care for single persons in difficulty in return for legal ownership of their apartment.
The note did not include the name or address of an organization, only a phone number.
It included a promise to handle legal formalities and said that many people in the area were already being helped.
With the fall of communism, state apartments could now be privatized and become the property of their occupant.
This was the first time I was exposed to the apartment racket, but I felt intuitively that anyone who agreed to this arrangement was signing his death warrant.
The bodies of those who agreed were discovered by the hundreds, perhaps thousands, in forests and garbage dumps all over Russia.
Russian citizens during the Yeltsin years experienced the trauma of losing an entire worldview that had given meaning, however falsely, to their lives.
In response, the government removed all restrictions on the sale of alcohol.
The result was that at a time when the purchasing power of the average Russian was cut in half, his salary in relation to the cost of vodka increased threefold.
The era of cheap vodka and the resulting tranquilization of the population lowered resistance to the pillaging of the country, but at a severe cost to the nation’s health.
For the first time, Russians had to pay for many medical services, from necessary medicines to lifesaving operations, and the inability to pay led many to give up on their own lives.
By various estimates, five to six million people died prematurely during the Yeltsin period.
The change was unaccompanied by an effort to provide ... a reason for which this change should be undertaken.
He was Russia’s overwhelmingly popular head of state at a pivotal moment in the country’s history after the fall of the Soviet Union and could have helped Russia to break once and for all with its totalitarian past.
Unfortunately, he understood communism as an economic phenomenon and assumed that to produce democracy it was necessary only to change economic structures.
In fact, communism, which promoted “class values,” was always a moral phenomenon whose failings could be addressed only through restoration of the universal values that the communist system denied.
By concentrating on introducing capitalism and carrying out the transition so lawlessly, Yeltsin assured that Russia would be taken over by criminals and that Russian oppression would not end but only enter a new phase.
The country, exhausted and demoralized, had no sympathy for the departing Yeltsin.
But it welcomed Putin in the hope that his elections marked the start of something new.
Russians saw in Putin what they wanted him to be, rather than what he was.
He also took power at a moment when the Russian economy started to expand.
Although Putin declined to debate in the presidential election campaign, his vow to destroy the terrorists who carried out the apartment bombings resonated with the public.
At the same time, a public relations campaign on state-run television helped turn him into a popular hero.
He was shown dressed as a fighter pilot, swimming in a river, shooting a Siberian tiger with a sedation dart, and, after a suspicious explosion on August 8 in Moscow’s Pushkin Square underpass that killed thirteen people, calming Russians’ nerves by tagging a polar bear.
Putin’s intention, however, was to create a system in which the regime exercised total power.
In fact, even under the 1993 Constitution, which created the superpresidency, the president did not answer for everything.
Parliament was responsible for making laws, and the courts for the administration of justice.
This too was a departure, because Russia is ostensibly a democracy in which the government answers to the people.
The promise to be guided only by the interests of the state was implicitly a claim to one-man rule.
These words were little noticed at the time, and Russia was still too weak to contemplate foreign aggression, but they were a claim for the future.
Putin did not refer in his speech to individual rights, but his attitude on the subject became clear three months later.
On August 12, two massive explosions occurred on board the nuclear submarine Kursk during a training exercise, and it sank to the bottom of the Barents Sea.
The entire world was transfixed by the drama of the trapped Russian sailors, but for four days, the government, unwilling to admit weakness, refused offers of foreign help.
Later, when asked by Larry King on CNN what happened to the Kursk, Putin said only “It sank,” giving an eerie smile.
But it was an ominous sign of the indifference to suffering that would be a hallmark of the years ahead.
In the system created under Putin, power was exercised through a bureaucracy that answered only to the country’s leader.
Lies and manipulation helped reconcile the population to this state of affairs, but the regime nonetheless viewed the Russian people with suspicion, rightly regarding their desire for rights as its most dangerous potential threat.
The criminality of the Yeltsin period engendered a hunger for order, which, in the absence of moral content, led to banditry in the guise of a state.
A facade of rational government was preserved, but all normal values were displaced.
Under optimal conditions, such a structure could rule successfully for a long time.
But it was based on the proposition that the good luck would never run out.
The creation and consolidation of the Putin-era system involved installing a vertical chain of command and eliminating alternative centers of power.
An autocratic system was created almost before the population understood what had taken place.
Putin filled the highest posts with those who had worked with him in the St.
Other posts were filled with veterans of the KGB-FSB and the Interior Ministry.
By 2004, the top ministers, half of the Security Council, and 70 percent of the senior regional officials in Russia came from the security services.
Like most Soviet citizens, many of Russia’s leaders grew up in poverty, living, as Putin did, in communal apartments with shared kitchens and baths.
With no reason for success except Putin’s patronage, they acquired wealth beyond the dreams of avarice, and repaid the favor with total conformity.
Boris Gryzlov, the former speaker of the Duma, once said that if Putin told him to jump out of a window, he would do it.
Andrei Illarionov, who was Putin’s economic adviser for his first five years in office, said in testimony before the United States Congress that the leadership operates on the basis of mutual support and omerta, the Mafia code of silence.
Its members show a high degree of obedience to the current leadership, strong loyalty to each other, rather strict discipline.
Russian national income fell by almost half during the 1990s, but sharp rises in world energy prices, coupled with the first benefits of the capitalist economic transformation under Yeltsin and huge pent-up demand, led, under Putin, to an unprecedented economic boom.
In 2000, Russia’s GDP rose 7. percent and industrial production by 9. percent.
Russians who inherited their Soviet era apartments suddenly found that they had disposable cash, and there was a boom in consumption.
The oil and gas revenue made it possible to organize, equip, and staff government agencies that had been barely functioning, resulting in a semblance of order.
Under Putin, enforcement was organized and taxes began to be collected.
Other government agencies also began to perform their required functions.
The strengthening of state institutions, however, did not lead to greater legality.
Instead of stamping out criminality, the government apparatus took it over.
Anarchy and lack of governance were replaced by meddling and ubiquitous bribe taking.
Between 2001 and 2005, according to the INDEM think tank,® bribes extorted by the authorities increased nearly tenfold, to over $316 billion.
In 2001, Russia ranked 79th in the global Corruption Perceptions Index compiled by ‘Transparency International.
Besides creating a system of top-down control, Putin acted to eliminate independent centers of power.
One by one, institutions capable of providing an alternative to unitary power were subordinated, starting with the media, followed by business, and ending with parliament and the courts.
The result was a society in which the regime was the only center of power, drastically limiting the freedom of the population.
Everywhere there is the need for political protection and the necessity of being subject to control.
Putin had seen the role of television in sabotaging Primakov’s presidential candidacy and creating his own favorable image, and he wanted to make sure that the national television stations in particular were always under his control.
The first target was NTV, which on the eve of the April 2000 elections had angered the FSB with its investigation into the apartment bombings.
On May 11, the headquarters of Media Most, the holding company that owned NTV, was raided by masked men who identified themselves as the tax police.
In June, Media Most’s chairman, Vladimir Gusinsky, was called to the prosecutor for questioning, supposedly about the origin of several bullets for a decorative pistol that were confiscated in the May 11 raid.
That evening he was arrested in connection with the privatization of a St.
Petersburg television company, Russian Video, and taken to the Byutyrsky Prison.
On July 16, Gusinsky was charged with fraud and released on the condition that he not leave Moscow.
He was offered $300 million and forgiveness of a debt of $473 million to Gazprom in return for Media-Most and NTV, his entire empire.
With Gusinsky’s removal, the type of critical reports that had distinguished NTV in the 1990s disappeared.
Instead, NTV concentrated on entertainment, including foreign soap operas and such programs as Fear Factor, which rewarded contestants for climbing high buildings, sitting in cells underwater, or eating worms or cockroaches.
The neutralization of NTV was followed by the takeover of ORT , the most important television station, which was run by Boris Berezovsky.
ORT had supported Putin during the presidential campaign, but once Putin was elected, Berezovsky began to oppose some of his policies, in particular the creation of presidential envoys who could interfere with the ability of governors to make decisions concerning industries in which Berezovsky had an economic interest.
The station showed scenes of Putin jet skiing in Sochi and contrasted his behavior with the despair of the doomed sailors’ mothers and widows.
ORT’s coverage of the Kursk disaster is apparently what led Putin to decide to take the station away from Berezovsky.
At a meeting in the Kremlin, Alexander Voloshin, Putin’s chief of staff, told Berezovsky to give up ORT in two weeks or share the fate of Gusinsky.
At a subsequent meeting with Putin, Berezovsky argued that the attacks by ORT actually helped Putin because it showed that he tolerated criticism.
In December, Berezovsky’s friend and collaborator Nikolai Glushkov was arrested.
Berezovsky told a Moscow radio station that the arrest was blackmail and that it made no sense for him to struggle further and expose his friends and family to risk.
That left TV-6 as Russia’s last remaining independent television station.
It quickly became the subject of a bankruptcy suit filed by Lukoil-Garant, the pension fund of the Russian oil company Lukoil, which owned 15 percent of the station and was itself minority owned by the state.
Nonetheless, the Supreme Arbitration Court ordered the station liquidated, and on January 14, 2002, the station was pulled off the air.
With the actions against NTV, ORT, and TV-6, national television, the most important information source for 90 percent of the population, came entirely under the regime’s control.
The takeover of television was accompanied by the subjugation of business.
If under Yeltsin, corrupt businessmen and gangsters had privatized the state, under Putin, businessmen became serfs of the regime.
The number of bureaucrats grew by nearly two-thirds, and this army of officials acted in their own predatory interests.
In 1994, the Analytical Center for Social and Economic Policies of the Presidential Administration said that 70 to 90 percent of Russia’s enterprises and banks in major cities were forced to pay criminal gangs 10 to 20 percent of their revenues.
The only thing that changed under Putin was the identity of those collecting the tribute.
As a result, businesses generally do not show their real revenues, a fact that is overlooked in exchange for bribes.
Businessmen also pay bribes to get goods through customs, to acquire permits, to avoid fines after inspections, and just to be left alone.
The system involves nearly everyone, which means that almost every citizen is vulnerable to facing criminal charges.
It came from Mikhail Khodorkovsky, the head of the Yukos oil company and Russia’s wealthiest man.
Like other Yeltsin-era oligarchs, Khodorkovsky acquired his holdings through the corrupt privatization schemes, but he proved to be a very effective manager.
He imported Western advisers and techniques and doubled the flow rate in his Western Siberian oil fields between 1997 and 2002.19 Khodorkovsky provoked a confrontation because, with the price of oil rising steadily, he realized that the best way to increase profits was to break with the Putin system and turn Yukos into a Western-style enterprise.
He declared his income and introduced Wester standards of accounting and corporate governance.
At the same time, Khodorkovsky began to accuse the government of corruption.
The authorities’ response was to arrest Khodorkovsky on October 25, 2003, and accuse him of fraud and tax evasion.
The charges alleged that he avoided taxes by setting up intermediary firms in closed cities that offered tax advantages, and that he stole shares in a fertilizer plant during privatization.
Similar charges could have been made against every Yeltsin-era oligarch, but Khodorkovsky alone was prosecuted.
He was sentenced to eight years in a labor camp, and Yukos was dismembered, with the pieces sold off cheaply to Putin’s cronies.
Near the end of his prison term, Khodorkovsky was charged again, this time with stealing the entire production of Yukos’s subsidiaries, even though he had already been tried and sentenced for avoiding taxes on the sale of that production.
After Khodorkovsky’s arrest, there were no more attempts by Russian oligarchs to confront the Kremlin or finance the political opposition.
On the contrary, the oligarchs, in their public statements and private gifts, tried to show total loyalty so as not to share Khodorkovsky’s fate.
With the Yukos case, the authorities made sure that private wealth could be used politically only in the service of the regime.
The arrest of Khodorkovsky and dismemberment of Yukos set a precedent that local officials were quick to follow.
In a Russian raid, an owner is typically charged with a crime by investigators in the pay of his economic competitors, who are often state officials or their close friends and relatives.
The owner is then put in pretrial detention and given a below-market offer for his property.
If this is not enough to persuade him to give up his business, a judge, in the pay of the raiders, can issue an order allowing the raiders to take it over.
An entire industry has grown up dedicated to taking companies away from their original owners.
Sergei Kanyev, a crime reporter for Novaya Gazeta, described the situation of a typical Moscow businessman.
He gives the local police chief an expensive foreign car and treats his “curator” from the FSB to daily dinners in a restaurant.
Once a month, the fire and trade inspectors visit his stores and they expect money or presents.
In addition, the businessman makes payments to another pair of spongers, the head of the local branch of United Russia, and a representative from Just Russia,” the other main pro-Kremlin party.
Street extortion, formerly the province of criminal gangs, is now carried out by the police.
The warehouses are controlled by the commanders; shops and small restaurants by the criminal investigation unit; bootleggers and sellers of pirated DVDs by the anti—economic crimes unit.
While private businesses were being bled by bureaucrats at every level, high-ranking officials were able to enrich themselves by stealing from the state after being put on the boards of state-run corporations.
Dimitri Medvedev, when he was first deputy premier , was made the chairman of Gazprom.
Igor Sechin, the deputy head of the Kremlin administration, became the chairman of the Rosneft oil company.
Igor Shuvalov, an assistant to the president, was put on the board of Russian Railways.
In 2007, the capitalization of Gazprom was $236 billion, Rosneft $94 billion, and Russian Railways $50 billion.
Access to the cash flows of huge state enterprises made it possible for Russian officials to channel business and stolen state resources to offshore companies that they secretly controlled.
Putin’s friend Leonid Reiman, the minister of telecommunications, was found by a Zurich arbitration tribunal in 2007 to have used his position as chairman of the board of the state-run telecommunications holding company to acquire assets valued at $6 billion.
Evidence suggests that he also pillages the state, on an even grander scale.
Some of Russia’s wealthiest men are Putin’s personal friends, including Gennady Timchenko, the head of the Gunvor oil trading company, who is believed to be worth $15. billion; Yuri Kovalchuk, an owner of the Rossiya Bank ; and the Rotenberg brothers, Arkady and Boris, whose combined wealth is estimated at $5. billion.
Gazfund, the largest nongovernment pension fund, Gazprombank, Russia’s second—most important bank, and Gazprom-media were all removed from state-run Gazprom and put under the control of the Rossiya Bank.
Citing senior figures in the president’s own administration as his sources, Belkovsky said that Putin was the beneficial owner of 75 percent of Gunvor, 37 percent of Surgutneftegaz (a principal supplier of oil for Gunvor), and 4. percent of Gazprom.
This ownership structure was concealed behind a “non-transparent network of offshore companies,” with the final points in Zug, Switzerland, and Lichtenstein.
When asked whether he could prove his claims, Belkovsky said that Putin’s wealth is no secret among the elites.
With national television and business under the regime’s control, all that remained was to neutralize the parliament and the courts.
This process, well advanced in the early years of Yeltsin’s rule, reached its final expression under Putin.
Under Yeltsin the State Duma was weak but not completely powerless, and there were possibilities for oppositionists to achieve representation.
The dramatic rise in Russian living standards under Putin was of immense benefit to United Russia, which began actively recruiting new members and opening offices all over the country.
The shift of power to the government bureaucracy and concentration of decision making in the hands of the president created a situation in which nearly everyone in a Management position felt that he needed the protection of a good relationship with the authorities, which, as representatives of the regime made clear, was best guaranteed by donations and activism on behalf of United Russia.
They now supported the regime’s policies while occasionally arguing about their implementation.
This left the members of the two liberal parties, Yabloko and the Union of Right Forces , as the only potential opposition voices in the Duma.
After Khodorkovsky’s arrest, however, both parties were starved of funds.
At the same time, a law was passed raising the threshold for representation in the Duma to 7 percent, meaning that a party had to poll strongly all over the country to be represented.
After 2007, neither Yabloko nor SPS was able to surmount this barrier, and their failure to gain places in the Duma all but eliminated liberals from the country’s official political life.
In 2007, People for Democracy and Justice, led by former prime minister Mikhail Kasyanov, was denied registration because of 37 mistakes in a list of more than 56,000 party members.
In the 2012 presidential race, each of these parties fielded a candidate.
A fifth candidate, Mikhail Prokhorov, collected enough signatures to be placed on the ballot and ran with the tacit approval of the authorities.
Serious criticism of the regime or its policies played no role in the presidential race.
Despite the elimination of real political opposition, the regime tried to produce the highest possible vote totals for its candidates—members of United Russia in the parliamentary elections and Medvedev and Putin in the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections.
Officials, managers, law enforcement officers, and businessmen were all expected to work for United Russia.
In twenty of the eighty-three Russian regions, including the North Caucasus, the South Urals, Tuva, and Kalmykia, there was virtually no local opposition and election returns were easily falsified.
State employees were instructed to vote for the regime’s candidates, and workers were frequently forced to vote at their place of work under the watchful eyes of their bosses, who were normally members of United Russia.
In rural areas, people not supporting the authorities could have their water turned off or their houses burned down.
The electoral results were reinforced by ballot-box stuffing, multiple voting, and the falsification of protocols.
Control over the electoral process was complemented by the subjugation of the judiciary, which had little ability to maintain its independence within an otherwise unitary government.
In every region, it is the court chairmen who organize the work of the court, including the assignment of cases.
Before Putin, many chairmen fulfilled their responsibilities in a neutral manner, but in December 2001, chairmen began to be appointed by the president.
The chairman is in direct contact with the political authorities and has many ways of controlling the judges in his or her district.
He or she arranges housing for the judges and sets their vacation schedules.
The chairman also collects material that can be used as grounds for a judge’s dismissal—for example, that a judge is dilatory in hearing cases or commits procedural errors.
He or she can also influence the qualification commission, a supervisory organ elected by the judges themselves, to make sure that a judge suspected of corruption is or is not investigated.
If a matter between individuals is before the court, it often is decided on its merits.
In one famous instance, Judge Olga Kudeshkina was removed in May 2004 after stating publicly that Yegorova had ordered her to make a decision desired by the general prosecutor in the case of the Three Whales and Grand furniture chains, which were founded by the father of a high-ranking FSB official and had reportedly evaded millions of dollars in import duties.
After the case was closed on orders from the general prosecutor, the prosecutor’s office brought charges against Zaitsev for conducting a search without authorization.
Zaitsev said that he had to conduct an immediate search in order to prevent the destruction of records, a reason allowed under the law.
The case was assigned to Kudeshkina, who was newly arrived in Moscow from Siberia.
Kudeshkina told journalists that before the trial started, Dmitri Shokhin, the prosecutor in the case, hinted to her that a guilty verdict was expected.
The trial began in May 2003, and after a week, Shokhin began protesting against Kudeshkina’s line of questioning, accusing her of favoring the accused.
He turned to the lay jurors, members of the public who until 2004 served in Russian courts as monitors, and asked them to replace her.
Yegorova phoned Yuri Biryukov, the deputy general prosecutor, and discussed the case in Kudeshkina’s presence.
In written statements, they said that Shokhin’s “disgusting” efforts to put pressure on them were damaging their health.
Five months later, another judge found Zaitsev guilty and gave him a two-year suspended sentence.
In November, Kudeshkina took a leave from the bench to run for the Duma.
She withdrew from the race days before the election after receiving threats, and the Moscow qualification commission began disciplinary proceedings against her for defaming the judiciary.
In May 2004, the commission fired her from her judgeship, accusing her of seeking to denigrate the authority of the judges and undermine the prestige of the judicial profession.
Russians do not expect and cannot obtain justice in any case where the regime’s interests are involved, including the cases of those who exploit their political ties to amass wealth.
The corruption of the judiciary in Russia is the reason the European Court is overwhelmed with complaints from Russia.
In 2013, there were 24,102 complaints to the European Court from Russia, more than from any of the other forty-six countries that make up the Council of Europe.
Behind the facade of rising wealth, however, Russia had come full circle.
It had once again become a state that deprived its citizens of a voice or the means to defend their rights.
The resulting system, however, is not prepared to withstand external political and economic shocks.
It can be protected only through concealment or aggressive militarism if it is to stave off internal conflict and eventual collapse.
The Putin system divided Russian society into two groups, a handful who benefit from corruption and the vast majority who cannot.
Such a division invites a violent crisis and, as a result of events in Ukraine, this is exactly what Russia got.
Bureaucrats sucked money out of Russia at a phenomenal rate, but energy prices boomed and there were signs of the new prosperity everywhere.
Near the building that once housed the Military Colleagues of the Supreme Court, where thousands were sentenced to death during the Great Terror, there opened Bentley and Maserati dealerships and an Ermenegildo Zegna clothing store.
Deprived for decades of Western consumer goods, many Russians quickly became connoisseurs.
Government officials bought apartments for their mistresses, helping to aggravate the housing shortage, and there was a boom in private planes and cosmetology.
The economic boom and a centralized system, however, could not by themselves ensure the regime’s durability.
The terror served to remind everyone that behind the fagade of a normal society, the regime had the ability to eliminate its enemies and, if threatened, would not hesitate to do so.
For many Russians, defeat in the first Chechen war was a symbol of the country’s humiliation under Yeltsin.
The invasion of Chechnya in September 1999 made it possible to depict Putin as the person who was restoring the nation’s honor and helped him win the presidency.
To preserve Putin’s image as a successful warrior, however, it was important that the Chechen resistance be destroyed.
The second Chechen war was pursued even more ruthlessly than the first.
The Russians used ground-to-ground missiles and fuel air “vacuum” explosives, which have been compared to low-level tactical nuclear weapons, against populated areas.
At the same time, thousands of Chechen males disappeared in security sweeps.
The barbarity of Russian tactics prompted international pressure to end the war.
The Dubrovka and Beslan hostage takings changed Russia in ways that were not fully appreciated at the time.
But the KGB-FSB view of the supremacy of the state’s interests and the negligible value of human life was affirmed and legitimized.
In each case, a thousand or more hostages were seized by Chechen terrorists.
In both instances, the Russian authorities refused to negotiate and acted instead to kill the terrorists as well as hundreds of hostages.
And in both cases, there was evidence that the government had a role in instigating the original attacks.
The seizure of the Theater on Dubrovka took place during a performance of Nord-Ost, the most popular musical in Russia.
On October 23, shortly after 9 PM, just as the audience was settling in for the second act, forty heavily armed male and female Chechen terrorists entered the theater and moved rapidly down the aisles in the semidarkness.
The men wore camouflage gear, had Kalashnikov assault rifles slung over their shoulders, and carried grenade launchers.
The terrorists moved large canvas bags into the middle of the stage and began taking out packets of explosives that the women attached to belts around their waists.
The men meanwhile laid booby traps and taped explosive devices to the walls.
The bombs were placed so that if they went off at once, the entire audience would be caught in a hail of shrapnel and the force would cause the building to collapse.
They warned that if any one of them were killed, they would kill ten hostages in response.
They told relatives to beg the authorities to negotiate with the terrorists and not to attack the theater.
A series of intermediaries, including the politicians Grigory Yavlinsky, Irina Khakamada, and Ruslan Aushev, and the journalist Anna Politkovskaya, attempted to negotiate with the terrorists, but at first the terrorists had trouble formulating their demands.
They finally said that if Putin announced an end to the war and pulled troops out of one Chechen region within twenty-four hours, the hostages would go free.
The Russian response was to offer the terrorists safe passage if they left the building, which, under the circumstances, resembled a nonoffer.
For forty-eight hours, the hostages lived in a state of extreme tension, whiplashed between dull apprehension and crippling fear, unable to leave their seats except to relieve themselves in the orchestra pit, which became a public toilet, and too agitated to sleep.
But on the evening of October 25, the authorities suddenly agreed to negotiate.
They announced that Victor Kazantsev, Putin’s envoy in the Southern Federal District, would arrive at the theater at 10 the next morning to begin talks.
Baraev got up on the stage and said, “Everything is going according to plan.
After waiting about fifteen minutes for the gas to take effect, members of the FSB’s Alfa and Wympel units equipped with flak jackets, gas masks, and assault weapons entered the building in a two-pronged assault from the front and rear and began executing the terrorists.
The first group killed a large number of terrorists who had been forced backward onto the stage.
The other group ran up the stairs and along the corridors to the storeroom that had served as the terrorists’ headquarters, killing as they went, encountering ineffectual resistance.
Many of the terrorists, including almost all of the female suicide bombers, were overcome by the gas.
They had had time to realize that the hall was being filled with gas but did not open fire on the hostages or kill them with grenades.
None of the explosives with which they had threatened to blow up the building were detonated.
It was later discovered that the bombs were dummies, as were many of the women’s suicide belts.
But in the theater, more than eight hundred unconscious hostages were slumped in their seats or lying in the aisles, finding it difficult to breathe.
In the absence of medical personnel, police and soldiers draped the bodies of comatose hostages over their shoulders or carried them out by the arms and legs.
Bodies were piled one on top of another outside the theater entrance, with no attempt to separate the living from the dead.
Although the medical authorities had had days to prepare for the aftermath of the siege, there was a shortage of ambulances, and hostages were taken to hospitals in buses, microbuses, and cars.
Alexander Karpov, a wellknown songwriter, died after spending seven hours alive in a bus packed with corpses.
The gas was not identified for the rescuers, who were forced to spend several hours testing antidotes before they found one that was effective— naloxone, which is used to treat heroin overdoses.
The confusion continued at the hospitals, where hundreds of hostages suffering exposure to an unknown gas suddenly appeared, overwhelming the hospital’s ability to treat them.
The FSB, apparently aware that the death toll was going to be shocking, initially deliberately understated the fatalities.
The first report was that 10 people had died, leading Russians to feel a sense of relief.
But in the weeks following the storm, there began to be serious doubts about the regime’s actions and fears that, once again, the entire episode might have been a provocation.
Preparations for the attack had begun in April 2002, when a terrorist linked to Shamil Basaev bought a house in the village of Chernoe, in the Moscow oblast, and began to receive visitors and a stream of weapons from the North Caucasus.
Neither the police nor the FSB reacted to this highly unusual activity.
The FSB also did not react to warnings from sources in the criminal world that a large group of armed Chechen extremists had gathered in the central and southwest districts of Moscow.
One warning came from Mikhail Trepashkin, who was no longer in the FSB but had stayed in touch with his criminal contacts.
He informed the FSB, among other things, that Abubakar had been living in Moscow and was running protection for two firms that were providing money to the Chechen rebels.
After the attack, when Trepashkin learned of Abubakar’s role, he again contacted the FSB and offered to share information.
The security services may have done more than fail to stop the preparations.
There were signs that the FSB and the terrorists were closely connected.
One of the visitors to the house in Chernoe was Arman Menkeevy, a retired major in Russian military intelligence and a specialist in the making of explosives.
He reportedly prepared the suicide bombers’ explosives belts and other devices used by the hostage takers.
Menkeev did not take part in the actual hostage taking, but his role is hard to understand if the authorities were not facilitating the attack.
A fourth was supposedly serving a long sentence in a Russian labor camp.
The hostage takers identified themselves as Islamists, but the authorities blamed the attack on Aslan Maskhadov, Chechnya’s president and the leader of the non-Islamist separatists.
This suggested that the authorities actually wanted a bloody denouement.
In a confrontation between Islamists and the government, Maskhadov, as Chechnya’s last elected leader, was probably the only person capable of negotiating a peaceful resolution.
When the terrorists seized the theater, Ahmed Zakaev, Maskhadov’s overseas representative, said that Maskhadov, who was in hiding in the mountains of Chechnya, condemned the attack and called for a peaceful end to the crisis.
The Russian media, however, said that the attack was ordered by Maskhadov.
From the original it was clear that the tape was made not on the eve of the theater siege but at least two months earlier, at the end of the summer.
This supported Zakaev’s statement that Maskhadov was referring not to the seizure of hostages but to an impending military operation against federal forces.
In the months after the Nord-Ost attack, family members and survivors began to demand answers from the authorities.
The authorities would say only that the gas had been a calmative opiate, a derivative of fenatyl delivered in aerosol form.
Many of the survivors were seriously ill, and without knowing the identity of the poison, doctors did not know how to treat them.
In April 2003, a lawyer representing some of the former hostages said that approximately forty more had died since October 26, 2002.
They had died from long periods of immobility, he said, and from chronic diseases.
One of the surviving hostages who became concemed about the possible ties between the terrorists and the authorities was Vesselin Nedkov, a Bulgarian who, on the first night of the siege, noticed that a man appeared in the theater wearing a suit instead of camouflage gear.
Nedkov was already shocked that a large group of terrorists carrying bombs and grenade launchers could take over a theater in the center of Moscow, but the ability of one of the terrorists to enter the building even after it was surrounded by police astonished him even more.
I was in Moscow at the time of the Nord-Ost siege, and like nearly everyone in the city, I prayed for the hostages’ safety.
I went to the scene but, like other journalists, could get no closer than the police lines.
What I was able to reconstruct about the events in the months after the storm, however, convinced me that the authorities facilitated the takeover of the theater.
All of the terrorists were executed, including many who were shot while unconscious.
This made no sense if the Russian authorities hoped to learn about the organization of the attack and any plans for future attacks.
It was logical, however, if the authorities wanted to make sure that there could be no public trial at which inconvenient details could be revealed.
At the same time, relatives of victims and survivors who filed suit against the Moscow city government in an attempt to learn more about what had happened faced bureaucratic harassment from the authorities.
A request by human rights groups to the prosecutor to open an investigation into the use of the gas was denied.
A motion to open a parliamentary inquiry into the siege was voted down.
Sergei Yushchenkov, the head of a commission investigating the apartment bombings, promised to investigate the Nord-Ost attack as well but was assassinated on April 17, 2003.
Before the seizure of the theater, the Russian authorities were under mounting pressure to reach a settlement over Chechnya.
The Russian population was growing tired of the war, which had been going on for three years.
In a September 2002 poll, 56 percent of respondents favored peace negotiations to end the Chechen conflict, while only 34 percent supported continued military action.
Under a plan proposed by Brzezinski, Chechens would acknowledge Russian territorial integrity and a referendum would be held under which the Chechens could approve the constitutional basis of extensive self-government.
With pressure for a settlement removed, the regime was free to carry out its preferred strategy, in which a pro-Moscow puppet government headed by the former rebel Ramzan Kadyrov was given nearly complete freedom to act inside Chechnya as long as it professed loyalty to Moscow.
The security organs were staffed by ethnic Chechens, who were as cruel as their Russian predecessors but more selective.
These tactics and exhaustion after nearly a decade of war split the ranks of the resistance, and the fighting declined.
Reduced violence in Chechnya, however, came alongside an increase in fighting in the neighboring republics, particularly Ingushetiya.
Murat Zyazikov, an FSB veteran who was elected president of Ingushetiya in a rigged election, responded to attacks with hundreds of summary executions, which led to a massive influx of young men into the insurgents’ ranks.
On June 21, 2004, Chechen and Ingush militants led by Basaev carried out a large-scale attack on government buildings in Nazran, the Ingush capital, including the Interior Ministry.
The Russians were taken completely by surprise, and scores of police and security personnel were killed.
By the summer of 2004, both the Chechen resistance and the Russian authorities were considering ways to reassert their positions.
The radical Islamist wing of the resistance knew that it would take something spectacular to force the Russians to negotiate over Chechnya, and resistance leaders wanted to show that the war was continuing.
The Russians wanted to deliver a decisive blow to the resistance and confirm the success of their policies.
The result was the seizure by Chechen terrorists of a school in the city of Beslan in North Ossetia on September 1, 2004.
Music was playing over the loudspeakers and many of the children were carrying balloons.
Just as the formalities were about to begin, scores of terrorists in military clothes invaded the schoolyard, firing machine guns in the air.
Many parents did not spot the terrorists at first and did not realize the significance of the shots.
But the firing continued, with the terrorists shouting, “Allahu Akbar” and “Get into the school” and herding the parents, teachers, and children first into the school and then into the gymnasium, which was twenty-five yards long by ten yards wide.
Finally, a male hostage approached one of the terrorists and was immediately shot in the head.
Other male hostages were forced to drag his corpse by the arms through the gym, and the crowd suddenly became quiet.
The terrorists hung bombs packed with ball bearings and shards of glass from a wire strung across the gym and pulled up floorboards to put bombs beneath.
Khuchbarov’s second in command was Vladimir Khodov, a_ half-Ukrainian, half-Ossetian convert to Islam who had committed rapes in 1998 and 2004 and was involved in a car bombing in Vladikavkaz in March and a train derailment in Elkhotovo two months later.
Alexander Dzasokhov, the president of North Ossetia; Ingush President Zyazikov; Aslambek Aslakhanov, an adviser to Putin on the North Caucasus; and Leonid Roshal, a pediatrician who was believed to have worked with the FSB during the Nord-Ost siege.
The note also contained a cell phone number for contacting the terrorists.
A second hostage was sent out with a video of the situation inside the school as well as a second note demanding a halt to the war in Chechnya and the release of twenty-seven rebels captured after the June raid in Ingushetiya.
Despite the notes, however, the authorities showed no interest in negotiating.
State television reported that the hostages were making no demands, and although Mamitova insisted to the authorities that more than a thousand were held captive in the school, state television gave the number as 120.26 The lies enraged the terrorists.
They told the hostages that their lives had already been written off and forbade them to drink water or go to the toilet.
They then separated out the younger men and led them to a small room, where they were forced to sit facing the wall with their arms over their heads.
The male terrorists then withdrew, and the female terrorists in the room detonated their bomb belts, causing an enormous explosion, killing most of the men instantly.
The male terrorists returned after the explosion and forced the few survivors to carry the dead and injured to a room on an upper floor, where the injured were reportedly beaten to death.
According to a report on the siege by a North Ossetian parliamentary commission, the murder of the young adult male hostages was a direct response to the authorities’ refusal to acknowledge the terrorists’ demands.
Two deputy directors of the FSB, Vladimir Pronichev and Vladimir Anisimov, arrived from Moscow and set up a parallel operational headquarters that had very little contact with the crisis committee.
Dzasokhov announced that he was ready to enter the school, but he was warned by the operational headquarters that he would be stopped if he tried.
At that point, Vitaly Zangionov, a negotiator from the North Ossetian FSB, was appointed to talk to the terrorists, but his offers—an escape route, money, and a human shield—were irrelevant to the terrorists’ demands.
If the authorities had agreed at least to free the twenty-seven imprisoned terrorists who took part in the raid on Ingushetiya, they might have bought the lives of many hostages.
In the meantime, the FSB was almost certainly responsible for eliminating one more potential negotiator, Anna Politkovskaya.
After hearing about the hostage taking, Politkovskaya boarded a 9 pm flight for Rostov, hoping to proceed to Beslan by car.
She was respected by Chechens for her reporting and had more success in the Nord-Ost crisis than other negotiators.
After boarding the plane for Rostov, however, she took a sip of tea and lost consciousness.
When the plane landed, she was rushed to a hospital and put in intensive care.
On the second day of the siege, state-run television announced that it had the exact number of hostages in the school—354.
The terrorists who had access to radio and television and the hostages who were close enough to hear were stunned as reporters repeatedly gave out this absurdly understated estimate.
It was a hot day and the heat in the gym became unbearable, making it difficult to breathe.
Many of the hostages, prevented from drinking, were dehydrated and beginning to slip in and out of consciousness.
The terrorists brought in buckets for the hostages to relieve themselves into.
At the same time, ravaged by thirst, the hostages began to drink their own urine.
Despite the worsening humanitarian crisis, the authorities did not speak to the terrorists.
Instead, tanks and armored personnel carriers were brought up to Beslan from Vladikavkaz.
The only real negotiation was with Ruslan Aushev, the former president of Ingushetiya, on September 2.
Aushev called the terrorists on his own initiative, and they agreed to let him enter the school.
He was led inside at 3:30 pm by masked terrorists and brought to see the Colonel, who told him the terrorists were acting on the orders of Shamil Basaev.
Aushev was able to secure the release of eleven women and fifteen nursing infants and toddlers.
If Chechnya were given independence, Basaev wrote, it would not conclude any military or political agreements directed against Russia, would join the Commonwealth of Independent States, and would remain in the ruble zone.
Several times on September 2, Russian officials gave interviews in which they said they had no intention of storming the school.
At 2 PM, in his first public comments on the attack, Putin said that the chief task was saving the lives of the hostages and that everything would be subordinated to that goal.
The sight of armed men seizing the school created panic among village residents, who thought the building was being taken over by terrorists.
When the local police went to investigate, they found that the terrorists were Special Forces.
Word of the exercise spread to Beslan, where the relatives of the hostages became convinced that, regardless of their public statements, the authorities fully intended to storm the school.
From September 1 on, parents of the hostages gathered in front of the school and formed a human chain to prevent an attack.
While Aushev was arranging to enter the school, he and Dzasokhov were also on the phone to Zakaev in London; they asked him to contact Maskhadov.
But Zakaev called the Chechen Service of Radio Liberty and told them of his talks with Aushev and Dzasokhov.
Radio Liberty broadcast the news and, at his secret headquarters in the mountains, Maskhadov heard the broadcast and immediately called Zakaev.
When Zakaev explained the situation, Maskhadov said he was ready to come to Beslan without preconditions if he was given safe passage.
During the second night of the siege, the hostages were becoming increasingly desperate and depressed.
Others, particularly among the youngest children, were suffering from paralysis and were in danger of losing consciousness.
On the moming of September 3, Aushev and Dzasokhov again called Zakaev, who told them of Maskhadov’s reaction.
Dzasokhov emerged from his headquarters and went to a nearby club where many of the relatives were waiting for him.
After being told that Dzasokhov had spoken to Maskhadov, they had left their posts in front of the school, where they were prepared to use their bodies to prevent Russian forces from storming the school.
Dzasokhov said the situation was grim but that Maskhadov’s intervention gave cause for hope.
He said steps were being taken to assure Maskhadov’s safe arrival in Beslan.
According to Yuri Saveliev, a member of the parliamentary commission appointed to investigate the massacre, the first explosion was the result of the impact of a thermobaric grenade that was shot by either a flamethrower or a grenade launcher from a five-story building at 37 School Lane at 1:03 pm.
These explosions, which state television attributed to the terrorists, were the signal to begin a storm of the school by Russian Special Forces.
Others were taken by the terrorists to the cafeteria, assembly hall, and southern wing.
But hundreds were trapped in the gymnasium, where the ceiling rafters were burning and beginning to fall on them.
At 1:30, the Russian forces began to bombard the school with tanks, grenade launchers, and flamethrowers.
In the cafeteria, the terrorists placed women and children in the window openings, but Russian forces fired at the windows, killing them.
They then, according to hostage accounts, began sweeping the cafeteria area with automatic-weapons fire.
Three mushroom-like clouds rose over the school, two white and one black.
A videotape showed that at 3:08 pm, the school was still under massive fire from grenade launchers and flamethrowers.
It was only at 3:10 pm that the head of the Special Forces, General Alexander Tikhonov, gave an order to begin putting out the fire.
Until that time, for more than two hours, Tikhonov had forbidden anyone from extinguishing it.
Ten soldiers from the Russian Special Forces were also killed by the terrorists, as were two rescuers.
He went directly to the district hospital and spent thirty minutes visiting victims in their rooms.
He then went to the FSB operational headquarters, where he met with officials and made a televised statement.
He then returned to Moscow without meeting with relatives of the victims or, apparently, visiting the burned school.
One was the abolition of the popular election of governors, a direct violation of the Russian Constitution.
While it was going on, the Beslan school crisis riveted the world’s attention.
On September 4, 2004, the day after the attack by the Special Forces, the debris from the school, including children’s notebooks and the body parts of the victims, was scooped up by an excavator, loaded onto trucks, and taken to a garbage dump outside of town.
This destruction of evidence made it impossible to establish fully the sequence of events.
The survivors, however, wanted justice, and they were plunged into emotional turmoil as they listened to the version of events put forward by the Russian authorities, who blamed the terrorists, exonerated officials of any wrongdoing , and refused to listen to the survivors’ accounts of what they had seen and experienced.
In their despair, some of the parents turned to a cult leader to help resurrect their dead children.
They were joined by two journalists, Marina Litvinovich, editor of the site Pravdabeslana.ru, and Elena Milashina, a reporter for Novaya Gazeta.
The North Ossetian parliament organized an investigative commission, and Yuri Saveliev, despite being a member of the commission, also began his own, independent investigation.
Although the authorities put sole blame for the attack on the Chechen terrorists, and Putin, in the aftermath of the tragedy, suggested that the terrorists enjoyed the support of the West, the evidence showed that the Beslan terrorist attack, like the Nord-Ost hostage siege, was also the result of a Russian provocation.
In August 2004, according to police documents obtained by Novaya Gazeta, warnings to the authorities about an impending terrorist attack in North Ossetia began arriving with chilling regularity.
At 5 AM, the Russian internal affairs ministry was informed by the Chechen police that a man named Arsamikov, whom they had under arrest, said that there were plans by terrorists on that day to seize a school in Beslan.
Not only was no action taken, but all roadblocks on the route to the school were mysteriously removed, giving the terrorists unhindered access.
Khodov, the subject of a federal search after his participation in the two terrorist attacks in 2004 in Vladikavkaz and Elkhotovo, nonetheless lived openly in Elkhotovo through the spring and summer, praying daily in the local mosque.
His presence was reported to the North Ossetia FSB and the police organized crime division, but he was not arrested.
But an explanation came from the author of the Beslan tragedy, Shamil Basaev.
In a letter entitled “We have a lot to tell about Beslan ...,” published on August 31, 2005, on the separatist web site Kavkazcenter.net, Basaev wrote that the seizure of the school began with a plan by the Russian security services to provoke Chechen rebels into trying to seize the North Ossetian Parliament and government buildings.
According to Basaev, the terrorist acts Khodov committed in 2004 were carried out with the help of the FSB to win Basaev’s trust.
Once he had done so, Khodov proposed a plan for seizing the North Ossetian government buildings.
But after he confessed to Basaev that he was working for the FSB, Basaev persuaded him to become a double agent.
In that capacity, he led the Russians to believe the plot was operational and scheduled for September 6, the anniversary of Chechen independence.
The FSB, Basaev wrote, “intended to meet the group as they entered Vladikavkaz and destroy them.
Moreover, the Maskhadov-led non-Islamic opposition conducted its own investigation and concluded that Basaev’s explanation was accurate.
The foiled takeover of government buildings in North Ossetia was meant to justify the abolition of the direct election of governors, a measure that had long been planned in order to reinforce Putin’s hold on power.
There was no greater outrage over the authorities’ role in the Beslan crisis than in Beslan itself.
Relatives of the victims organized themselves into a group called “Mothers of Beslan” to investigate why the authorities had attacked a gymnasium packed with helpless hostages after agreement had been reached on negotiations that might have ended the crisis without further loss of life.
The authorities insisted that it was necessary for the Special Forces to storm the building after the terrorists set off bombs.
But survivors of the siege said there was no explosion inside the school, and that the storming began after the school was attacked with flamethrowers and grenade launchers from the outside.
When officials denied that the Russian forces used flamethrowers, the relatives recovered used tubes from flamethrowers near the school and presented them to reporters.
In May 2005, the relatives of the victims wrote to Putin, saying they had detailed information about the crisis and were ready to come to Moscow, on foot if necessary, to present it.
In response, Putin proposed a meeting with the relatives on September 2, in the middle of the ceremonies marking the tragedy.
In the end, however, three mothers left the ceremonies and went to Moscow, where they met with Putin for three hours.
He said the meeting had been delayed to allow time to gather information.
The investigation, whose results were announced in December, absolved the police and other security forces of any blame for the tragedy.
The seizure of the school by Chechen Islamist rebels firmly identified all Chechens with terrorists.
But the bloody denouement of the crisis was also the responsibility of the Russian authorities, who gave no thought to the lives of hundreds of hostages who had become prisoners as a direct result of the authorities’ incompetence and adventurism.
Although his intervention had represented the only hope of avoiding a massacre, the Russians blamed Maskhadov for the school seizure and announced that there was a bounty on his head.
On March 8, 2005, Maskhadov was killed in a shoot-out in the Chechen town of TolstoyYurt.
In keeping with a Russian law that the bodies of “terrorists” are not returned to their families, his remains were disposed of secretly.
Except among a few individuals in Moscow and the relatives of the victims in Beslan, interest in what actually had happened all but disappeared.
The Nord-Ost and Beslan hostage takings were immensely helpful to Putin’s efforts to depict himself as a foe of terrorism and to legitimize the war in Chechnya to both Russia and the West.
In Chechnya itself, Kadyrov ruled with the help of torture and disappearances, but Chechnya had faded from the world’s consciousness.
The notion that Putin was restoring order there became widely accepted.
Russians could speak freely, and there was wide discussion in the independent press.
The average citizen did not fear death at the hands of the authorities for political reasons.
But selective killings made it clear that opposition in Russia was tolerated only within certain limits.
If someone crossed an invisible line, which was subject to change, he did so at the risk of his life.
Two types of people who were vulnerable to assassination were the regime’s opponents and its inconvenient friends.
When the victims were friends who had become a problem, the reasons were often more difficult to surmise.
Perhaps the best-known killing of a political opponent was that of Alexander Litvinenko, a fugitive FSB agent who wrote books about the apartment bombings and the FSB’s links to organized crime.
Litvinenko also contributed articles to Chechen rebel sites in which he ridiculed the FSB and Putin personally.
His murder, November 23, 2006, was the world’s first clear case of nuclear poisoning, and there were diverse theories about the motive.
It is more likely, however, that the problem was not what he wrote but who he was.
Litvinenko, by his example, showed that even FSB agents could think and act on their own.
In an FSB-dominated regime, this was a challenge that could not be ignored.
Litvinenko became ill on November 1 after drinking tea with Andrei Lugovoi, the owner of a Moscow security company, and Lugovoi’s associate, Dmitri Kovtun, in the Pine Bar of the Millennium Hotel in London.
His hair began falling out, and there was a sharp drop in his white blood cell count.
Litvinenko’s doctors suspected radiation poisoning, but only gamma and beta particles can penetrate the skin, and there was no gamma or beta radiation in his blood.
On November 20, he was moved to intensive care, where a photographer slipped into the ward and took a picture of him, wasted and bald, staring at the camera.
Litvinenko’s friend Alexander Goldfarb read a statement from Litvinenko in which he accused Putin of his murder.
Litvinenko died without knowing exactly what killed him, but on the eve of his death, samples of his urine were sent to the Atomic Weapons Establishment , which monitors Britain’s nuclear weapons arsenal.
There it was tested for alpha-emitting elements, which unlike gamma and beta particles cannot pass through the body but are deadly when taken internally.
If Litvinenko had died sooner, the cause of death might never have been detected.
After the discovery of polonium, the British police began an exhaustive effort to trace Litvinenko’s movements.
Traces of polonium were found at the Pine Bar, at a sushi restaurant where Litvinenko dined with Lugovoi and Kovtun on October 16, and on the seat occupied by Lugovoi on a British Airways flight from Moscow to London on October 25.
Sergei Ivanov, a deputy prime minister, said Litvinenko had a “low intellect” and was inclined to provocation.
In response, the Kremlin said that it was conducting its own investigation and asked to question a hundred people in London, including Boris Berezovsky.
Six months after Litvinenko’s death, the British prosecutor officially requested Lugovoi’s extradition.
Putin refused, saying the Russian Constitution barred sending citizens abroad for trial even though Russia had signed the Council of Europe Extradition Convention in 2001.
The British, he said, should present their evidence to Moscow prosecutors and allow the Russian judicial system to decide the case.
On October 7, 2006, she was shot four times in her apartment building after stepping out of the elevator on her floor.
He said the killers were Chechen criminals but that the crime had been masterminded by people outside Russia to discredit the Russian leaders.
A fourth person, Pavel Ryaguzov, a former FSB lieutenant colonel, was suspected of a leading role in the plot but was not charged due to a lack of evidence.
A third brother, Rustam Makhmudov, the suspected triggerman, escaped abroad.
The trial lasted for three months and ended February 19, 2009, with the acquittal of all three defendants.
It had leaked information about the identity of the suspects, making it possible for the triggerman to flee, and prevented investigators from seizing Ryaguzov’s office computer.
According to Novaya Gazeta, it had started following Politkovskaya in the summer of 2006 but refused to say what was found.
There was evidence that besides the defendants, a shadowy “second team” had also placed Politkovskaya under surveillance.
On the afternoon of her death, she was shopping at the Ramstor supermarket on Moscow’s Frunze embankment.
A hidden video camera captured a man in jeans and a sweater and a light-haired woman in black following her down the aisle.
Investigators failed to identify the couple or explain how they fit into the murder.
The ties between the assassination team, the FSB, and the police were also found to be far more extensive than was first revealed.
Sergei Sokolov, the deputy editor of Novaya Gazeta, which conducted its own investigation, testified that Dzhabrail Makhmudov was an FSB agent and that he and his brothers were recruited by their uncle, Lomi-Ali Gaitukayev, also an FSB agent who reported to Ryaguzov and was serving time in prison for the attempted murder of a Ukrainian businessman.
A new trial was not immediately scheduled, but Novaya Gazeta found evidence that Dmitri Pavlyuchenkov, the head of surveillance of the Moscow police and a witness in the first trial, had been hired by Gaitukayev to place Politkovskaya under surveillance.
He had given the assassins her address and the weapons and bullets they used to kill her.
But he never testified about the supposed mastermind or who paid for the crime.
Pavlyuchenkov’s deal with the prosecution made it possible to cover the trail leading to the mastermind.
There is no evidence to support the official story that Berezovsky was behind the crime.
Gaitukayev, who recruited the gang, and his nephew Rustam Makhmudov, the gunman, received life in prison.
Ibrahim and Dzhabrail Makhmudov were sentenced to twelve and fourteen years, respectively, for following Politkovskaya the day she was killed.
Besides Litvinenko and Politkovskaya, other prominent political opponents of Putin were also killed.
Sergei Yushenkov investigated the apartment bombings and was ready to investigate the Nord-Ost hostage siege, and was also a cochairman of Liberal Russia, a new political party that appeared to have a chance to become the main democratic opposition party to Putin.
He was shot in front of his apartment building on April 17, 2003, just hours after obtaining the registrations needed for the party to participate in that December’s State Duma elections.
Mikhail Kodanev, the other leader of Liberal Russia, was tried and sentenced to twenty years in prison for ordering Yushenkov’s murder.
He protested his innocence and was convicted solely on the basis of the testimony of another convicted suspect, Alexander Vinnik, who made a series of contradictory claims.
The police collected the tape, but it was never included in the case filed against Kodanev.
In his capacity as a journalist for Novaya Gazeta, he also investigated the case of the Grand and Three Whales furniture stores, which were founded by the father of a high-ranking FSB official and had reportedly evaded millions of dollars in import duties.
The illness progressed catastrophically, from peeling skin to “edemas of the respiratory system and brain,” and finally death.
His relatives were denied an official medical report about the cause of his illness and forbidden to take tissue specimens.
Journalists for Novaya Gazeta nonetheless managed to obtain a tissue sample and send it abroad for testing, but the sample was too small and the results were inconclusive.
Another victim was Natalia Estemirova, who worked’ with Politkovskaya and after her death was virtually the sole surviving source of information on torture and murders carried out by the security services under Kadyrov in Chechnya.
She was abducted on the street in Grozny on July 15, 2009, and driven to a wooded area in Ingushetiya and shot.
In one of her last meetings with Kadyrov, he virtually foretold her death.
After Estemirova criticized the policy of compelling young girls in Chechnya to wear head scarves, Kadyrov replied, “I’m up to my elbows in blood.
Klebnikov wrote a critical biography of Berezovsky using information supplied by FSB general Alexander Korzhakov, Yeltsin’s chief of security.
At the time of his death, he was believed to be investigating the distribution of property in Moscow by the family of Luzhkov and the redivision of property in the telecommunications sphere.
Russian authorities charged a group of Chechens with the crime, and a trial took place in 2006 in a Moscow court.
The prosecutor said the killing was ordered by Khozh-Akhmed Nukhaev, a high-ranking Chechen official, who did not like the way he was portrayed in a book by Klebnikov.
As the case progressed, Sergei Sokolov, who investigated the Politkovskaya murder, added an unexpected twist.
Dukuzov and Vakhayev were acquitted, but the Russian Supreme Court overturned the verdict and ordered a new trial.
Petersburg, Anatoly Sobchak, and Putin’s reputed liaison with organized crime, Roman Tsepov.
Sobchak was the best-known Putin colleague to die under mysterious circumstances.
Putin had been Sobchak’s deputy, and Sobchak was familiar with the extent of Putin’s corruption in the early years of Yeltsin’s rule.
On February 17, he traveled with two male assistants to the Kaliningrad oblast to campaign.
On February 19, after drinking moderately at a reception, he retumed to his hotel room and died.
In the wake of this finding, a second autopsy was carried out, this time in a military hospital in St.
In Paris, Arkady Vaksberg, an investigative journalist who knew Sobchak and met with him during the latter’s two-year exile in the city, began his own investigation and learned that the two assistants who accompanied Sobchak had been treated for mild poisoning following Sobchak’s death.
Vaksberg, who had extensive forensic experience, concluded from the apparent poisoning of the bodyguards that Sobchak had also been poisoned.
He suggested that Sobchak was killed when a poison placed on the bulb of his bedside lamp vaporized after the lamp was turned on.
Such poisons were developed in special laboratories in the Soviet Union in the 1930s.
A few months after Vaksberg’s book was published, his car was blown up in Moscow.
Petersburg, Tsepov regulated relations between the mayor’s office and the St.
He fell ill on September 11, 2004, after drinking tea in the headquarters of the St.
He first experienced severe vomiting and diarrhea and a sharp drop in his white blood cell count, then began to lose the skin from his tongue and lips.
When he died, on September 24, his body had a level of radiation a million times higher than normal.
Only close friends and relatives went to the cemetery, Barsukov-Kumarin among them.
It demanded participation in or tolerance for corruption, but this was seen by many Russians as a minor compromise more than compensated for by the improvement in their material circumstances.
Dmitri Medvedev, Putin’s longtime protégé, was elected president in 2008.
In this way, Putin ostensibly respected the Constitution, which limited the president to two consecutive terms in office.
Medvedev immediately made Putin his prime minister, and power in Russia never really changed hands.
Putin loyalists occupied 95 percent of the positions in Medvedev’s government, and Putin continued to be the real source of power.
Mikhail Delyagin, the director of the Institute of Globalization, commented that Medvedev “is not capable of running anything, even his own secretariat.
Medvedev, in apparent response, said, “It is wrong for us to orient ourselves only to calm and measured growth.
His statements were intended to sound presidential, but their only effect was to give false encouragement to liberals who hoped for a positive evolution.
The longer the regime held on to power, the more corrupt it became and the more contemptuous of limits, which put it increasingly at odds with the population.
In 2008, the growth rate declined sharply as a result of the world economic crisis.
Lev Gudkov, the director of the Levada Center, wrote in Novaya Gazeta in September 2011, “A poor society that was tired of upheavals was ready to turn a blind eye to administrative caprice and the war in Chechnya, corruption and growing social inequality not to mention sham democracy and electoral sleight of hand.
Suddenly there were doubts about the future and a loss of faith in the authorities’ ability to lead.
The process that led to the political awakening of the population, however, began not with the economic situation but when Russians realized that Putin intended to remain in power for life.
In 2011, Putin started to give unmistakable signs that he intended to take back the presidency.
Vladislav Surkov, the first deputy head of the presidential administration, confessed in an interview in July 2011 that he believed that Putin was sent to Russia by God.
The realization that Putin was returning to power, however, had a demoralizing effect on Russia’s urban middle class, an estimated 40 percent of the population in Moscow and 20 to 30 percent in the other major cities.
For most, the future under Putin promised little besides professional futility and national stagnation.
On December 4, elections were held to the State Duma, and United Russia got a majority amid clear indications that the elections were falsified.
In an age of cell phones, photos showing ballot-box stuffing and multiple voting poured into the headquarters of vote monitors from all over the country.
Voters in closed institutions such as the military, asylums, and prisons were the easiest to coerce, and these voters gave United Russia overwhelming support.
The vote counts were sent from the polling stations to the Central Election Commission, where the results for United Russia were sometimes inflated two to three times.
An analysis showed that the vote for United Russia tracked in almost linear fashion with the turnout, indicating ballot stuffing in favor of the party.
The results for United Russia also spiked at round values—50, 60, or 70 percent— suggesting that local officials were trying to reach preestablished targets.
Opposition rallies during the 2000s had generally attracted only a few hundred people, but the clear vote fraud in 2012 drew 10,000 to a spontaneous rally on December 5 in the Chistoprudny area of central Moscow.
On December 24, a rally on Prospect Sakharova brought out more than 100,000, protesting in subzero cold.
The appearance of mass protests in a previously quiescent country did not pass unnoticed in the Kremlin.
For eleven years, the Putin regime had built a system of bureaucratic control that, as long as the ruling group remained united, could not be challenged other than by mass protests.
Lilia Shevtsova, one of Russia’s most astute analysts, wrote that the new social activism led to panic among the leadership, which feared that the loss of political control meant a loss of freedom or even life.
Leading businessmen and bureaucrats began seeking safe havens, laundering their money, and shipping their assets abroad.
This had happened in 2008, when there was uncertainty over whether Putin would run for a third term, but the flight of wealth in the wake of the 2011 protests was three to four times as great.
As the March 4 presidential election neared, Medvedev announced a number of reforms that were intended to defuse the protests.
These included the reintroduction of the direct election of governors and an easing of the requirements for the registration of political parties.
The election of governors, however, was counteracted by the government’s control over nominations, and the liberalized registration was neutralized by a ban on coalitions.
The audience consisted of many state employees, who were paid bonuses to attend; migrant workers were bused in from the provinces to swell the crowd.
The presidential election, on March 4, 2012, was marred by the same falsification as the previous December’s parliamentary elections.
Other experts estimated Putin’s share at 45 to 50 percent, including all the state employees paid or compelled to vote for him.
In an open contest, the votes cast for Prokhorov would have gone to a liberal, anti-Putin candidate.
On the night of March 4, Putin gave a tearful speech in Manezh Square, next to the Kremlin, thanking his supporters.
A demonstration in Bolotnaya Square took place on May 6 to protest Putin’s inauguration.
Between 50,000 and 100,000 people marched through the streets, but as they approached the Square, they were met by heavily armed police, who allowed only a very narrow corridor for them to enter.
Demonstrators were pushed up against the police line by the pressure from behind.
Despite this and other measures, demonstrations continued for the rest of the year.
In September, Navalny ran for mayor of Moscow, and despite a lack of funding or television exposure, he gained almost 30 percent of the vote.
But the opposition had lost energy, not least because its various factions— liberals, socialists, and nationalists—lacked a coherent program other than opposition to Putin, whose support among the population was still strong.
By 2013 the protest wave had largely dissipated, just as much more massive opposition was building against a regime that closely resembled Putin’s in neighboring Ukraine.
Privatization in Ukraine was dishonest everywhere, but in the Donetsk oblast, where Yanukovych got his start, it was carried out at the point of a gun.
Yanukovych owed his political career to Rinat Akhmetov, the country’s richest oligarch, who began as an enforcer for Akhat Bragin, a leading Ukrainian gangster.
Since protecting their financial interests was the reason many Ukrainian deputies went into politics in the first place, these tactics were highly successful.
Once Yanukovych had secured a parliamentary majority, he used it to remake the Constitutional Court, firing six of the eighteen judges.
The Constitutional Court then stripped the Supreme Court of its ability to review appeals.
At the same time, the judicial congress, which regulates the judiciary, shifted power to the judges of the administrative and economic courts, which were the most corrupt.
Businessmen were offered below-market prices for their businesses, and if they did not accept, criminal cases were opened against them in court.
Those who tried to resist the seizure often learned that they were the ex-owners of their enterprises on being handed a court decision in a case of which they had no previous knowledge.
Raiding at the highest level led to raiding at the local level, creating a pervasive atmosphere of lawlessness.
But unlike Russia, where there was a widespread belief that Putin is fighting corruption instead of directing it, in Ukraine there was no doubt that the person responsible for the country’s new gangland atmosphere was Yanukovych himself.
As Yanukovych consolidated power in his hands, Ukrainians also witnessed the rise of his son, Oleksandr, a forty-year-old dentist who became a multibillionaire in two or three years.
Yanukovych used his son as a counterweight to Akhmetov and another powerful oligarch, Dmytro Firtash.
But the open promotion of Oleksandr inspired a visceral reaction against the government.
At the same time, the seizure of property by the Yanukovych family and the appointment of loyal but incompetent managers to run it had a visibly damaging effect on the Ukrainian economy, which had been hard hit by the world economic crisis and never really recovered.
The system that allowed Yanukovych and his cronies to engage in massive theft also led to the degradation of the Ukrainian police and prosecutors, creating a situation in which Ukrainians felt vulnerable to arbitrary arrest and imprisonment.
Anger over this situation came to a head in the summer of 2013 in the town of Vradievka, in the Nikolaev oblast.
On the night of June 26, Irina Krashkova, a twenty-nine-year-old divorced bookkeeper, was walking home from a discotheque when she was abducted by two police officers and a cab driver, gang-raped and beaten with a metal rod, and left for dead.
After the attack, her assailants went to get a shovel to bury her, but while they were gone she managed to crawl to safety.
Yevgeny Dryzhak, a police captain, Dmitri Polishchuk, a senior lieutenant, and the driver, Sergei Rabenenko.
Dryzhak, whose relatives were high-ranking local officials, was not charged, and the head of the Vradievka police and five fellow officers provided him with an alibi.
As news of what had happened to Krashkova spread, people started to gather in the city center.
In the previous three years, the police in Vradievka had raped and killed five women, and then tortured men to force them to confess to the crimes.
Three of the men had hanged themselves, and one died at home from the torture.
Soon there were a thousand people in the square; they stormed the police headquarters and were dispersed with tear gas.
The riot in Vradievka inspired protests against the police in cities all over the country.
On July 7, dozens of residents of Vradievka left for Kiev on foot to demand the punishment of those guilty of the rapes and murders, and the resignation of Vitaly Zacharchenko, the interior minister.
After arriving in Kiev, the protestors went to the Maidan Nezalezhnosti , where they set up a tent camp that was broken up by the police.
On July 27 there was another protest in the Maidan against police terror, and ten people were arrested.
The protests eventually came to an end, but not before the entire country was aware of what had happened in Vradievka and what, in the eyes of many Ukrainians, could happen to them.
Despite anger over Yanukovych’s conduct, there was a belief that he could not be challenged because he had successfully centralized power in his own hands.
A series of chance events, however, turned simmering discontent into a revolution.
In November, however, plans to sign an association agreement with the European Union were unexpectedly dropped.
This created the impression that the path to Europe was permanently closed.
At 4 AM, they were attacked without warning by Berkut riot police and savagely beaten.
Many fled to the nearby Mikhailovsky Zlattoverkhy Cathedral, the same monastery where, centuries ago, Kievans had hidden from the Mongols.
The mass beating of the students was unprecedented in post-Soviet Ukraine.
In response, three opposition parties announced that they were forming a Committee of National Resistance.
On Sunday, December 1, half a million people gathered in the Maidan in support of Ukraine in Europe and to protest the actions of the Berkut.
That night, radicals who may have been provocateurs attacked Berkut forces guarding the presidential administration.
In the “counterattack,” hundreds of protestors and at least forty journalists were injured.
Activists from the Svoboda and Batkivshchyna parties then broke down the doors of the trade unions building on the Maidan and claimed it as the protest headquarters.
The demonstrators started building barricades and putting up tents in the square.
They also took over a city administration building just off the Maidan, and as many as a thousand demonstrators a night began sleeping in the columned hall.
A stage was set up in the square for speeches and performances, and the oratory of opposition leaders as well as crowd scenes were flashed on a huge screen on the trade unions building wall.
Medical, security, and food services began operating, with the help of hundreds of volunteers.
When I arrived in Kiev on December 4, the fifth day of the protest, to renew my journalistic visa, I asked the cab driver who picked me up at the station what was going on.
While waiting for the processing of my visa, I talked to people in the square, who gave their reasons for the uprising against Yanukovych.
Pyotr, a teacher from Kiev, said of Yanukovych, “This is a zek , a bandit who came to power.
Anatoly Boiko, a pensioner from Kiev, said, “We hate this power because it is based on complete thievery.
Alexander Reshetnyak, a welder from Lugansk, said, “I live in a village where there is no gas, no water, no medicines in the clinic, no heat.
Many people in the square emphasized that if the movement was repressed and people were killed, the whole country would rise up and there would be civil war.
There were always thousands of protestors in the Maidan, although their numbers rose and fell.
The UNA-UNSO flag eventually all but disappeared amid the suspicion that the members of this organization were provocateurs.
The protestors demanded that the government resign and that Ukraine sign the association agreement with the European Union.
They did not, at first, demand that Yanukovych step down, but this was only because they did not see a reasonable way of removing him.
With the first snow, the encampment in the Maidan took on an air of permanence.
The barricades were reinforced with heavy pipes and wooden platforms, and the entrances were narrowed to make it easier to control the flow of people.
They included an ecumenical “prayer” tent, as well as a medical station and outdoor movie theater.
Outside the tents, groups of men sat on makeshift benches around rusted metal barrels where flames from burning logs gave off showers of crackling sparks.
Instead, its food services and self-defense brigades became institutionalized.
The elite hated him because they were the first victims of his seizure of property, and the ordinary people hated him because they felt they were living under the heel of a criminal organization.
He offered amnesty and a moratorium on the use of force if the demonstrators would end the protests.
But the protestors feared that their identities were being registered and that if the protest ended without achieving its goals, Yanukovych would launch mass repression.
As the revolt continued, with Yanukovych refusing to address the protestors’ concrete demands, the demonstrators’ biggest enemies became exhaustion, the need to report to work, and the onset of cold weather.
As the Christmas holidays approached, Yanukovych secured a $15 billion financial rescue package from Russia, and the crowds started to dwindle.
Opposition leaders said that it might be best to focus on the next presidential election.
For the first time since the protests began, the demonstrators’ determination seemed to be waning.
On January 16, however, Yanukovych’s allies in the parliament passed a set of laws providing for harsh fines and long prison terms for participation in protests.
The new laws would have allowed the government to put every participant in Maidan in prison, and the threat of repression galvanized the demonstrators.
On the night of January 19, there were bloody clashes between demonstrators and the police, and Maidan returned to the front pages of the world’s newspapers.
On January 22, Dmitri Bulatov, one of the Maidan activists, was abducted.
He was held prisoner for eight days, during which time he was tortured, including having his hands nailed to a door.
Another activist, Yuri Verbytsky, a seismologist from Lvov, abducted from a hospital where he was being treated for an eye injury he had suffered in the Maidan, was later found dead in a forest.
At the same time, Yanukovych and the ruling party lost control in the western and central regions of the country, including Kiev.
On January 23, protestors in Lvov occupied the regional administration building.
Demonstrators in Rivne demanded that riot police deployed to Kiev return home.
In Cherkasy, thousands of protestors clashed with police protecting the municipal administration building.
On January 28, in an attempt to quiet the uprising, the parliament revoked the laws on protests it had passed only twelve days earlier and Azarov and the cabinet resigned.
Clashes between demonstrators and the police in Kiev declined, and the press reported that multiple nationalist factions that were independent of any political party had splintered within the movement.
He forced the parliament to vote for his version of an amnesty bill that made the freeing of dozens of detained protestors conditional on an end to the occupation of administrative buildings.
They now demanded Yanukovych’s resignation and _ early parliamentary and presidential elections.
The rapidly deteriorating political situation caused previously loyal deputies to desert the president.
On the morning of February 18, protestors marched on the Verkhovna Rada, demanding changes to the Constitution that would limit the president’s power.
The situation became violent after the speaker of parliament cut off discussion on the subject.
The police sent in titushki, paid pro-government thugs, to attack the demonstrators.
As the fighting escalated, almost eight thousand demonstrators retreated into the square and set fire to tents, mattresses, and tires to create a barricade of flames.
By morning there were twenty-five dead, including nine police officers.
The police said that their officers were shot in the head and neck over bulletproof vests with sniper bullets, but the shooters were never identified.
It appeared that a third force armed with sniper rifles, separate from the police and the known leadership of the Maidan, was also taking part in the killing.
Some of the protestors were killed by firearms, others were beaten to death with truncheons by the police.
With the mass killing on the 18th, the attitude of the protestors underwent a change.
Instead, there was almost military discipline and, everywhere, faces hidden under black balaclavas.
In Uzhgorod, Lutsk, Khmelnitsky, and Poltava, protestors seized police stations and administrative buildings, and in Lvov they reoccupied the regional administration building.
The Yanukovych government declared a truce with the leaders of the opposition.
In the meantime, the SBU announced that on February 18, fifteen hundred weapons and 100,000 rounds of ammunition had been seized in raids on five district police stations in Lvov and the headquarters of the Interior Ministry’s western command.
But in light of the sniper attacks in the Maidan on the 18th, no one was sure in whose hands the guns would end up, or who would be shooting at whom.
On the morning of February 20, shooting broke out, and radicals smashed through the police lines established two days earlier.
The protestors surged out of the square up Institutsky Street to the government district, and the police gave way, firing as they pulled back.
The protestors then began to be picked off by snipers firing from the roofs and windows of surrounding buildings.
The police also came under fire, and evidence uncovered later seemed to show that at least some of the snipers were firing at both protestors and the police.
When the firing ceased, corpses littered the streets and the city center was firmly in the hands of the opposition.
According to the Ukrainian Interior Ministry, sixteen police officers were also killed in the February 20 fighting.
Residents of Kiev brought food and drink to the protestors and began reinforcing the barricades, creating huge choke points around the city center.
Yanukovych agreed to talks with three leaders of the opposition, mediated by the foreign ministers of Germany, Poland, and France.
To protest the violence, twelve members of Yanukovych’s party and the mayor of Kiev resigned.
After “a night of difficult negotiations,” Yanukovych and the opposition leaders agreed on a peace deal that provided for a return to the 2004 Constitution, which shifted power from the president to the prime minister, early presidential elections, the creation of a new coalition government, and amnesty for all involved in violent rioting.
Yanukovych also agreed to refrain from imposing a state of emergency and to give the protestors three days to surrender all illegal weapons.
The security forces on which Yanukovych depended for his power, however, were preparing to abandon him.
Shortly after the killings in the Maidan, the Ukrainian parliament ordered all Interior Ministry troops and police officers to return to their barracks.
This was viewed by police as the first step toward blaming them for the violence.
Middle-level officers tried to contact their superiors but were unsuccessful.
In response, police began “laying down their shields” and leaving Kiev.
The details of the peace agreement were announced in Maidan by the leaders of the opposition, but in light of the killings, which were overwhelmingly blamed on Yanukovych, many protestors felt it was unthinkable to compromise with him or leave him in place.
The Right Sector and other activists demanded that Yanukovych resign by 10 Am and warned that if he did not, they would remove him by force.
With the presidential administration and Yanukovych’s home both left unguarded, Yanukovych now feared for his life and decided to flee, flying to Kharkov.
The violence that had convulsed Kiev came to a complete halt after he left.
On Saturday, February 22, the streets were empty of police, and the protestors took control of the presidential administration and Yanukovych’s residence simply by walking through the front gate.
In Moscow, the events in Ukraine were seen as a textbook example of the popular overthrow of a kleptocratic ruler that could be duplicated in Russia.
The regime in Ukraine was almost identical to what had been created in Russia, with the sole difference being that Ukraine, with a nationalist west and center and a pro-Russian east, was more pluralistic.
Under these circumstances, it was essential to the Russian leadership that the Ukrainian revolution be discredited.
The regime chose the method traditionally used to distract the Russian population from their rulers’ abuses.
On February 22, the day after Yanukovych fled Kiev, Russia began planning a special operation to seize the Crimean peninsula, which had been transferred to Ukraine in 1954 by Nikita Khrushchev.
In an interview for a documentary, Homeward Bound, produced by state-run Channel One television to mark the first anniversary of the annexation, Putin said he had made the decision at 7 AM after an all-night emergency meeting with his security chiefs on the crisis in Ukraine.
There was no resistance because the Ukrainian leadership feared an armed conflict could serve as a pretext for an invasion, not only of Crimea but of the entire country.
On February 28, troops in camouflage but without identification seized the airport in Simferopol, blocking a number of Ukrainian military units, and the road between Simferopol and Sevastopol.
They were backed by civilian volunteers wearing the orange-and-black St.
George’s ribbon, a symbol of Russian military prowess that had been adopted by pro-Russian activists in Crimea.
A Russian warship blocked the bay at Balaklava, where the Ukrainian Coast Guard was based.
On March 1, a rocket unit in Yevpatoria was seized, and in Fedosiya, the unidentified troops cut off a battalion of Ukrainian marines.
The “polite, green men,” as the anonymous troops were called, began to seize strategic locations everywhere.
It would have been a different matter if they had been resisted with heavy weapons.
On March 6, the new government announced Crimea’s independence, and the date of the referendum was moved up from May 25 to March 30, then to March 16.
The vote was preceded by a propaganda campaign on radio and TV, with calls to participate in the referendum, a special song about it, and the publication of a newly created newspaper, Crimea 24, with a circulation of half a million.
Russia justified its invasion of Crimea by saying that it needed to protect the Russian-speaking population from neo-Nazi extremists.
It was later confirmed that the video was made not in Crimea but in Kiev, during the street battles on February 20.
Naturally, we could not leave this plea unheeded; we could not abandon Crimea and its residents in distress.
On March 28, the acting president of Ukraine, Oleksandr Turchinov, bowed before superior force and issued a decree calling for the withdrawal of Ukrainian units from Crimea.
The takeover of Crimea led to a surge of chauvinistic euphoria in Russia that was carefully cultivated by the Russian state-controlled media.
In late March, Russia began to mass troops on the border with Ukraine, deploying forty thousand to fifty thousand in twenty-four hours.
In early April, pro-Russian groups stormed government buildings in various oblasts in eastern Ukraine.
Under the cover of a crowd of demonstrators, armed men in masks seized the headquarters of the oblast administration in Kharkov, declaring the oblast independent.
At the same time and in the same way, the buildings of the city administration and the SBU were seized in Donetsk, which was declared the Donetsk People’s Republic.
In Lugansk, masked men with automatic weapons seized the city headquarters of the SBU after taking hostages and announcing that the building had been mined.
On April 7, there was an attempt to seize the administration building in Nikolaev.
The April 6 actions were followed by a larger wave of attacks on April 12.
Groups of well-armed men in camouflage but without insignias or other identifying signs simultaneously attacked strategic buildings in Donetsk, Gorlovaka, Druzhkovka, Kramatorsk, Konstantinovka, Slavyansk, Krasny Liman, Artyemovsk, and Krasnoarmeisk.
The attempt to storm police headquarters in Gorlovka also failed, but on April 14, the building was taken after demonstrators formed a human shield around the attackers and the police declined to open fire.
Faced with takeovers on this scale by armed separatist groups, Oleksandr Turchinov, Ukraine’s transitional president, launched a_ full-scale “antiterror” military operation to retake the buildings and reestablish the authority of the state.
A key figure in igniting the fighting in the Donbas region was Igor Girkin , a Russian citizen from Moscow who is believed to be a colonel in Russian military intelligence.
While serving as an adviser in Crimea after the annexation, Girkin met there with people from the Ukrainian mainland who wanted eastern Ukraine to follow Crimea’s example.
He recruited fifty-two volunteers and went to Slavyansk, seventy miles north of Donetsk, where pro-Russian sentiment was deemed to be strongest.
He was joined there by two hundred local men, and this force seized all of the principal government buildings in the city.
On May 11, the “Donetsk Republic” held a referendum on “state sovereignty” for the oblast.
According to its representatives, 89 percent of the participants voted for self-rule, and there was a 75 percent turnout.
The separatists then announced that they planned to incorporate most of Ukraine’s southern and eastern regions, including the Kharkov, Kherson, Dnepropetrovsk, Zaporozhe, and Odessa oblasts, into the new entity.
The various strike groups were led by capable professionals from the former Ukrainian police or the Russian reserve military.
The cities that were attacked were not chosen at random but were important transportation nodes for railroads and highways.
By holding the Slavyansk node, for example, the rebels were able to cut off supplies to the Ukrainian Army in the northeast of the Donetsk oblast.
Kramatorsk had an airport with a landing strip capable of receiving Russian military transport planes.
Controlling Kramatorsk made it possible to move forces to the heart of the Donbas region by air.
By early June, the number of fighters holed up in the city had reached one thousand, 90 percent of whom were locals.
The Ukrainian police in the Lugansk and Donetsk oblasts, including former members of the disbanded Berkut, defected en masse to the separatists.
The state-controlled media depicted the fighting in eastern Ukraine as a crusade to protect ethnic Russians from persecution by Ukrainian Nazis, and the flow of false information on Russian television was unremitting.
The overthrow of Yanukovych was depicted not as a revolt against a kleptocratic ruler but as an uprising by Ukrainian fascists intent on suppressing Russian speakers.
This coverage helped to inspire thousands of Russian military veterans to volunteer to fight.
Appeals to join the “People’s Guard of Donbas” were published on the internet along with telephone numbers to call in Ukraine.
In announcements in the social media and on various sites supporting the Donetsk and Lugansk Republics, those wishing to volunteer were told to contact the Moscow office by email or Skype.
Volunteers were told to go to Shakhti, a city in the Rostov oblast near the Ukrainian border, where they were met and given places to stay.
It was illustrative that outside the transfer apartments in Shakhti there was an entire parking lot of cars from different regions.
They were there from the Kursk region and from Moscow, of course from Rostov, and there was even a new jeep from the Khanty-Mansisk region.
They were not successful in their work and family life and were leaving nothing special behind.
At first done secretly, the recruitment operation became increasingly open.
In Ekaterinburg, volunteers began to leave from the railroad station accompanied by ovations from the crowd and the blessing of a priest.
Despite official denials, an increasing stream of active-duty Russian soldiers were sent to join the fighting.
Contract soldiers were told there could be orders that involved crossing the border.
When soldiers in the Murmansk oblast asked what the basis was for this, they were told, “You have to love your motherland.
Ukrainian military representatives said, on the basis of recovered identity papers of members of the Pskov 76th Airborne Division, that the soldiers died in fighting near Lugansk.
The rebels also had man-portable air defense systems, or MANPADS, which they used to shoot down Ukrainian military helicopters.
On July 14, a Ukrainian military Antonov An-26 transport plane with eight people on board was shot down over the Lugansk region.
The airliner was flying at thirty-three thousand feet in one of the busiest air transit corridors in the world.
But it could not have been fought, let alone sustained for months, without Russian weapons, soldiers, and experienced volunteers.
As the war intensified, Putin’s popularity rating reached 86 percent, which exceeded even the support for Russia’s 2008 war with Georgia.
Just as the first Chechen war distracted Russians from the hardships of Yeltsin’s economic reforms and the second Chechen war from the injustices of privatization, the war in Ukraine distracted the Russian population from the real meaning of the events there and prevented them from contemplating the possibility of a Maidan in Russia.
The distraction, however, took a high toll, as both sides engaged in indiscriminate killing.
The insurgents, based mainly in the towns, fired on the Ukrainian forces from positions next to schools and hospitals and between apartment buildings.
The Ukrainian forces returned the fire, using Grad multiple-rocket launchers and artillery even though they were shelling populated urban areas.
But the tactics of the Ukrainian Army, extensively covered for propaganda purposes on Russian television, turned residents against the Kiev government and led some to join the rebels.
Vasily Budik, an adviser to Ukraine’s Defense Ministry, described the approach to Anna Nemtsova of the Daily Beast.
As a result of the tactics of both sides, by early 2015, approximately fifty-seven hundred people had been killed in the fighting, and more than a million had fled their homes.
The Maidan revolution, however, shocked the Russian leaders and brought an end to the dissimulation.
The West was suddenly faced not with a masquerade but with the Russia that had existed all along, that somehow had been overlooked by many Western policy makers and observers.
After annexing Crimea, Russian leaders began threatening a nuclear attack on the West.
On March 21, Russia’s ambassador to Denmark, Mikhail Vanin, told the Danish daily JyllandsPosten on March 21 that if Denmark carried out plans to join the NATO antimissile defense shield, Danish ships might become targets for Russia’s nuclear missiles.
At each end of the bridge, closed posts are manned twenty-four hours a day by officers who survey video information and a strike group that can act immediately to block any suspicious persons.
Perhaps most significant, the regime has used state-run television to rally the population in support of the war in Ukraine and against the West.
Putin’s approval rating, 65 percent in January 2014, jumped to 88 percent after the annexation of Crimea and has remained there ever since, sustained by an onslaught of false information about Ukrainian atrocities and hostile acts by the West.
The Putin regime’s recent actions, however, cannot disguise his government’s fundamental insecurity.
With the fall of communism, the Russian people received the freedom to earn money, obtain information, speak openly, and travel abroad.
The political regime, however, enshrined theft and was guaranteed with the help of repeated bloody provocations.
A superstructure was created, but it is held together by mendacity and greed, and although it may sustain itself for many years, it could also collapse, a victim of its own rejection of normal moral values.
Taken together these factors are more than sufficient to undermine the system’s stability.
The steady rise in living standards during the 2000s led to an implicit deal between the authorities and the population.
The authorities would be free to steal as long as average incomes and living standards continued to rise.
The boom, however, depended on high oil and gas prices while corruption crippled normal development.
When the price of oil collapsed in June 2014, Russia had no other comparable source of revenue, and Western sanctions in response to the annexation of Crimea prevented badly needed investment.
Average household wealth has risen sevenfold since 2000, from $1,650 in 2000 to $11,900 in 2013, but median wealth among adults in 2013 was only $871.
In a more normal society, these developments might not be threatening, but in Russia, a weakening economy deprives the population of its most important reason for ignoring the elites’ corruption.
This is a clear sign that the authorities intend to use vodka to tranquilize the population.
Besides a weakening economy, the Putin regime is threatened by the consequences of the war in Ukraine, which it initiated but whose trajectory it cannot control.
Russians originally believed that the invasion of eastern Ukraine could be accomplished without casualties, like the seizure of Crimea.
But as the number of regular troops and volunteers killed in Ukraine continues to grow, official attempts to conceal the extent of the casualties are often revealed as absurd or ineffectual.
After the publication on the internet of satellite photos showing a quickly growing cemetery in Rostov, Russian journalists went to the site and photographed graves with the letters “NM” for Neopoznanyi Muzhshchina_ on the nameplate.
Russia has fought from the beginning to discredit the revolution in Ukraine so that it cannot become an example for a similar revolution in Russia.
For this purpose, rebel control over parts of the Donetsk and Lugansk oblasts, with millions of impoverished people and a dysfunctional economy, is insufficient.
Finally, the regime is threatened by the moral collapse of which it itself is the principal author.
To a degree that is extreme even by the standards of kleptocracies, the Russian “elite” behaves like occupiers.
Insofar as corrupt wealth in Russia is a product of political patronage and the political constellation may always change, Russian oligarchs and major businessmen, rather than keeping their capital in Russia, establish a second life for themselves in the West, where they keep their bank accounts, property, and families.
The resentment inspired by Russia’s moneyed class is aggravated by the elite’s habit of conspicuous consumption.
In a 2014 program about “Black Friday,” the first day of Christmas shopping in London, REN-TV showed an interview with wives of three Russian oligarchs, one of whom remarked that there was no need to seek a discount on a crocodile skin coat because £50,000 was a reasonable price.
The interview, which revealed other details of the women’s shopping habits, was seen by 200,000 people on YouTube and evoked a wave of abusive comments, including not only personal insults but threats.
One commenter wrote, “It’s necessary to organize them a beautiful life with the help of Molotov cocktails.
There should be terror for these bourgeois so that they go and work as slaves for the Uzbeks and Tajiks.
The French Revolution—guillotine, the October Revolution, nationalization and shootings, the Revolution of Dignity in Ukraine, 2014, the fleeing of Yanukovych and his gang.
Putin’s adventurism has led to Western sanctions that have struck directly at many of the regime’s wealthiest and most powerful figures.
But since a condition for becoming wealthy in Russia is cooperation with the regime and involvement in its corruption, it is unlikely that any revolt from within would lead to a qualitative improvement in the life of the country or remedy its corrosive moral, political, and economic corruption.
Democratic change in Russia could take place, however, as the result of the same type of self-organizing anticriminal revolution that took place in Ukraine.
It has been argued that the Russian population is inert and Putin’s hold on power is secure.
In any case, the fate of any democratic revolt in Russia would be decided not across Russia but in Moscow, where the population has demonstrated its capacity for political action and the number of people who are middle class is more than 50 percent.
The popular revolt in Ukraine occurred and was able to sustain itself because certain preconditions had been met.
At the same time, Yanukovych’s sudden refusal to sign an association agreement with the European Union, which many saw as critical to the country’s future, caused widespread shock and dismay.
Finally, there was a spark—the attack by Berkut riot police on student demonstrators in the Maidan, who had gathered to support a future for Ukraine in Europe.
In starting a war in Ukraine, Putin sought to distract Russians from the Ukrainian example’s relevance to their own situation.
But despite the explosion of chauvinism that followed, Russians are well aware of the corruption and lawlessness that surrounds them and are far from convinced that Putin is not involved in it.
To a degree, their willingness to absolve Putin and the regime of responsibility for abuses reflects a determination not to face reality.
That determination might disappear very quickly if protests gain momentum and people begin to believe that positive change is a real possibility.
One catalyst for a democratic revolt could be the 2018 presidential elections, particularly if Putin wins a fourth term as president through massive falsification.
A political crisis could also erupt because of economic collapse or a military defeat in Ukraine.
Under these circumstances, a democratic revolt could be ignited by a single event that, like the beating of the students in the Maidan, reminds people of their helpless situation.
In February 2010, two doctors, Vera Sidelnikova and Olga Aleksandrina, a mother and daughter, were killed in Moscow when their car crashed head-on with that of Lukoil vice president Anatoly Barkov, which, according to witnesses, turned into the oncoming lane to jump the morning traffic.
The incident sparked an explosion of outrage over the internet but no demonstrations.
The prospect that the regime could face a systemic crisis makes it imperative that the democratic forces in Russia recognize the importance for Russian society of a moral revolution.
Frederick Douglass wrote that the essence of the slave mentality is the tendency to treat conditions that are abnormal as if they were natural.
In any Russian city, corruption is so routine and well developed that the participants can easily convince themselves that they are doing nothing wrong.
But corruption is a symptom of a deeper ill, the disregard for the value of the individual by comparison with the perceived requirements of the state.
An attack on corruption that does not address this underlying subservience risks removing one group of corrupt leaders and replacing them with another group that is just as bad.
The war in Ukraine, at the same time, has given renewed strength to extreme Russian nationalism, and an economic downturn could increase the appeal of left-wing socialism.
The most desirable scenario for Russia would be the removal of the Putin regime in a free and fair election.
The last honest presidential election in Russia was in 1990, before the Soviet Union fell, when Yeltsin was elected president of the Russian Republic.
If the Putin regime is to be denied its goal of ruling forever, it will be not through an election, which the regime will be able to control, but because popular discontent grows so massive that the police and army become unreliable and the ruling group splits, with at least one faction going over to the side of the people.
Under these circumstances, it will be important under which banners a democratic revolt occurs.
Nearly all opposition forces share a theoretical opposition to corruption.
What Russia needs, however, is the triumph of a consciousness capable of guiding a popular movement away from radicalism and toward a fully articulated commitment to universal values.
The tendency to treat the individual as raw material for the realization of the State’s ambitions made possible the triumph in Russia of communism, which tried to create “heaven on earth” at the cost of millions of lives.
The same tendency led to the determination to introduce capitalism without the rule of law and Russia’s total criminalization.
To restore respect for the individual as the foundation for a new beginning, Russia must take an honest look at its past.
Because it has failed to face the truth about the crimes of the communist regime, it did not purify the moral and political atmosphere after seventy-four years of communism.
Facing the truth about communism and commemorating its millions of victims remains a fundamental requirement for Russia to have a decent future.
An even more urgent necessity, however, is to face the crimes that were committed after the fall of communism, including the 1993 massacre at the Ostankino Television Tower, the shelling of the White House, the thievery that drove the privatization process, the 1999 apartment bombings, the 2002 Moscow theater siege, the 2004 Beslan school siege, the radiation poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko in London, and the murders of, among others, Anna Polikovskaya, Sergei Yuschenkov, Yuri Shchekochikhin, Paul Klebnikov, Natalya Estemirova, and Boris Nemtsov.
The explosions in Moscow, Buinaksk, and Volgodonsk were the ultimate result of the country’s criminalization under Yeltsin and the key to Putin’s rise to power.
If the Putin regime faces a democratic revolt, it will seek to defend itself by claiming it is under attack by foreign agents.
The apartment bombings demonstrate that it is the Putin regime itself that is the enemy of the population, and that the regime will not hesitate to use any means at its disposal to stay in power.
At the same time, the apartment bombings, more dramatically than any other episode in recent Russian history, demonstrate the inherent criminality of the Russian authorities’ view that individuals exist for the benefit of the state.
It may be argued that, in the case of the apartment bombings, Putin’s and Yeltsin’s guilt is unproven.
This is true, but only in the sense that the guilt of any criminal convicted in a court of law can be said to be ultimately unproven.
The Putin regime never faced a court of law, but only because it controlled the judicial process and was in a position to seize and then hide or destroy the evidence.
The totality of circumstantial evidence—which, unlike direct evidence, is impossible to fake—presents a picture of guilt so convincing that were it presented against an individual in a criminal case, the verdict would be obvious and incontrovertible.
Insofar as the regime has blocked three attempts at independent inquiries of the apartment bombings and is implicated in the murders of people who tried to investigate the bombings on their own, it should be regarded as guilty.
The evidence of its subsequent actions suggests that it is fully capable of these crimes.
If the authorities wish to disprove allegations of their participation in the apartment bombings, they have the option of releasing vital evidence for independent examination, particularly the bomb that was planted in the basement of the building in Ryazan and was sequestered by the FSB in direct violation of Russian law, which states that evidence of extraordinary threats to the rights and security of citizens cannot be treated as state secrets.
The war in Ukraine shows no signs of ending, and in the wake of the murder of Boris Nemtsov, the conditions have been created for mass internal repression.
By threatening to use nuclear weapons against countries that are not Russia’s enemies, the leadership has also increased the chance that they might actually be used, either through miscalculation or in a confrontation inspired by Russia’s own actions.
Against this, however, is the resiliency and talent of the Russian people, who succeeded, against all expectations, in overthrowing communism peacefully and who have the capacity to overthrow the new tyranny that took communism’s place.
Russia’s most pressing need is a truth commission, like South Africa’s Commission on ‘Truth and Reconciliation, that is able to examine dispassionately the crimes of postcommunist regimes and make them known to the Russian people.
Many of these crimes were terrible, but an awareness of their true nature can be critical in building a new, democratic Russian society.
In the event that Russia is able to follow the example of Ukraine in overthrowing a criminal government, it will be necessary to convene a new Constituent Assembly capable of producing a Constitution enshrining a true separation of powers.
Russia has never recovered from the suppression of the elected Constituent Assembly on January 18, 1918.
In its wake, political structures in Russia had no independent authority and were always used as vehicles for arbitrary power.
Russia’s pro-democratic public probably amounts to no more than 10 to 15 percent of the population, but the experience of the perestroika period suggests that they can carry millions with them.
But it can enable the democratic forces to break with Russia’s tragic history and lay a basis for the country’s future.
They need only to defend the worth of the individual and let truth be their guide.
Viktor Davidoff, “David Satter, the Kremlin’s Bete Noire,” Moscow Times, January 20, 2014.
Why Russia Has Failed to Become the West and the West Is Weary of Russia , 102.
Patrick Cockburn, “Russia Planned Chechen War Before Bombings,” Independent, January 29, 7.
This is the opinion of Colonel General Vyacheslav Ovchinnikov, commander of Russia’s internal troops.
Oksana Yablokova, Simon Saradzhyan, and Lera Kor, “Apartment Block Explodes, Dozens Dead,” Moscow Times, September 10, 1999.
Dunlop, The Moscow Bombings, 238; “September 1999 Russian Apartment Bombings Timeline,” The Fifth Estate, January 8, 2015, www.cbc.ca/fifth/blog/september-1999-russianapartment-bombings-timeline.
David Satter, “Anatomy of a Massacre,” Washington Times, October 29, 1999.
Alexei Levchenko and Lev Moskovsky, “Seleznev znaet, kto zryval Rossiyu,” Noviye izvestiya, March 21, 2002.
Priznanie Oligarkha Prokuroru Respubliki,” Novaya Gazeta, January 21, 2001.
Anders Aslund, “Tri Osnovye Istochniki Bogatstva Novykh Russkikh,” Izvestiya, June 20, 1996.
Svetlana Glinkina, “The Criminal Components of the Russian Economy,” working paper no.
Between 1990 and 1998, Russia sold more enterprises than any country in the world but was in twentieth place in terms of revenue.
Even Hungary, where the state controlled much less than in Russia, earned $2. billion more than Russia did.
In Russia, privatization revenue was $54.60 per capita, compared with $2,560.30 in Australia and $1,252.80 in Hungary.
The Socio-Economic Situation in Russia,” Johnson’s Russia List, July 2, 1998; Murray Feshbach, “Russia’s Population Meltdown,” Wilson Quarterly, Winter 2001.
Leonid Proshkin, “Shturm kotorogo ne bylo,” Sovershenno Sekretno, no., 1998.
There seems to have been a decision to force through adoption of the draft constitution at any price.
In a change from the existing law on referendums intended for the adoption of decisions on constitutional questions, which required a yes vote by more than 50 percent of eligible voters—a threshold in force the previous April in the referendum on trust in Yeltsin and his economic policies —the threshold for the approval of the new constitution was set at 50 percent of actual voters, with a minimum turnout of 50 percent of those who were eligible.
The threshold for approval was thus dropped from 50 percent of eligible voters to 25 percent.
Western observers were barred from the Central Election Commission headquarters during the vote count.
Official results were published not within ten days of the voting, as required by law, but more than two months later.
After Sobyanin’s finding that the turnout had been falsified by nine million votes was published in Izvestiya, Sobyanin’s team was barred from its offices and its archives were confiscated.
Den’gi Mozhet Byt ne Tol’ko ‘Derevyannyie’ no Tozhe ‘Berezovskyi’” Moskovsky Komsomolets, July 31, 1997.
David Satter, “A Low, Dishonest Decadence,” National Interest, Summer 2003, 124.
The World Health Organization considers that if per capita consumption of alcohol in a country exceeds eight liters , each additional liter subtracts eleven months from the life expectancy of the average male and four months from the life expectancy of the average female.
Ada Gorbacheva, “Poka Nadeyus—Dyshu,” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, January 26, 2001.
Andrei Illarionov, Testimony Before the United States House of Representatives Committee on Foreign Affairs, February 25, 2009.
The INDEM think tank, founded in October 1997 by Georgy Satarov, a former adviser to Boris Yeltsin, does independent sociological research.
Speaking at the Kennan Institute in Washington in October 2000, Igor Malashenko, the deputy director of Media Most, the parent company of NTV, confirmed that the “Ryazan sugar” broadcast had served as a key irritant in the company’s relations with the FSB and with the Russian government.
Sergei Kanev, “Kak ustroeni ‘kryshi’ v Rossii,” Novaya Gazeta, October 22, 2007.
The total capitalization of just three state-run companies, Gazprom, Rosneft, and Russian Railways, is $380 billion.
Anders Aslund, “Unmasking President Putin’s Grandiose Myth,” Moscow Times, November 28, 2007.
According to Vladimir Milov and Boris Nemtsov, while Medvedev was the head of Gazprom, 6. percent of the shares, worth $20 billion, disappeared.
What Ten Years of Putin Have Brought: An Independent Expert Report, trans.
Luke Harding, “Putin, the Kremlin Power Struggle, and the $40 bn Fortune,” Guardian, December 21, 2007.
The Kremlin Fixes Another Election,” World Affairs, September—October 2011; Vladimir Kara-Murza, “Russia’s Rigged Election,” Wall Street Journal Europe, June 28, 2011.
Bill Bowring, “Judicial Independence in Russia,” EU-Russia Review, no., May 2006, 33.
Guy Chazan, “In Russia’s Courts, a Judge Speaks Up and Gets Fired,” Wall Street Journal, August 5, 2004.
Garbielle Tetrault-Farber, “No Closure for Victims of Theater Hostage Crisis, 12 Years On,” Moscow Times, October 22, 2014.
Alexander Podrabinek, “Politika na Krovi,” Prima News, November 5, 2002.
Fred Weir, “Gas Clouds Moscow Rescue,” Christian Science Monitor, October 28, 2002; Nedkov and Wilson, 57 Hours, 212; Bogoran and Soldatov, “Nepravda”; Oliver Bullough, “Putin Vows No Deal with ‘Terrorists’ After Siege,” Reuters, October 28, 2002.
Svetlana Gubareva, Karina Moskalenko, and Olga Mikhailova, “‘Nord-Ost,’ Gaz ne spasal ot vzriva,” Novaya Gazeta, March 21, 2005.
David Satter, “Remembering Beslan”; David Satter, “The Truth About Beslan,” Weekly Standard, November 13, 2006; Dunlop, Hostage Crises, 17.
Lidiya Grafova, “Chtoby nigde inikogda,” Novaya Gazeta, August 29, 2005.
Elena Milashina, “Agentura vyshla uz-pod kontrolya. i Dosha do Beslana,” Novaya Gazeta, August 31, 2009.
Lidiya Grafova, “Nado zhe Komu-to Verit,” Novaya Gazeta, September 15, 2005.
Ben Fenton, John Steele, Roger Highfield, and Duncan Gardham, “Net Tightens on the Amateur Assassins,” Telegraph, December 1, 2006; LeVine, Putin’s Labyrinth, 145.
Sostoyalas’ press-konferentsiya, nosvyashchennaya zavershivshemusya sudebnomu razbiratel’stvu po delu ob ubiistve Anni Politkovskoi i opravdatel’nomu verdiktu prisazhnikh, vynesennomu segodnya,” Novaya Gazeta, no. ot, February 18, 2009; Philip P Pan, “3 Acquitted in Killing of Russian Reporter,” Washington Post, February 20, 2009.
David Satter, “Who Killed Litvinenko,” Wall Street Journal, November 27, 2006.
Quoted in David Satter, “Putin in Charge,” Wall Street Journal Europe, December 13, 2007.
Russia Must Be Strong To Withstand Foreign Threats,” Radio Free Europe/ Radio Liberty, April 21, 2011; Geoffrey T Smith, “Medvedev Puts Russia in a Choice Situation,” Wall Street Journal, June 23, 2011.
Andrew Osborn, “All-Female Sect Worships Vladimir Putin as Paul the Apostle,” Telegraph, May 12, 2011.
Charles Clover, “Russia’s Middle Class Finds Its Feet,” Financial Times, December 12, 2011.
Operative in the Kremlin (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2013), 356.
Denys Kazanskyi, “Akhmetov’s Losing Bet,” Ukrainian Week, May 18, 2015.
Militsioneri Vradiivki za 3 roki zgvaltuvali I vbili 5 zhinok,” Ukrains’ka Pravda, July 3, 2013.
Timeline,” BBC News, November 13, 2014, www.bbc.co.uk/news/worldmiddle-east-26248275.
According to the Ukrainian Health Ministry, the death toll was twenty-eight.
S nachala stolknovenii pogiblo 28 chelovek,” Ukrainskaya Pravda, February 20, 2014.
Flaws Found in Ukraine’s Probe of Maidan Massacre,” Reuters, October 10, 2014.
Dozens Dead as Kiev Protesters Regain Territory from Police,” Guardian, February 21, 2014.
Address by President of the Russian Federation, President of Russia, March 18, 2014, en.Kremlin.ru/events/president/news/20603.
Alexander Prokhanov, “Kto ty ‘Strelok’?,” interview with Yegor Strelkov, Zavtra, November 20, 2014.
Rebels Claim High Turnout and Landslide ‘Yes’ Vote in Plebiscite on Independence,” Telegraph, May 11, 2014.
Luke Harding, “Uneasy Standoff in Ukraine’s pro-Russian Stronghold of Slvayansk,” Guardian, April 24, 2014.
Margaret Coker and Robert Wall, “Ukraine Knew of Separatists’ Air-Defense Capabilities, Say Officials,” Wall Street Journal, July 19, 2014.
Tatyana Lokshina, “Civilians Despair as Both Sides Break the Rules in East Ukraine,” Moscow Times, December 24, 2014.
Russia Prepared Raising Nuclear Readiness over Crimea,” Associated Press, March 15, 2015.
Julian Isherwood, “Russia Warns Denmark Its Warships Could Become Nuclear Targets,” Telegraph, March 21, 2015.
Institute of Modern Russia, December 23, 2014, imrussia.org/en/analysis/nation/2135-putins-ratings-anomaly-or-trend.
Bibliography “Address by President of the Russian Federation.” en.kremlin.ru, March 18, 2014, en.Kremlin.ru/events/president/news/20603.
Inopressa.ru, trans. and rpt. from Wall Street Journal, November 1, 2002.
Testimony before the United States House of Representatives Committee on Foreign Affairs, February 25, 2009.
The Kremlin Fixes Another Election,” World Affairs, September—October 2011.
Kramer, A “The Role of the Masses During the October 1993 Moscow Rebellion.” www.
Palmer, Richard L Testimony before the United States House of Representatives Banking and Financial Services Committee, September 21, 1999.
Nezavisimaya Gazeta—Politekonomiya, Johnson’s Russia List, April 17, 2001.
Russian Studies Centre, Henry Jackson Society, in cooperation with the Russian Service, Radio Liberty, October 2014.
Znak.com, August 25, 2014, rpt. at www.anti.kor.com.ua, August 26, 2014.
See also Ryazan incident Arsamikov, Askyonov, Serhiy, Assassination of Russia , , assassinations.
See presidential elections Elmurzaev, Ruslan , , energy prices, Estemirova, Natalia, European Court, European Union, and Ukraine association agreement, , exports, raw material, family income, Fatherland-All Russia movement, Fear Factor, Federal Security Service.
