As pro-Russian protesters became increasingly assertive in Crimea, groups of armed men whose uniforms lacked any clear identifying marks surrounded the airports in Simferopol and Sevastopol.
Voice and data links between Crimea and Ukraine were severed, and Russian authorities acknowledged that they had moved troops into the region.
Turchynov criticized the action as a provocation and a violation of Ukrainian sovereignty, while Russian Pres.
Vladimir Putin characterized it as an effort to protect Russian citizens and military assets in Crimea.
Aksyonov declared that he, and not the government in Kyiv, was in command of Ukrainian police and military forces in Crimea.
Sevastopol, Ukraine Sevastopol, Ukraine Unidentified soldiers accompanied by Russian military vehicles patrolling Sevastopol, Ukraine, on March 1, 2014, a few weeks before Russia annexed Crimea and the city.
Andrew Lubimov/AP Images On March 6 the Crimean parliament voted to secede from Ukraine and join the Russian Federation, with a public referendum on the matter scheduled for March 16, 2014.
Meanwhile, Yatsenyuk affirmed Kyiv’s position that Crimea was an integral part of Ukraine.
On the day of the referendum, observers noted numerous irregularities in the voting process, including the presence of armed men at polling stations, and the result was an overwhelming 97 percent in favour of joining Russia.
The interim government in Kyiv rejected the result, and the United States and the EU imposed asset freezes and travel bans on numerous Russian officials and members of the Crimean parliament.
On March 18 Putin met with Aksyonov and other regional representatives and signed a treaty incorporating Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Within hours of the treaty’s signing, a Ukrainian soldier was killed when masked gunmen stormed a Ukrainian military base outside Simferopol.
Russian troops moved to occupy bases throughout the peninsula, including Ukrainian naval headquarters in Sevastopol, as Ukraine initiated the evacuation of some 25,000 military personnel and their families from Crimea.
On March 21 after the ratification of the annexation treaty by the Russian parliament, Putin signed a law formally integrating Crimea into Russia.
As international attention remained focused on Crimea, Yatsenyuk negotiated with the IMF to craft a bailout package that would address Ukraine’s $35 billion in unmet financial obligations.
He also met with EU officials in Brussels, and on March 21 Yatsenyuk signed a portion of the association pact that had been rejected by Yanukovych in November 2013.
The IMF ultimately proposed an $18 billion loan package that was contingent on Ukraine’s adoption of a range of austerity measures that included devaluation of the hryvnya and curbs on state subsidies that reduced the price of natural gas to consumers.
Russia continued to solidify its hold on Crimea, and it abrogated the 2010 treaty that had extended its lease on the port of Sevastopol in exchange for a discount on natural gas.
The price Russia charged Ukraine for natural gas skyrocketed some 80 percent in a matter of weeks.
While Russia openly exerted economic pressure on the interim government in Kyiv, Russian officials publicly stated that they had no additional designs on Ukrainian territory.
In early April, however, a NATO press briefing revealed the presence of an estimated 40,000 Russian troops, massed in a state of high readiness, just across Ukraine’s border.
Subsequently, heavily armed pro-Russian gunmen stormed government buildings in the eastern Ukrainian cities of Donetsk, Luhansk, Horlivka, and Kramatorsk.
In Kharkiv a group of ostensibly local gunmen mistakenly seized an opera house, believing it to be city hall.
As was the case in Crimea, a number of these takeovers were executed by men with Russian equipment, in uniforms bearing no insignia, acting with military precision.
In the city of Slov’yansk in the Donets Basin, a gun battle erupted as pro-Russian militiamen occupied buildings and established roadblocks.
Turchynov imposed a deadline on those occupying the buildings, offering them immunity from prosecution if they surrendered but threatening a military response if they did not.
The deadline passed without incident, the occupiers consolidated their gains, and Turchynov called on the United Nations to dispatch peacekeeping forces to eastern Ukraine to restore order.
Meanwhile, he signaled his support for one of the key demands of the pro-Russian camp—a popular referendum on the conversion of Ukraine into a federation, a change that would convey greater autonomy at the regional level.
On April 15 the Ukrainian military successfully retook the airfield at Kramatorsk, but the following day a broader effort to reassert control in Slov’yansk went sharply awry when Ukrainian troops surrendered six armoured personnel carriers to pro-Russian militiamen.
As emergency talks between Ukraine, the United States, the EU, and Russia began in Geneva, Ukrainian troops in Mariupol repelled an assault by pro-Russian gunmen that left several militiamen dead.
Although all parties at Geneva agreed to work to defuse the conflict in eastern Ukraine, Russia commenced military maneuvers on its side of the border, and pro-Russian militants expanded their zone of control, seizing additional government buildings and establishing armed checkpoints.
In late April Volodymyr Rybak, a Horlivka city council representative and a member of Tymoshenko’s Fatherland party, was kidnapped and killed by a pro-Russian militia.
Subsequently, dozens would be abducted and held by pro-Russian forces, including eight members of an Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe monitoring mission, numerous Ukrainian and Western journalists, and several members of Ukrainian police and security services.
On May 2 the Ukrainian government restarted its offensive against pro-Russian forces in Slov’yansk.
Although two helicopters were lost to hostile fire, Turchynov reported that many separatists had been killed or arrested.
That same day, violence erupted in Odessa, a city that had been relatively unscathed until that point, and dozens of pro-Russian demonstrators were killed when the building they occupied caught fire.
On May 9 Putin celebrated Victory Day, a holiday that commemorates the defeat of Nazi Germany in World War II, with a trip to Crimea and a review of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet.
Days before Putin’s visit, the Council for Civil Society and Human Rights, a Kremlin advisory body, had released a cautionary report about Crimea that sharply contradicted the officially published results of the March 16 independence referendum.
Actual voter turnout was estimated to have been between 30 and 50 percent, with just over half of those casting ballots choosing annexation by Russia.
As self-declared separatist governments in Luhansk and Donetsk prepared to stage their own referenda on independence, Ukrainian security forces continued to contest territory with pro-Russian militias, and a particularly bloody clash in Mariupol left as many as 20 dead.
Those referenda, held in separatist-controlled cities on May 11, were dismissed by Kyiv as “a farce” and were widely criticized throughout the West.
While stopping short of recognizing the results of the referenda, which overwhelmingly favoured independence, Putin said that he respected the will of the voters, even as the Kremlin called for negotiations.
The EU responded by expanding its sanctions against Russian individuals and companies.
The Poroshenko administration Skirmishes between separatist militias and government forces continued in the east, while the remainder of the country prepared for presidential elections on May 25.
Ukrainian billionaire Petro Poroshenko won in a landslide, easily topping the 50 percent mark necessary to secure a victory in the first round of polling.
Tymoshenko finished a distant second, with 13 percent of the vote, while candidates from the ultranationalist Svoboda and Right Sector parties received barely 1 percent.
In the days following the election, intense fighting resumed in eastern Ukraine.
Dozens of pro-Russian separatists were killed in a battle over Donetsk’s international airport, and a Ukrainian military helicopter was shot down outside Slov’yansk, killing all 14 people aboard.
Poroshenko was sworn in as president on June 7, and he immediately set forth a proposal to restore peace in separatist-controlled regions.
Fighting continued, however, and Russia was again accused of directly supporting the rebels when a trio of unidentified Soviet-era tanks appeared in Ukrainian towns near the Russian border.
On June 14, one day after government forces reclaimed the city of Mariupol, the Ukrainian army suffered its largest single-day loss of life to that point, when rebels shot down a transport plane carrying 49 people as it attempted to land in Luhansk.
Poroshenko called a halt to military operations in the east, offering a temporary truce, as well as amnesty to separatists who were willing to lay down their arms.
He dispatched former president Kuchma to negotiate with rebel leaders, and they indicated their acceptance of the proposed cease-fire.
Putin, citing a desire to help normalize the situation in eastern Ukraine, rescinded an order—issued before the annexation of Crimea—that authorized the use of Russian troops on Ukrainian soil.
On June 27, amid strenuous Russian objections, Poroshenko signed the long-delayed association agreement with the EU, pledging closer ties with Europe.
In the following weeks the Ukrainian military recaptured the cities of Slov’yansk and Kramatorsk, which suggested that government forces were making significant headway against the rebels.
Separatist militias began to deploy increasingly sophisticated weapons systems, however, and at least 19 Ukrainian soldiers were killed and scores were wounded during one attack in eastern Ukraine when their position was hit by a rocket artillery barrage.
As the Ukrainian military became more assertive with its use of attack aircraft, pro-Russian forces intensified their air-defense campaign.
On July 14 a Ukrainian transport plane was shot down at an altitude of more than 20,000 feet , a range far beyond the capabilities of the portable air-defense systems that separatists had used previously.
On July 16 a Ukrainian fighter jet was shot down over the Donetsk region, about 12 miles from the Russian border.
Ukrainian officials blamed both attacks on the Russian military, whom they alleged were taking an active role in the fighting.
Igor Strelkov Igor Strelkov Pro-Russian separatist leader Igor Girkin holding a media briefing on July 28, 2014, in the rebel stronghold of Donetsk, Ukraine.
Dmitry Lovetsky/AP Images Hear the Dutch Safety Board's investigation about the shooting down of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 on July 17, 2014 Hear the Dutch Safety Board's investigation about the shooting down of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 on July 17, 2014 A video released by the Dutch Safety Board in October 2015 summarizing the board's investigation of the shooting down of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 on July 17, 2014.
Both Ukrainian and pro-Russian forces were quick to deny responsibility for any role in the downing of the jet, which United States intelligence analysts confirmed was brought down by a surface-to-air missile.
Investigators and recovery workers found their efforts hampered by the pro-Russian forces who controlled the crash site, and days passed before the majority of the bodies could be collected.
Malaysia Airlines flight 17 Malaysia Airlines flight 17 Emergency workers examining the charred debris at the crash site of Malaysia Airlines flight 17, near the village of Hrabove, eastern Ukraine, July 20, 2014.
Vadim Ghirda/AP/Shutterstock.com As international attention focused on the crash, the government in Kyiv ground to a standstill.
Svoboda and UDAR withdrew their support from the ruling coalition, and Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk, frustrated at the pace of legislative action, announced his resignation.
Parliament ultimately rejected Yatsenyuk’s resignation after agreeing to his proposed budget amendments, but Poroshenko proceeded with a call for early elections to be held in October 2014.
In the east, the area under separatist control continued to recede, as the Ukrainian military steadily advanced on the rebel strongholds of Donetsk and Luhansk.
Although Russia continued to deny involvement in the conflict, in August Moscow confirmed that a squad of Russian paratroopers had been captured while inside Ukraine.
After Ukrainian authorities released video interviews of the prisoners, Russian military officials stated that the soldiers had accidentally crossed the border.
Ukrainian government troops experienced a sharp reversal of fortunes in late August, when rebel forces opened a new front in the south, taking the city of Novoazovs’k and threatening the key port of Mariupol.
Poroshenko flatly declared that Russian forces had entered Ukraine, and NATO analysts estimated that more than 1,000 Russian troops were actively participating in the conflict.
On September 5 the governments of Ukraine and Russia met with separatist leaders in Minsk, Belarus, and agreed to a cease-fire that temporarily slowed, but did not stop, the violence.
With an eye on the future, Poroshenko proposed a series of political and economic reforms that were designed to prepare Ukraine to apply for EU membership in 2020.
Poroshenko’s mandate received approval from voters on October 26, when pro-Western parties triumphed in snap parliamentary elections.
Mirny, Ukraine Mirny, Ukraine A bar provides the only light in a neighbourhood of Mirny, Ukraine, after months of heavy fighting between government forces and rebels led to electricity shortages in the Luhansk region in October 2014.
Petro Poroshenko in Minsk, Belarus, in an effort to end the fighting in eastern Ukraine, August 26, 2014.
Alexander Zemlianichenko/AP Images On November 2 separatists held local elections in Donetsk and Luhansk in violation of the Minsk cease-fire agreement.
Ukrainian and Western authorities dismissed the results, which predictably favoured separatist candidates, and, although Russia initially stated that it would recognize the elections, it later walked back those comments, saying that it would “respect” them instead.
Poroshenko responded by vowing to rescind an agreement that would have granted additional autonomy to Donetsk and Luhansk.
In January 2015 the United Nations estimated that more than 5,000 people had been killed since the beginning of hostilities.
By that point the cease-fire agreement had been largely discarded by both sides.
Although the Russian economy had been pushed into recession by a combination of Western sanctions and low oil prices, advanced Russian military equipment continued to appear in eastern Ukraine, as a separatist offensive pushed back government forces.
In late January rebels occupied the fiercely contested Donetsk airport—little more than a ruin after months of heavy fighting—and they intensified efforts to capture the government-held town of Debaltseve.
Hundreds were killed in the shelling of civilian areas in the conflict zone, including at least 30 in a separatist rocket attack on Mariupol, and world leaders pressed for a diplomatic solution to the crisis.
On February 12, 2015, the leaders of Ukraine, Russia, France, and Germany agreed on a 12-point peace plan that proposed, among other things, the cessation of fighting, the withdrawal of heavy weapons, the release of prisoners, and the removal of foreign troops from Ukrainian territory.
The tenuous peace held, and heavy weapons were pulled back by both sides in early September 2015.
Frequent violations of the truce left over 9,000 dead and more than 20,000 wounded by year’s end, however.
Citing research from Russian human rights groups, Ukrainian authorities estimated that over 2,000 Russian troops had been killed since the beginning of fighting in April 2014.
Ukraine crisis Ukraine crisis World leaders meeting in Minsk, Belarus, to discuss the terms of a cease-fire in the conflict in eastern Ukraine, February 11, 2015.
Alexander Zemlianichenko, Pool/AP Images As the situation in the east settled into a frozen conflict, Ukrainians grew impatient with the pace of political and economic reform.
Although the Poroshenko administration had promised transparency and a renewed effort to stamp out endemic corruption, it could claim few real successes.
In May 2015 Poroshenko tapped former Georgian president Mikheil Saakashvili to serve as governor of the Odessa region, but Saakashvili soon encountered resistance from Kyiv as a tug-of-war developed between anti-corruption crusaders and politicians aligned with the country’s oligarchs.
Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk narrowly survived a vote of no confidence in February 2016, and he resigned in April of that year.
Poroshenko quickly moved to install his ally Volodymyr Groysman as prime minister, but he was dogged by revelations about his use of offshore tax shelters during his tenure as president.
A leak of documents from the Panamanian law firm Mossack Fonseca unveiled a money-laundering and tax-evasion operation of breathtaking scope, implicating dozens of public figures and politicians from around the globe.
Poroshenko denied any wrongdoing and stated that he had fully complied with the law.
Poroshenko’s public approval rating sagged into the single digits approaching the 2019 presidential election, but a pair of events in late 2018 boosted his popularity.
In November 2018 Russian naval vessels in the Kerch Strait fired on Ukrainian ships and seized both the ships and their crews.
Poroshenko declared martial law in 10 regions, the first time such a step had been taken since Ukraine’s independence from the Soviet Union.
Ukraine also appealed to the United Nations, and the General Assembly voted in favour of a resolution that called on Russia to withdraw its forces from Crimea and to end its occupation of Ukrainian territory.
The third of those pillars would be the focus of Poroshenko’s major pre-election policy initiative—namely, the creation of an independent Ukrainian Orthodox Church.
The Orthodox churches of Ukraine had been under the jurisdiction of the Moscow Patriarchate since the 17th century, but in December 2018 Poroshenko and Orthodox leaders announced a break with Moscow.
Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I formally granted the Ukrainian Orthodox Church autocephalous status in January 2019; by this point, the Russian Orthodox Church had already severed ties with Constantinople and the ecumenical patriarchate in protest.
The election of Volodymyr Zelensky and continued Russian aggression In spite of Poroshenko’s efforts to direct the public conversation in the months leading to the March 2019 presidential election, official corruption and the economy remained voters’ key concerns.
The race had initially appeared to be a replay of the 2014 contest between Poroshenko and Tymoshenko, but the candidacy of television personality and political novice Volodymyr Zelensky shattered the established order.
Zelensky had portrayed the president of Ukraine in a popular situation comedy, and he leveraged his massive online following into a serious campaign against official corruption.
Sergei Chuzavkov—SOPA Images/Shutterstock.com In the first round of polling on March 31, 2019, Zelensky won over 30 percent of the vote, and Poroshenko finished second with 16 percent.
The second round was held on April 21, and Zelensky crushed the incumbent in a landslide, capturing more than 73 percent of the vote.
Poroshenko’s concession speech was marked with a promise that his political career was not yet over, while Zelensky vowed that his first goal as president would be to achieve a lasting peace in war-torn eastern Ukraine.
Zelensky took office on May 20, 2019, and used his inauguration speech to announce the dissolution of parliament and the triggering of snap legislative elections.
Those elections, held on July 21, delivered an absolute parliamentary majority to Zelensky’s Servant of the People party.
This confirmation of Zelensky’s mandate allowed him to promote a peace settlement that would see Ukrainian forces and Russian-backed insurgents withdraw from the so-called “contact line” in eastern Ukraine.
Zelensky’s opponents characterized the move as a capitulation that would do nothing but legitimize Russian aggression in the Donets Basin and Crimea, but he retained widespread support from a war-weary public.
While Zelensky endeavoured to focus his months-old administration on Ukraine’s foreign and domestic challenges, he soon found himself drawn into a political scandal in the United States.
Some $400 million in military aid for Ukraine had been approved by the United States Congress, but United States Pres.
Donald Trump put a hold on the funds prior to a July 25, 2019, phone call with Zelensky.
During that call, Trump urged Zelensky to investigate the son of a political opponent, Democratic United States presidential candidate Joe Biden, who had served on the board of one of Ukraine’s largest natural gas companies.
Over a month later the military aid was finally released, but, by that point, congressional Democrats were investigating Trump’s alleged attempt to pressure Ukraine.
That investigation eventually served as the basis for an impeachment inquiry against Trump that was launched on September 24, 2019.
Trump was acquitted by the United States Senate in a largely party-line vote, and he responded by purging senior United States government and national security officials whom he regarded as insufficiently loyal.
Alexander Vindman, the top Ukraine expert on the National Security Council, was fired, and the post of United States ambassador to Ukraine would remain vacant beyond the end of Trump’s term.
Beginning in 2020, the spread of the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 pandemic led to massive disruptions of daily life in Ukraine, and the Ukrainian economy took a sharp hit from lockdowns and the closure of nonessential businesses.
The situation was especially dire in the Donbas, as infrastructure damage from the Russian-backed insurgency led to serious disruptions of the water supply.
Zelensky’s national mitigation strategy against COVID-19, the potentially deadly disease caused by the virus, put him at odds with some local politicians who sought to assert their independence under 2014 government decentralization reforms, and this clash would have a significant effect on local elections in October 2020.
Local parties dominated mayoral races, while national parties, including Zelensky’s Servant of the People, struggled.
The poor showing in local elections also reflected an overall decline in Zelensky’s public approval.
There appeared to be little progress on the populist reform agenda that had swept him into office, and the conflict in the Donbas remained unsettled.
While Zelensky did manage to address the former matter with the passage of a law intended to curb the influence of oligarchs, the latter issue would soon devolve into the greatest threat to regional stability since the end of the Cold War.
Between October and November 2021, Russia began a massive buildup of troops and military equipment along its border with Ukraine.
Over the following months, additional forces were dispatched to Belarus , the Russian-backed separatist enclave of Transdniestria in Moldova, and Russian-occupied Crimea.
By February 2022 Western defense analysts estimated that as many as 190,000 Russian troops were encircling Ukraine and warned that a Russian incursion was imminent.
Putin dismissed these accusations and claimed that an accompanying Russian naval buildup in the Black Sea was a previously scheduled exercise.
While Western leaders consulted with both Zelensky and Putin in an effort to stave off a Russian invasion that appeared inevitable, Putin issued demands that included de facto veto power over NATO expansion and the containment of NATO forces to countries that had been members prior to 1997.
This would, in effect, remove the NATO security umbrella from eastern and southern Europe as well as the Baltic states.
On February 21, 2022, Putin responded by recognizing the independence of the self-proclaimed people’s republics of Donetsk and Luhansk.
Putin ordered Russian troops into Ukrainian territory as “peacekeepers,” and Russian military activity in the Donbas—ongoing since 2014 but consistently disavowed by the Kremlin—at last became overt.
Western leaders, pledging solidarity with Ukraine, responded by levying a raft of sanctions against Russian financial institutions.
In the early hours of February 24 Zelensky addressed the Russian people directly, delivering an impassioned plea for peace but vowing that Ukraine would defend itself.
Within minutes explosions were heard in major cities across Ukraine, and air raid sirens began to sound in Kyiv.
Around the world, leaders condemned the unprovoked attack and promised swift and severe sanctions against Russia.
