State Audit Service chief charged with profiteering released on personal recognizance.
Expecting some results from a meeting between Volcker and Surkov is unlikely to be worth it.
Russia is studying Britain's critical infrastructure and may hit the power supply system.
Even the supporters of Putin are afraid to speak to the occupied Crimea, the American correspondent Kim.
The most developed robot in the world ""froze"" after the question of corruption in Ukraine at the forum in Davos.
President Petro Poroshenko is convinced that Ukraine will gain a prospect of membership in the EU in 2021.
The only thing that will change in 2021 is that Ukraine will gain EU membership prospect with the support of Poland and Lithuania,"" Poroshenko said.
The president also stressed the need for unity among the European Union’s nations and other democratic countries.
As reported, Ukraine signed the Association Agreement with the EU in 2014 following the Revolution of Dignity.
In 2014-2017, the agreement was ratified by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, the European Parliament, and the parliaments of all the EU countries.
Former Commander of United States Army Europe Lieutenant General Ben Hodges believes Russia will make every effort to locate the sites where Ukraine stores U.S.-supplied Javelin anti-tank missile systems.
The fact that Ukraine now has Javelins in its arsenal might prevent Russia from making “small land grabs” and “moving the line” at certain favorable periods.
As reported, the United States administration announced its decision to allow selling lethal weapons to Ukraine.
United States officials also reported that Ukraine had received Javelin ATGMs.
And so whenever we provide a weapon system to another country there is a package that goes with it… there’s a training aspect to it, it does not have magical powers but it is very good,” Hodges stressed.
Hodges also said that the United States move to arm Ukraine did not spark harsh reactions in Europe and Russia, of which observers and former United States administration had been wary.
I haven’t seen as much of a reaction from the Russians or Europeans to that decision, which tells me that Ambassador Volker did a great job of laying the groundwork and making sure that this decision did not break the unity of the Alliance,” he said.
The court in the government-controlled part of the Luhansk region passed a guilty verdict against Russian serviceman Viktor Ageev sentencing him to 10 years in prison.
Ageev’s lawyer Viktor Chevhuz wrote on social media, Censor.NET reports.
The trial and legal debate in the criminal case of the Russian national were completed yesterday.
The prosecutor considers the so-called self-proclaimed ""Luhansk People’s Republic"" a terrorist organization the ranks of which Ageev joined under the contract.
Ageev was also charged with illegal possession and carrying of firearms and ammunition.
The prosecutor requested to sentence him to 12-year imprisonment with confiscation of property for multiple offenses,"" the lawyer said.
The defense sees the penalty as disproportional and intends to appeal against it.
As reported, Russian scout Ageev, born in 1995, was captured by fighters of the Ukrainian Army in a skirmish between the 93rd Separate Mechanized Brigade and a scout group of the 4th mechanized brigade of the 2nd army corps of the so-called ""Luhansk People's Republic"" at Zholobok, the Luhansk region, on June 24.
Solomianskyi district court of Kyiv released Lidia Havrylova, chief of the State Audit Service recently indicted on charges of illicit enrichment, on personal recognizance until March 25.
As reported by Censor.NET citing Ukrinform, the decision was made by Judge Oleksandr Bobrovnyk.
Havrylova will be released on personal recognizance until March 25,"" the judge announced.
The court also ordered Havrylova to hand over all the passports, cooperate with the investigators, and avoid contacts with witnesses in the case.
It is noteworthy that the prosecutors requested to place Havrylova into pre-trial detention with the right to post 1 million hryvnia in bail.
President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko is optimistic about relations with Washington, declaring substantial support from the United States for the presidency of Donald Trump.
Another thing is Russia. we need to try to keep the balance because it is our neighbor.
We need to try to establish a dialogue at a low level, but we need to demand respect for international law and also respect not only in Europe, the whole world.
We have very bad examples in the last 10 years Georgia, Ukraine"", noted Dud.
The construction of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline is a political rather than an economic project.
Nord Stream 2, headed by former German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, involves the construction of two gas pipelines with a total capacity of 55 billion m³ of gas a year from Russia to Germany along the Baltic Sea.
The current Nord Stream gas pipeline consists of two twenty threads of length 1224 km with a throughput capacity of 27. bcm each, Gazprom began supplying this pipeline in 2012.
In December 2015, the President of the European Council, Donald Tusk, said that the project for the second stage of the North Stream pipeline is not in line with the EU energy rules and undermines Ukraine's role as a gas transit.
In March 2016, eight EU countries signed an appeal to the European Commission to protest the gas pipeline project.
President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko said on June 25, 2017 that the North Stream 2 is a very serious threat to Ukraine.
He noted that the goal of the Russian project is to save Ukraine $ 2 billion that it receives for gas transit.
The Ukrainian side was able to hinder the implementation of the initiative to return the Russian delegation to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe.
I thank almost the entire Ukrainian delegation, the Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the Council of Europe and the BP secretariat who worked with us in Strasbourg for a cohesive and effective work.
Thanks to the World Congress of Ukrainians and, personally, to Mr Eugene Czolia for holding a joint round table. concerning the war on the Donbass, which managed to organize despite the resistance of certain CE officials and even the refusal to make the event in the usual list of side-events, but eventually everything was done as it should.
We managed to stop blitzkrieg from returning the Russian Federation and so on.
In the Kremlin, they are urged not to wait for the results of a meeting between the assistant to the president of the Russian Federation Vladislav Surkov and his American visitor, Kurt Volker, this is only a ""clock alignment"" on working issues.
As informs Tsensor.NET with reference to Interfax-Ukraine , the press secretary of the head of the Russian state Dmytro Peskov said.
This is a"" clock alignment, ""a working process,"" he told reporters, answering a question about what the Kremlin is waiting for this event.
As expected, the meeting between V Surkov and K Volcker will take place in Dubai on Friday.
A Russian journalist, accredited at the Economic Forum in Davos, tried to provoke President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko.
According to Tsensor.NET with reference to the TSN, dressed in embroidery, a Russian propagandist asked Poroshenko in Russian, why Ukraine ""adopted a law on the war"", referring to the reintegration of the Donbas.
And he added that he would answer the question if it would sound in Ukrainian.
Russia is studying the critical infrastructure of Britain and its connection to the energy supply system.
In an interview with the publication, Williamson noted that Russia is studying the critical infrastructure of Britain and its connection to the energy supply system.
UK Defense Secretary Gavin Williamson warned of Russia's plans for the destruction of British infrastructure, which could lead to thousands of casualties, he said in an interview with Daily Telegraph, Ukrinform writes.
According to Williamson, Russia has been monitoring the UK's energy supply system for a long time, blocking which may cause total chaos in the country, causing thousands of casualties.
The head of the Ministry of Defense said that Britain had four underwater channels for supplying electricity from the continent and four more for the transportation of gas to the country.
As reported by Censor.NET citing UNIAN, the Polish Sejm on Friday adopted the bill submitted by the Kukiz'15 party setting a ban on promoting the so-called ""Bandera ideology"", with its historic roots stemming from Ukraine.
Radio Poland quoted leader of the party Pawel Kukiz as saying on social media.
The bill defines ""the crimes of Ukrainian nationalists and Ukrainian units who collaborated with the III Reich"", introducing a possibility of launching criminal probes against deniers of such crimes.
Residents of the occupied Crimea complain that there is no work, prices have doubled, and even bribes have doubled.
Correspondent of the National Public Radio of the United States , Lucian Kim, who visited the annexed Crimea, said that the biggest surprise for him was that ""the record is afraid to speak"" even supporters of the president of neighboring Russia Vladimir Putin.
One driver even told me that the bribes had doubled,"" the publication quoted. correspondent.
Failure to fulfill Putin's promises of economic improvement in Crimea is disappointing with the population, says Lucian Kim.
Now he is very dissatisfied and wants to leave. like the lack of political will, lack of economic opportunities, ""said an American correspondent.
Personality of Putin, in the opinion of the correspondent, is an important factor for the inhabitants of the peninsula.
According to him, the neighboring Russia is trying to make the process of returning the Crimea to Ukraine impossible.
The robot has 62 mechanisms responsible for facial expressions and neck movements.
In Sofia's eyes, there are cameras that allow you to identify your face and set up a visual contact.
The United States Treasury Department has expanded the list of sanctions against Russia due to aggression in Ukraine.
The updated list contains 21 surnames of Russian citizens and Ukrainian citizens who are active participants in illegal organizations ""LNR"" and ""DNR"", as well as the names of 9 companies.
The sanctions were imposed against Minister of Energy of the Russian Federation Andriy Cherezov and the Director of the Department of Operational Control and Management of Electricity Yevhen Hrabchak.
Among the companies that came under the sanctions are subsidiaries Surgutneftegaz, Power Machines and Technopromeksport.
President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko said that already known dates when the United States will supply defense weapons to Ukraine, but they will not be publicly disclosed to the public.
He said this on Friday, January 26, at a briefing on the results of a meeting with United States Secretary of State Rex Tillerson at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, according to Ukrainska Pravda.
We are already seeing new opportunities for cooperation in the defense field today and agreed today on certain stages of this cooperation,"" Poroshenko said.
According to him, after the militants in the Donbas learned about Ukraine's new weapons, they are much more cautious to the front line.
As you understand, as it is a weapon, defense cooperation, I am not what I do not want, but definitely not interested in disclosing it. these ideas"", summed up Poroshenko.
As reported by the ""Apostrophe"", formerly the Special Representative of the United States State Department, Kurt Volker, said that the United States supplies arms to Ukraine is rather small compared with the number of tanks that the Russian Federation has placed in the Donbas.
Among the companies included in the new United States sanction list , in particular, CJSC Vneshtorgservis, as well as OOO Technopromexport and Power Machines.
The last two appeared in the supply of Siemens turbines to the annexed Crimea.
On July 5, 2017, Reuters reported that Russia sent gas turbines to the Crimea of ​​the German concern Siemens to Crimea , despite the EU sanctions.
The Russian company acknowledged the supply of modernized Siemens turbines to Crimea.
Subsequently, new sanctions against Russia were approved by the EU through Siemens turbines.
It was also reported that Russia threatened Siemens with sanctions due to EU restrictions.
On September 24, Siemens announced changes in the work with Russian customers after the delivery of turbines to Crimea.
In November, the Ministry of Energy of Russia stated that Siemens continues to take part in contests for the supply of equipment.
And on December 19, 2017 Siemens signed an agreement with Russia on the supply of gas turbines.
The United States imposed sanctions against a company through which the Russian Federation legalized trade with the ""DPR"" and ""LNR"" Vneshtorgservice and its leader Volodymyr Pashkov, a former vice governor of the Irkutsk region in the Russian Federation, entered the new United States sanctions list against Russia.
After the so-called ""nationalization"" of enterprises in the territory of self-proclaimed republics, ""Vneshtorgservis"" transferred to the management of factories, mines and other enterprises in this territory.
In turn, Russia is among the few countries that have recognized South Ossetia as an independent country.
Thus, through the companies registered in South Ossetia, the trade of the Russian Federation with self-proclaimed republics is legalized.
Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, who is also known for his habit of wearing colored socks , has not changed the tradition and during a visit to the World forum in Davos.
During a speech at the forum on Trudeau were wearing socks with yellow ducks.
Even the money for normal socks is not enough"", the network users are joking.
Recall that during his official visit to Ukraine, the Canadian PM was in dark colored socks with a white abstraction.
Recently, in the United States, there has been a change in the more rigid policy towards Russia, which was not the case before.
About this in his column for ""Apostrophe"" writes Russian political scientist Lilia Shevtsova.
According to a political scientist, Russia is no more a serious factor a new list of sanctions against the elites , and a radical change in the Russian course in United States foreign policy.
Already very soon the United States will present the so-called Kremlin report.
By January 29, the United States Department of the Treasury has to prepare a list of high-ranking Russian officials and businessmen close to Vladimir Putin, against whom further personal sanctions may be imposed.
This Washington step, like some others before, marks a new policy of hard pressure on the Kremlin, which will have consequences not only for Russia but also for the whole of the West.
This is written in his column for ""Apostrophe"" by Russian political scientist Lilia Shevtsova.
Official Moscow has been in a state of nervous expectation for several months.
Such is the price of Russian statehood, whose guarantors were humiliatingly dependent on another state.
Meanwhile, the American ""list"", which should excite the Russian elite, is by no means the main event that can affect the Russian political landscape.
Much more serious is the range of strategic decisions of the United States establishment over the past six months, which indicate radical changes in American foreign policy and, above all, in its Russian course.
The paradox is that these shifts occur during the term of Trump's presidency, which is the most pro-Russian president in American history.
But it is for him that the United States is turning tough restraint of Russia, including measures to undermine the Russian political regime, which no American administration dared yet.
In August 2017, the United States Congress endorses the law ""On Resistance to American Opponents with Sanctions"" , which equates Russia with states that, in the sense of American legislators, are global ""rogue"", and which limits Trump's ability to influence policy mitigation Moscow In January 2018, Washington endorses a new National Defense Strategy, which, according to United States Secretary of Defense General James Mattheys, means denying America its traditional priority the fight against terrorism and, as a matter of priority, counteracting Russia's and China's challenges.
Implications for United States National Security,"" which should become a party orientation towards Russia and not give the Republicans a chance to mitigate the Russian course.
It is unlikely that the successor Trump will be able to exit the current course and decide on a new reboot relative to Moscow.
America creates an extremely unfavorable field for Russia to develop its economy and to meet the interests of the ruling class personally. integrated into Western society.
Nevertheless, the Western structures and groups involved in servicing the Russian ruling class, which receives rents in Russia and exports it to the West, must also be nervous.
Now they will have to lose not only their reputation, but also their income for servicing Russian kleptocracy.
Moreover, there is a threat to the whole system of servicing corrupt officials from other authoritarian states.
So the Americans suddenly woke up and started a campaign that could have seismic consequences and not only for Russia, but also for the whole of the West, whose highly influential circles are gaining support for authoritarian kleptocracies.
But with consistent pressure and elimination of money laundering channels, the more so if Europe decides to join the policy of hard pressing , the Russian ruling class will increasingly feel its vulnerability.
It will come to realize that Putin is not a guarantor of their well-being and security.
According to the consistent pressure from the West, the Russian ruling class will realize that Putin is not a guarantor of his welfare and security, according to a political scientist.
Even if the current purpose of the American Congress can not be achieved, Washington's decisions undermine not only the conditions for Russian modernization , but also a model of the survival of the elite at the expense of parasitic in Western society.
Most likely, the Kremlin will answer, but so that America will not even annoy even more, and so as not to give the Russian audience an idea that it is about protecting the ""trillion"" stolen from Russia.
So let's see what will become for the Russian elite publishing a list of non-hitters.
The fighters who are fighting against the forces of the ATO in the Donbas are in an unstable position due to the probability of the return of the occupied territories of Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine.
He noted that Ukraine continues to build its military potential and pointed to the unchanging United States position on the Donbas.
The editor-in-chief of the Internet Resource ""Information Resistance"", military columnist Yuriy Karin also follows a similar point of view.
They are not warlike, they are not capable of carrying out combat operations by units, they will be closed by the trade union, and it is unlikely that they will be taken by the occupiers to Russia""says Karin.
