World leaders — heads of state especially — tend to be tactful people, whatever else might be said about them.
Here is that phone-conversation, between Ashton and Paet, annotated by the author to explain what they were referring to, and accompanied with a link to the phone-conversation itself, so that you can hear it if you wish.
It was clear from the conversation, up to that point, that Paet regretted needing to inform Ashton that the pro-EU side was actually controlled by some scoundrel , and it’s clear that Ashton was shocked to hear this; but, as Ashton made evident from her response, she didn’t want to discuss this matter any further.
These were two seasoned diplomats, and they both understood that there was nothing they could do about water already “under the bridge,” and on its way.
But both of them realized, now, that its way was anything but democratic.
This assignment ended up being fulfilled on 26 February 2014, just four days after the February 22nd coup.
Obama wanted Yats’s sponsor, Yulia Tymoshenko, to win the election to replace Yanukovych as President, when that post was put up for a vote in only the northeastern half of Ukraine, the half that favored the EU and the United States over Russia.
But she turned out to be too extreme in her Russia-hatred to be able to win even in just the northeast ; and, so, Obama had to settle for the slightly less racist-fascist anti-Russian, Petro Poroshenko, when he won on May 25th, and the Presidency was now downgraded to little more than a figurehead status.
Putin enabled them to hold a plebiscite in Crimea on 16 March 2014, which was declared by international observers to be free and fair; and the result was 96% to rejoin Russia — virtually the same percentage that was shown in opinion-polls of Crimeans.
United States President Obama wanted to punish Putin for taking this defensive measure against United States aggression — against the anti-Russian coup in Ukraine.
At first, the EU went along with the weakest sanctions that Obama pushed for against Russia, and they held out for as long as they could to delay the serious ones, until 17 July 2014, when the Obama regime in Ukraine sent up at least one fighter-jet and downed the MH17 Malaysian airliner over Ukraine’s conflict-zone and blamed it on pro-Russian separatists who had been bombed for months by the Ukrainian regime — the legend was that they had fired a “Buk” missile-launcher at the MH17 mistaking it for being one of Ukraine’s bombers.
Not knowing that this had been yet another set-up job by the Obama-team, the EU now consented to join really stiff sanctions against Russia — on the theory that the downing wouldn’t have happened if Russia had not helped the separatists to do it.
But, then, EU leaders came to know that Obama had been behind this atrocity too.
What had started with Nuland’s “F—k the EU” was now the EU’s complicity with the racist-fascist, or ideologically nazi, anti-Russian coup-imposed Government that she and her boss Obama had placed into power in Ukraine.
A lot of influential people in Europe aren’t as accepting of nazism as Obama quite evidently is.
When it became clear — after two successive invasions of the resisting Ukrainian region, Donbass, both of which invasions failed to do anything other than to destroy the region that Ukraine claimed to be protecting against ‘Terrorists’ via Ukraine’s ‘Anti Terrorist Operation’ or ‘ATO’ for short — that assisting any further with America’s take-over of Ukraine would be not only war-criminal, but likely to lose, they started falling away from the entire effort.
Critically important in this regard was a 21 November 2014 vote in the United Nations on whether to condemn racist fascism, and especially to condemn Nazi Germany’s World War II Holocaust against mainly Jews.
Far-right racist nationalism has been booming recently; and, so, when the United States was one of only three countries — the U.S., Ukraine, and Canada — to vote against this resolution, almost the entire world was shocked.
Among the first to abandon Obama on this, right on Christmas Eve, was Viktor Orban, Hungary’s leader, who was outraged at Obama’s treatment of Hungary as if it were a vassal-state of the United States Empire.
Then, on 3 January 2015, Milos Zeman, the Czech head-of-state, joined with Orban in that.
And, now, it seems to be the majority of the EU who are resisting Obama’s contemptuous treatment of every other nation than his or her own.
On March 13th, Ukraine’s figurehead President announced that he had reached agreement with “a series of the EU countries on the supply of armament”; and, the next day, Russian Television reported that 11 of the 28 EU member-nations had agreed to supply Ukraine with weapons. refused Ukraine’s request for arms.
Then, on March 17th, washingtonsblog bannered, “Major American Allies Ignore United States Pleas and Join China’s Alternative Bank” and reported that UK, Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, India, France, Germany, and Italy, had all agreed to join China’s newly-forming international-development bank competitor to Washington’s IMF and World Bank.
Russia, China, and the rest of the BRIC countries — the rising developing economies — are seeking to replace the dollar-monopoly.
The Obama Administration has been twisting arms all over the world to try to block nations from signing onto China’s new world bank; and Obama’s getting rebuffed by all these nations, many of which have been traditional United States allies, is a historic turn away from the American Empire that he is trying to ram down everyone’s throat.
Good-bye, Uncle Sam; you’re not the nation you were during World War Two; you’ve instead become the global enemy; you’ve turned and become fascist yourself.
Presumably, he thinks that Russia is by far the most ‘aggressive’ country.
Obama is re-arming his Ukrainian stooge-regime for yet a third attempt at exterminating the residents of the area of Ukraine that had voted 90% for the man he overthrew.
Obama and his stooges apparently think that they can get away with everything.
And Republicans in the United States Congress complain not that he’s doing this, but instead that he’s not giving Ukraine enough weapons to do it.
Russia wasn’t even listed in the news-reports , because the news-reports listed only the top six-mentioned nations, and Russia wasn’t among them.
No doubt, this was one reason why Gallup yanked the question from their polling during 2014, especially after all of the international mayhem that the United States perpetrated last year.
EU leaders are finally getting the message — and even Japan and Australia are.
When George W Bush put together a coalition of English-speaking countries to invade Iraq in 2003, nuclear weapons weren’t an issue.
And, more and more, the world’s leaders are trying to dispense with “the one indispensable nation,” so that they won’t be dispensed with, themselves.
And O’Bomba represents them just as much as his Republican ‘opposition’ do.
But, now, even the aristocrats in other nations are increasingly abandoning him.
All he evidently still has going for him is liberal and Democratic fools in the United States, who haven’t yet figured out that he’s a Manchurian candidate, Trojan horse, ‘Democrat,’ who would have FDR twisting in his grave if only he saw this.
President O’Bomba might become even more isolated internationally than he is at home, where there are enough liberal fools to keep him barely aloft, and enough conservative fools to keep alive the myth that he’s a Marxist Muslim.
The United States has become a nut-hatchery, and the foreigners are beginning to notice.
