Russia’s war in Ukraine, explained Reddit Pocket Flipboard Email Russia is bombarding major cities in Ukraine, more than a week into a war where Moscow has faced setbacks on the battlefield — yet seems undeterred from its campaign to take Ukraine.
On March 4, Russia seized Zaporizhzhia, one of Europe’s largest nuclear power plants.
Russian shelling of the southeastern Ukraine facility set off a fire, which Ukrainian officials warned could set off a nuclear disaster.
It took hours, but the fire was extinguished, and international monitors said that they do not detect elevated radiation levels and that the fire did not damage “essential” equipment.
United States officials have said Russia now appears to be in control of the plant.
But the incident was a reminder of how dangerous this war in Ukraine is becoming, and how uncertain and confusing things still are on the ground.
Russian troops were advancing toward Kyiv, and thousands and thousands are fleeing in advance of a possible siege on the city.
The Russian military has made advances in the south, and are gaining in the area of Kherson, a port city on the Black Sea whose control is reportedly contested, and Mariupol, on the Sea of Azov.
Russian bombardment of these cities has resulted in humanitarian issues, with bridges and roads damaged by the fighting and dwindling access to food, clean water, medicine, and electricity in certain areas.
Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city, experienced heavy Russian fire this week, and strikes have heavily damaged residential areas.
Ukrainian and Russian officials met in early March, and tentatively agreed on the need to humanitarian corridors — basically, safe zones for civilians to flee and supplies to pass through — but did not reach agreements on a larger ceasefire.
As of March 6, multiple attempts to evacuate Ukrainian civilians have been halted because of Russian shelling.
The battle for Ukraine began in the early morning hours, local time, on February 24, when Russian President Vladimir Putin launched what he called a “special military operation” into the country of about 40 million.
He claimed the Russian military seeks “demilitarization and denazification” but not occupation; attacks shortly followed from multiple fronts and targeted toward multiple cities.
Ukraine’s resistance has complicated Russia’s efforts to seize the country.
Russian forces have not made the progress they likely thought they would at the start of the campaign.
The Russian military’s early strategy has perplexed some experts and observers.
But the more protracted this war becomes, the more catastrophic it will be.
A woman sits in the middle of a crowd as she waits for a train to leave Kyiv on February 24.
Emilio Morenatti/AP A woman holds her baby inside a bus as they leave Kyiv on February 24.
Emilio Morenatti/AP People rush through a subway to get a train to leave Kyiv on February 24.
Emilio Morenatti/AP A crowd of people struggles to get on a bus as they try to leave Kyiv on February 24.
Emilio Morenatti/AP The United States and its allies in Europe and the United Kingdom imposed the toughest financial sanctions ever on Russia after the first incursion, and have only built on these penalties since.
On February 26, the United States and European countries agreed to block some Russian banks from SWIFT, a global messaging system, which will essentially prevent those institutions from doing any global transactions, a punishment that allies had previously hesitated to pursue.
Already, Russia’s economy is reeling from the impact of these penalties.
This sustained international pressure, and Ukraine’s resistance, may still not be enough to force Russia to end its military campaign.
That leaves Ukraine — and the world — in a perilous and unpredictable moment.
Putin’s war on Ukraine, explained Ukraine is under siege After months of Putin building up tens of thousands of troops near the Ukrainian border and a series of failed diplomatic talks, Russia is now waging a full-out war on Ukraine.
Tensions escalated quickly when, on February 21, Putin delivered an hour-long combative speech that essentially denied Ukrainian statehood.
He recognized the independence of two breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine where Moscow has backed a separatist rebellion since 2014 and sent so-called peacekeeping forces into the region.
As experts said, that was likely just the beginning, setting the stage for a much larger conflict.
On February 24, Putin announced he was launching an assault “to defend people who for eight years are suffering persecution and genocide by the Kyiv regime,” a reference to a false claim about the government in Ukraine.
Soon after Putin’s speech, reports emerged of explosions around cities, including Kharkiv in eastern Ukraine and the capital Kyiv.
Black smoke rises from a military airport in Chuguyev near Kharkiv, Ukraine, on February 24.
The main battlefronts are in Kyiv’s outskirts; in southern Ukraine, including the major city of Mariupol; and in eastern Ukraine around Kharkiv, the country’s second-largest city.
But the Russian army has not been able to completely roll over Ukrainian forces, and some analysts have suggested Moscow may have been surprised at Ukraine’s resistance.
Pentagon officials said that, as of March 4, Russia has committed about 92 percent of its combat power so far.
Samuel Charap, a senior political scientist at RAND Corporation, told a panel of reporters on February 28 that Russia’s military performance has been odd.
I wouldn’t read too much into that about the ultimate course of the war, though.
Members of the Ukrainian civil defense prepare Molotov cocktails in a yard in Kyiv, Ukraine, on February 27.
Efrem Lukatsky/AP Civilian volunteers check their guns at a Territorial Defense unit registration office on February 26 in Kyiv, Ukraine.
Chris McGrath/Getty Images Volunteers weave camouflage nets while setting up a defense position for the Ukrainian military in a building in Kyiv as they anticipated an attack on the city from the Russian army.
Mykola Tys/SOPA Images/LightRocket via Getty Images Putin himself has called on the Ukrainian army to “take power into their own hands and overthrow” Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, a sign that Putin remains focused on regime change.
On February 28, high-level officials from Russia and Ukraine met at the Ukraine-Belarus border, and again on March 3.
Russia has continued to insist that a ceasefire requires “demilitarization” and neutrality for Ukraine, but Ukraine has only continued to push for more military aid and ascension into Western bodies like the EU, even signing an EU membership application amid the fighting.
Both Ukraine and Russia have suggested they will hold another round of talks in coming days.
Across conflicts, there is usually a severe escalation in fighting before ceasefires, as everyone attempts to maximize their leverage.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, center, displays the country’s application for membership in the European Union in Kyiv, Ukraine, on February 28.
Ukrainian Presidency/Handout/Anadolu Agency via Getty Images The toll of this young conflict is growing.
Ukrainian officials have said about 11,000 Russian troops have been killed in the fighting, as of March 6, but American and European estimates of Russian casualties have been substantially lower.
Experts said all these statistics should be treated with a great deal of caution because of the fog of war and the incentives both Russia and Ukraine have to push a particular narrative.
Ukrainian officials have also accused Russia of war crimes after reports of a shelling of an orphanage and kindergarten outside of Kyiv.
Across Ukraine, thousands of civilians of all ages are enlisting to fight.
Ukrainian officials called on residents to “make Molotov cocktails” to defend against the invasion.
More than 1. million Ukrainians have fled to neighboring countries like Poland since the conflict began, according to a United Nations estimate.
Children being treated at a pediatric hospital in Kyiv have been moved to the basement of the hospital, which is being used as a bomb shelter, on February 28.
Aris Messinis/AFP via Getty Images The roots of the current crisis grew from the breakup of the Soviet Union Russia’s invasion contravenes security agreements the Soviet Union made upon its breakup in the early ’90s.
At the time, Ukraine, a former Soviet republic, had the third-largest atomic arsenal in the world.
But the very premise of a post-Soviet Europe is helping to fuel today’s conflict.
The prospect of Ukraine and Georgia joining NATO has antagonized Putin at least since President George W Bush expressed support for the idea in 2008.
A resident checks on a damaged room of her apartment in a residential block hit by an early-morning missile strike in Kyiv, Ukraine, on February 25.
Chris McGrath/Getty Images Ukrainian firefighters arrive to rescue civilians after an airstrike hit an apartment complex in Chuhuiv, Ukraine, on February 24.
Wolfgang Schwan/Anadolu Agency via Getty Images A child swings outside a residential building damaged by a missile strike in Kyiv on February 25, 2022.
Pierre Crom/Getty Images Ukraine is the fourth-largest recipient of military funding from the US, and the intelligence cooperation between the two countries has deepened in response to threats from Russia.
But Ukraine isn’t joining NATO in the near future, and President Joe Biden has said as much.
Still, Moscow’s demand was largely seen as a nonstarter by the West, as NATO’s open-door policy says sovereign countries can choose their own security alliances.
Though Putin has continued to tout the threat of NATO, his speech on February 21 showed that his obsession with Ukraine goes far beyond that.
It is an inalienable part of our own history, culture and spiritual space,” he said, per the Kremlin’s official translation.
As experts noted, it is difficult to square Putin’s speech — plus a 2021 essay he penned and other statements he’s made — with any realistic diplomatic outcome to avert conflict.
It was, essentially, a confession that this wasn’t really about NATO, said Dan Baer, the acting director of the Europe program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and a former ambassador to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Sergei Guneyev/Sputnik/AFP via Getty Images This is the culmination of eight years of tensions This isn’t the first time Russia has attacked Ukraine.
In 2014, Russia annexed the Crimean Peninsula, invaded eastern Ukraine, and backed Russian separatists in the eastern Donbas region.
Russia’s assault grew out of mass protests in Ukraine that toppled the country’s pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych, which began over his abandonment of a trade agreement with the European Union.
Since then, corruption has persisted in the Ukrainian government, and the country ranks in the bottom third of the watchdog group Transparency International’s index.
Ukraine’s far-right presence has grown and become somewhat normalized, and there are government-aligned fascist militias in the country.
But Moscow has drawn out those issues to advance false claims about genocide and other attacks on civilians as a way to legitimize the separatist movement in eastern Ukraine and to create a pretext for invasion.
In his prerecorded speech shared on the eve of the bombardment of Ukraine, Putin said he sought the “denazification” of Ukraine.
The Ukrainian government is not a Nazi regime and has not been co-opted by the far right.
Zelenskyy is Jewish; he speaks proudly of how his Jewish grandfather fought against Hitler’s army.
Ukrainian soldiers prepare to repel an attack in Ukraine’s Luhansk region on February 24.
Anatolii Stepanov/AFP via Getty Images Yet, days earlier, Putin used these sorts of claims as part of his explanation for recognizing as independent the so-called Luhansk People’s Republic and the Donetsk People’s Republic, the two territories in eastern Ukraine where he has backed separatists since 2014.
Of all the patriotic forces of the country,” Putin said before moving troops into the regions for “peacekeeping” purposes.
At the time, most experts Vox spoke to said that looked like the beginning, not the end, of Russia’s incursion into Ukraine.
How the rest of the world is responding The United States and its allies around the world have condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and have since announced increasingly tough sanctions, intended to completely isolate Russia from the international community and inflict real economic costs.
Biden announced on the afternoon of February 24 that the United States would impose sanctions on Russian financial institutions, including cutting off Russia’s largest banks from the United States financial system, and on Russian elites in Putin’s inner circle.
The United Kingdom and Europe added their own sanctions, imposing the “massive” penalties the West had been warning Putin about.
People demonstrate in support of Ukraine outside the residence of UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson in London on February 25.
Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images Tens of thousands of people gather in Tiergarten Park in Berlin, Germany, on February 27 to protest against the ongoing war in Ukraine.
Sean Gallup/Getty Images The United States and its allies have only amped up the pressure since then.
On February 25, the EU and United States imposed sanctions on Putin himself.
On February 26, the United States and European countries announced an agreement to cut some Russian banks off from SWIFT, the global messaging system that enables most international transactions, which will make it very difficult for Russia to make transactions beyond its borders.
The United States and its allies have said they will target Russia’s central bank, specifically its foreign reserves that Moscow needs to help support its currency.
The United States has continued to add penalties, including joining other countries in closing United States airspace to Russian aircraft, and sanctioning more than a dozen oligarchs.
The United States has said it will not involve troops in any Ukrainian conflict, though more United States military aid to Ukraine is on its way and the United States has shored up its presence on NATO’s eastern flank.
Other European and NATO countries are also stepping up their assistance, including Germany, which reversed a long-standing policy of not sending lethal aid to conflict zones.
On February 27, Putin escalated that threat by putting the country’s nuclear deterrent forces on high alert.
American soldiers at the Polish-Ukrainian border near Arlamow, Poland, on February 24.
Maciej Luczniewski/NurPhoto via Getty Images NATO has vowed to protect its members from any Russian aggression.
On February 25, NATO announced that it was activating part of its NATO Response Force — a 40,000-troop unit modernized after the 2014 Crimea invasion — to protect allies on NATO’s eastern flank.
We speak about air and maritime capabilities,” NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg said.
Yet these are largely defensive measures, which means most of the punishment against Russia will come in the form of economic sanctions.
Still, the West is starting to shift from an original hesitancy to impose the most severe costs on Russia over fears of what it might mean for Europe, the US, and the rest of the global economy — and what Russia might do to retaliate.
For example, even the SWIFT action is expected to leave some carve-outs so Russia can still export gas to Europe.
The tougher the sanctions on Russia, the harder it will hit the United States and especially European economies, so leaders are still trying to soften the impact.
But the fallout from these punishments — along with other measures, like the EU and United States barring Russia from their airspace — is being felt in Russia, as the ruble crashes and analysts warn of a deep recession.
Related Prepare for higher gas prices thanks to Russia — and more inflation Maxar satellite imagery shows a large Russian military convoy moving toward Antonov Airport in Hostomel, Ukraine, near Kyiv, on February 28.
Satellite image 2022 Maxar Technologies/DigitalGlobe/Getty Images A way out of this war is difficult to contemplate as bombs are falling on Ukraine, but the United States and its allies are going to have to do careful diplomacy to isolate and put pressure on Russia in the long term — and create incentives for Moscow to stop its assault on Ukraine.
The United States and its allies are also likely going to have to decide how much they want, or can, support Ukraine as it battles Russia.
