May 6 – Security Service of Ukraine has warned State Security Administration that Yulia Tymoshenko’s life is in danger.
May 6 – Supreme Allied Commander Europe of NATO Allied Command Operations General Philip Breedlove said that no regular Russian troops would enter Ukraine, predicting Russia could achieve its goals through other forces by stirring up trouble.
In eastern Ukraine Russian special units are acting familiar to how they acted in Crimea before its annexation, said Breedlove.
Separatists, aiming to destabilize the situation in Odesa oblast, have been arriving from Crimea, informs Dmytro Tymchuk, head of “Information Resistance” group.
Ukrainian intelligence agencies are acting to neutralize these groups of extremists.
May 6 – Acting Deputy Head of Presidential Administration Andriy Senchenko doesn’t rule out terrorist attacks on May 9th in Ukraine.
May 6 – Terrorists are preparing to seize one of the military units in Donetsk.
A large number of weapons, dating back to Soviet times, are located in the above-mentioned military unit.
Separatists are engaged in racketeering at the roadblocks in Luhansk oblast.
Trolling covers a multitude of sins but a particularly nasty strain has emerged in the midst of the armed conflict in Ukraine, which infests comment threads on the Guardian and elsewhere, despite the best efforts of moderators.
Readers and reporters alike are concerned that these are from those paid to troll, and to denigrate in abusive terms anyone criticising Russia or President Vladimir Putin.
Luke Harding, the Guardian's highly experienced former Moscow correspondent, who was expelled in 2011, is in no doubt about the nature of the campaign and how damaging it is to debate in the threads.
At the time no one from the group was prepared to confirm or deny the veracity of the emails, which were sent between November 2010 and December 2011.
Harding said that it was obvious the trolling on Ukraine-related issues was organised, as the trolls ""are given talking points"" and certain phrases were used again and again.
Sometimes I wonder how many of the top people in the new rightwing pro-Nato Guardian are privately educated.
I imagine that Russian-hater Luke Happyman was but do get some state-educated sxcum as well.
In fairness there is no conclusive evidence about who is behind the trolling, although Guardian moderators, who deal with 40,000 comments a day, believe there is an orchestrated campaign.
Harding, who is inured to the abuse, would simply like better systems to deal with it, as would the moderation and community teams.
Zealous pro-separatist comments in broken English claiming to be from western counties are very common, and there's a list of tropes we've learnt to look out for.
These posts may be suspicious but it's when the content of them breaks our community standards that we will step in.
These accusations do break the community standards and moderators take a hand here.
We will also, obviously, act against abusive statements at the expense of our writers, of which Luke receives a substantial number.
Those are more likely to be the reason for us taking action on these threads.
Here are three Ukraine-related stories and the numbers of comments listed and removed for reasons of abuse.
