If the United States and Western NGOs were not up to their eyeballs in the whole 2014 Maidan Square uprising, what was Undersecretary of State Victoria Nuland doing there throughout.
CIA top guns don’t often appear at ground zero – it does send a message.
Paul Mantafort was paid big bucks by pro-Russian Ukrainians to hold these views.
So now Mantafort heads to jail and anything resembling a pro-Putin stance is now suspect in the United States thanks to Muller, the Steel dossier and anti-Trump mania.
The Cold War “revisionist” historians in the United States during the late 60s-70s argued Harry Truman imposed the Cold War on a purely defensive Russian state under Stalin.
Ironically, the revisionist argument, updated to 2018, has much to recommend it.
If we end up with a new Cold War – or worse – with a nation that has many interests that coincide with ours we will have ourselves to blame.
Nikita Kruschev grew up in the Donbass, the pro Russian part of the Ukraine.
He signed the Crimea over to his friend the Governor for the Ukraine in the USSR in 1954 after an evening of binge drinking.
Crimea was therefore only part of Ukraine from 1954-2015 and has an overwhelmingly Russian speaking population who favoured unification, and that’s where it will stay.
This article is what you get when you swallow Putin’s propaganda uncritically.
Ukraine followed the same procedure for transiting the strait as before.
Putin, being the pirate he is, blocked it and attacked the Ukrainian ships.
The seizure of the Nord was a result of the fishing boat’s trespass and was entirely legal.
Only a criminal would protest such an action and that’s why it was simply reported as the minor incident it was.
The Nazi thing is another result of accepting Putin’s lies uncritically.
The Militias that rose to stop Russia’s incursion into the Donbas have long ago been incorporated into government forces.
The commentariat here are the same sort that justified Hitler’s actions in the 30s.
Unfortunately, the Ukraine and democracy can’t be on the same page, to put it mildly.
This incident is a strong indication that Ukraine is a ‘budding’ dictatorship.
So, he only got a partial declaration of martial lower for a limited period.
Unless he intends to flee the country he will be in a prison cell shortly after the election, probably of Timoshenko.
He is liable to become increasingly desperate and therefore increasingly dangerous.
There are a number of readers that do not understand either what happened or are ignorant of UNCLOS law.
Military right of “innocent passage” is also in the law, and has been implemented many a time before.
As article points out, there are many reasons, but most important one is domestic politics.
I do not agree with meely mouthed Zakaria describing Ukraine as illiberal democracy.
Many a Nazi even in this country have rehabilitated themselves by becoming ardent anti-communists, even when they espoused the ideoligy themselves.
It is in this climate, where one oart of the country is trying to impose their ideology upon the rest of the country — that the repression stems from.
West has always been comfortable with East European Nazi collaboratirs, as they were fiercely loyal to anticommunism to save their skins and reputations. day a process by which we would ask people to pay for their own foreign policy and their wars.
Most of the Russia bashing comes from very few, influential circles, and their armies of compliant politicians and media.
What they do — transform their own likes and dislikes into national concern.
Those who respond that Ukraine is right in this case are ignoring the treaty that requires notice of shipping transit.
There is no question that the Ukrainian government willfully refrained from giving notice in order to create a provocation.
To Russia and to Crimeans as well as Eastern peoples of Donbass etc., the Kiev government is illegitimate and illegal.
To support it, Western nations have to deny everything that their own soldiers fought for, in that terrible war.
This article is more of the same Pro-Putinist BS one sees coming from the Russian media and Putin’s propaganda department.
Ukraine has the right to us eth kerch stariat under a treaty Putin himself signed.
The Ukrainians notified the Russians they were coming and called for a pilot.
Putin’s regime is looking for a way to provoke Ukraine into lashing out so Putin can have the all out invasion he craves.
He’s also proved that nothing he says can be trusted, and no agreement he signs is worth the ink it took for him to sign it.
