He served in various levels of command and in staff positions for nine years in the Armor branch before transitioning to the Operations Research and Systems Analysis functional area.
This is part of a Russian strategy focused on Russia reemerging as a dominant power within the region.
When the West threatened Russian interests and Russia viewed the conditions as favorable in terms of being able to achieve its objectives with acceptable levels of risk, Russia utilized controlled escalation of military operations to promote its interests and achieve its objectives.
Russia conducted military operations in Georgia, Crimea and the Donbass region of Ukraine as a means of reasserting its influence within the region while simultaneously seeking to reduce the Western influence of the United States, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and the European Union within Russia’s zone of privileged interest.
This paper argues that Russia utilized controlled escalation in their operations in Georgia, Crimea, and the Donbass region of Ukraine as a means to manage operational cost and risk and maintain the operational initiative in achieving objectives in pursuit of their interests.
There are important lessons the United States and its allies can draw from the Russian operations in Georgia and Ukraine that will inform potential options in countering future Russian aggression. iv Introduction Since the end of World War II, Russia has sought to maintain influence over buffer and satellite states within its orbit.
The fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 and a series of revolutions and elections within these states greatly reduced Russian influence within the region and across the globe.
The Russian operations were initial steps as part of its strategy in pursuit of interests to enable Russia to emerge as the dominant state in the region.
This paper utilizes a qualitative approach to argue that Russia utilized controlled escalation in their operations in Georgia, Crimea, and the Donbass region of Ukraine as a means to manage operational cost and risk and maintain the operational initiative in achieving objectives in pursuit of their interests.
The following paper provides an overview of the Russian interests and objectives it pursued in their military operations in Georgia, Crimea, and the Donbass.
The paper will then compare and contrast the Russian operations to glean insights.
Finally, the paper will address implications and considerations for the United States and NATO as they look to counter future Russian aggression.
Thesis This paper utilizes a qualitative approach to argue that Russia utilized controlled escalation in their operations in Georgia, Crimea, and the Donbass region of Ukraine as a means to manage operational costs and risks and maintain the operational initiative in achieving objectives in pursuit of their interests.
The means are the forces, tools, devices generally associated with national power that a state uses.
The ways explain how a state will utilize its means to achieve its identified end states.
Russia hopes to regain the prestige enjoyed under the Soviet Union by reestablishing global influence and reasserting itself as a legitimate global actor.
In order to do this, Russia feels it must first reassert dominance in the zone of privileged interests or the zone of the near abroad which contains the states of the former Soviet Union.
Russia is pursuing this by attempting to establish a structure placing itself in the center of a new Eurasian order that includes an economic, political, security, and values component.
The EEU is a Moscow-led political and economic union that would include Russia, Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan.
At the extreme, Moscow’s plan would entail a new political entity that would include within its borders Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan.
Russia does not want the states of the former Soviet Union to seek integration into Western structures, like the EU and especially NATO, nor to host any new US military bases.
Moscow’s agenda is to limit the foreign policy options of the former Soviet republics, prevent their integration into the EU and NATO, and ensure their deep integration into the Moscow-led economic and political institutions.
In doing so, Moscow can deny or at least reduce western influence within the Russian near abroad.
The following section provides additional detail on Russian interests, objectives, and background information for both the Ukraine and Georgia.
A string of protest movements developed which led to a heavy handed response from the government.
This led to the removal of the Ukrainian President and the establishment of a pro-Western interim government.
The events led to a sudden loss of influence for Russia with an important neighbor and a geopolitical defeat for the Russians.
Ukraine – Russian Objectives The Russians had four primary objectives for the operations in the Ukraine.
South Ossetian received support from North Ossetia which lies in the Russian Federation.
Tensions rose but a ceasefire initiated a peacekeeping operation that included joint Russia-Ossetian-Georgian patrols.
Georgia and Russia were locked in a frozen but relatively peaceful conflict from the early 90s to 2004 over South Ossetia.
Russian peacekeepers were is both South Ossetia and Abkhazia although the Georgians did not see the peacekeepers as impartial in their role.
Tensions between Russia and Georgia increased in 2004 with the election of President Saakashvili as he committed to restoring Georgia’s lost territories of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
Russia developed a symbiotic relationship with both South Ossetia and Abkhazia 6 issuing Russian passports to large portions of their populations, and Tbilisi saw the Russian’s as pursuing an absorption of South Ossetia.
These events were occurring as Georgia sought closer relations with the west as it pursued membership in NATO and closer ties to the United States.
In April 2008, Georgia attended the NATO Bucharest Summit in hopes of taking steps towards NATO membership.
South Ossetia offered Moscow leverage over Ossetian minorities in Russia and provided a means of diffusing internal problems.
Based upon these interests and the broader interests mentioned earlier, Russia pursued three primary objectives with their operations in Georgia.
The primary objective for the operation was to heighten Georgia’s strategic vulnerability.
The Russians saw Georgia joining NATO as a threat within their area of privileged interest.
The third objective was shift the local military balance of power to Abkhaz authorities and away from Tbilisi.
The fourth objective was to establish military protectorates for the areas of South Ossetia and Abkhazia which would quickly be followed by Russian recognition of statehood for each.
With the interests, objectives, and backgrounds laid out, let’s take a look at the comparison of the Russian military operations in Georgia, Crimea, and the Donbass region.
Russian Operations There are many differences and similarities when assessing the operations in Georgia, Crimea, and in the Donbass region of Ukraine.
Clausewitz highlights that each war and battle is unique as there are different variables and circumstances specific to each.
There are important insights in how the Russians conducted the operations and how the operations enabled the Russians to achieve objectives that supported their interests.
Covert Operations and “Non-Military Measures” The Russian military forces conducted covert operations and performed non-military measures during operations in Georgia, Crimea, and Donbass.
Military forces are part of the official government and armed forces structure, and when openly deployed abroad, implies an act of interstate war, unless under the auspices of a United Nations Security Council mandate.
In Russian doctrine, “non-military measures” include change of militarypolitical leadership, actions against opposition forces, economic blockade, and several others.
Military forces can perform non-military measures, but in some cases, it may require the forces perform the measures covertly or in a capacity in which the state may deny the operation.
Therefore, a state may have their military forces adapt their appearance or operating procedures when performing a non-military measure like civil war in another country so the state may retain plausible deniability.
Russia utilized both regular forces and SOF for covert and non-military measures in the execution of operations in Georgia, Crimea, and Donbass.
The Russian peacekeepers transitioned from performing a non-military measure, carrying out complex measures to reduce tensions in the form of peacekeeping, to a military measure, waging combat operations, in support of operations in both South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
Some of the 9 peacekeepers in Abkhazia participated in a mechanized infantry advance through a UN security zone into undisputed Georgian territory.
Because of the speed of the operations on Crimea and the absence of engagements, the SOF role on Crimea was small but decisive in the operation.
The SOF, pretending to be a local “self-defense militia,” seized control of the Crimean Parliament and raised a Russian flag over the building.
This operation supported the non-military measure of change of military-political leadership in that it enabled the election of “marionette” Sergei Aksenov as new Crimean Prime Minister.
The Russian SOF and elite forces led the takeover of the Ukrainian military’s headquarters and a number of other hardtarget military compounds on Donbass via direct action in order to disrupt command and control of Ukrainian forces.
The Russians utilized conventional forces from the 810th Naval Infantry in armored personnel carriers to seize the city square and support the emplacement of a Russian mayor in Sevastapol.
This demonstrated the use of conventional forces to perform the non-military measure of forcing a change in political-military leadership.
The use of these regular military forces was the first unambiguous indication that Russia decided to intervene militarily to change the political order on Crimea.
Russia utilized SOF for various purposes in Donbass and deployed military forces in significant numbers to conduct operations, they would deny, that were associated with civil war in the Donbass region in the Ukraine.
Russian forces anonymized conventional military force 10 equipment by removing unit markings and number plates on vehicles as they deployed military forces to carry out non-military measures.
There is no plausible explanation for the removal of the vehicle markings and the removal of distinguishing unit designations except to deny they were Russian forces.
The Russians utilized covert operations and/or non-military measures to differing degrees of effectiveness in the operations in Georgia, Crimea and Donbass.
In all three operations, the Russians utilized different forces for non-military measures.
In Georgia, there was a plausible explanation for the presence of regular forces as the Russians had peacekeepers with combat vehicles in both South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
In Crimea, there was also a plausible explanation as the Black Sea Fleet had over 12,000 military personnel stationed in and around Crimea with substantial leeway in bringing additional units in from the mainland.
There was not a plausible explanation for Russian forces in Ukraine so they operated covertly and took great strides to remove identifiable markings from combat vehicles and personnel.
The Russian utilization of SOF varied widely between the operations due to the nature of the conflicts.
In Crimea, the Russians used SOF to conduct decisive operations and setting conditions to cut the command and control capability.
There were no exchanges of fire on Crimea so the conflict did not require the Russians to utilize SOF in a more expanded role.
On Donbass, the Russians utilized SOF in direct action, covert action, and training militias.
The difference in the operational use rests primarily in the fact that the war in Donbass escalated to battles between the Ukrainians and the Russians.
Although it is likely the Russians utilized SOF in direct action and possibly special reconnaissance in the war with 11 Georgia, there were no available authoritative sources on the topic so they are not included in the analysis.
Use of Exercises and Inspections as Cover for Massing Formations The Russians utilized exercises and snap-readiness inspections as a cover for movement and mobilization of forces in preparation for operations and as a means of positioning forces during the conflicts in Georgia, Crimea, and Donbass.
In late July and early August 2008, the Russian 58th Army, Russia’s main military force in the North Caucasus region, conducted extensive joint force exercise, code named “Kavkaz-2008” just north of the Georgian border.
In preparation for the operations in Crimea, Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered an inspection of 150,000 troops from the Western and Central Military District.
Inspections of this scale had become commonplace since 2013, but the Russians utilized this one specifically as a diversion and a cover for troop movements.
Similarly, in the spring of 2014, Russia deployed up to 90,000 service members from elite and regular units to the east and north of Ukraine.
In March 2015, President Putin ordered another large-scale surprise inspection in western Russian involving 80,000 troops and 12,000 vehicles.
The exercise, deployments, and snap inspections enabled Russia to accomplish several critical elements of the military strategy.
Strategically, the deployments served to deter Western or other third party intervention.
The posturing of forces provided Russia with the flexibility to quickly transition to large scale operations should the west attempt to intervene.
Operationally, 12 the postured Russian forces served as a deterrent in the cases of Crimea and Donbass as the Ukrainian leadership recalled what occurred in Georgia with the employment of large formations of Russian forces.
The exercises and inspections also enabled Russia to establish the infrastructure and logistical support for operations.
The availability of large formations of conventional forces provided flexibility to Russian leadership in achieving their objectives.
Integration of Fires to Support Ground Forces Russia’s effective integration and delivery of fires was driven largely by its willingness to acknowledge the presence of military forces on the ground within the conflict areas.
Russian maneuver forces combined with massive air and artillery attacks against Georgian forces created a significant shock effect.
On the Crimean peninsula, the deployment of attack helicopters, armored vehicles, and artillery units substantially reinforced lightly armed anonymized elite regular troops.
The Russians denied the deployment of these combat multipliers for weeks.
The employment of these capabilities enabled the Russians to neutralize Ukrainian armor and operate at night which gave them a great advantage over the Ukrainian forces.
In an attempt to make conventional forces appear non-military, Russia used air support very sparsely in support of ground force operations.
This hampered Russian operations despite the availability of forces (two regiments and ten squadrons of ground-attack aircraft, and one brigade and eight squadrons of attack helicopter) and impeded the suppression of opposing Ukrainian forces.
Regular artillery units supported rebel forces and militia with artillery fire across the border into Ukraine.
The use of fires, especially that of air delivered fires, were very effective in supporting ground operations in Georgia.
In the Ukraine, Russia attempted to conceal the use of fires assets in support of ground operations.
This more restricted use, or in some cases not using the fires assets at all, hindered Russian operations.
Although limited in scale as compared to the Georgian operations, the artillery and attack helicopter use in Crimea enabled the Russian ground forces and, as mentioned in the previous paragraph, enabled support of Russian operations at night.
When openly using their fires assets, the Russians were able to effectively utilize them to enable ground operations.
Implications Russia utilized controlled escalation in their operations in Georgia, Crimea, and the Donbass region of Ukraine as a means of maintaining the operational initiative and managing the operational cost and risks.
In order to maintain the operational initiative, the Russians methodically set conditions and used escalation to covert use of conventional forces to achieve objectives.
This controlled approach enables them to manage the cost and effectively mitigate the risk in achieving their ends especially against a much smaller adversary.
The controlled escalation enabled the Russians to minimize the likelihood of timely western influence or involvement and enabled them to exploit the blurred lines between war and peace in these operations.
This unrest set conditions for 14 escalated use of force by the Russians in the form of their regular forces conducting operations in Ukraine.
In Crimea, the SOF seized parliamentary buildings and military headquarters compounds.
These actions set conditions for elections in which Russian backed candidates took office eventually leading to Crimea becoming part of the Russian federation.
The seizing of the compounds by the Russians disrupted the Ukrainian ability to effectively coordinate operations across the peninsula within a week.
The use of exercises and surprise inspections helped set the conditions for controlled escalation.
The Russians utilized the exercises to posture large formations of regular forces along the respective borders of Georgia, Crimea and the Ukraine.
It masked the movement of forces to particular areas so they could posture for offensive operations.
In Georgia, the exercise served to prepare the Russian forces for the operation as they rehearsed the large scale joint force operation.
Although intended as a deterrent force, Crimea is the only case where it seems to have worked, but the speed in which the Russians conducted the operations and the lack of Ukrainian command and control on the peninsula likely contributed to the lack of action on the Ukrainians part as well.
The massed formations, as a result of exercises and snap inspections, enabled the Russians to quickly escalate to overt operations with large formation of conventional forces.
The Russians set the conditions for the operations so as to conduct the rapid escalation with overwhelming combat power to mitigate the risk associated with achieving their objectives.
This was effective in Crimea in that Russia was able to annex Crimea and seize Ukrainian bases on the peninsula without any direct casualties and little resistance from Ukrainian forces.
The seizure of Crimea provided the Russians with naval and force basing in the Black Sea it desired without fear of losing it to NATO or a NATO member.
By taking control of the Ukrainian naval 15 assets it wanted and relinquishing those it did not want, Russia asserted itself as the most powerful fleet on the Black Sea.
Having the most powerful fleet on the Black Sea supports its interest of reasserting itself within the region postures it to reassert itself globally.
Russia was able to achieve its other three objectives within Ukraine strategically, but it came at an operational cost.
In Donbass, there was a slower transition to the overt use of force which led to less effective fires in supporting the ground operations.
The Russian forces operating in Donbass were largely unmarked so they were not identifiable.
Without an internationally justifiable reason to be in Donbass, the Russian forces utilized the unmarked vehicle technique in an apparent effort to maintain deniability of large scale Russian involvement in the conflict.
While the Russians escalated to the use of regular military forces, the nonstandard use inhibited their ability to quickly achieve their ends in Donbass.
Russia’s eventual employment of its conventional forces enabled it to gain the upper hand in the conflict and forced Ukraine authorities to eventually negotiate leading.
Russia wanted the Donbass region as negotiating leverage to gain control of Ukraine’s strategic orientation.
Russia’s desire to use an escalatory approach so as to minimize the cost of the operation created significant operational challenges for the Russian forces as they operated covertly initially.
As a result of the eventual successful operations of conventional forces, Russia was also able to maintain economic ties and influence in the eastern and southern portions of Ukraine.
If there is a mismatch between the forces Russia has available, means, and the identified objective, the ends, the foe has an opportunity to regain the initiative.
Despite quick Russian actions in Georgia, the Georgian forces had a small window of initial success before the larger conventional Russian forces arrived in South Ossetia.
In the case of Donbass, Russia avoided utilizing their conventional forces and miscalculated Ukrainian nationalism which served to rally the country against Russia.
As this prolonged, Russia moved to eventually employ its conventional forces.
While the employment of conventional raised the cost both militarily and with scrutiny amongst the international community, the forces provided Russia with the means to achieve its objectives.
In Georgia, the Russian’s quickly transitioned to the overt use of conventional forces to achieve their objectives.
The Russians justified the offensive operations in Georgia by claiming they were protecting their citizens and peacekeepers in South Ossetia.
The overt use of force included the effective use of fires to enable the ground forces to achieve their objectives.
The combined effects of ground forces, fires, SOF, and militia enabled the Russians to escalate quickly and set conditions for the seizure.
The Russians established protectorates and quickly moved by Russian recognition of statehood for both South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
The Russian accomplishment of these objectives collectively stood to heighten Georgia’s strategic vulnerability.
Russia is likely to continue to pursue interests within the region utilizing the same tactics by exploiting the blurred line between war and peace.
Russia will continue to assert its influence to attain dominance in its near abroad.
The blurred area in which these operations sit within the spectrum of peace and war limits the ability of the West, NATO, and the international community to intervene militarily without risking much broader conflict.
It is not likely that NATO will offer membership to states with ongoing border disputes as it could conceivably draw NATO into conflict almost immediately given the frozen conflicts in South Ossetia and Abkhazia and the continued conflict in the Donbass could spark broader conflict.
The United States must determine its interests as it pertains to the region, the CIS, the Baltics, and based upon its interests, the United States must develop a consistent and coherent foreign policy in regards to the region.
Upon determining the US’s interests and foreign policy for the region, the United States must work with its NATO partners to determine an approach to dealing with Russia within the region and more specifically in regards to the Ukraine and Georgia.
As demonstrated by the Russian operations in 2008 in Georgia and in Ukraine 2014, NATO membership for these countries or moves by these countries away from Russian interests will prompt action from Russia.
Because of the Article 5 defense requirements in the NATO charter, an attack on one member of NATO is an attack on all members.
The continued disputes between Russia and the states of Ukraine and Georgia make NATO membership problematic as it would escalate tensions between NATO and Russia and possibly lead to further conflict.
This does not mean that NATO should not continue to work with Georgia and Ukraine on prospective membership in the future.
The United States and NATO must weigh the risk and potential costs associated with likely tensions or conflict with Russia over the membership.
Given the almost certain escalation by Russia in these circumstances, the United States and NATO must be prepared to respond should they desire to take action pursuant to their interest.
Because of the rapid escalatory measures Russia can take in this style of warfare, the response time for the United States and NATO is extremely narrow.
With massed formations for inspections and exercises, Russia can take action quickly to achieve objectives before western forces can move forces into the region.
The rapid escalatory measures inhibit the ability for international organizations to respond because of the typically slower more deliberate bureaucratic processes these organizations require for action.
Because of the narrow response time, the United States must develop and wargame potential US and NATO actions to pursue interests or to counter Russian escalation within the region.
Like Clausewitz points out, the situation and circumstances associated with any conflict will be different given the myriad of factors and variables that may exist.
The wargame must be detailed in so far as it identifies the conditions that would likely lead to the use of some combination of power by the United States, NATO, or another ally to pursue interests or counter Russian escalation.
The utilization of diplomatic, informational, and economic means of power will continue to be the predominant forms utilized to coerce Russia.
Because of Russia’s ability to escalate and deescalate quickly, the United States and its allies must be able to anticipate or recognize escalatory patterns to more effectively provide a timely response against Russian aggression to inhibit their ability to achieve objectives.
Again, the proximity to Russia makes military or even clandestine operations more challenging and difficult.
The United States could attempt to utilize national assets to determine if there were any patterns and to provide early warning of large formation movements by the Russians.
The extensive use of Human intelligence, as well as open source intelligence will be critical in providing some early warning as to Russian intentions and movements.
The most opportune time to counter Russia will be when they are in a period of greatest risk.
As identified in the implications section, Russia attempts to achieve its objectives at a lower cost and can be vulnerable in the periods before escalation.
In both Georgia and Ukraine, Russia faced setbacks during these periods.
Because their forces were far inferior to the Russian forces, they were not able to exploit the opportunity.
If the United States or NATO were to take action or want to provide assistance to states in the CIS to counter Russian aggression, these periods would be the most opportune.
There is risk associated with this action as Russia will likely see any action to support a state within the CIS by the United States or NATO as provocative.
The historical use cases in Georgia and Ukraine demonstrate Russia’s willingness to exploit the blurred lines between war and peace and the use of rapidly escalatory means to achieve objectives in pursuit of their interests.
The controlled escalation enables the Russians to gauge risk and balance costs stay ahead of their adversary’s and the west’s decision cycles.
Understanding how the Russians utilize their military means of power to influence and coerce states within this zone is important in shaping potential options to counter Russian influence.
The Russians have periods of risk in which there are opportunities to disrupt the momentum of their operations as they take escalatory measures, but the opportunities are fleeting.
Understanding these case studies and their implications provide insights to the United States, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the European Union, and the international community in terms of how they might counter Russian military escalation if it is in their interest to do so.
Moscow’s campaign to ‘coerce Georgia to peace’,” International Affairs 84, no. , 1167.
The Russian Approach to the Use of Armed Force as Seen in Ukraine,” The Journal of Slavic Military Studies 29, no.
