Imagine, for a moment, that the future of global political power is a zero-sum contest, one in which you—the wealthy, self-elected head of a heavily armed petroleum state—are competing against the United States.
Now imagine that your competitor appears to be relenting as it looks to shrink its global military footprint and loses interest in maintaining the alliances that hold you in check.
A zero-sum game may not be the best way to understand global affairs, but it is how Russian President Vladimir Putin understands it.
The West’s loss is his gain, or at least, something to show the Russian people in order to discredit democracy.
Several experts who closely track Russian military and diplomatic maneuverings have offered their view of what Putin may try to pull in 2019.
They predict that the situation between Russia and Ukraine will worsen.
Some expect an imminent attack against Ukraine after a prolonged military tank buildup on the border.
Others were more conservative in the estimates of when and how large new hostilities would flare.
Both Russian and Ukrainian officials have been forecasting an increase in hostility in 2019, each preemptively blaming the other.
On Dec., Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said Russia believes Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko was preparing some sort of “provocation” near the end of the month.
They note in particular recent Russian statements about the possibility of Ukrainian use of chemical weapons.
Meanwhile, the Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, Gen.
Viktor Muzhenko, has said that the Russian military poses its greatest threat to Ukraine since 2014.
At a recent press conference, Muzhenko pointed to satellite imagery of a new military base near Kamensk-Shakhtinsky, close to the Ukrainian border.
The photos show hundreds of T-64 and T-62 tanks, plus trucks and artillery.
ISW concludes that the tank build-up heralds an increased likelihood of an offensive.
Kofman is unconvinced since neither the Russian military, nor the irregular “separatist” forces that they support, use T-62 and T-64 tanks.
The forces fighting in Ukraine are trained on more modern T-64BV and T-72B1 tanks and there is little overlap, he says.
Experts also pointed to the possibility that Russian forces could launch a land grab operation from the illegally annexed Crimean peninsula.
The Black Sea Fleet has its headquarters there and the Russians recently deployed the S-400 anti-aircraft radar and missile battery to the peninsula as well.
But the most important factor in the future of Crimea is the acute shortage of water, a situation that’s going to get much worse by 2040.
Crimea derives 86 percent of its water from the Dnieper-Crimea canal in Ukraine.
In 2014, the government of Ukraine cut off water to the annexed peninsula, exacerbating the shortage.
While Russia has been building infrastructure to connect Crimea to Russia, such as a large bridge, there is no easy or cheap replacement for the water coming from Ukraine.
Michael Carpenter, a former deputy assistant defense secretary with responsibility for Russiaand Ukraine, says that the Dnieper Crimea canal could be Putin’s prime target in Ukraine in 2019.
Without this water, Crimea’s agriculture sector can’t survive,” wrote Carpenter, who is now senior director of the Penn Biden Center for Diplomacy and Global Engagement.
Experts were split on whether that represented ideal timing for such an assault or terrible timing since an assault could provide the beleaguered Poroshenko government in Kyiv a justification for postponing the elections.
Polish President Andrzej Duda has been pushing United States President Donald Trump for a U.S.military base in Poland.
Carpenter predicts that if Trump submits to that wish, Putin will push hard for a countering base in Belarus, an ally of Russia.
It’s something that Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko “has skillfully resisted until now,” says Carpenter.
In Yugoslavia, “If Kosovo and Serbia reach a deal on a land-swap and mutual diplomatic recognition, I expect Russia will back Republika Srpska’s secession from Bosnia, which could lead to renewed conflict in the Balkans,” he says.
Across the Middle East, and particularly in Syria, the United States withdrawal will make Moscow “even more of a regional powerbroker, but it will also saddle the Kremlin with the cost of propping up the Assad regime ,” Carpenter says.
The Russians could also initiate a limited military operation in Libya to lend a hand to Moscow’s favorite Gaddafi wanna-be, Libyan Gen.
Khalifa Haftar, who has taken over a large part of the country and who visits Moscow frequently.
Meanwhile, Putin is poised to gain from the United States pullout from Afghanistan as well, Carpenter predicts.
The Taliban will almost certainly gain in strength after the United States drawdown,” he says.
On the science and technology front, Russia will look to field new long-range missiles that would have been prohibited under the crumbling INF treaty, Russian Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu said recently.
He also projected that Russia would conduct no fewer than 4,000 exercises in 2019.
The number of exercises Russia partakes in has been going up every year since 2008, according to Aki Heikkinen, curator of the site Russiamilitarywatch.com.
Heikkinen says be on the lookout for at least one involving the Strategic Missile Corps and one in the Southern Military District, the nearest one to Crimea and the Black Sea.
Aleksandr Dvornikov, is “very capable and has rapidly upped combat capabilities with innovative training and giving officers much more operational freedom to execute tasks,” he says.
Russia will continue to invest and rapidly upgrade electronic and cyber weapons, with many new systems coming online, he says.
Commanders will emphasize new electronic warfare and counter electronic warfare training across the branches.
In terms of artificial intelligence, where Putin has lofty ambitions but lacks the discretionary budget of China nor the tech sector of the U.S., “there is a stark realization in Russia that it has to invest in developing advanced digital technologies or risk losing out in the technology race.
In fact, President Putin actually stated that if Russia does not make a concerted effort in that field, the country “won’t even be able to jump on the last car of the fast-moving technological progress train,” said Bendett.
In March, the Russian Ministry of Defense and the Academy of Science announced that they would begin working on an AI development roadmap to guide the future of AI in conflict and military affairs.
How quickly Vladimir Putin will be able to achieve any of his aims will depend—and not exclusively—on the West’s willingness to exact economic and other penalties on Russia for his behavior.
