Discrimination along ethnic and linguistic lines, xenophobia and racial extremism.
This study covers the period from the end of November 2013 to the end of March 2014 and deals with the situation with human rights and the rule of law that emerged in Ukraine as a result of a violent seizure of power and unconstitutional coup.
As a factual basis, a careful monitoring of Ukrainian, Russian and some Western media reports was conducted, covering statements and announcements made by the leaders of the “new government” of Ukraine and their supporters, numerous eyewitness accounts, including those posted on the Internet, as well as records based on observations and interviews with people on the scene, and those collected by non-governmental organization The Foundation for Researching Problems in Democracy, and the Moscow Bureau for Human Rights.
Excerpts from the basic international documents on human rights whose universal regulations and standards have been violated in Ukraine during the indicated period precede each section of this study.
Nonetheless, the present list of the most flagrant violations of fundamental international norms of human rights and the rule of law committed in this country, by ultranationalist, neo-Nazi, and extremist forces which have monopolized the Euromaidan protests, far from being exhaustive, gives enough grounds to claim that such violations were widespread.
The history of the twentieth century has given tragic lessons which would be irresponsible and also at times just unlawful to ignore.
Those who cynically, in pursuit of their own selfish interests and under the guise of good intentions and pseudo-democratic demagogy, are plunging a multimillion multi-ethnic Ukrainian population into extremism, lawlessness, and a deep crisis of national identity.
The onslaught of racism, xenophobia, ethnic intolerance, the glorification of the Nazis and their Banderite sycophants should be brought to a speedy end through the united efforts of the Ukrainian people and the international community.
The alternative is fraught with so devastating consequences for peace, stability, and democratic development in Europe, that it is absolutely necessary to prevent further escalation of this situation.
No restrictions may be placed on the exercise of this right other than those imposed in conformity with the law and which are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security or public safety, public order , the protection of public health or morals or the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.
All persons are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to the equal protection of the law.
No one shall be deprived of his life intentionally save in the execution of a sentence of a court following his conviction of a crime for which this penalty is provided by law.
Deprivation of life shall not be regarded as inflicted in contravention of this article when it results from the use of force which is no more than absolutely necessary … in action lawfully taken for the purpose of quelling a riot or insurrection.
The first clashes between the police and demonstrators occurred in Kiev.
After the opposition rally entitled For a European Ukraine, a portion of the demonstrators Svoboda) tried to break into the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine building’s territory and block the passage for government vehicles.
The police retaliated, using tear gas to stop the protestors’ aggression.
Activists from several right-wing groups, including the Stepan Bandera All-Ukrainian Organization Trizub movement, the Socio­National Assembly/Patriot of Ukraine , the Ukrainian National Assembly party, the Bilyi Molot group, as well as football fans, organized the informal Pravyi Sektor association at Euromaidan.
Under this «brand», radical nationalist activists were further mobilized to participate in the Euromaidan rebellion, including participating in violent confrontations with law enforcement officers.
Right-wing activists primarily associated with Pravyi Sektor, organized trainings on tactics for violent confrontation with law enforcement officials, including exercising of group actions using available tools as melee weapons.
During a mass demonstration in Kiev, activists of radical nationalist groups, joined by football hooligans, some radical activists in AUU Svoboda, and protesting youth, carried out a series of illegal actions.
Same evening, activists of right-wing groups, including members of AUU Svoboda, attempted to vandalize the monument to Lenin on Shevchenko Boulevard, provoking a clash with members of the Special Forces.
A group of extremists demolished and destroyed the monument to Lenin on Shevchenko Boulevard in Kiev.
Responsibility for this act of vandalism was claimed by AUU Svoboda, which is represented in the Parliament.
Opponents of the current government put up a fierce resistance to law enforcement officers who were trying to comply with the decision of the Shevchenko district court of Kiev on the Prohibition of blocking government buildings and obstructing the governmental activity.
Euromaidan supporters barricaded themselves inside the Kiev city state administration building and deliberately provoked the police to use force by throwing stones from the windows at law enforcement and pouring water over them using fire hoses.
Due to the gravity of the situation, the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Ukraine was forced to withdraw the Special Forces from the captured building.
Euromaidan protestors set up barricades around the perimeter of Maidan and Khreschatyk Boulevard and announced the resumption of picketing the government quarter.
Pravyi Sektor militants engaged in violent clashes with security forces on Grushevski St.
Brody State Administration in Lviv Oblast was violently taken over by AUU Svoboda forces.
Lviv, Ternopil and Rivne Regional State Administrations were violently taken over by AUU Svoboda forces.
In the Ukraine regions, the formation of the so-called «People’s Self-Defense groups» and the so-called «People’s Councils» began under the supervision of AUU Svoboda.
Preparations began for carrying out the rebellion and seizure of power in Kiev, as well as fundraising and the stockpiling of ammunition for rioters on Maidan.
Forcible takeovers of the regional administration buildings in Sumy, Zhytomyr, Poltava, Zaporozhye, Dnepropetrovsk, Uzhgorod were attempted.
Activists of the radical movement Obschee Delo attempted to seize Ministry of Energy and Coal Industry of Ukraine premises.
Activists of the radical movement Obshee Delo seized the the Ministry of Justice of Ukraine.
The opponents of the current government seized the buildings of regional administrations in all areas of Western Ukraine, except for the Transcarpathian region.
One was forcibly locked in the basement, hit by a «Molotov cocktail» and died of suffocation and burns.
The other’s head was smashed in and he was thrown down a flight of stairs.
Females who were present in the building were stripped half-naked, their backs were painted with symbols and slogans, and then they were kicked out into the street.
Supporters of Euromaidan attempted to capture the Interior Ministry and Security Service of Ukraine buildings in Ternopil and IvanoFrankivsk regions, in order to appropriate weapons.
Large-scale street riots in Kiev resumed, which resulted, according to the Ministry of Health of Ukraine, in the killing of 77 people , with more than a thousand injured.
A group of radicals seized the building of the Lviv regional state administration overnight.
Riots were staged in the Lviv region Ministry of Internal Affairs building, in the Lviv oblast District Attorney’s Office, and at the Lviv region Office of Security Services of Ukraine.
After the riots at the MIA and USBU buildings, the law enforcement officers who were forced out of the building were stripped of their epaulets, disrobed of their uniforms, all of which was thrown into a bonfire that was started near the building’s entrance.
Buildings of Military Unit N9 4114 of Interior Troops of Ukraine in Lviv were burned down.
As a result, the officers and soldiers of the unit completely lost their uniforms, ammunition, weapons, and a place to sleep.
The so-called «People’s Self-Defense» activists established roadblocks at the state and regional level, as well as at entrances to the major cities of Western Ukraine.
He was handcuffed to the local Euromaidan stage and asked to sign a «voluntary» resignation.
After refusing, he was thrown on his knees, which caused him to smash his forehead on the ground.
Five liters of water were poured on him, and then he was cuffed to the stage again.
When that did not work, the Euromaidan activists took the governor away in an unknown direction and sent a group of thugs to his house to intimidate his family members.
Near the town of Korsun-Shevchenkovsky , several buses with passengers, who were returning to Crimea from protests against European integration at St.
Michael’s Square in Kiev, were fired upon and stopped at the barricades, where the flags of the UPA, the Udar party and AUU Svoboda were flying.
The people, both men and women, were dragged out of the buses through a «corridor» of militants who beat them with bats and entrenching shovels.
Then the passengers were knocked down in a heap on the roadside, doused with gasoline, and threatened to be set on fire.
After that, many Crimeans were forced to take off their shoes «for the needs of Maidan soldiers», and they were driven around the buses like cattle and forced to pick up the broken glass.
People’s Self-Defense activists fired at a bus with Belarusian tourists who were traveling to Western Ukraine.
As a result, the bus driver, a Russian citizen, was hospitalized with a gunshot wound.
On the same day, when the parliamentary opposition leaders publically announced on Maidan the conditions of signing the Agreement, a representative of the so-called «Maidan Self-Defense» V Parasyuk said that he and the rest of the Self­Defense members were not satisfied with a document that agreed on gradual political reforms.
He demanded the immediate resignation of President Viktor Yanukovych; otherwise Self-Defense was going to go to storm the Presidential Administration and the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.
He called the agreement «another attempt to pull the wool over the people’s eyes» and refused to implement it.
Euromaidan supporters in 18 Ukrainian cities demolished monuments to Lenin.
They were looking for some documents and the mayor himself, who managed to escape.
A monument to a Soviet soldier was removed in a city of Stri in the Lviv oblast.
Euromaidan activists succeed in capturing the government district, which was abandoned by police officers, and they issued a number of new demands, in particular, the immediate resignation of President Yanukovych.
O Turchynov was elected the the new Speaker of the Ukrainian parliament.
Only the intervention of the Udar party leader V Klichko, who appealed not to lynch Shufrich, saved him.
According to eyewitnesses, he had needles pushed under fingernails, his right lung pierced, three ribs, nose, and facial bones broken.
After the severe torture, R Vasilko was taken to hospital, where the threats continued.
Eventually, Vasilko had to flee Ukraine with the help of his relatives.
The regional and city offices in Volyn and Lutsk and many other party premises were taken over by illegal armed groups.
On a stage installed in Lviv’s central square, near the monument to Taras Shevchenko, local nationalists forced Ukrainian Interior Ministry «Berkut» Special Forces of Lviv to «get on knees and beg for forgiveness for participating in actions against Euromaidan in Kiev.
The decision was made in the Verkhovna Rada to appoint Speaker O Turchynov as interim President of Ukraine for the period up to May 25, 2014.
After that, the legitimate President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych, who was forced to leave the country because of threats to his life and the lives of his family, said during a press conference in Rostov-on-Don, Russia, on 28 February 2014, that he was still the legitimate head of the Ukrainian state, elected by the free will of its citizens, noting also that none of the conditions stipulated by the Constitution of Ukraine on the early termination of Presidential powers were followed properly.
In Uzhgorod, Transcarpathian region, local activists of Pravyi Sektor tied the regional administration head of customs S Harchenko to a pole in front of administration building.
The activists threatened him with violence, and he was forced to resign.
Volyn region district attorney staff turned to the acting Prosecutor General of Ukraine with a request for protection, given that Pravyi Sekyor militants forced them to resign from their posts, and in the case of disagreement, they were threatened with firearms.
The Resolution was provided for the early termination of office and dismissal, due to «breach of oath», of five Constitutional Court of Ukraine judges, including the Chairman of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine.
On two occasions, deputies of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine held a political amnesty, freeing 28 people who were jailed on the suspicion of committing a crime or who had already been found guilty of committing one.
It is indicative that not all the amnestied individuals, who were presented to the public as «political prisoners», were involved in any political action.
For example, Sergey and Dmitry Pavlychenko were criminated for murdering a judge and subsequently convicted.
Another amnestied «political prisoner» was Igor Gannenko, the leader of a neo-Nazi gang, which committed crimes motivated by ethnic, racial, and religious hatred, including anti-Semitism.
Some amnestied radical nationalists, taking on the romantic aura of «martyrdom», immediately rushed to take an active part in the political life of the country.
Vindicated by their imprisonment, they manipulated young adults and teenagers, casting themselves and those of their kind as heroes.
This primarily regards the group of leaders of the «Patriot of Ukraine» movement.
Between 2006 and 2011 this group, according to human rights NGOs, was the most serious neo-Nazi organization in Ukraine.
The ideologist of the organization, Oleg Odnorozhenko, was accused of organizing several beatings of political opponents by the «Patriot of Ukraine» militants, and participating in these beatings.
The most famous of the amnestied «Patriot of Ukraine» activists were the so-called «Vasilkovsky terrorists», including Igor Moseichuk, Sergei Bevz, and Vladimir Shpara.
They were radical nationalists from Vasylkov, the Kiev region and, by a January 2014 ruling of the Kiev region Svyatoshinsky District Court, were convicted of preparing a terrorist act.
Just a few days after their release, the amnestied «Patriot of Ukraine» movement leaders became involved in the political life of Ukraine under the Pravyi Sektor banner.
In response to the rejection of the «new Kiev government» by the inhabitants of the Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, leaders of right-wing groups in Ukraine issued a statement calling for the «punishment» of Crimeans for their openly expressed civil position.
In particular, the activist Igor Moseychuk, who was convicted for terrorism and amnestied by the «new government», publicly proposed to arrange «trains of friendship» consisting of the right-wing nationalist militants to punish the inhabitants of the peninsula for their decision.
He was taken out to the crowd and forced to kneel and ask for forgiveness.
As a result of the massive attack, civilians who voluntarily defended the administrative building were killed.
A video surfaced on the Internet showing the coordinator of the Pravyi Sektor in Western Ukraine, A Muzychko publicly beat and humiliated employee of Rivne prosecutor’s office A Targoniya at his workplace.
Crimean self-defense forces managed to prevent a major terrorist attack on the peninsula.
However, the regional investigating authorities of Kherson, where the detainees were transferred, still have not given any legal assessment to the facts.
The illegal armed groups seized the Dovzhenko Film Studio administrative building.
The aggressors demanded access to the shop that housed weapons and pyrotechnics.
The Crimean people were ordered, under the threat of physical violence, not to participate in peaceful demonstrations opposing the Maidan movement.
Crimean activists, including Tatar religious figures, their relatives, and children received threatening messages on their phones.
Nationalist groups organized pickets outside the Russian Consulate General in Lviv.
In the evening, the protesters attempted to block the main vehicle entrance gate using their personal vehicles.
Pravyi Sektor gunmen carried out a series of arson attacks on nonresidential premises and private vehicles of Crimean residents.
It was reported that the Ukranian Parliamaent is ready to introduce a bill that calls for a prison sentence of 3 to 10 years for Ukrainian citizens who apply for a second citizenship.
The document was submitted to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine in the beginning of February 2014 by deputies from the Batkivshchyna faction, Alexander Brigintsa, Leonid Emtsom and Andrei Pavlovsky.
The bill’s authors still do not consider it necessary to withdraw the bill.
A recording of the telephone conversation, dated February 26, 2014, between the Estonian Foreign Minister U Paet and EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Catherine Ashton, following the visit of the Foreign Minister of Estonia to Ukraine, surfaced on the Internet.
During the conversation, Paet referred to information, received from the chief Maidan doctor O Bogomolets, about snipers who had shot people during the protests in Kiev.
According to Paet, all evidence points to the fact that both protesters and law enforcement officers were killed by the same snipers.
He said that the new coalition is unwilling to investigate the exact circumstances of the incident and the people are growing rapidly aware that these snipers were not hired by Yanukovych, but by someone from the new coalition.
Paet also noted that in Ukraine, there is very strong pressure on the members of parliament.
He said that journalists saw armed men beat a deputy in broad daylight in front of the Verkhovna Rada.
Euromaidan supporters in Sevastopol carried out an assault at a collection point for humanitarian aid.
There were reports posted on the Ukrainian forum antifashist. com, that the people’s governor of Donetsk Region Pavel Gubarev, who had been detained the same day by the Security Service of Ukraine, was being tortured.
The reports stated that, according to data obtained from physicians working in SBU prison in Kiev, where P Gubarev is being held, he was severely beaten several times and eventually fell into a coma.
Prison physicians didn’t have enough medical opportunities to attend to P Gubarev in jail, but the medics were prohibited to transfer him to another facility because the Security Service did not want to make the incident public.
Shortly after, the portal of Vremya Novosti had information that P Gubarev had not just been beaten but also tortured in order to force him to confess that he was on a mission from Russian special services.
Self-Defense Forces in Simferopol, Crimea, detained two nationalradicals, natives of Rivne, who had been previously convicted.
Ukrainian activists of right-wing organizations located in the Crimea shouted extremist slogans during the celebration of the 200th anniversary of Taras Shevchenko in Simferopol.
In Kharkov, about 10 radical nationalists attacked the activists, who were returning from the rally against the current Kiev authorities.
As a result, several activists were injured, and one of them was subsequently hospitalized.
March 9, 2014 Pravyi Sektor militants gunned down E Slonevsky, a local businessman, at a cafe in the center of Kharkov.
Cases of destruction of Crimea peninsula residents’ passports by provocateurs were documented.
The said provocateurs visited houses under the guise of Crimean law enforcement officials and representatives of electoral commissions, asking the citizens to show their passports, and once having received them, tore them, making them invalid.
While trying to break through the Crimean Self-Defense forces checkpoint, a Pravyi Sektor activist resorted to using weapons; however, he was neutralized and sent to the hospital.
A resident of Ivano-Frankivsk who arrived in Sevastopol brought down fire on Ephraim St.
After his arrest, he said that in Kiev, he acquired the weapons and was assigned a task to stage a provocation.
Thirty masked men with wooden sticks entered the premises of the Sviatoshynskyi district prosecutor’s office in Kiev.
They threatened to inflict physical harm on the senior prosecutor and his family members, and demanded that he write a letter of resignation.
In Donetsk, peaceful demonstrators who took to the streets to express their opposition to the «new Ukrainian authorities» and support the idea of the country’s federalization were attacked by non-lethal weapons and bats, wielded by right-wing militant groups who began to arrive to the city the night before from other regions of Ukraine.
About 20 armed men in masks and camouflage uniforms broke into the office of UkrBusinessBank in the center of Kiev, disarmed the guards, and tried to enter the cash vault.
At the police station they called themselves «soldiers of Narnia», claiming to be part of the Maidan Self-Defense group.
A detachment of the radical nationalists in camouflage uniforms and flak jackets with metal sticks and bats in hand, stormed the prosecutors’ office in the Sviatoshynskyi district of Kiev.
All prosecutors were forced out of the office rooms into the corridor, and then seven insurgents attacked one of the prosecutors, Valentine Bryantsev, beating him with bats.
The attackers demanded to close a pending Sviatoshynskyi District Court criminal case against one of their accomplices.
In the center of Kiev, a group of young men in masks with Pravyi Sektor armbands and machine guns attacked three local residents.
About ten of these individuals shot off automatic rifle fire into the air, and they hit one of the tenants on the head with a metal bar.
They demanded that the rector of the university, Professor N Kulik, write a letter of resignation.
The scientist was saved from punishment only by the police who rushed to the scene.
The Director of the Department of Migration Services of Ukraine N Naumenko, who refused to give Pravyi Sektor militants files with refugee cases, was beaten and stabbed in the face.
According to media reports, numerous armed groups generated by the Ukrainian Euromaidan movement were financially poor after the «hot phase» of the coup and resorted to robbery and racketeering as a source of revenue.
The new «leadership» of the MIA of Ukraine turns a blind eye on this fact.
Praviy Sektor interrupted work of the Sberbank-Ukraine branch office in Vinnitsa.
About ten militants barricaded the door of the bank, stacked tires in front of it, and allowed neither customers nor employees to enter.
In the same way, they promised «to starve out» the other offices of Russian banks in the area.
According to unconfirmed reports, one such sticker costs from 10 to 25 thousand dollars.
A group of unidentified men demanded owners of a restaurant in the Podgortsi, Kiev region, to transfer their business to the property of the people.
The men called themselves members of the Maidan Self-Defense movement and threatened to destroy the property using «Molotov cocktails», demanding throughout the day that the owners transfer business ownership over to the people.
At the Kiev Borispol airport, over 30 Sevastopol sailors returning from long voyage became victims of looting and robbery committed by unknown persons who introduced themselves as Euromaidan militants.
Turning to the police resulted in no action, and the airport management chose not to advertise this fact.
On the night of March 14, 2014 the building of Bessarabian market in Kiev was set ablaze.
Eyewitnesses claim that immediately after the fire started, a few dozen Maidan Self-Defense militants in camouflage uniforms with batons exited the building.
Pravyi Sektor militants staged a massacre in Kharkov, during which two people were killed and four wounded.
Journalists contend that the militants were led by Andrew Beletskyi, one of Pravyi Sektor’s leaders.
The voiced assumption was that he, along with other rebel leaders, was released by the police.
Representatives of law enforcement agencies arrived at an apartment in the Dnieper district of Kiev to detent the landlord for illegal possession of drugs.
However, almost immediately another group of people, calling themselves members of the Maidan Self-Defense, arrived on the scene.
They tied and immobilized police officers and the prosecutor, took their identification cards from them, and told the officers that their IDs would be passed on to the Assistant Minister of the Interior.
Former Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk called on the «powers in Kiev» to give their attention to the fact that looting has already begun in Ukraine, with Kravchuk’s own house being looted, too.
While the authorities promise to restore order, I am forced to shoot to protect myself,» said the first president of Ukraine.
Russia announced an international search for the leader of the ultranationalist Pravyi Sektor organization D Yarosh, who threatened to cut off the supply of Russian gas to the EU through Ukraine’s territory.
D Yarosh also urged the Ukrainian government to order the formation of guerrilla and sabotage groups, which must take action in case armed forces of the Russian Federation enter Ukraine’s territory.
First Deputy Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada Committee on Fighting Organized Crime and Corruption G Moskal said that twenty unidentified Euromaidan activists armed with Kalashnikov machine guns and pistols seized the residential house belonging to Ukrkomplekt Plus company, in Kobtsy village in the Vasilkovskaja district of Kiev region.
The house was under protection of the State Security Service of the Vasilkovskaja police department.
The SBU staff, and following them, the task force of Vasilkovskaja police department, arrived on call.
But instead of protecting the property, the SBU and police forces went on to consume spirits stolen from the house, together with the criminals.
In the morning, without taking any measures, the law enforcement officers left.
The written appeal from the owners of the home to the Vasilkovskaja police department brought no response.
As the young people remained silent in response, the extremists have beaten them severely.
Members of Pravyi Sektor refused to surrender their weapons and join the National Guard of Ukraine.
According to the organization’s leader D Yarosh, there are about 10 thousand Pravyi Sektor members in Ukraine.
In Simferopol, shots from a sniper killed a Crimean self-defender and a Ukrainian soldier.
Two more people, a Crimean self-defender and a Ukrainian soldier, were wounded.
The Ministry of Defense of Ukraine passed the order to the Armed Forces of Ukraine stationed in the Crimea, allowing the use of weapons.
March 20, 2014 Deputy Head of the Committee of National Defense of Sevastopol S Tutuev said that recently, 30 alleged ultra-right activists who planned provocation during Crimea people referendum were arrested in Sevastopol and deported to mainland Ukraine.
The night after the referendum, a signal from the Euromaidan leaders calling for the retreat from the peninsula was intercepted,» said S Tutuev.
Posing as «anti-corruption committee staff», they tried to seize folders with archive documents.
A house belonging to the leader of the movement Ukrainskyi Vybor V Medvedchuk was burned down.
At the same time, citizens who submitted Russian passports were forced to hand over their money and jewelry.
Attempts by the victims to submit a report to the local police were in vain.
Radical nationalists from the Pravyi Sektor extremist movement created a party under the same name on the basis of the Ukrainian National Assembly political party.
The members of the party included other nationalist groups who support the Pravyi Sektor movement.
Its elected leader D Yarosh was nominated as a candidate for the presidential elections in Ukraine.
The property and funds of 23 children’s health camps were handed over to Pravyi Sektor leader D Yarosh for National Guard of Ukraine youth reserve training.
The Pravyi Sektor youth wing consists of juvenile football ultras and supporters of Ukrainian nationalism.
According to Yarosh’s plans, militants from the nationalist youth wing, often referred to as «Yarosh Youth» , will teach the basics of military affairs, subversive struggle, unarmed combat, and mine blasting in the children’s health camps.
Daily youth recruitment is being carried out by the territorial command recruitment services of the National Guard.
In Kiev, the members of the so-called «11th self-defense sotnya» group made an attempt to seize a building that houses the Russian Center of Science and Culture and the representative office of Rossotrudnichestvo.
All attempts of the head of the representative office and his deputy, who arrived at the place of the conflict, to make the «self-defense forces» to listen to reason failed.
Moreover, the attackers took keys from the guards and hijacked from the courtyard of the RCSC a car which belonged to Rossotrudnichestvo.
Media reported on the plans of the Security Service of Ukraine to attract the private military company Greystone Limited to work on the suppression of dissent in the Russian-speaking eastern regions of the country.
It is significant that the practice of attracting foreign private military companies violates the Ukrainian law that prohibits foreign citizens to take part in the work of Ukrainian private security companies.
These detachments were impeding the pre-election work of party members in the current presidential campaign.
Activists of the social movement «Avtodozor» and the sotnya of the «Maidan Self-Defense» forces picketed the offices of banks with Russian stock , demanding the closing and nationalization of all their branch offices in Ukraine.
The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine adopted, in the first reading, the draft law «On restoring confidence in the judicial system of Ukraine», proposed by the All-Ukrainian Union Svoboda, which implies the introduction of lustration of the judiciary in the country.
Another draft law, which deals with the lustration of persons holding public positions, was proposed to the Parliament by Svoboda on March 26, 2014.
Lustration requirements were announced in February during the Maidan protests.
The Member of the European Parliament Jacek Saryusz-Wolski announced from the rostrum of the Maidan that Russia was allegedly interfering with the «European choice» of the Ukrainian people.
Also, the MEP urged the Ukrainian government to stop the «provocations» and release the arrested protesters from prisons, as well as to stop using force against the demonstrators.
The Chairman of the European Parliament Committee on Foreign Affairs Elmar Brok , attending the Maidan protests, asked the sovereign authorities of Ukraine to change their decision and release Yulia Tymoshenko from jail.
The Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs at the United States Department of State Victoria Nuland visited the Maidan.
According to numerous testimonies, V Nuland participated in the selection of the current «government» of Ukraine; this is proven by a recording of her telephone conversation, held in early February 2014 with the United States ambassador in Kiev Geoffrey Payette that appeared on the Internet.
According to some media and independent analysts, Euromaidan was directed by the United States State Department through government-controlled NGOs and private foundations.
The site of Ron Paul Institute for Peace and Prosperity published a study of the American political scientist Steve Wiseman, who provides specific information in this regard.
According to him, the planning of events in Ukraine started in advance.
A group of several dozen Ukrainian opposition organizations was created, which received funds from the Soros Foundation and the Pact Inc organization, working for the United States Agency for International Development.
Steve Wiseman cites a number of examples of how protests against the government of Viktor Yanukovych were held, using American technologies and new developments in propaganda and mass communications.
The publication claims that the main coordinators in the United States State Department for the organization of the coup in Kiev were the Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs Victoria Nuland and the United States ambassador in Kiev Jeffrey Payette.
The study of Steve Wiseman contains information referring to specific financial indicators.
Under the patronage of Jeffrey Payette, this channel was to receive about 30,000 USD from the Soros Foundation and about 95,000 USD from the Netherlands Embassy in Kiev.
The newly created channel, according to the American political scientist, began to broadcast one day after the President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych suspended the signing of the Association Agreement with the EU on November 21, 2013 until analysis of its economic consegnences is finalized.
Two United States senators, Democrat Chris Murphy and Republican John McCain, made speeches at the «Euromaidan» in Kiev.
Both American politicians stated that the United States supported the desire of the participants of Euromaidan to join Europe.
A delegation of the Lithuanian Seimas, headed by the Vice­Speaker Petras Austrevicius, spoke from the rostrum of the Euromaidan in Kiev.
Earlier, in his speech at the Maidan on February 22, 2014, he also condemned the «illegitimate» use of force by the government of Ukraine.
At a meeting with the head of the opposition party Udar V Klitschko, held at the Opera Hotel, the Chairman of the European Parliament Committee on Foreign Affairs Elmar Brok openly sided with the opposition, calling on President Viktor Yanukovych to fulfill the demands of the opposition.
The European Union actually gave up its obligations as a guarantor of the execution of the agreement between the President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych and the Ukrainian opposition leaders, signed on February 21, 2014, under the mediation of foreign ministers of Germany, France and Poland.
Thus, the EU supported and accepted the illegitimate rise of the opposition to power in Kiev, and directly contributed to the attack against the constitutional order in Ukraine.
Shortly after the coup in Kiev, the United States announced the removal of the legitimately elected President of Ukraine as a «fait accompli» and recognized the «legitimacy» of the self-proclaimed authorities, headed by Oleksandr Turchinov and Arseniy Yatsenyuk.
On March 4, 2014, the Secretary of State John Kerry arrived in Kiev to pay his respects and show his support.
The political agreement on the EU-Ukraine Association was signed as part of the European Council meeting.
On behalf of Ukraine, the document was signed by Arseniy Yatsenyuk, appointed as the Prime Minister by the Ukrainian Verkhovna Rada.
Thus, the EU recognized de jure the current illegitimate government of Ukraine and officially confirmed their willingness to work with it, bypassing the legally elected Viktor Yanukovych, who under the Constitution of Ukraine is still the official head of the state.
Residents of Kiev reported that the office building in the city center, which houses one of the headquarters of the «Pravyi Sektor», was regularly approached by cars with diplomatic plates and people unloaded massive bags and shrouded objects.
Deprivation of life shall not be regarded as inflicted in contravention of this article when it results from the use of force, which is no more than absolutely necessary.
No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
The evidence, obtained within the framework of the project on «Public investigations of the violations of human rights in Ukraine», implemented by the NGO «Fund to research problems of democracy», makes it possible to clearly identify, among the participants of the Euromaidan, the presence of large and permanent groups of militants, numbering up to several thousand people, who organized the attacks, shootings, beatings and killings of law enforcement officers, dissidents , seizures of public buildings, etc.
This group was characterized by a high level of provisions with firearms and cold arms, various special gear and radio communication equipment, personal protective equipment , mastery of specific tactical methods of group actions, shift work in the organization of fresh reserves, organization of small-scale production of improvised explosive devices and training of other activists, etc.
Witnesses also reported the high skills of the protesters, who knew how to use irritant poisonous substances, including gases of unknown origin, as well as smoke from burning tires, and smoke bombs.
The respirators and equipment of law enforcement officers did not prove to be of much help against these.
According to witnesses, this group was the only one constantly present and most actively operating at the Euromaidan.
All interviewed witnesses point out the good equipment and training of the militants.
It is noted that at the beginning of these events, homemade protective equipment was used — sports and construction equipment, bicycle helmets, arm and shin guards.
Witnesses noted the characteristics of the militants’ homemade weapons — sticks, cudgels, axes that were upgraded to increase their striking effect by means of welding iron spikes onto them, using pieces of circular saws, domestic axes with larger helves, etc.
Widely used were traumatic weapons, air rifles with optical sights, converted pistols, etc.
Special chemical components were added, which by their properties were almost like napalm.
We observed some people who were walking and showing them some signals; they were coordinating things.
Violations of the right for freedom of thought and belief, including political beliefs, and violations of the right to express them.
This right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authority and regardless of frontiers.
In Kiev, the ultra-radical Pravyi Sektor activists prevented leftist activists to enter the «Euromaidan» with their slogans, snatching posters from their hands and forcing them to leave the meeting.
About thirty Pravyi Sektor activists, using tear gas canisters, attacked a women’s rights campaign, being held in Kiev, under the slogans «Ukrainian women — European salaries», «Europe — this means paid maternity leave», etc.
In Kiev, a few dozen right-wing radicals, supporters of the All-Ukrainian Union Svoboda, attacked the Levin brothers , activists of the Confederation of Free Trade Unions of Ukraine , that were handing out campaign materials on Khreshchatyk Street.
Anatoly Levin’s ribs were broken, Alexander Levin got a broken nose and a dissected cheekbone, Denis Levin suffered from the use of tear gas.
In addition, KVPU’s property was destroyed; the attackers slashed the tent, broke the sound-amplifying equipment and stole the generator.
Activists of All-Ukrainian Union Svoboda, with the use of physical force, expelled journalist Viktor Gatsenko from the captured building of Kiev Administration, obscenely insulting and threatening him with death because of his political views.
There were identified, among those who had expelled the journalist, such people as the deputy head of the Kiev branch of AUU Svoboda, Ruslan Andreiko, and one of the leaders of the party’s student organization, Artem Ruban.
Masked men with bats and guns attacked Vyacheslav Veremiy and his colleague, an IT engineer Alexey Lymarenko, as they were returning home by taxi.
A Lymarenko had his face disfigured and V Veremiy was wounded to the chest, an injury from which he soon died.
The Union of Journalists announced that such media worker rights violations during the «revolutionary events» were unprecedented.
The presence of a press certificate or the inscription «press» on the clothing did not save reporters from attacks and destruction of their professional equipment.
He was then forced to do it, presented with threats of dismissal under the «gross violation of labor discipline» article.
P Prudyakov was forced to resign from the university at an extraordinary meeting of the department, although this scientist is one of the world’s leading experts in his field.
Director of the Ukrainian News Agency GolosUA, Oksana Vaschenko asked the existing power structures of Ukraine to prevent the possible seizure of the agency office and to protect journalists from attacks by extremist organizations.
However, in early March 2014, the Ukrainian News Agency GolosUA office was captured by Pravyi Sektor militants.
Most of the staff was forced to go on leave with no pay, the remaining staff members moved to another place, keeping the location of these premises secret.
The news agency leadership was accused by the ultra-nationalists of «misrepresentation of the people’s revolution», having had regular threats directed at them.
The Ukrainian televison anchorperson V Syumar was appointed deputy secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine.
She immediately initiated her activities in her new position by putting crass pressure on Ukraine’s state television channels.
In particular, the managment of UTR was informed of the necessity of switching to a «counterpropaganda» mode in the form of an ultimatum.
As a result, UTR was reoriented towards English language broadcasts involving anti-Russian speakers.
Similar processes are characteristic to the editorship of Ukraine’s national radio.
In the center of Kiev on Maidan, radicals seized reporter S Rulev of the Navigator Information Agency, who had come to the square to shoot footage of an anti-war demonstration, and dragged him into a tent set up opposite the Trade Unions House.
The journalist was severely beaten and his documents, telephone, and camera were taken.
The reason for the assault was that S Rulev had prepared reportage on Berkut employees.
In Donetsk, civic activist Pavel Gubarev, who was elected people’s governor of the Donetsk region at a popular assembly on 1 March 2014 and stood for not recognizing the new authorities in Kiev that had come to power as a result of the coup d’état and for the holding of a referendum on the future of Donbas, was arrested by the Security Service of Ukraine and taken to Kiev.
He had been campaigning for the federalization of Ukraine and recognition of Russian as an official state language.
The beating occurred in the office of V Guslavsky, the chief of the General Directorate of the Internal Affairs of Ukraine in the Lugansk Region, and with his full connivance.
Threatened with reprisals, Klinchaev was forbidden to participate in pro-Russian demonstrations or to express his opinions and position.
The same day, Klinchaev was arrested by Ukrainian Security Service forces and sent to Kiev.
The National Television and Radio Broadcasting Council of Ukraine was taken over by the «new authorities» and providers were required to cease retransmission of the Russian television channels Vesti, Russia 24, Channel One, RTR Planet, and NTV World by sevenm.
A court in Kiev placed the former head of the Kharkov Regional State Administration, M Dobkin, under house arrest.
In late February 2014 M Dobkin resigned in order to take part in the May 25th presidential elections.
As the region’s governor, he had harshly criticized Euromaidan supporters.
Similar complaints were received from the city of Gorlovka in the Donetsk region, where the local provider Interset had cut off the NTV and RTR channels, and from Kharkov, where the Channel One, Russia, and NTV channels were disabled.
A Kiev court placed the Mayor of Kharkov, G Kernes, under house arrest.
He had repeatedly expressed his disagreement with the political events taking place in Ukraine, including those connected to the forceful seizure of power by Euromaidan supporters.
The editorship does not rule out the total cessation of its work in relation to threat of seizure of its Kiev office.
For many years, the paper has published materials critical of the politicians who currently find themselves in power today.
Immediately after the change of government took place in the country, the Ukraine Press, the largest printing office in Kiev, announced that it would review its contract with the editorship of «2000» unilaterally.
The rates were artificially inflated to several times higher than market rates and those that had been negotiated in the previous contract.
The fighters from the so-called Maidan Self-Defense Force blockaded the building of the Ukrainian television channel «Inter» and demanded its management be replaced because of the channel’s information policy.
Threats continued to be made against the television channel’s management, its journalists, and its anchorpersons even after changes were made to its editorial policy.
Pressure on Inter’s leadership increased especially after the arrest of its primary shareholder, D Firtash.
A Davidchenko, one of the leaders of the protest movement in Odessa and the leader of People’s Alternative, was detained by unknown persons.
Unidentified people in black uniforms lacking any insignia grabbed the social activist, threw him into an automobile with transit numbers and drove off with him towards an unknown location.
A Davidchenko’s comrades think that SBU employees carried out the operation and that the leader of People’s Alternative was taken to Kiev.
Panteleymonov, later commenting on the incident on air, stated that the deputies had a «long and officious conversation» with him.
Footage posted on the Internet bear witness to the fact that the MPs beat O Panteleymonov on the face and head.
They called O Panteleymonov a «moskal’» and constantly reminded him that NTU was «disseminating lies» about the events on Maidan.
Alexey Khudyakov, a journalist from the online publication Segodnya.ru, was abducted.
He had been in Donetsk since February 28th carrying out the work assigned to him by the editors.
While on his trip, he prepared and published five articles and news items for them that were critical of the radical pro­Nazi groups and «the new government» in Kiev.
A tinted van pulled up next to A Khudyakov and without any explanation people in masks jumped out and then shoved him into the automobile.
One of the kidnappers was an SBU employee, but he refused to produce any identification.
Threatening him, they forced him to read an unknown text in Ukrainian into a video camera, as well as sign documents stating he was prepared to work for the Security Service of Ukraine.
The malefactors threatened violence to him and his relatives should the fact of his abduction be made known.
Thereafter, his Ukrainian SIM cards and telephone memory cards were confiscated, and the photo and video materials and telephone book in his phone were destroyed.
The journalist was driven to a border post on the border with Russia and handed over to the border guards to be deported.
Russian journalists — A Buzoladze, S Yeliseyeva, S Zavidova, and M Isakova — from the Russia-1 TV channel were detained in Donetsk.
The Russians’ documents were seized and they were taken to the checkpoint «Vasilievka,» where they were held for several hours without explanation and then expelled from Ukrainian territory.
In Odessa, representatives of the so-called Maidan Self-Defense Force demanded that the director general of the regional television channel, M Aksenova, write a resignation letter, threatening physical violence.
Lyashko, had organized a hunt for members of the Lugansk Guard and was persecuting activists and members of their families.
Euromaidan activists besieged the Office of the Public Prosecutor in Odessa and proceeded to carry on a conversation in raised voices with the regional prosecutor.
The main demand of the activists was to «deal toughly» and «take measures» in relation to the camp and leaders of the social movement Kulikovo Pole , which advocates the recognition of Russian as a state language, as well as constitutional reforms and the federalization of Ukraine.
The Security Service of Ukraine detained one of the leaders of the protest movement, the leader of the so-called People’s Militia of Donbas, M Chumachenko, under suspicion of violating the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
The Directorate of the Security Service of Ukraine in the Transcarpathian region opened criminal proceedings for «infringement upon the territorial integrity and inviolability of Ukraine» and disseminating «separatist appeals» on the Internet.
Putin, to recognize and create a republic called «Transcarpathian Ruthenia» served as the basis for this.
Euromaidan fighters attacked the Lugansk Guard activists’ tent in Lugansk city.
The opponents of the «new Kiev government» were beaten with bats and their tents were slashed and torn down.
Some of the victims from among the tent camp activists were hospitalized with significant head and limb injuries.
It is indicative that police patrols located near the scene of the incident preferred not to interfere.
Any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence shall be prohibited by law.
In this respect, any discrimination based on belonging to a national minority shall be prohibited.
An inverted Satanic cross was painted on the memorial plaque in indelible black spray.
In downtown Kiev, a demonstration commemorated the 105th anniversary of the birth of Stepan Bandera, an ideologue and founder of Ukrainian ultranationalism, and a collaborator with the German Nazis.
The torchlight procession, which was led by the Svoboda party, attracted around 10,000 participants.
In Kiev extremists attacked H Wertheimer, a 26-year-old Israeli citizen who is a teacher in the Rosenberg synagogue in Kiev.
After leaving a synagogue, Dov Ber Glickman, a 33-year-old Russian citizen and congregant studying at the yeshiva , was beaten up.
His attackers hit him with their hands and feet, and it appeared that the attackers had blades installed in the toes of their shoes, which left deep wounds.
February 22, 2014, V Yavorivsky, a member of the Batkivshchyna faction, introduced in Ukraine’s Verkhovna Rada draft legislation proposing that standards of accountability for expressing personal opinions on Fascist crimes be abolished.
Ukraine’s Verkhovna Rada declared the repeal of the Law on the Principles of the State Language Policy of July 3, 2012, which granted the status of regional language to Russian and other languages of national minorities.
Oleksandr Muzychko , the coordinator of the Pravyi Sektor in Western Ukraine, recorded and broadcast on the Internet a video address in which he called on people to «cleanse Ukraine and Crimea» of its Russian­speaking inhabitants.
In the city of Chigiri in Cherkassy region, unidentified culprits used Molotov cocktails to burn a Jewish commemorative plaque erected in 2012 next to a cemetery in which the graves of Hasidic elders were found.
In 2011, the Svoboda party claimed responsibility for a similar action defiling a Hungarian memorial in the Verecke Pass.
An ad hoc task force in Kiev began working on writing the draft legislation On the Development and Use of Languages in Ukraine.
Ruslan Koshulinsky , deputy speaker of the Verkhovna Rada, was named the committee chairman.
Farion introduced draft legislation calling for a criminal penalty for speaking Russian in government offices and public places in Ukraine.
In the Ukrainian capital, a group of neo-Nazis followed a Hasidic husband and wife who were on their way to synagogue.
At the last minute, the couple managed to jump into a taxi, which the assailants hurled stones at.
Ukrainian border guards on Transnistrian territory on the Moldova-Ukraine border forbade passage to men from Russia.
Reports of such Banderist patrols in Dnepropetrovsk have become commonplace.
The crimes frequently occur in front of the police, but the «law enforcement» officials try not to get involved.
During an official briefing, Y Perebiynis, head of the Information Policy Department of Ukraine’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, said that Russians are not an indigenous people of Ukraine and therefore do not have the right to self­determination on Ukrainian territory.
Dmitry N from Kharkiv witnessed a beating by nationalist radicals of a young woman on the street for speaking Russian on her mobile phone.
A group of Ukrainian nationalist radicals attacked Hungarian schoolchildren who were visiting Transcarpathia from Miskolc, Hungary.
Armed extremists stormed a meeting of the Hungarian community council in the city of Beregovo in Transcarpathian province and beat its participants.
Beginning on March 20, 2014, Russians living in Ukraine started to complain en masse to the Consulate General of Russia in Kharkiv about pressure from the Ukrainian authorities, who are harshly demanding that they formalize their renunciation of Russian citizenship or leave Ukraine.
A recording appeared on the Internet of a telephone conversation between former Ukrainian prime minister and current presidential candidate Y Tymoshenko and N Shufrich, the former deputy secretary of the National Security Council of Ukraine.
In it, Tymoshenko makes a series of Russophobic comments and statements.
H Koschyk, German commissioner for matters related to ethnic German re-settlers and national minorities, said that people in Germany are concerned about the situation of ethnic Germans and other national minorities in Ukraine.
He said that the central government in Kiev needs to clearly demonstrate its readiness to protect their rights.
Representatives of the Kiev Patriarchate, which is unrecognized in the Orthodox world, threatened the forcible seizure of the Kiev Pechersk Lavra.
On the evening of the 22nd, on Maidan, its representatives propagated false information about the «threat» of the removal of the church valuables of Kiev Pechersk Lavra from Ukraine.
As a result, a group of representatives from the so-called Maidan Self­Defense Force went to Lavra.
In the end the situation was stabilized, but the anxious mood did not abate for a long time.
In fact, this was an illegal blockade of the entrances to a monastic cloister.
Moscow Patriarchate , was transferred into the ownership of representatives of the Kiev Patriarchate.
The transfer was carried out on the basis of a court decision made under pressure of demonstrations primarily from the nationalist party Svoboda.
In 2006, the church abbot had given the building to representatives of the Kiev Patriarchate secretly, without the knowledge of church management of his own church community.
After lengthy proceedings in April of 2013, the court decided in favor of the UPC of the Moscow Patriarchate.
However the schismatics appealed the legal decision just before «Svoboda» members provoked clashes with UPC priests and parishioners.
As a result, the church was shut down for renovation by the authorities, but after the Euromaidan victory in February 2014, the schismatics won their appeal.
Information surfaced about preparations being made for an attempt to capture the Pochaev Lavra spiritual center.
In order to prevent this provocative act, numerous Orthodox believers started gathering at Lavra, blocked the main entrance to the monastery, and created a solid living wall in front of the Holy Gates of the cloister.
These conditions made it impossible for the group of nationalist radicals and schismatics arriving at Lavra in six buses to carry out their original plan.
A group of aggressively disposed people accompanied by journalists from the 1 + 1 television channel entered the administrative building of the Sumy Eparchy.
Karpenko categorically demanded that Archbishop Eulogius, archbishop of Sumy and Akhtyrka, conduct joint services with the schismatic Archbishop Methodius in the Holy Transfiguration Cathedral in Sumy.
He then blamed the priesthood of the canonical Church of unwillingness to pray for those killed at Maidan.
Parishioners found pamphlets of a provocative nature on the windows and doors of thirteen Orthodox churches in Kovel in the Volyn district.
They contained crude insults directed at the UOC priests in addition to their photographs.
In Severodonetsk in the Lugansk region, archpriest of the UPC of the Moscow Patriarchate and doctor of theology, Father Oleg Trofimov, was subjected to persecution and threats on the part of the authorities and activists of the local Euromaidan because of the active position he had taken in civil society and his antifascist convictions.
He was transferred to serve in a distant rural parish forty kilometers from home.
The investigations being imposed on the archpriest in relation to questions surrounding the appropriateness of his official behaviour are based on groundless accusations of the misuse of funds donated by parishioners, etc.
The mass media, which is controlled by extremists, has been harassing the priest.
His home address and telephone number are constantly being published on the Internet accompanied by calls to violence.
In particular, it was stated in it that if A Shirokov did not cease his «pro-Moscow and anti-constitutional enemy agitation» on internet social networking sites, the same party would change its «heretofore still tolerant and polite» relationship to him.
The facts set forth above clearly demonstrate that under the influence of extremists from ultranationalistic and neo-Nazi forces, and with the active multidimensional support of the USA and the European Union and its members, the protests in Ukraine which bore an initially peaceful character rapidly escalated into a coercive rebellion and, in the end, the forceful seizure of power and an unconstitutional coup d’etat.
These dramatic events were accompanied by widespread and gross violations of human rights and freedoms on the part of the self-proclaimed government and its supporters.
As a result, manifestations of extremist, ultranationalist, and neo-Nazistic sentiments, religious intolerance, xenophobia, blatant blackmail, threats, pressure placed by the Maidan leaders on their opponents, «purges» and arrests amongst them, repression, physical violence, and sometimes plain criminal lawlessness have become commonplace in Ukraine.
In all of Ukraine’s regions, but especially in the southeastern part of the country.
Ukrainian radical nationalists, instructed by the de facto authorities in Kiev and their external patrons, are ramping up the pressure on Russian-speaking citizens who do not want to lose the centuries-old ties that bind them to Russia and Russian culture.
Moreover, affairs are being conducted Maidan-style — through the use of threats, intimidation, physical violence, and heinous attempts to obliterate Russian culture and identity among the inhabitants of these regions of Ukraine.
Unfortunately, all of the gross human rights violations and violations of the principle of the rule of law that have been committed and are still being committed remain unpunished.
Moreover, the bandits from Euromaidan who, weapons in hand, committed atrocities against the legal authorities and citizens have been amnestied by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine and declared national heroes.
We are convinced that if the lawlessness in Ukraine continues, the situation may erupt into a serious threat to regional peace and security and lead to further escalation of international and interethnic contradicions and conflicts in Ukraine and Europe in general.
They fought against the moskals, the Germans, and struggled with kikes and mischief-makers, who wanted to take the Ukrainian lands from us.
On November 21, 2013 in Kiev, protests under the «Euromaidan» title began.
They were organized by a number of opposition parties that disagreed with the decision of the Government of Ukraine to suspend the signing of the Association Agreement with the European Union.
Since November 21, 2013, the project is conducting surveys of witnesses and monitoring human rights violations in Ukraine.
The survey of the Euromaidan supporters was conducted primarily at the Maidan and in the seized buildings, in the period from November 21, 2013 to February 22, 2014.
A number of law enforcement officers were poisoned by gases of unknown origin and required hospi­tal treatment.
A finger was broken and a tendon was ruptured, January 19, 2014, Grushevsky Street.
Moskal’ — derived from Moscow, it is a humiliating and insulting labeling of Muscovites in particular and all Russians in general, widely used in Ukraine.
