Here are some pivotal moments in the years leading up to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine on Feb., as well as a brief look at their relationship in the 20th century.14 — Protesters in Ukraine overthrow President Viktor Yanukovych in February.
Secessionists in eastern Ukraine, backed by Russia, later declare themselves independent, as the Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic.
They go to war against Ukraine.The secessionist war continues in the eastern region known as Donbas.
Many view these accords as ambiguous.April 2019 — A former comedian, Volodymyr Zelensky, is elected by a large majority as president of Ukraine on a promise to make peace with Russia and restore Donbas to the country.21-2022 — President Vladimir V Putin of Russia seeks to prevent Ukraine’s drift toward the United States and its allies.
Many Russians view the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv, as the birthplace of their nation and cite the numerous cultural ties between the two countries.Here is a brief recap of their relations in the 20th century:1918 — Ukraine declares independence from Russia during a conflict fought by multiple countries and armies over several years.
Its independence and sovereignty receive international recognition at the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk.
The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic is founded in 1921, and Ukraine is subsumed into the Soviet Union the following year.32 and 1933 — A famine caused by Stalin’s policy of collectivization kills millions of people, mainly ethnic Ukrainians in a republic that is known as the bread basket of the Soviet Union.
The disaster is known as the Holodomor, from the Ukrainian word for famine.39-1944 — The Soviet Union annexes what is now western Ukraine from Poland and Romania.
Later, Nazi Germany and the Axis powers invade the Soviet Union and occupy Ukraine, which suffers enormous devastation.91 — Ukraine declares independence, a move endorsed in a referendum by 92 percent of voters.
Russia, Ukraine and Belarus sign an accord recognizing that the Soviet Union has dissolved.
