Army War College Assessment on Russian Strategy in Eastern Europe and Recommendations on how to Leverage Landpower to Maintain the Peace Douglas Mastriano Project Leader United States ARMY WAR COLLEGE STRATEGIC STUDIES INSTITUTE The United States Army War College The United States Army War College educates and develops leaders for service at the strategic level while advancing knowledge in the global application of Landpower.
The purpose of the United States Army War College is to produce graduates who are skilled critical thinkers and complex problem solvers.
Concurrently, it is our duty to the United States Army to also act as a ""think factory"" for commanders and civilian leaders at the strategic level worldwide and routinely engage in discourse and debate concerning the role of ground forces in achieving national security objectives.
The Strategic Studies Institute publishes national security and strategic research and analysis to influence policy debate and bridge the gap between military and academia.
STRATEGIC STUDIES INSTITUTE The Center for Strategic Leadership and Development contributes to the education of world class senior leaders, develops expert knowledge, and provides solutions to strategic Army issues affecting the national security community.
The Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute provides subject matter expertise, technical review, and writing expertise to agencies that develop stability operations concepts and doctrines.
S Army War College The School of Strategic Landpower develops strategic leaders by providing a strong foundation of wisdom grounded in mastery of the profession of arms, and by serving as a crucible for educating future leaders in the analysis, evaluation, and refinement of professional expertise in war, strategy, operations, national security, resource management, and responsible command.
The United States Army Heritage and Education Center acquires, conserves, and exhibits historical materials for use to support the United States Army, educate an international audience, and honor Soldiers—past and present. i STRATEGIC STUDIES INSTITUTE The Strategic Studies Institute is part of the United States Army War College and is the strategic-level study agent for issues related to national security and military strategy with emphasis on geostrategic analysis.
Studies produced by civilian and military analysts concern topics having strategic implications for the Army, the Department of Defense, and the larger national security community.
In addition to its studies, SSI publishes special reports on topics of special or immediate interest.
These include edited proceedings of conferences and topically oriented roundtables, expanded trip reports, and quick-reaction responses to senior Army leaders.
The Institute provides a valuable analytical capability within the Army to address strategic and other issues in support of Army participation in national security policy formulation.
Authors of Strategic Studies Institute and United States Army War College Press publications enjoy full academic freedom, provided they do not disclose classified information, jeopardize operations security, or misrepresent official United States policy.
Such academic freedom empowers them to offer new and sometimes controversial perspectives in the interest of furthering debate on key issues.
Each newsletter also provides a strategic commentary by one of our research analysts.
Project 1721 would not be possible without the support and advice of numerous experts from around the world.
Special thanks to the former Minister of Defense of Lithuania, Rasa Jukneviciene, for her excellent advice on this project.
Colonel Dalius Polekauskas, Chief of Staff of the Lithuanian Army, Lieutenant Colonel Arturas Jasinskas, Major Eugenius Lastauskas, and Major Tomas Balkus.
Special thanks to Estonian Lieutenant Colonel Vahur Murulaid for his research for the chapter addressing national security questions raised in the United States.
Thank you also to Mr Jonas Ohman for his exceptional insight on Ukraine.
Appreciation to United States Army Europe G2 for their support, especially Mr Steven Boltz.
Colonel Tarn Warren, the Chair of the Department of Military Strategy, Planning, and Operations also provided excellent analysis and support.
Lieutenant Colonel Mike Adelberg, USAWC, SSI, was a vital part of Project 1721, providing the final review of the study.
Additionally, Project 1721 would not be possible without the editorial and formatting skills of Ms.
America's Commitment to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Alliance.xix Russia's Sword of Damocles.xxv Chapter 1: Cat and Mouse: Putin's Complex Application of Russian Strategic Landpower.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the New Russian Strategic Environment.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Its Concept of Collective Defense.
A New North Atlantic Treaty Organization Approach: The Very High Readiness Task Force .83 Deterrence, Provocation, or Assurance: Is the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's Very High Readiness Task Force the Right Answer?.85 Chapter 7: Adapting Policy to the New Russia.
Answering the Hard Questions Facing the Baltics.Ill Chapter 9: The Way Ahead and Recommendations.
How the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Can Deter the ""Goliath"" Russian Threat to the Baltics.
The positive response to Project 1704 across NATO and the United States made it one of those rare assessments used to inform and shape strategy.
Although much of Project 1704 is still relevant in its view of the emerging Russian strategy toward NATO, the environment has changed.
Since the publication of Project 1704, Vladimir Putin announced the modernization of the Russian armed forces and deployed forces to Syria, Russian aircraft aggressively buzzed a United States Navy vessel in the Baltic Sea, and Putin's political proxies threatened NATO members with nuclear war.
Although many trends are disconcerting, there are points of light in the darkness.
Chief among these is that Putin's aggressive tone and approach is forging a greater unity among NATO members hitherto not seen since the 1980s.
Although many in NATO are facing divergent dangers (i.e., immigration/refugee influx), Moscow poses an existential threat to much of Europe.
Using defense spending as a measure of resolve, only 5 of the 28 NATO members are spending the pledged 2% of Gross Domestic Product on defense.
Another by-product of Putin's aggressive and hostile strategy is evident in Ukraine.
Ukraine has a rich history, with much in common with Russia economically, culturally, and religiously.
Yet, Putin's war against a once stalwart friend is working against him.
A truly Ukrainian identity is emerging from this, something not evident since before the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917.
The increasingly bombastic rhetoric and actions of the Kremlin is disconcerting and is placing European peace in a precarious situation—where one misstep by Moscow or Washington, D.C. could plunge the world into a costly war.
The world experimented with appeasement when faced with another nationalistic leader in the form of Adolf Hitler.
Project 1721 offers a way on how to preserve the peace in these turbulent and uncertain times.
USAWC Project 1721 Leader & USAWC Department of Senior Editor National Strategy and Security Project 1721 LTC Vahur Karus Estonian Defence Forces COL Kevin Copsey British LTC Algimantas Misiunas Lithuanian Land Forces COL Peter Nieuwenhuis Royal Netherlands Army COL Markus Kreitmayr COL Postrybailo Volodymyr _German Army_ Ukrainian Army STRENGTH — WISDOM xiii Lt.
Corey Collier United States Marine Corps LTC Vahur Murulaid Estonian Defense Forces LTC Chris Briand United States Army COL Ryan Wolfgram United States Army LTC Jeffrey Setser West Virginia National Guard LTC Eric Zimmerman Pennsylvania National Guard LTC George Hammar COL Joseph Barber COL Gary Graves United States Armv United States Armv United States Army xiv PREFACE AND HISTORIC CONTEXT Colonel Douglas Mastriano, Ph.D., United States Army War College I cannot forecast to you the action of Russia.
It is a riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma; but perhaps there is a key.
Winston Churchill, October 1,1939 The Great Northern War began in 1700 after Russian Czar Peter forged an alliance with Denmark and Poland to contest the supremacy of Sweden in the Baltic region.
The victory was a remarkable reversal of Russia's fortune and put it on the path to becoming a European power.
Czar Peter on horseback is depicted as trying to stop his army from committing atrocities against the people of Narva in 1704 after it was seized from the Swedes.
By Nikolay Sauerweid. xv The Great Northern War lasted until 1721, with various Swedish and Russian victories and defeats.
The war ended in 1721 with the Treaty of Nystad where Sweden gave up its Baltic territories to Russia.
The 1721 Treaty of Nystad made Russia a European power, placing it in a position to influence not just the Baltics, but also Scandinavia and Eastern and Central Europe.
Seizing on the new strategic environment achieved by this victory, Czar Peter moved his capital from Moscow to St.
Petersburg as his capital was a pivotal moment that symbolically declared that Russia was looking toward Europe.
Ironically, as if symbolically turning back the clock on its relations with the West, the Russian capital was moved back to Moscow after the Bolshevik Revolution in 1917.
The subsequent 84 years of atheistic Soviet rule unleashed one of the bloodiest epochs in human history, with genocide, ideological purges of those who disagreed with the government, ethnic cleansing, massed imprisonment, and the forced migration of entire populations.
The Baltic nations felt the brutality of this period in unimaginable ways.
Latvia typified the Baltic experience of living under Soviet rule when its population suffered mass executions, imprisonment for anyone perceived as a threat to the regime, and the deportation of one-third of its people to Siberia where many died.
This deportation of ethnic Latvians dovetailed with a sinister Soviet policy of resettling ethnic Russians to the Baltic region.
Although there was an economic incentive to this policy, it also had an ethno-political design.
The 20th-century Russian dark ages ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.
From the view of the West, a refreshing decade of cooperation and collaboration between Moscow, Europe, and the United States ensued, bringing hope that the century of Russian hostility was at long last over.
Russia was viewed as a partner, and there was even serious discussion about it being offered North Atlantic Treaty Organization membership.
For them, the 1990s was when their country was ""on its knees,"" with a shrinking economy, declining life expectancy, rampant social chaos and a president who was not respected abroad.
The rise of Vladimir Putin, viewed in the West as the beginning of a period of revanchist and reactionary ethno-centric nationalism, is considered in Russia as the beginning of its regaining respect and great power status.
The United States and the major European powers were slow to adapt to the new strategic reality of growing Russian hostility toward the West.
Even after the 2007 cyberattacks against Estonia, and the 2008 war against Georgia, there were hopes of a reset of relations with Russia.
This rings true today for many of the senior officers in NATO still on active service, who began their careers facing a powerful Russian-led Soviet threat.
NATO nations have divergent views of how to contend with the aggressive Russian approach.
The nations near Russia seek assurance and deterrence measures, while those further away often call for moderation.
Yet, the notion that accommodation will reduce the threat is viewed more in hope than reality.
Project 1721 offers a way for the United States and NATO to preserve the peace without sacrificing the Baltic Nations to the territorial ambitions of Vladimir Putin and an expansionist Russia.
A successful strategy must be accompanied with an approach that leverages not just the military instrument of power.
It must also include the ""Joint Force"" of air, land, sea, cyber, and space, and the participation and support of NATO allies and its partners.
As a USAWC assessment, the focus of Project 1721 is what contributions Strategic Landpower can provide to maintain the peace in the Baltic region.
Any Landpower decision must be integrated in the NATO approach to the region.
Having proved itself in the Balkans and demonstrated resolve in Afghanistan, NATO has never been stronger or better positioned to maintain the peace XVII and stability in Europe.
Although beset by numerous challenges, with the chief being diminishing defense spending, the United States must integrate its strategy and operational approach with that of NATO to ensure continuity and consistency.
AMERICA'S COMMITMENT TO THE NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION ALLIANCE Colonel Douglas Mastriano, Ph.D., United States Army War College There is only one thing worse than fighting with allies, and that is fighting without them.
Winston S Churchill Soldiers from across NATO during exercise Iron Sword 2014, in Pabrade, Lithuania.
World War I witnessed the transformation of Europe, the Middle East, and Africa at an appalling price in blood and treasure for people around the globe.
Although entering the war late, the United States made a decisive contribution to the Allied victory.
Yet, it was higher than it ought to have been due in large part to emerging technologies (i.e., tanks, chemical warfare, air power) and the failure of the Allies to accept unified command under one supreme leader.
It took 4 painful years for the western nations to finally embrace the idea of a Supreme Allied Commander in the person of French Marshal Ferdinand Foch.
XIX After World War I, the nations met at Versailles to discuss how to prevent another world war.
The United States led the discussion of forming international organizations and institutions as a way to prevent another calamity.
Thus was born the League of Nations that would serve as an international forum to peacefully resolve disputes.
Meanwhile, in Europe the recovery from the horrors of World War I was daunting.
Entire generations of men had perished and the rapid withdrawal of the United States from Europe weakened the fledgling League of Nations.
Additionally, Europe was besieged by hostile ideologies ranging from Bolshevism to Socialist Fascism.
The Russian-led Soviet Union was the first to threaten the post-World War I peace by invading its neighbors in the Baltics and Poland.
Although the Poles beat the Soviets back, peace would not endure for long, after fascist governments emerged in Spain, Italy, and Germany.
The resolve of the Allies and the League of Nations was put to the test throughout the 1930s.
This included the Spanish Civil War, Mussolini's invasion of Abyssinia, and others.
Yet, the greatest challenge to peace came with the rise of Adolf Hitler.
Hitler defied the mandates of Versailles and the resolve of the League of Nations and Allies.
The first challenge was the rearmament of Germany, which was forbidden by the Versailles Treaty.
Despite these flagrant violations, the League and Allies took no action, emboldening Hitler to annex Austria in the 1938 Anschluss.
This was followed by a demand to control the border of Czechoslovakia so that Hitler could ""protect"" ethnic Germans living there.
In the now infamous Munich Conference, the Allies, led by British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, granted Hitler his demand (without consulting the Czechoslovakians) in exchange for a pledge for peace.
The ""peace"" lasted less than 6 months, ending with the Nazi invasion of Czechoslovakia.
Seeing nothing but weakness within the Allies, Hitler continued his expansionist agenda with the invasion of Poland on September 1, 1939.
At long last, the Allies declared war, but did nothing until Hitler unleashed his machines of war against the Low Countries and France in the spring of 1940.
The United States entered the fray in 1941 and, at considerable cost in blood and treasure, worked closely with the Allies to defeat the Nazi and Fascist forces.
The second Supreme Allied Commander, General Dwight D Eisenhower, seemed to have adopted the strategy and approach of Ferdinand Foch in winning World War II, demonstrating the value of learning from the past.
The United States was eager to demobilize its Armed Forces after World War II, and it appeared that once again it would withdraw militarily from the world scene.
Yet, the impending danger of a Soviet invasion of Central and Western Europe was rising, and the United States altered its strategy to keep a robust military presence in Europe.
The key tenant of the XX NATO Alliance remains Article 5, which declares that an attack upon one member shall be considered an attack upon all.
Although greatly outnumbered conventionally by Soviet forces throughout the Cold War, the United States, acting with its allies, provided an unprecedented era of peace across Europe not experienced since the Roman Empire.
As deliberation continued on the future of NATO, instability exploded in the Balkans as Yugoslavia fragmented along ethnic lines.
Horrific scenes of genocide were broadcast around the world to the dismay of modern viewers.
The United Nations endeavored to bring peace through negotiations and by deploying inadequately armed forces to the region; yet, the atrocities continued.
In the end, the bloodshed only ended when NATO deployed to the region with the power and might of its members' armed forces.
Even then, commentators predicted that the Balkans would prove the end of the Alliance.
They were proven wrong, and NATO emerged from the Balkan crisis stronger and unified.
The world changed suddenly when the United States was attacked on September 11, 2001.
It is ironic that when Article 5 was adapted in 1949, the belief was that it would be invoked when the Soviets attacked Europe.
Yet, Article 5 was used to come to the support and defense of the United States.
The forecasts of NATO's demise endured throughout its 13-year commitment to helping the United States in Afghanistan.
To this end, Afghanistan was labeled by some commentators as ""the graveyard of empires,"" and with such a specter in mind, the ISAF mission would put NATO to a difficult test.
Even the Taliban believed that NATO was vulnerable and commenced their counteroffensive in 2006.
Early in 2006, the United States began to transition the southern portion of Afghanistan to the ISAF mission.
It would be a strategic blow to the Alliance if a nation retreated from Afghanistan in the face of high casualties.
XXI NATO Image The fighting in 2006 was the worst since the end of the 2001-2002 American-led invasion.
During the initial push, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld decided to restrict the number of ground forces deploying to Afghanistan.
Due to this, the Taliban leadership was able to flee to safe havens in Pakistan.
The spring campaign kicked off with ferocity in April 2006, with the Canadian forces receiving the brunt of the attacks.
Yet, in the end, the combined forces of Canada, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom , Denmark, and the United States and their Afghan partners prevailed.
The Taliban failed to drive a NATO nation out of the ISAF mission, and the Alliance came out of Afghanistan stronger.
As the ISAF mission ended, a new challenge arose threatening both the security of Europe and North America —Putin's Russia.
The Russian annexation of Crimea, its war against Georgia and Ukraine, and its cyberattack against Estonia threaten the peace and stability so hard won.
NATO is gradually taking measures to deter Russian aggression from being directed against the eastern member states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
It is at this point in the geo-political discourse that the question of America's commitment is being debated.
From an American perspective, it is troubling that many in Europe and Canada have ungraciously taken advantage of the security umbrella provided by the United States to slash their defense spending to create societies rife with government benefits.
The specXXII ter of tiny military expenditure is amplified by short workweeks and long vacations by those nations reaping the benefits of an America providing for their security concerns.
This misuse of American good will should end and every nation must do more.
What is not mentioned is that the NATO allies made incredible sacrifices fighting America's wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
It would be hard for the citizens of nations in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania to justify their soldiers being deployed to Afghanistan from an economic or other perspective.
The simple fact is that the United States was attacked, Article 5 was invoked, and they came to our aid.
Of the 3,407 soldiers killed in Afghanistan during ISAL and Operation Enduring Lreedom, 1,136 were from NATO or partner nations.
This does not include the tens of thousands wounded allied and partner-nation soldiers.
Additionally, most of the NATO nations also deployed their soldiers to Iraq, which was not a NATO mission.
They came, and many died to honor their commitment to the United States in friendship and in fulfillment for the ideas for which it stands.
Yet, the outcome of the Cold War, the Balkans, the ISAL mission, and the deterrence effect on an aggressive Vladimir Putin demonstrates that the Alliance is more relevant than ever and central to maintaining the peace.
It took two horrific world wars for Europe and the United States to realize the need for a viable military alliance.
It would be a costly and irreversible mistake to undercut and weaken the one military alliance in world history that has so long held back death and destruction from a continent so familiar with war.
It has been the greatest guarantor of democracy and defender of capitalism.
NATO has made it possible for both Europe and the United States to enjoy unprecedented prosperity and security.
What Russia hears from the political discourse in the United States could be catastrophic and may result in a risky gambit by Putin to try to seize the Baltic region.
This would not be some far-away war, but something that would result in a conflict that would cause the collapse of the American economy and in the end, lead to another horrific world war.
NATO has immense value and enduring worth to Europe, Canada, and the United States.
The Alliance has come out of difficult missions in the Cold War, the Balkans, and Afghanistan stronger.
Yet, this strength can be undone by doubts of America's commitment to it.
All 28 nations must do more from a defense perspective, but such negotiations should be conducted behind closed doors.
Too much is at stake to telegraph lack of resolve and could result in a war of unimaginable proportions.
We know that peace is the condition under which mankind was meant to flourish.
It depends on us, on our courage to build it and guard it and pass it on to future xxiii generations.
George Washington's words may seem hard and cold today, hut history has proven him right again and again.
NATO is a bulwark of strength to avert war only as long as the commitment of its members to honor Article 5 exists.
Salacgriva VORUMAA Smiltene Saulkrasti Tukums 1 Lubana Base 802569 1-99 Estonia Railroad Expressway Road International boundary -County boundary ★ National capital ® County capital Tallinn is the capital of Har/umee Maakond.
Lieutenant Colonel Jeffrey Setser, West Virginia Army National Guard In early 2015, the USAWC, at the request of the former Army Chief of Staff, General Raymond Odierno, published Project 1704, a study that discussed the changing strategic environment in Europe spawned by Russian aggression against Ukraine.
The positive reception of Project 1704 across NATO and the United States has made it one of those rare assessments used to inform and shape strategy.
Although much of Project 1704 is still relevant in its view of the emerging Russian strategy toward NATO, the United States, and the European Union , the geo-strategic environment has changed significantly.
Since the publication of Project 1704, Vladimir Putin announced the modernization of the Russian armed forces and deployed forces to Syria, Turkey shot down a Russian aircraft after it violated its airspace, Russian aircraft aggressively buzzed a United States Navy vessel in the Baltic Sea, and Putin's political proxies threatened NATO members with nuclear war.
Despite the slow response in material action by NATO members, there are trends working against Putin's expansionist designs.
One of the startling developments is in Finland and Sweden, two traditionally neutral nations in the Baltic region.
Moscow's aggression against Ukraine and in the Baltic Sea is pushing these two nations closer to NATO and the United States.
A realignment of one or both of these countries into the NATO camp would dramatically alter the strategic environment and give the West considerable leverage to prevent Russian aggression.
XXV The increasingly bombastic rhetoric and actions of the Kremlin is disconcerting and is placing European peace in a precarious situation where one misstep by Moscow or Washington, D.C. could plunge the world into a costly war.
BLUNTING RUSSIA'S SWORD OF DAMOCLES IN THE BALTIC REGIONS 6 Richard Westall's 1812 painting depicts a sword hovering over Damocles, held in place by a single horse hair.
The saga represents impending doom or the not knowing of when the sword will fall.
The ancient Roman philosopher, Cicero, told a story of how King Dionysius answered a courtier, Damocles, who thought that ruling a realm was merely pleasure and leisure.
In response to this naive view, King Dionysius offered Damocles to switch places with him.
However, King Dionysius had a large sword suspended above Damocles' head, suspended by a mere hair from a horse's tail.
Upon realizing the danger that came with ruling a kingdom, Damocles gave up his envy of King Dionysius and happily remained a courtier.
The moral of the story is that imminent danger often ""hangs by a thread"" and a simple misstep or miscalculation could let the sword fall and unleash death.
XXVI Thus was the case a century ago when a complex web of alliances maintained the European balance of power.
The Serbian assassin, Gavrilo Princip, shattered this delicate balance of power on June 28,1914, after he murdered the Austro-Hungarian Archduke Ferdinand and his wife, Sophie.
So precarious was the complex system of alliances that, in just over a month, World War I would engulf Europe.
The irony was that the very system that was created to guarantee peace ended in bringing war.
Such a precarious situation is developing in the Baltic region today, where a sign of weakness by NATO or a misstep by Russia could let the Sword of Damocles fall and unleash the horrors of another catastrophic war.
A 1914 German postcard depicting the precarious European Balance of Power that led to World War I The idea of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania being under a looming danger by a Russian ""Sword of Damocles"" is evident.
The indicators of this growing peril are manifested in the Kremlin's increasingly harsh rhetoric toward NATO, the aggressive and often reckless behavior of Russian military aircraft in the Baltics, and the dramatic increase in scale and tempo of Russian military exercises in the region.
These events makes it appear that indeed a ""Sword of Damocles"" hangs over the NATO nations of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
XXVll A Russian SU 24 buzzes the USS Donald Cook in the Baltic Sea on April 13, 2016.
Vladimir Putin's grand strategy is to reassert Russian influence in the region and to make it a dominant player in international affairs.
To achieve this end, Putin needs to diminish the credibility of NATO, especially in the Baltic nations.
The ""unthinkable option"" of a direct attack on Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania would be a high-risk move that could only come if American leadership is weak and NATO's commitment to its Baltic allies diminished.
Once the land route is cut, Russian anti-aircraft and anti-shipping assets would make it too risky for United States and other NATO forces to arrive to expel the invaders.
The second, and more likely, option for the Kremlin is to use ambiguity.
This would take the form of fomenting a ""local"" ethnic Russian separatist movement similar to what was witnessed in Ukraine.
The separatists, who would really be Russian Special Porces, would appear as civilians seeking independence for the ""discrimination"" that they suffer from Estonians or Latvians.
Moscow's goal would be to destabilize the region in a way where no direct connection between the Kremlin was evident.
The purpose of this ambiguity is not just xxviii to provide Putin plausible deniability, but, more importantly, to cause the NATO Alliance to dither and delay on taking action.
NATO, not known for quick action, would act slowly to determine if the crisis was foreign or domestic.
When a decision was made to move the Soviet era statue, pro-Russian protestors violently took to the streets, followed by a massive Russian cyberattack that debilitated the nation.
As NATO dithers, debates and delays a decision, the opportunity for a low risk move to destroy the Alliance would begin.
Moscow would order a large force along the borders of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania to intimidate the Alliance and to provide covert support to their separatist movement.
As security deteriorates and the local population suffers depravations, Putin would announce a humanitarian mission to end the distress.
Of course, Moscow would pledge that the army would be withdrawn from the disputed area once security is restored.
However, before the Russian troops depart, there would be a referendum with the ethnic Russian population appealing to Putin to remain.
The brilliance of this strategy of ambiguity is that, should NATO respond in uncharacteristic rapidity, Putin could merely deny any involvement and wait for another opportunity to try such an action when and where the environment was more favorable.
However, there are concerted steps that NATO, and specifically the United States, can take to prevent either of the dangerous actions delineated above from coming to fruition.
XXIX The Armed Forces of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania must be capable, survivable, and maneuverable.
This is why acquiring midto long-range weapons could make these nations less appetizing to Moscow.
If attacked, these offensive weapon systems could wreak havoc to Russian command and control nodes and transportation hubs and disrupt the movement of Russian forces.
Using the Return of Forces to Germany model from the Cold War, the goal is to have units rapidly fly soldiers into the region to use American equipment already staged there.
This reduces the arrival time of ""over the horizon"" forces considerably.
Another key to forward defense of NATO includes permanently stationing American and NATO forces in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
The 2016 NATO Summit made a historic announcement, with the UK deploying a battalion to Estonia, the Canadians deploying a battalion to Latvia, Germany committing a similar force to Lithuania, and the Americans doing the same for Poland.
This is a good start to deterring a possible Russian invasion of the ""eastern flank"" NATO nations, but more should be done.
The multinational force deployed in the Baltic region should be increased to a three-brigade element, one in each nation.
The brigade in Lithuania should be a multinational NATO force permanently stationed in the Suwalki Gap.
This three-brigade model for the Baltic nations borrows from the Berlin Brigade concept from the Cold War.
Although the American, British, and French Brigades stationed in West Berlin could not stop a Soviet invasion, these served as a guarantee that, should there be an attack, three powerful nations would fight to defend Germany.
Additionally, these brigades would have made the Soviet invasion bloody and difficult to accomplish.
Simply put, the cost/benefit analysis would be too high for Moscow to try a violent seizure of West Berlin.
This is the same end desired for the Baltic nations of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania — making an attack on them too risky for Moscow to contemplate.
As the final element of a strategy to deter Russia from threatening the Baltics, NATO should also assist Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia in developing a robust unconventional warfare capability.
If deterrence fails and Russian forces overpower NATO forces stationed there, waging unconventional war could be key.
Simply the knowledge that XXX Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia have a robust capability to wage unconventional war against an occupying force would give Russian military planners pause, since it would trigger memories of the Forest Brotherhood that waged an insurgency against Soviet occupation forces from 1944-1956.
This movement killed over 15,000 Soviet military and security forces and significantly hindered Moscow's ability to establish control over the Baltics.
Should Putin contemplate taking an area of the Baltics with a high ethnic Russian population, the question is if NATO will act quickly enough to deter aggression.
Indeed, the lack of an adequate forward force presence makes such an eventuality feasible.
However, should the United States and NATO embrace the three-brigade concept for the region, the calculus for a Russian ambiguous attack on Narva, Estonia, changes the strategic calculus.
This would not be a replay of 1940, as NATO would already be there to deter Russian aggression.
This is the power of a modest forward presence of American soldiers and other NATO ground soldiers deployed permanently in the Baltic region.
It changes everything from a strategic point of view and in the end will save lives and money.
Yet, there are voices in Western Europe and North America warning against doing anything to provoke Vladimir Putin.
These often suggest that forward positioning forces in the Baltics will cross a Kremlin redline.
Much is spoken of the Russian fear of invasion and that it should be given a buffer to demonstrate good will.
The recklessness of such a view was demonstrated by how the French and British approached the demands of Adolf Hitler in the 1930s.
With the horrors of World War I in their thoughts, the Western European leadership did all it could to accommodate and appease Hitler.
Had the Allies exercised strength earlier in this epoch, perhaps the horror and devastation of World War II could have been averted.
In 1990, Saddam Hussein sought an excuse to invade Kuwait to ameliorate his economic and financial woes.
Being confronted by a massive buildup of Iraqi forces on his border, the Emir of Kuwait ordered his forces to stand down as a gesture of goodwill.
Instead of convincing Saddam Hussein of calling off his invasion of Kuwait, it simply made his mission easier, with the Iraqi Republican Guards rapidly seizing the nation on August 2,1990.
The idea that Russia should be given buffer states to make it feel more secure is not unique in history.
The Japanese Empire's strategy in the 1930's was to establish a Co-Prosperity Sphere.
This was to not only to serve as an economic zone dominated by Tokyo, but also a buffer zone to protect Japan militarily.
Although this was a sound theory from a Japanese perspective, life for the people in those nations included in this economic and military buffer zone was abysmal.
The idea of allowing Russia economic XXXI and military domination over any region is contrary to American strategy and ideals.
Rasa Jukneviciene, a Member of Parliament and former Lithuanian Minister of Defense, brilliantly stated, ""The biggest provocation for Putin is empty security promises.
In 1940, Stalin demanded that Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania open their borders to the Red Army, which they did, in an endeavor not to provoke or antagonize Moscow.
This weakness resulted in the invasion and occupation of these lands that within a year would suffer unimaginable horror and depravations at the hands of Moscow.
The idea that inaction and weakness is a reasonable course of action for the United States and NATO is a hazardous and dangerous approach that historically has only resulted in costly and bloody wars.
The emerging Russian ""strategy of ambiguity"" is a direct threat to the NATO Alliance.
Yet, it can be deterred now with resolve and a modest forward deployment of American Forces in the region.
The United States can change the calculus in the region and avert a perilous move by Russia with a simple commitment of a brigade in the Baltic region.
There is a Russian ""Sword of Damocles"" hanging over the Baltic region, yet the impending doom can be blunted by the physical commitment of NATO landpower to Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
CAT AND MOUSE: PUTIN'S COMPLEX APPLICATION OF RUSSIAN STRATEGIC LANDPOWER Military Parade on Red Square in 2016.
The changing face of Russia's operational approach began in 2007 when it launched a crippling cyberattack on Estonia.
This was in retaliation of an Estonian decision to move a Soviet era Red Army monument, something that Moscow opposed.
In 2014, the world witnessed the Russian annexation of Crimea using soldiers in unmarked uniforms.
The annexation of Crimea was rapidly followed by a Russian inspired and led subversive war in Eastern Ukraine.
A common thread among these diverse Russian operations is its use of ambiguity to confound and confuse decision makers in the West.
RUSSIAN LANDPOWER The 2008 invasion of Georgia and the ongoing intervention in Ukraine demonstrates Russia's reliance on the military and security services as instruments of its grand strategy.
The application of the Russian military instrument of power has taken various forms over recent history.
For instance, the Russian operation in Georgia was largely conventional.
The 2014 Russian operation in Crimea diverged from the conventional approach by manipulating a sympathetic population and using a robust security infrastructure built up for the Sochi Olympics.
Finally, Moscow inspired and is leading a separatist movement in Eastern Ukraine hidden behind a cloak of ambiguity and backed by the powerful capabilities of its army.
These operations exhibit common features of Russia's use of military force.
Russia depends on Landpower to achieve its strategic military objectives.
This Landpower-centric approach is part of a broader Russian strategy to roll back Western influence — especially the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the European Union —from the former Soviet republics.
Russia has adjusted the use of its army to conduct hybrid, irregular warfare as the primary means of warfare against its neighbors so as not to provoke a decisive response from either the United States or other European nations.
With this in mind, Information Operations and cyber-capabilities have emerged as key components of Russian military operations.
The importance of modernization is an ongoing concern for Moscow and its armed forces.
These reforms are directed to developing a capability that can act decisively in the region, capable of anything from small special purpose forces missions to largescale conventional operations.
It is this ability to tailor forces across the range of operations that makes it uniquely adaptive and capable.
To do this, Russia is concentrating resources on a small number of elite units, primarily airborne and special operations forces that make up the core of its emerging Rapid Reaction Force.
When Putin believes that employing conventional forces is too risky, he resorts to using unconventional forces, scaled and adapted to the strategic environment to confound American and European decision-makers.
This ""strategy of ambiguity"" was used to great effect in Crimea; such was the case where, despite evidence to the contrary, Putin denied that the ""little green men"" were his soldiers until after he annexed the region.
By doing this, he operated inside the decision-making cycle of NATO and thus retained the strategic initiative.
Putin's adaptable approach encompasses two phases, comprised of eleven factors.
The goal of Phase 1 is to shape an environment favorable to Russian strategic interests.
Phase 2 exploits cleavages in the NATO Alliance created during Phase 1 and attempts to alter the strategic environment through an ambiguous/hybrid intervention.
Phase I: Shaping a strategic environment favorable to Russian interests.
Consolidate political power and use nationalism to maintain domestic support.
At the core of the strategy of ambiguity is the maintenance of Putin's powerbase and his need for popular support.
Putin secures his base by casting the West as the enemy of Russia and thus fuels the engine of nationalism.
The modernization of Russia's already massive nuclear arsenal is a threat to regional stability.
Yet, a greater concern is the rhetoric coming out of the Kremlin threatening to use nuclear weapons against any European nation that challenges its national interests.
Such was demonstrated when Moscow threatened Denmark with nuclear targeting should it join NATO's missile defense shield.
The use and threat of nuclear strikes is part of Russia's emerging strategic/operational approach to bully and intimidate nations to submit to its desires.
The May Victory Parade in Moscow showcased Russia's intent to replace its fleet of armored vehicles with modern systems.
Although facing economic challenges, it seems that the Western Military District will benefit from this boost to conventional land force capability and capacity.
When completed, this will alter the strategic dynamics of the continent.
Apply economic incentives and blackmail to pressure neighboring countries' economic well-being.
Although this tactic has been applied against Ukraine, the dynamics of doing this against other European nations is a bit more complex.
However, it is unlikely that Germany and other NATO members, who rely on Russian energy, are willing to have their economic well-being put at risk and therefore are not willing to take a hard stand against Russian expansionist activities in the east.
The tools of the IO campaign include highquality Russian cable and television, radio programming, hockey clubs, youth camps, and the internet.
These export Moscow's strategic message across Europe, specifically targeting the Russian Diaspora.
This brilliant campaign barrages the viewers/listeners with an unrelenting one-sided view of the world.
With a continuous IO campaign brewing in the background, the groundwork is laid to manipulate disgruntled ethnic Russians where Putin chooses.
As in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, these movements start as peaceful protests, but ultimately lead to taking over government buildings and armed insurrections.
Once engaged in low-level combat, the rebels proclaim their right to self-determination and eventually appeal to Moscow for aid.
However convenient it is to have local support in an uprising, the Kremlin does not need popular support in the Russian Diaspora to achieve its strategic ends.
Should the local populace not support an uprising, Moscow can simply export a separatist movement from Russia to provide the pretext for an intervention as in evidence in Eastern Ukraine.
Move a large conventional force along the borders to dissuade action against the subversives.
As in Eastern Ukraine, Moscow responded to the instability by deploying a large conventional force along the border under the guise of aiding refugees and containing unrest.
The real reason, however, was to intimidate Ukraine, which hesitated out of fear of provoking a response from Moscow.
Deception and disinformation are the key ingredients of this approach, and Putin uses these tools to sow ambiguity and thus obscure his strategy.
As a result, the Kremlin remains a step ahead of NATO's decision-making process and quickly adapts its actions to keep the Alliance off balance.
As the Ukrainian Army launched its offensive to subdue the rebels in Eastern Ukraine, the Russian Army was poised to provide support to their comrades.
Meanwhile, the Kremlin equivocated about its intentions and denied involvement in the conflict.
Had there been a determined international response against Moscow, Putin could have withdrawn support from the separatists, denied complicity in the violence, and waited for a more opportune time to try again.
When the security of a targeted region collapses, and the international response is mired in debate, and a humanitarian crisis ensues, the conditions are set for Russian forces to intervene.
The forces would arrive with aid, food, and provide security to the embattled people of the region.
This intervention would be characterized as a temporary effort to ameliorate the humanitarian crisis Moscow created.
By doing this, Russia can attain limited strategic objectives with minimal risk.
The ultimate goal of this would be to discredit NATO by seizing a piece of a member state's territory.
As Russian forces move to bite off a piece of territory for ""humanitarian reasons,"" the Kremlin would threaten to use nuclear weapons against any nation acting against its interests.
Should the West have a weak political class ruling NATO's lead nations, the threat might just work and trigger a period of appeasement and surrender.
This two-phased, eleven-part plan demonstrates an adaptive strategic approach.
Yet, despite the flexibility inherent in Putin's two-phase and multi-faceted approach to impose his influence in the region, concerted action now can preserve European security.
The only way to do this, however, is through decisive and comprehensive action.
There are advantages that Russian strategic Landpower enjoys in the region.
This makes the so called unannounced ""snap exercises"" that Russia conducts close to NATO's eastern borders a serious concern.
Another factor working in favor of Russian strategic Landpower is the traditional, and at times extended, presence it has had across broad areas of the region.
For instance, Russian domination over Estonia began in 1704 with the defeat of the Swedish Army in Narva at the hands of Czar Peter the Great.
Independence was finally secured in 1920; but this would end with another Soviet occupation in 1940.
During the Cold War, the region was a key location for the Soviet Armed Forces, with Russian troops remaining in the country until 1994.
This is why Putin, in part, is so belligerent toward the Baltic integration into NATO and why Article 5 of the Washington Treaty (an attack on one NATO member is an attack on all) is integral to their security.
However, the greatest advantage that Russian strategic Landpower retains is the application of a hybrid mix of forces to befuddle and confuse Western decision making.
As the West prevaricates during a crisis, Russian troops move toward achieving their objective, which can be rapid, as in the case of Crimea, or slower and messier, as in the case of Eastern Ukraine.
Yet, the appearance of Russian intelligence and Special Forces in Eastern Ukraine pretending to be a local independence movement would be laughable if it did not so brilliantly confuse and baffle Western politicians, who continue to lack unanimity and resolve on how to contend with this threat to European security.
Influence Russian Diaspora Phase I Shape the Strategic Environment to Favor Russian National Interests 6.
Maiatau Political Power Phasen 1 “Invade” with Irregular Forces Masquerading as Local Separatists 3.
US Army War College Yet, one should not be lulled into a false sense of security, even if NATO should figure out a way to deter or mitigate the hybrid application of Russian forces.
In the background remains the real threat of its conventional attack, which is poised to support cross border hybrid operations.
Another outcome, often viewed unthinkable but not out of the realm of the impossible, is the hybrid war morphing into a conventional effort should the strategic environment prove opportune.
This could even start off as a conventional fight if the United States becomes weak internationally.
It may be just this that is in the back of Putin's mind with his stunning announcement to modernize and expand Russia's nuclear arsenal and armed forces.
In just a few years, Moscow will have both a modernized conventional ground force and robust unconventional force, backed by a large nuclear arsenal.
Looking at a map, Kaliningrad appears as a wedge partially thrust between Poland and Lithuania, and, therefore, between Central Europe and the Baltic region.
The emerging hybrid cat and mouse application of its military force makes it complicated for the West to come up with a coherent response to any Moscow inspired aggression.
Yet, behind this hybrid approach is a capable conventional force that enjoys interior lines of communication, the benefits of operating on familiar terrain, and the promise of being provided with modern equipment.
We can safely assume that any future Kremlin operation against Eastern Europe will be backed by a real threat of a nuclear strike against any nation acting contrary to Moscow's interests.
Russian Landpower remains the centerpiece of any actions it takes in the future to expand its influence across the region.
This is an increasingly capable and adaptive force, which has come a long way since its invasion of Georgia.
EUROPEAN SECURITY AND RUSSIAN EXPANSIONISM Russian Military Parade in Red Square, 2016.
Lieutenant Colonel Chris Briand, United States Army The European security environment has changed dramatically.
With Moscow's annexation of Crimea, the invasion of Ukraine, and militarization of the High North, the question of collective security and the core purpose of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization are priority topics with the European allies.
Russia's destabilization of Ukraine has triggered detrimental effects both politically and economically in the region.
Additionally, this has created fear among its neighbors that Russia will continue its ""land grab"" and take measures to weaken their independence and territorial sovereignty.
State policy in the sphere of the safeguarding of national security and the socioeconomic development of the Russian Federation contributes to the implementation of the strategic national priorities and the effective protection of national interests.
These opposing ends could lead to a clash should diplomatic or other missteps transpire.
Moscow has long viewed this regional geographic area as part of their Eurasian empire.
This would create the potential for other nations to gravitate toward an open democracy and might even encourage Russians to advocate for a similar system.
Hence, politically, Kiev's Western orientation and their attempt to align themselves with the EU creates, in the view of the Russian Government, a political instability to their vision of managed democracy in the former Soviet space.
More ominous for the Baltic States is Putin's statement that it is his duty to defend ethnic Russians wherever they live.
Ukraine poses several strategic concerns for Russia, one being the reliance on Ukraine's aerospace and defense industry.
Russia's biggest strategic concern would be if Ukraine joined NATO, which would challenge Russia as a Eurasian Power.
There are long-term implications for the west centered on security, stability, arms control, and trade in relation to Russia.
The EU is dependent on energy from Russia and exports agricultural products to it.
In fact, during the crisis in Ukraine, the EU did not wish to impose a new set of sanctions on Russia until it was forced to do so after the MH-17 civilian airline was shot down.
Politically, as Putin is faced with more pushback and a downturn in the economy, he may face discontent.
This is because his rule is hinged on 14 providing economic growth and social stability for the Russian people.
These are key to Putin's legitimacy, which in turn can be undermined by the sanctions and the downturn in the oil price.
Appealing to Russian patriotism against foreign threats is the tool he is using to survive the economic challenge to his regime.
Based on his character and previous actions, he will continue to appeal to Russian nationalism and intensify military confrontation with Ukraine, if not the Baltic States, to secure his position as Russia's leader.
Vladimir Putin did not consider the economic implications of his actions in Ukraine.
Crimea, which had been a major source of tourism and farming under Ukraine, is now an economic strain on the Russian economy.
In 2014, the Ruble lost half its value due to not only financial concerns, but also geopolitical concerns that Ukrainian separatists backed by Russia were planning a new offensive in Eastern Ukraine.
Inflation is rising as the sanctions on food imports from the west aggravate the situation.
Many European countries are facing declining exports and industrial output because of the sanctions.
As the Russian economy slows as a result of lower energy prices and sanctions, business and wealthy individuals have begun sending money overseas.
A downturn in defense spending because of the economic situation is projected, and these economic hardships will add to the pressure on Putin at home and abroad.
Suggestions that the United States is pulling back in Europe —due to its ""rebalancing"" and focus on Asia — is causing unease in Europe, especially in light of the inability to formulate a common foreign policy, which is concerning to the United States and the Baltic nations.
The United States maintains approximately 67,000 United States Armed Forces in Europe with many on a rotational basis in Poland and the Baltic nations.
This was recently bolstered by the deployment of military equipment in Eastern Europe.
Yet, NATO military members have significant capability gaps that they rely on the United States to address.
These gaps in strategic air and sealift, as well as aerial refueling, intelligence surveillance, and reconnaissance require more United States resources.
However, things are not as ""simple"" as they were when the Washington Treaty was signed in 1949 establishing the concept of collective security.
The economic concerns compound an already tenuous strategic environment and could force Putin to act in a manner that could threaten European peace.
TESTING THE SECURITY AND STABILITY OF EUROPE AND BEYOND Researcher: Lieutenant Colonel Eric Zimmerman, United States Army Russia's intervention in Ukraine is a fundamental disregard of national sovereignty that threatens security and stability in Europe and United States national security interests.
The end of this crisis will have lasting implications concerning stability in Europe and United States interests in the region.
The Ukraine crisis provides an opportunity to demonstrate the post-Cold War relevancy of these organizations by exhibiting solidarity, cooperation, and resolve against a re-emergent regional threat.
While much of the world's attention has shifted, the crisis in Ukraine continues to smolder and even flare up on occasion.
During 2016, Ukraine was the target of a significant and sophisticated cyberattack against its power grid.
OSCE observer movement is being restricted in areas not controlled by the Ukraine Government 44 and cease fire agreements have largely failed to take hold.
As a result of Russia's unwillingness to fully support the implementation of the Minsk II peace deals, the European Union and United States sanctions were extended through the end of January 2017.
Given the inadequacy of narrow multi-lateral political pressure and economic sanctions, a stronger, broader, and more unified approach is required.
Clearly, there is a reason that Russia's recently published national security strategy names NATO as a threat.
Namely, that NATO is preventing Russia from bullying their way back into former Warsaw Pact states — states that are now members of the Alliance.
While this can be attributed to a wide variety of reasons, the most prominent is that not only do all 28 NATO members also belong to the OSCE, so do Russia and Ukraine.
The OSCE is a forum for political dialogue on a wide range of security issues and a platform for joint action to improve the lives of individuals and communities.
This ""whole of government"" approach to regional affairs, coupled with both the resources and the necessary political backing of the nations that have direct interests in the Ukraine crisis, 55 make the OSCE an invaluable part of any solution in Ukraine.
The most visible and publicized missions are the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine and the Observer Mission at the Russian Checkpoints of Gukovo and Donetsk, but the OSCE is doing considerably more.
Additional efforts include facilitating high-level diplomatic and multilateral dialogue that includes Russian and Ukrainian political leaders, activities to strengthen Ukraine's democratic institutions and practices , and activities to promote respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The OSCE has the usual criticisms of any large international organization—inefficiency, indecisiveness, and taking too long to respond.
Both NATO and OSCE are important in achieving United States national security interests, and are particularly relevant given the threat to these interests posed by Russia's actions in Ukraine.
It is also evident that NATO and the OSCE have a long-standing tradition of cooperation, having worked alongside one another in the Balkans and, more recently, in Afghanistan.
As a member of both organizations, the United States should encourage NATO and OSCE leaders to find ways to deepen their cooperation in areas where their goals overlap.
Ukraine is certainly one of those areas, and remarks by leaders from each organization reinforce this notion.
NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg recently thanked OSCE for ""renewing dialogue and strengthening the OSCE's instruments and discussion forums,"" 61 and he called for increased information sharing between the two in order to increase transparency on military activities in Europe.
Newly appointed OSCE chairman, German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, stated that solving the Ukrainian crisis was one of his top priorities.
Given these statements against the backdrop of the Ukraine crisis, increased cooperation as a publicly stated common goal should be well within reach.
Russia's actions in Ukraine threaten European security and stability, as well as directly and indirectly threaten United States national security interests in the region.
While NATO and the OSCE are each conducting independent activities and missions in response to the Ukraine crisis, both Europe and the United States can benefit from deeper cooperation between the two.
Fortunately, recent statements from leaders in both organizations indicate that they also share this belief.
Strong support from the United States, a member of both organizations and a respected global leader, would advance this concept from a mutually held idea to a formally agreed upon and publicly announced common goal.
ITS IMPLICATIONS ON ARMED FORCES DEVELOPMENT Researcher: Colonel Volodymyr Postrybailo, Ukrainian Army I would like to remind you that Alexander III, our emperor, once said that Russia has just two allies, the army and the navy.
Vladimir Putin, April 2015 The Revolution of 2014 was a turning point in Ukrainian history.
For the first time since its independence, the country seized the opportunity to join European civilization and determine its own destiny on the basis of freedom and democracy.
However, Ukraine's aspirations were not acceptable to Russia because they contradicted its imperial ambitions and geopolitical objectives.
As a result, Russia has utilized all instruments of national power in an endeavor to keep Ukraine under its sphere of influence.
However, neither political, nor economic, nor informational pressure has achieved the Kremlin's objective.
As a last resort, having violated fundamental principles of international law and bilateral agreements, Russia occupied Crimea and launched military aggression in Eastern Ukraine.
In this frustrating strategic environment, Ukraine revised its approach to national security and defense.
Starting at the strategic level down to operational and tactical, Ukraine developed a new National Security Strategy and Military Doctrine, in addition to reevaluating its operating doctrines.
This resulted in a series of ambitious comprehensive reforms of its armed forces based on lessons from the annexation of Crimea and anti-terrorist operations in Eastern Ukraine.
This is characterized by the insurgent's disregard of humanitarian law, moral principles, human rights, and the needs of the civilian population.
There are cases where insurgents forcibly embroiled the local population in military actions, using them as human shields.
They also use large-scale sabotage warfare, including mining, sniper, and radio-electronic and informational warfare.
Quite often there was an absence of a continuous, clearly defined front line, with heavy fighting in urban areas.
During the summer of 2015, Russia developed a powerful ground force in Eastern Ukraine.
This force consisted of two army corps totaling up to 35,000 troops and supported by a reserve component of 21 tactical battle groups of regular Russian troops with a total strength of over 9,000 personnel.
In addition, along the Ukrainian eastern border, Russia mustered another 53 tactical battle groups numbering over 50,000 people.
In such conditions, Ukraine needed to double its armed forces strength, which currently is about 250,000 personnel.
There is a critical requirement for a highly qualified, trained, and motivated reserve component.
During 2014-2015, the UAF managed to increase its combat strength and capabilities through six waves of partial mobilization.
This approach provided a sufficient amount of troops in the AO, with up to three brigades simultaneously being deployed.
Therefore, Ukraine will keep a mixed manning system of military professionals and conscripts.
Analyzing the conflict from the domains perspective, it can be concluded that they are being mostly conducted in land and cyber.
Due to the adversary's substantial air-defense capabilities and remarkable Ukrainian Air Force and Army aviation combat losses, the airspace is being used for medevac and transportation purposes only.
This is 24 another lesson, which is reflected in a number of the UAF conceptual documents.
Due to the annexation of Crimea, the UAF lost the majority of their naval assets and capabilities.
A new Maritime Doctrine was developed to ensure the revival of the Ukrainian Navy.
The UAF does not have any space capabilities, but the space domain is definitely being used by Russia for intelligence and communication purposes.
At the beginning of the conflict there was a shortage of digitally encrypted communication systems.
C2 at all levels was mainly accomplished through analog Soviet-origin communication systems and often even via commercial cell phones.
Not surprisingly, such communications were frequently eavesdropped upon by adversaries, which resulted in the breach of one of the fundamental principles of C2 —concealment.
After 3 to 4 months of intensive combat engagement, the UAF did not have enough weapons and equipment to recover losses and activate reserve units.
The existing battle dress uniform was of low functionality and poor quality.
There was a lack of modern helmets and a limited amount of bulletproof jackets.
However, due to unprecedented support by civilian volunteers from all over the country, numerous NGOs, and enormous efforts made by the state defense industrial complex in close cooperation with the UAF, it became possible to improve the UAF logistic and medical support.
Highly mobile airborne troops have proved to be the most mission capable combat arm of the UAF Army.
However, the early combat engagements revealed a shortage of their firepower.
Taking into account this lesson, airmobile brigades were transformed into air assault brigades.
A typical airmobile brigade is now reinforced by a tank company, self-propelled howitzer battalion, missile artillery battalion, and air defense artillery battalion.
At the beginning of the conflict the adversary had superiority over the UAF in cyber and informational warfare.
Pro-Russian separatists supported by Russian armed forces made many efforts to demoralize not only Ukrainian soldiers and officers but also their family members.
Massive mail outs of text messages to cell phones and e-mail inboxes of the UAF military personnel and their dependents is just one example of such informational influence.
Therefore, the importance of strengthening the psychological fortitude of military personnel became another vital lesson learned.
As a result, battle mind training is now fully integrated into the combat training system.
There is, however, a great potential to capitalize on the UAF's unique advantages.
We defend our motherland against separatists and external aggressors; we are supported by the vast majority of the Ukrainian population as well as the international community; and, UAF morale and patriotism are very high.
As a result, the UAF developed an effective and efficient system of civilian-military cooperation , which did not exist at all prior to the conflict.
This not only harmonized all joint civil-mil activities and remarkably improved support of Ukrainian troops by the local population, but also increased situational awareness and quite often allowed for the receipt of valuable intelligence information.
The best proof of the benefits of NATO-Ukraine military cooperation, and another lesson, is provided by those UAF units that participated in NATO-led exercises, initiatives, and programs such as Planning and Reviewing Process and Operational Capability Concept.
These units, including the 95th airmobile brigade and 30th mechanized brigade, proved to be the most organized and capable of executing their missions and suffered fewer casualties compared to other military units and formations.
This positive experience at the tactical level has to be shared, promoted, and brought to the operational and strategic levels.
According to the Stockholm Peace Research Institute, Ukraine was among the ten largest exporters of major weapons in 2010-2014.
The signing of the ""Roadmap of Military-Technical Cooperation between Ukraine and NATO"" on December 18, 2015, is the first promising step on this path.
The conflict has already revealed many gaps in Ukrainian doctrines and concepts, mistakes made during planning and execution of combat missions, and shortages in a number of joint functions that could have been avoided and overcome if the UAF had utilized the best practices and experience of the NATO countries' Armies prior to the conflict.
Nevertheless, because of its battlefield experience, high readiness, and enhanced operational capabilities, Ukraine's Army is now one of the five strongest in Europe.
It is willing to share this experience with NATO countries, cooperation which would doubtlessly be mutually beneficial.
Hopefully, the new National Security Strategy expenditure on security and defense totaling 5% of the country's GDP will drive continued progress of the UAF's development.
Therefore, despite a number of institutional regional and global security systems, any country's neglect of defense capabilities in the contemporary world is unacceptable.
RUSSIA AND THE BALTIC NATIONS Lithuanian President Dalia Grybauskaite watches a battle demonstration with Lithuanian Chief of Defense Major General Jonas Vytautas Zukas and Lithuanian Land Forces commander.
Major General Almantas Leika, during the final day of Saber Strike 2015 at the Great Lithuanian Hetman Jonusas Radvila Training Regiment, June 18, 2015.
Lieutenant Colonel Algimantas Misiunas, Lithuanian Army There are three distinctive strands of Russian revanchist policy.
One is directed toward Western countries, one toward the former Soviet republics that were not able to end Russian influence, and one is aimed toward the former Soviet republics that managed to break away from Russia and are steadily headed to the West.
The Kremlin views the latter two categories as the ""near abroad"" 84 and employs all instruments of national power to communicate this to the West.
The wars in Georgia and Ukraine demonstrate that President Putin follows this policy, and also demonstrates that Europe has been waiting for his next step in pursuing this.
After the Russo-Georgian war and the annexation of Crimea, Western observers and policymakers have expressed worries that Moscow's next step will be the Baltic States.
Furthermore, Russia is likely to employ a hybrid war strategy because the United States and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization have no effective strategy to counter it.
On the other hand, former NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen clearly announced that if Russia intervenes in the Baltics it will be crossing a red line, and NATO will respond.
Determining whether it is worth it to Russia to attack the Baltic States, and what Putin's real intentions are, is difficult to discern.
Since the Russo-Chechen wars, one of the goals for President Vladimir Putin has been the restoration of Russia's former status as a global power with unlimited access to the oceans.
In the late 1990s, the Warsaw Pact countries and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics had disintegrated into independent countries, each with divergent national strategic interests and objectives.
In fact, overnight Russia had been thrown back to its 17th-century borders, with limited access to the Black 86 and the Baltic Seas.
The collapse of the Soviet Union has changed the balance of power in the world.
However, those bases, from the military perspective, can also be easily cut off from the mainland's support.
Therefore, ensuring control of the Black Sea remains a top priority for Putin and was a driving factor guiding Russia's strategy in its incursions into the territories of Ukraine when pro-Russian Ukrainian President, Victor Yanukovych, 31 was ousted from power.
The strategic importance of Kaliningrad is almost the same, and there is no doubt that Moscow has prepared plans to reestablish lost access to the Baltic Sea and consequently to build a land bridge with Kaliningrad.
Russian revanchist political ideologists argue that Russia has to evoke its imperial ambitions and undermine American influence.
The Russian National Security Strategy and Military Doctrine describe NATO as a threat, and that the dissolution of NATO would be a great political-strategic victory for Putin.
Given the complexity of the NATO decision making process and the versatility of the interests of the members of NATO, there is a strong possibility that NATO would fail to respond to possible Russian aggression against the Baltic States.
There is no doubt that NATO would collapse if it failed to respond to armed aggression against one of its members.
The document asserts that an entire spectrum of political, financial, economic, and informational instruments could be applied to gain influence in the international arena, and that Russia will only use force when other options to protect its national interests fail.
Furthermore, Russia's 2014 military doctrine considers the expansion of NATO military infrastructure toward Russia's border as a military danger.
Large-scale military exercises in Russia's neighborhood, which NATO and the United States conduct to deter Russia, are described as threats.
An important nuance in the doctrine is that Russia perceives a need to defend what it sees as its vital sphere of interests.
According to Polina Sinovets and Bettina Renz, two associate professors who studied Russia's 2014 military doctrine, Russia does not outline the perimeter of its sphere of vital interests and does not explicitly name the states in the sphere.
Non-military measures would be applied in order to disrupt the opponent's political decision-making processes and to weaken the unity of military and political alliances.
Military measures such as unconventional and covert actions could be initiated in the opponent's territory before the beginning of military conflict.
Moreover, local protests and the opposition would actively be exploited during the crisis.
When the crisis escalates into an open military conflict, it is planned to launch unexpected and rapid operations in the territory of the adversary, to destroy its critical civil and military infrastructure with the aim to break the political or social will to resist.
In addition, simultaneous information operations and cyberattacks would be applied extensively.
Russia's ""end-state"" has always been maintaining the role of a superpower in Eurasia.
The ways have focused on using all the instruments of national power to intimidate and by using the strategy of ambiguity to disrupt the opponent's political decision-making processes; and, if this does not work, to change the opponent's policy toward Russia, to launch a massive and rapid land attack into the opponent's territory.
Later, depending on how internal and external audiences react to this action, Russia will either maintain counterinsurgency warfare or will enjoy a quick and incredible victory.
First of all, it is because the separation of the three Baltic States had left Russia with limited access to the Baltic Sea.
Secondly, Russia again lost territories, which former Tsarist Russian and Soviet leaders had occupied in the 19th and 20th centuries.
Finally, the collapse of the Soviet Union and the rise of NATO has changed the balance of power and has damaged Russian imperial ambitions.
Therefore, Putin's main objectives are to ensure permanent control in the Baltic Sea region, and if the situation permits, reestablish former power and influence over Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia.
Analysis of the Russian wars against Georgia and Ukraine, the published Russian strategies, and ""Gerasimov's"" doctrine indicates that a Russian occupation of the Baltic States would be executed by employing a combination of non-military and military measures.
Any military or non-military actions will be supported by the employment of all the instruments of national power along with simultaneous information operations and cyberattacks.
Furthermore, the Kremlin will use ambiguity, deception, and disinformation to prevent a quick response from the Western Community.
And, due to the fact that Baltic countries have very small defense forces, the Russian campaign could turn quickly into another frozen conflict, which allows Putin to achieve his main objectives.
RUSSIAN INFORMATION WARFARE AND COUNTERMEASURES Researcher: Lieutenant Colonel Corey Collier, United States Marine Corps The fall of the Soviet Union and the subsequent independence among the republics ushered in an era that many believed spelled the end of tensions between Russia and the West.
Unfortunately, this ship of dreams shattered on the rocky shoals of reality.
Under the leadership of Vladimir Putin, Russia experienced a new tide of nationalistic fervor, casting its old nemesis, the United States, as the raison d'etre for nationalistic security concerns and citing the North Atlantic Treaty Organization as a prominent example of United States encroachment.
Over the last decade, Russia has increasingly tested the resolve of Europe and the West, inciting and then intervening in manufactured crises in Georgia and Ukraine.
However, it is possible for Latvia to survive this storm by understanding how Russia uses information warfare in combination with economic pressure and energy dependence to create tension.
Likewise, it is important to recognize how Russia could change its approach to undermine Latvian independence due to Latvia's NATO membership.
Finally, by implementing a few specific strategic initiatives, Latvia can counter these destabilizing forces and strengthen its position with regard to its Russian neighbor to the East.
A study of the events leading up to the 2014 Russian incursion into Ukraine provides insight into Russian strategy and understanding of what can happen without an effective counterplan.
After the Ukrainian president took steps that would distance the country from the West and realign it with Russia, popular unrest broke out, leading to the ouster of Ukrainian President Yanukovich.
Using disinformation as part of a hybrid warfare strategy to destabilize Ukraine, Russia manufactured unrest further by sending plainclothes soldiers, later referred to as ""little green men,"" across the border into Ukraine to seize key locations and act as instigators among the local ethnic Russian population.
After annexing Crimea and as tensions rose, Russia used the unrest as a pretext to invade, claiming an obligation to protect ethnic Russians.
Russia continues to provide thinly veiled support to separatists in the Eastern region of the country in a struggle that has no clear end in sight.
In a controversial 2014 study of Russian strategy, authors Michael Weiss and Peter Pomerantsev describe how Russia has redefined the use of information as a key component of its hybrid warfare strategy.
According to the authors, Russia long ago abandoned the Cold War method of releasing information to counter the message of the West.
Russia now exploits the freedom of speech its former republics enjoy to implement an intricate blend of disinformation using television, social media, and nongovernmental 37 organizations.
Using every medium available, Russia creates confusion, sows discord between ethnic Russians and other ethnicities, undermines political initiatives, and infuses doubt about the intentions of state governments while extolling Russian pride.
Russia used these techniques leading up to the 2014 incursion into Ukraine, and many of them are evident in Russia's strategy with other states today.
A look at recent history in the region bears witness to this reality, from the 2007 riots and cyberattacks in Estonia to the recent but limited internet campaign calling for independence in the Eastern Latvian region of Latgale.
Although the Baltic States of Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia are European Union and NATO members, there is growing concern they are the newest targets for Russian expansionism.
Due to its geographic location, Latvia represents an especially lucrative objective.
Reestablishment of Russian dominance in Latvia would isolate Estonia and bring Kaliningrad closer to the Russian mainland.
Although Lithuania's position would be tenuous, the country's shared border with Poland would provide contiguous connectivity with other NATO nations.
Estonia would become a veritable fortress, and economic benefits the country may enjoy otherwise would be consumed with military expenditures to defend the state.
Latvia's social makeup provides fertile soil for Russian information operations.
Caught between imperial powers, the Baltic States spent most of the last century consumed by competing world powers.
Ethnic division carries with it social division, creating enclaves of predominantly ethnic Russian people.
After independence, Latvia took measures to establish their national identity that added to these ethnic tensions.
To gain citizenship in Latvia, ethnic Russians must pass an exam that tests their knowledge of Latvian history and their proficiency in the Latvian language.
Many ethnic Russians have neither the desire nor the skills to pass the exam.
Compounding the matter, the Latvian Government rebuffed efforts in 2012 to establish Russian as the country's second language and removed the Russian language from the classroom throughout the education system, further dividing the population.
Latvian efforts designed to distinguish the country and its people as unique from Russia resulted in a large disaffected ethnic Russian population without citizenship, the ability to vote, hold public office, or even apply for a passport.
Many ethnic Russians in Latvia view these initiatives as discriminatory.
Russian news media, easily accessed via the internet and satellite television, pounced.
Seeking to exploit the opportunity and reinforce the idea that Russia is the only state that cares for the concerns of Russians at home or abroad, the Russian news message 38 resonates well with many of the Russian diaspora in the region.
Throughout these communities, Russian news stations portray state policies as an attempt to diminish Russian ethnicity while portraying Russian policy, and specifically Russian leaders like Putin, as protectors of Russian citizens and their rights.
Ethnic Russians even third-generation Latvian-born ethnic Russians can acquire Russian citizenship, Russian passports, and retire on a Russian pension years earlier than Latvian citizens.
The effects of these efforts are tangible, as demonstrated by the opinion polls of ethnic Russians in the Baltic States.
The preponderance of ethnic Russians view Moscow's actions in Ukraine as acceptable to protect Russian citizens; and view sanctions by the West against Russia for actions in Ukraine to be unacceptable.
The rise of social activist groups and nongovernmental organizations promoting Russian views provides another venue for Russian information to flow.
Lueled by Russian money and acting as spokespersons for Russian initiatives in the Baltics, groups, like the Lund for the Support and Defense of Compatriots Abroad, act as proponents of Russian policy and provide a voice to ethnic Russians throughout the Eastern European area.
Exploiting the free society in Latvia, these organizations, many of which are Kremlin-funded, take advantage of the hard-won freedoms of fledgling democracies to undermine unity and exacerbate differences among ethnic groups.
Information is not, however, a unilateral approach in Russia's strategy, but is used in conjunction with other instruments of power.
After the world reacted to Russian aggression in Ukraine with sanctions on Russian oil, Moscow reacted by emplacing an embargo on foodstuffs imported from the EU, an action that put a strain on the economies of the Baltic States and their political leadership.
Another issue the Baltic States recognized as key to future security after Russian actions in Ukraine is increased independence from Russia in the energy exchange market.
In all of these efforts, Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia recognize the need to bolster their ability to provide for their collective security.
Although the Baltic States share a common concern of Russian incursion and violation of sovereignty, cooperation has been slow in developing.
As if the destabilizing actions of Russia were not enough, the Baltic States are also concerned with the validity of NATO promises to respond if threatened.
Even if Georgia and Ukraine were NATO members, the strategy of instigation and misinformation used by Russia to intercede never rose to the level that would have triggered a NATO collective defense response until it was too late.
Under the distracted eye of the world, Russia pulled the levers of national power to manipulate events until intervention seemed to carry too much risk for the West.
Although Latvia recognizes the need to provide better security, economic strain hinders the state's ability to enact change.
Latvia's 2015 defense budget measured a paltry 1% of Gross Domestic Product —it since has increased to 1.7% with the 2% threshold being achieved in 2018.
Unrest in the same vein as what occurred in Ukraine could result, opening the door for Russia, poised at Latvia's doorstep and proclaiming its obligation to protect ethnic Russians, to become involved and leaving the United States and NATO to decide if intervention and possible escalation is worth the cost.
Nevertheless, there is still time to create an effective response to this threat, but serious steps must be taken soon.
First, Latvia must find a way to close the gap of ethnic division in the country.
Regardless of the country's dark history over the last century, ethnic Russians will only feel animosity and disassociation with the country until they are embraced as part of the social makeup of a united Latvia.
There is danger in making this move too quickly, because ethnic Russians gaining citizenship also immediately transition to voting constituents and could empower pro-Russian political parties.
A final course of action must include progress in energy independence throughout the Baltics.
A plan for continued development must include more energy sharing with EU partners while 40 further integrating the Baltic economies with Western move threats to energy resources as a way for Russia to States.
Lieutenant Colonel Vahur Karus, Estonian Defence Forces Following Russian aggression against Ukraine in 2014, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization rushed to secure and reassure its vulnerable Eastern flank and, more specifically, the Baltic States of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
Since then, these three states have been the focus of debates in NATO, the European Union , and in the United States concerning how to defend the Baltics against Russian aggression.
Most of the discussion has centered on what NATO, the EU, and the United States will do to protect their interests in the Baltics.
However, there are specific steps these countries can take to better prepare for potential future Russian aggression.
To recognize the way ahead, it is important to understand the current composition of the armed forces of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, as well as the planned development of those three armed forces.
Second, given Russian tactics in the region, correctly analyzing what capabilities these countries need to effectively counter conventional Russian forces is critically important.
Finally, some recommendations are provided for the future forces of the Baltic States.
Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania each have small populations and limited land area, restricting their freedom of choice in every aspect of statehood.
With 1.2,2.0, and 2. million inhabitants respectively, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania are together smaller than all of the other neighboring states.
Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania are members of NATO and the EU and greatly emphasize bilateral relations with the United States.
Consequently, these factors have impacted how these countries organize their armed forces.
All three countries' armed forces heavily emphasize land forces (while naval and air forces have only niche capabilities); and they heavily rely on NATO to cover the essential gaps in each countries' military limitations.
The land forces of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania are built around the Infantry Brigade concept as their primary maneuver force supported by a volunteer defense organization, which provides a territorial defense component.
However, all three countries have different principles of manning, equipping, and organizing their brigades.
Estonia relies heavily on the reserve army concept with mandatory military service as the primary system for producing wartime units for the brigades.
Estonian brigades are combined arms formations with all-around capability for independent operations.
Estonia has two infantry brigades — one mechanized and one light infantry brigade — and territorial defense units provided by the volunteer Defense League.
The Estonian Navy specializes in counter-mine operations, consisting of three mine countermeasure vessels and auxiliary ships.
The Air Force consists of Amari Air Base and Air Surveillance Wing, and contributes to the NATO Integrated Air and Missile Defense System with robust early warning and air defense mission command and control, and facilitates the NATO Air Policing Mission.
Recently, the Latvian Brigade's capability was greatly enhanced with the procurement of Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance —or CVR —light armored vehicles from the United Kingdom ; previously, Latvia only had light infantry units.
Latvian Naval and Air Forces only possess niche capabilities like their Estonian counterparts, with similar tasks.
Budget cuts during the recent economic recession impacted the Latvian Armed Forces.
However, this dynamic changed following the Russian occupation of Crimea.
The Latvian Government has announced that the defense budget will reach 2% of GDP by 2018, an indication that Latvia is heading in the right direction.
However, as with Estonia, Latvia's GDP is too small to provide for the purchase of new capabilities or to expand their force structure.
Likewise, the high personnel costs attached to a having a standing professional army will likely eat up Latvia's defense spending, leaving little for operations and maintenance or the procurement of new capabilities.
Currently, Lithuanian land forces consist of an ""Iron Wolf"" mechanized brigade manned with professional soldiers and equipped with M113 armored personnel carriers.
The development of a second infantry brigade is on the way, and, when ready, will primarily be a reserve formation with a professional cadre.
For territorial defense, Lithuania, like Estonia and Latvia, relies on its volunteer defense organization (in Lithuanian, Krasto apsaugos savanoriu pajegos ) of roughly six light infantry battalions.
The Lithuanian Navy and Air Force are very similar to its northern neighbors, and they possess niche capabilities like MCM vessels and air surveillance, with the exception that the Lithuanian Air Force has more rotaryand fixed-wing aircraft than either Latvia or Estonia.
According to guidance from its Minister of National Defense, Lithuania will reach the 2% of GDP defense budget by the year 2020, and will purchase infantry fighting vehicles, anti-tank and anti-aircraft weapons, weapons for fire support, and protective equipment.
This program is already under way, with Lithuania's recent purchase of a new self-propelled artillery system from Germany in 2015.
In both Latvia and Lithuania, and to a smaller degree in Estonia, the problem stems from the need to recruit well educated personnel for defense and pay salaries which are competitive with the rest of the society, while also securing enough available resources for the development of new capabilities, and maintaining the existing ones.
Another result of these small military budgets is the inability to purchase the necessary all-around capabilities for initial self-defense such as air defense, electronic warfare, and an integrated fire support system.
The Baltic countries primarily rely on their ground forces for their defense.
This is partly due to the fact that air forces and navies, with all their technical capabilities, are too expensive for small states to maintain; and partly due to the historical legacy of starting the build-up of armed forces from scratch.
The economic recession at the end of the last decade drove most countries toward a reduction of their defense budgets, many by at least one-third.
This fact, combined with pressure from NATO for deployable units, led Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania toward the development of a military primarily centered on a light infantry capability.
Despite this, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania pushed for the development of mechanized forces, and each state has, or soon will have, a mobile brigade with some level of protection.
The acquisition of Javelin anti-tank missiles in 2015 improved the short-range defensive capabilities against Russia's mechanized forces.
Likewise, all three countries have a very short range air defense systems capability, some form of fire support system, and their maneuvers are supported by combat engineers.
However, the land forces are missing a multilayered air-defense, self-propelled fire support capability, and the means to deploy scatterable minefields with fire support means.
In addition, there are no coastal defense systems to protect the vulnerable coastline of these states.
Given the combination of the tactical effectiveness of landmines in canalizing and delaying an adversary's movements combined with its cost-effectiveness, all three would benefit by withdrawing from the treaty as long as there were no penalty for doing so.
With the scarcity of forces available to counter possible Russian aggression, mines could prove critical in neutralizing Russian advantages.
To multiply the effectiveness of mines, all three countries should purchase medium range anti-tank systems to maximize their range of employment.
Since Baltic countries do not possess the air assets to guard their air space and instead rely on NATO support, they must build up a layered, integrated air defense to at least have some sort of capability to counter Russia's air advantage.
VSHORAD is effective against low and slow flying assets like helicopters and satisfies the needs of maneuver units, but to facilitate joint operations these Baltic States need medium range and long range air defense systems to influence enemy air operations.
Also, a multi-layered air defense will have the added benefit of further facilitating air defense in support of the brigade's maneuver on the ground.
Fire support systems are yet another area which all three countries must build upon, with both fire support and counter fire assets.
Lithuania's purchase of PzH 2000 is a step in the right direction, but Estonia is still relying on towed systems while Latvia does not possess any fire support assets which can tactically support the maneuver brigade.
In purchasing new artillery systems, all three countries also must acquire artillery tracking systems, which will enable them to conduct counter-battery missions.
Since all three Baltic countries have small navies, they need to have a means to defend their coastlines against the formidable Russian Navy.
Modern mobile coastal artillery or missile systems will at least give pause to an opposing navy, diverting additional resources away from enemy capabilities, and the smart use of coastal artillery will help all three states to minimize the risk of envelopment from the sea.
This leads to an additional capability the Baltic region must consider pursuing —effective electronic warfare and electronic countermeasures.
Lessons learned from Russian aggression in Ukraine demonstrate that all the Baltic countries must develop and acquire electronic warfare systems to assist in countering enemy's C2, unmanned aerial vehicles, and certain weapon systems, which Russia is currently actively using.
Using drones or certain ammunitions for delivery will greatly enhance the effect achieved by non-lethal means.
Foremost, however, is the need for Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania to continue to build mechanized forces, since mobility and protection with direct firepower are the only means to delay Russia's mechanized forces.
However, acquiring and maintaining the aforementioned capabilities, even if defense budgets doubled, will be impossible 46 unless foreign military sales to Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania come with ""friendly prices"" or leasing options.
And, even if obtained, the challenge of manning these new capabilities still exists.
Therefore, the need for deployment of NATO troops continues, but must be viewed more from the perspective of special capabilities than from maneuver forces.
This focus will allow the Baltic States to concentrate on the mechanization and development of maneuver formations while NATO forces fill the gap of some of the technical shortfalls.
Defending European security architecture has always been the task of NATO and is measured in the sum of all alliance members' capabilities.
The security situation has not changed this, and the Baltic States need help from other NATO countries to secure their part of the collective responsibility.
As stated above, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania must concentrate their scarce resources to develop conventional capabilities that will act as a deterrent and, if need be, to counter Russia's conventional forces until the whole of NATO can mobilize and restore security.
The alliance must agree to provide specific capabilities until the Baltic countries are able to acquire and apply these capabilities themselves, to include ballistic missile defense and subsequent air defense layers along with allied air forces.
The development of mobile fire support systems together with coastal artillery will be part of developing brigades as main maneuver forces and must be accompanied by the passive means of fire support to execute effective counter-battery or counter-asset missions.
Access to special munitions like scatterable minefields for their counter-mobility advantage against armor and tanks will help brigades to shape the conventional battlefield in their favor.
Electronic warfare and electronic counter-measures capabilities will further multiply the effect of fires.
The current Latvian force posture of territorial defense and only one maneuver brigade leaves them vulnerable against a Russian conventional attack.
Accordingly, Latvia would benefit by reestablishing mandatory service, thereby creating one additional maneuver brigade in the region.
Lurthermore, mandatory military service would help Latvia to integrate their Russian minorities into Latvian society and possibly undermine the threat of hybrid warfare.
Although Estonia and Lithuania already have mandatory service and are well ahead in this regard in effectively applying more manpower toward their defense forces, all three countries require the assistance of the remainder of the alliance to effectively convert the Baltics into a reliable NATO bastion.
THE NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION AND THE NEW RUSSIAN STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENT NATO Exercise Anakonda.
In the decades following NATO's formation, the global environment changed drastically from that established after the 1945 Potsdam Agreement.
The Cold War ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, and modern globalization allowed the United States economy to grow beyond transatlantic-markets of trade and commerce.
At the same time, terrorism and unconventional warfare became the modus-operandi of transnational threats attempting to abolish world order.
With these changes in the global environment, some argued that NATO was no longer relevant, or even needed by the United States for the advancement of its national interests.
Moreover, the world has become more volatile, uncertain, complex, and ambiguous.
Therefore, it is highly probable that the United States, because of its longstanding political, military, and economic commitment to NATO, could befall the same fate as ancient Athens during the Peloponnesian War —a super-power drawn into war by its alliances, not for its own political or military objectives.
Essentially, history predicts the United States will enter into a conflict, not of its choosing, or in support of its national interests, but because of its obligations to its allies in a continuously changing and unknowable global environment.
From a United States economic and military perspective, this risk does not outweigh the benefits NATO provides the United States.
Essentially, the NATO alliance is a means to balance the expenditure of finite United States national resources against United States national interests, while at the same time promoting global, international order.
In view of this changing geopolitical environment, and an increasingly aggressive Russia, the NATO alliance remains not only relevant, but an essential component to the protection and advancement of United States national interests in Europe, with ancillary effects globally.
This paper acknowledges NATO's outdated mandate, which does not account for the complexities of the global security environment or the modern-day character of war, and will address these concerns through specific recommendations for the mitigation of these issues.
NATO has a direct effect not only on United States policy, but also on a variety of United States national interests.
By continuing to invest in the success and growth of the alliance, the United States will influence its national, diplomatic, and economic destiny.
Moreover, by strengthening NATO, the United States guarantees continued access and influence in Europe and the around the world.
From a United States perspective, NATO is not exclusively about mutual defense.
While defense is a fundamental pillar, with respect to United States national interests, the alliance is arguably more focused on international access, the stability and economic prosperity created from United States involvement in Europe, and legitimacy.
The NATO alliance has been at the center of United States foreign policy and power projection, while concurrently maintaining the backbone of the European security apparatus.
The United States profits from a free, democratic, and peaceful Europe.
Equally, Europe benefits from the security umbrella NATO affords its members, of which the United States contributes more than 70% of the total defense expenditures of the alliance's 28 members.
This security, provided primarily through its collective defense principle stipulated in Article 5 of its mandate — a military attack against any is an attack against them all —has correlated directly into the political and environmental stability of Europe.
Through this staggering financial portfolio, the economic power of the United States, enriched by its sustained access to secure and stable European markets, continues to be a key foundational principle of United States NSS and a vital source of continuing influence overseas.
Furthermore, the geopolitical access NATO provides is a significant strategic advantage with respect to United States influence and global reach.
Additionally, with respect to United States opera52 tions in Iraq and Afghanistan, Ramstein Airbase in Germany remains a vital logistical supply hub for both personnel and equipment entering those theaters of operation for more than a decade.
In this respect, a military presence facilitates the U.S.' ability to assure its allies, cultivate new partners, and maintain a stabilizing presence globally.
This enables the United States to protect Europe's populace and borders through security collaboration.
This understanding highlights that NATO is, first and foremost, a political organization.
From a validity/authority rational, NATO offers the United States international legitimacy to act, within the framework of international law and norms, inside the global security system to protect and advance its national interests and those of its allies and partners.
The combined and voluntary will of 28 of the world's strongest, sovereign democracies is an extremely powerful source of political legitimacy.
Something that unilateral action or coalitions of the willing simply cannot enjoy.
It attracts partners whose political support and military contributions add to our broader international legitimacy.
Like the 20th-century, the 21st-century global security environment is complex, unpredictable, fiscally constrained, and comprised of multiple interconnected weak and failing states, including powerful armed groups, some of which maintain the ability to violently alter the geopolitical/strategic landscape within their own nations and in other various regions.
On the contrary, focus must be on evolving the fidelity of the international system itself, a structure of moral global citizens that endorse and advance United States core values, and the UN Charter.
In order to advance security and prosperity in the 21st century, we must maintain and even enhance our military strength.
But I also believe that the United States must place even greater strategic emphasis on building the security capabilities of others.
By doing so, the United States promotes the ability to shape the global security environment, while enhancing the collective ability of NATO to respond and defeat any source of regional instability.
ENDS, WAYS & MEANS NATO is a vital component of United States strategy and foreign policy with respect to the protection and advancement of United States national interests in not only Europe, but also the international community.
While NATO's mandate may be dated, its foundational philosophy— to safeguard freedom, common heritage, civilization, and principles (democracy, individual liberty, and rule of law) —allows the alliance to endure, despite the current complexities of the global security environment.
Although NATO maintained the peace in Europe throughout the 20th century, for it to remain pertinent and effective, it needs to adapt to the threats of the 21st century.
For this to occur, the United States must continue to lead, through financial investment, and political commitment and mentorship, in order to influence the following evolution and ratification of NATO's mandate and strategy to shape the global security environment.
If implemented, these will concentrate and focus the efforts of the alliance, specifically with respect to a vision for collective defense, cooperative security, and crisis management — the alliance's three core tasks.
NATO should continue to encourage political dialogue and diplomacy between its members and foster a comparable interface and collaboration with the rest of the international community.
The United States remains the preeminent power but the gap between the United States and the rest is narrowing.
In literal or factual terms, the alliance is a viable mechanism for political discourse among a multitude of diverse nations which have drastically different political identities and cultures, and who view the world through very different geopolitical lenses.
Fortunately, the ability of NATO to assimilate and synergize the varied cultural beliefs of its members, focusing on common values and interests, is one of its greatest strengths.
Although the character of the global security environment continues to evolve, international relationships, and the agreements that transpire between nations, remain a diplomatic endeavor.
NATO must enhance its ability to deter, and if required, defeat regional sources of instability, not just the military prowess of a common enemy.
Unlike the Cold War, NATO no longer faces a single communist threat embodied by the Soviet Union.
On the contrary, the alliance confronts modern dangers such as terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, cyberwarfare, piracy, narco-trafficking, hybrid warfare, radical nationalism, and more recently, mass immigration.
These problem-sets exemplify an assortment of regional sources of instability that severely influence global security, economic prosperity, and international order, and may necessitate a situationally dependent strategic response.
This entails the ability to compel or coerce the will of a state or nonstate actor, typically through the threat, or actual use, of forceful action.
NATO needs to foster domestic governmental stability among its members.
NATO's profile has transformed, especially with the incorporation of former Warsaw Pact countries into the alliance following the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Although the West perceived this NATO enlargement as a mechanism to provide greater stability to all of Europe, this expansion propelled multiple transitional, and somewhat weak and fragile, newly democratic states into a very mature and demanding political/military arena — a precarious position for states struggling to provide for the basic needs of its populace.
Since the end of the Cold War, and especially in the last two decades, the proliferation of weak and failing states has been the principal source of regional instability and conflict.
When these conditions become severe, a state's legitimacy seriously erodes and it can even vanish.
Because NATO draws strength and legitimacy from its partnerships, the alliances' founding members should work closely with new and emerging allies to ensure the sustainability of membership criteria.
By doing this, NATO not only shapes the global security environment by facilitating internal stability of its member states, but also provides an assembly of legitimate governing bodies, dedicated to the global advancement of security, freedom, prosperity, and order for the international community to emulate.
This is essential to equip leaders, both political and military, at all levels, with the comprehension and forethought to make decisions, mitigate risk, and account for 2nd/3rd order effects.
The United States has operated as part of NATO for over 65 years; however, NATO interoperability remains far from perfect.
It reflects outdated, linear practices and a conventional Cold War mindset mistakenly applied to the current global security environment, categorized as complex, asymmetric, and hybrid.
For example, alliance members must understand the standard forms of operational employment, mission command and signal/communication capabilities, and overall logistical/sustainment capacity.
Furthermore, NATO must recognize that many of the allies and partners operate under national caveats restricting their acts while deployed.
Alliance members may also preserve historically engrained frictions, shaped by common and sometimes contested national histories, which may impede operational participation and cooperation.
This multinational understanding is vital for NATO members, as it relates directly to planning considerations, collaboration, and the ability of the alliance to interoperate during the execution of its missions.
The ability to communicate this knowledge is as important as this detailed multinational understanding between nations.
Although this poses a challenge due to the nature of the alliance itself,e., various operating systems/procedures and language barriers, it is an integral requirement for success.
By sharing essential collective knowledge, the North Atlantic Council empowers its members by increasing situational 58 understanding thereby facilitating the resolution of possible misconceptions of ally or partner capabilities.
This enables informed decision-making to support the desired political end state, but more notably, builds greater trust in the alliance.
While achieving a shared collective multinational understanding in NATO is demanding, building trust between its members is even more challenging.
When operating in conjunction with NATO allies and other joint, interagency, intragovernmental, and multinational partners, diversity is the modus-operandi; a common language, doctrinal terminology, planning process, collective operating system, and other military equipment are not.
These dissimilarities can lead to biases, creating fissures in alliance solidarity and hindering NATO collaboration, integration, and unity of effort.
It is crucial that all NATO members place these parochial preconceived biases aside.
Although difficult to accomplish, successful implementation will allow better incorporation of the distinctive capabilities and capacities of each NATO ally and JIIM partner; interoperability is not about achieving congruency, rather, it is about compatibility and understanding how to integrate each contributing nation.
This cultivation of trust allows NATO to operate more effectively and efficiently, achieving synergistic effects, correlating directly to strategic, operational, and tactical success.
Once established, trust becomes the foremost advantage binding contrasting units or organizations together, empowering the many to act as one, and forging a unity of effort and purpose toward the accomplishment of the desired political end state.
Symbiotic to NATO's desired political end state, the alliance requires adequate resources — financial investment, political support, and military/non-military capabilities — from its members to operate effectively in the global security environment.
This equates to the assertion that NATO must continually reorganize itself to have the necessary conventional/unconventional and select ""niche"" capabilities available to proactively prepare for and respond to the wide-range and varied contingencies currently confronting the alliance.
For example, the dangers range from the complex, multidimensional hybrid warfare employed by Russia in Ukraine, to the cost-efficient, yet potentially devastating threat of cyberwarfare by any capable actor who has the ability to interface with the cyber-domain.
Unfortunately, of the 28 NATO nations, more than 70% of European land forces do not have the means to deploy equipment or personnel significant distances or to sustain them; this is primarily shouldered by the United States.
This investment equates to a 2% of GDP benchmark for defense spending, of which only Estonia, Greece, Poland, the UK, and the United States achieved in 2015.
As allies, we must all accept our fair share of security responsibility to each; and as allies we all must choose to invest in, develop, and field new capabilities now and in the future.
This emphasizes for NATO that, to effectively address the challenges and threats of the 21st century, it must modernize its response capabilities while developing new and improved technologies.
To accomplish this, alliance members must increase their national defense spending to at least the 2% GDP benchmark unanimously agreed upon by alliance members at previous NATO summits, such as the Wales Summit in 2014.
These investments are a critical requirement to the enduring relevance of the alliance and will provide NATO the political strength and military capability to defend its members and share the cost-burden through a multilateral, transatlantic approach to cooperative security.
The blunt reality is that there will be dwindling appetite and patience in the United States Congress — and in the American body politic writ large — to expend increasingly precious funds on behalf of nations that are apparently unwilling to devote the necessary resources or make the necessary changes to be serious and capable partners in their own defense.
For this reason alone, the United States should continue to invest politically, militarily, and financially in the alliance.
Furthermore, although the United States military remains the world's most resourced and accomplished fighting force, capable of sustained unilateral action virtually anywhere in the world, NATO provides the United States with the undeniable benefits of geopolitical/ strategic access, burden/cost sharing, and legitimacy.
Because of this, for more than seven decades, NATO operations have been the United States' preferred manner of applying military power toward its goals of protection and advancement of core United States national interests and projecting power and United States influence globally.
According to the 2015 United States NSS, the United States is committed to leading ""the world through a shifting security landscape toward a more durable peace and new prosperity""; however, in today's global security environment, the United States requires the assistance of its strategic transatlantic allies.
The crucial multilateral capacities contained in NATO enable it to face not only the current challenges of the 21st century, but also those yet to surface.
THE NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION AND ITS CONCEPT OF COLLECTIVE DEFENSE Researcher: Colonel Markus Kreitmayr, German Army We face enormous challenges both in our Eastern and our Southern neighborhoods.
People across the Alliance are understandably worried about their security.
We must be fully committed to doing collective defence and crisis management both at the same time.
Thus, focusing on the solidarity and resolve of an alliance of democracies, Stoltenberg said that he was resolved to ""keep NATO strong"" as a political and a military alliance.
It should implement a revolutionary approach that builds on the lessons of the previous 65 years and that proactively 63 addresses the challenges of the emerging strategic environment.
NATO's successful adaptations during and after the Cold War suggest that the Alliance's two distinct, but revolutionary, approaches helped it to overcome a direct confrontation with the Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact and developed NATO to a political and military Alliance that took on contemporary security challenges.
NATO's strategic adaptation at the outset of the 21st century was an important step that preserved the Alliance's relevance and concludes that, to remain relevant, NATO must adapt more comprehensively in the immediate future.
Additionally, this has spelled the end of NATO's goal of a ""true strategic partnership"" with Russia, at least for the mid-term.
Although a major conventional attack on NATO territory seems unlikely, the threat of a limited hybrid aggression including military means against the Baltic States has increased, and with it, the risk of escalation.
Moreover, this reality indicates Russia's application of a revised strategic approach.
Thus, the Alliance's deliberations in Wales resulted in several decisions with regards to Russia, but also built the starting point for a comprehensive review of NATO's future tasks and goals.
Although scholars agree that the Wales Summit was one of the most important summits in NATO's history, there are differences in the evaluations of the outcome.
There are critics arguing that the meeting unveiled NATO as incapable to act as a whole within the breadth of crisis management and collective defense missions.
The reason is a flawed policy of financial cuts and military reductions paired with political unwillingness to use the military instrument of power resulting in an under-resourced and weak Europe with insufficient military capacity and capabilities.
As such, initiatives launched in Wales seem to be a cosmetic patchwork of loosely connected activities.
Others argue that decisions made in Wales are of particular significance since NATO's reaction on Russia's aggression, despite the diverse security interests of the allies, indicated great consensus and comprehension of a flexible framework of political and military activities.
Hence, the rapidly changing and complex security environment as well as its members' diverse interests require a NATO with a balanced approach to collective defense, crisis management, and cooperative security that integrates regional and global perspectives.
His speech at the German Marshall Fund stressed that NATO does ""not have the luxury to choose challenges"" and therefore cannot focus on one pillar of its threefolded set of tasks.
Moreover, in his foreword to the first annual report, the Secretary General recognized the need for NATO's adaptation since its strategic approach does not address the breadth of challenges in the emerging security environment.
Hence, in accordance with John Kotter's Eight-Stage Process of Creating Major Change, Stoltenberg must strive for ""Establishing A Sense Of Urgency"" among NATO officials and its member nations' policymakers to enable NATO to adapt in the ever changing international security environment.
This lack of a sense of urgency suggests that several members are satisfied with the initiatives agreed on in Wales and do not envisage a comprehensive overhaul of NATO's strategic concept.
Otherwise, they would have commissioned a new concept to be developed for the 2016 Warsaw Summit.
This strategic leadership team should encompass Stoltenberg and at least the secretaries of state and defense from the United States, United Kingdom , France, and Germany.
Such a group would demonstrate cohesion through a collaborative transatlantic approach, strong European commitment, inclusion of diverse strategic cultures, and representation of regional and global perspectives on security and defense.
Based on its history in NATO and its geostrategic location, Germany could play a major role, in particular, in terms of collective defense.
It entered NATO when the country was divided and benefitted from NATO's solidarity and cohesion during the Cold War, eventually resulting in its unification in 1989.
In turn, this goal has to be expanded to a Europe that is whole, free, and at peace in a stable world, since in the 21st-century globalized security environment the former is not achievable without the latter, as the developments in the Middle East, North Africa and the Asia-Pacific (in particular, the South China Sea) demonstrate.
All of this must be based on NATO's enduring principles of cohesion, consensus, and collectiveness.
Moreover, as described in Kotter's Eight-Stage Process of Creating Major Change, ""Empowering Broad-Based Action"" through member countries' initiatives, ""Generating Short-Term Wins"" through the successful implementation of agreed on programs, ""Consolidating Gains And Producing More Change"" through continued ""renewal of Alliance,"" and eventually, ""Anchoring New Approaches In The Culture"" through a step-by-step development of a ""NATO Common Collective Security Identity and Culture"" should determine follow-on activities of the Alliance.
Hence, in the realm of deterrence and defense, and based on its Cold War experience, NATO has to adopt a 21st-century version of its Flexible Response strategy linked to the idea of deterrence and detente.
However, such a view indicates a lack of urgency, since Russia already chose this path and initiated the new confrontation.
Thus, the recommended approach will be understood by Russia, and will seek to deter a further escalation, while aiming to overcome tensions by guiding both sides out of a security dilemma.
This approach should incorporate not only conventional activities based on the RAP, but also elements that reinforce a broader approach to collective defense stressing countermeasures against Russian IO, cyberattacks, and landpower centric, hybrid aggression.
Both organizations should therefore review their ""Berlin Plus"" arrangement and develop it into a mutually supporting agreement.
Moreover, Germany could be the framework nation to comprehensively enhance NATO's collective defense based on its existing commitments, military cooperation programs, and its landpower centric armed forces.
In addition, a review of NATO's nuclear strategy — including its nuclear posture —is inevitable to provide a flexible, survivable, reliable, and accurate nuclear deterrence against the already existing threat posed by Russia.
With the United States in the lead for this component of deterrence and defense, a ""rock 69 solid"" transatlantic bond and the cohesion of the Alliance would be most effectively demonstrated.
In addition, NATO should consider another round of enlargement for those countries already in the process and should include Georgia and Ukraine.
NATO must not allow Russia to undermine this process by threat or use of force to prevent membership.
Although the standards for all members must be the same, historic events, such as Germany's acceptance during the Cold War, provide evidence that their flexible and prudent application can improve Euro-Atlantic security in the long-run.
However, NATO must come to terms with acceptable security guarantees to potential new members during their application process.
In all of these crisis management activities, the EU could be an essential partner based on its own interests, articulated ambitions, and available soft power capabilities.
This would reinforce the 2010 Strategic Concept's aim to ""fully strengthen the strategic partnership"" of both organizations.
Hence, NATO has to reframe its partnership concepts, aiming to offer interested global democracies a formal way of cooperation based on the experience of the ISAF mission, to support existing partners with security assurances adjusted to their strategic situation and mutual interests, and to integrate existing programs; however, these should be adapted to the changes in the emerging security environment.
NATO must leverage its historical strength and has to go back to the business of adaptation.
Thereby, it has to develop and implement a third revolutionary approach that builds on the lessons and success of the previous 65 years and that proactively addresses the challenges of the emerging strategic environment in the 21st century.
Thus, to preserve its relevance, the Alliance has to strengthen its credibility through enhanced effectiveness built on the foundation and modern interpretation of collective defense.
As Stoltenberg pointed out, ""working together in a strong NATO"" still is the ""winning combination"" for NATO's success.
This combination rests on the Alliance's enduring principles of cohesion, consensus, and collectiveness.
NATO must adapt successfully 70 again, because this time not only is Euro-Atlantic security at stake, but also the international order that NATO has taken responsibility for, whether the Alliance likes it or not.
Colonel Peter Nieuwenhuis, Royal Netherlands Army There is no contradiction between increasing the strength of NATO and engaging with Russia.
It is clear that the crisis in Ukraine is a low point in its relationship with the Russian Federation.
The ""pivot to Asia"" by the United States and the decrease of its Armed Forces' budget, raises questions about America's commitment to the Alliance.
This apprehension is particularly felt by NATO members in the eastern part of the Alliance's territory, especially those on the Russian border, who fear a shrinking United States commitment.
NATO should reconsider its policies and approaches for Europe in light of the current strategic environment.
The question is whether NATO's founding principles, procedures, and processes are suitable and strong enough to persuade the members to invest in the organization.
The basis of the treaty was Article 51 of the United Nations Charter, which gives independent states the right for individual or collective defense.
Although Ukraine is not a NATO member, the subsequent NATO initiatives, especially the leading United States role, remains significant.
The United States took the lead to reassure East European allies and moved to strengthen the Alliance cohesion.
Yet, this, combined with NATO's December 2015 decision to invite Montenegro to start accession talks to become the 29th member of the Alliance, brought the relationship with Russia to a new low point.
Although Ukraine is not a NATO member, there is a close relationship between the country and the Alliance.
Implementation of the RAP is not only challenging, but demonstrates NATO's credibility and therefore it may influence its future.
The question remains, however, if all member states are willing to make the RAP a success.
RAP requires a long lasting irreversible commitment and that all member states understand and accept each other's point of view or even a different approach toward solving issues.
It needs an analysis of the financial process and the military structures to answer this question.
The transatlantic NATO link between the United States and Europe has, since the birth of the organization in 1949, been one of its strongest points.
NATO appears to be a strong and cohesive Alliance, but under the surface, sometimes emotions run high.
Disagreements about the participation in the war in Iraq in 2003 and the disproportional contribution of the United States to NATO, compared to the European member states, are chief concerns.
The question is if member states are willing to solve these issues at all.
After the Soviet Union collapsed, the United States was the undisputed victor and world leader.
An illustration of its power at that time was the first Gulf War in 1991.
With its political and economic power, the United States was able to create an impressive multinational coalition.
Its strong military power enabled the United States to turn its words into deeds at any particular moment.
A focused information campaign supported its efforts to influence the domestic and international powerbrokers.
It even felt strong enough to use the UN to provide the legal authority to take military action.
Its strength and confidence ensured a positive result in the UN Security Council with its normally annoying VETO rule.
There is a rise of new and strong political, economic, and military powers in the form of China and Russia.
New alliances like BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) are important.
Non-state actors, without Westphalian structures, are starting to gain global influence.
More interstate and intrastate conflicts arising throughout the globe, such as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant issue, the Ukraine crisis, tension in the South China Sea, transnational terrorism, the Russian application of ambiguity, and non-traditional war, have transformed the global environment.
It seems there is less political and economic appetite in the United States to project global power, and the decreasing defense budget supports this policy.
Although the United States still wants to lead, building and empowering alliances is one of the solutions to set priorities and share the burden.
Meanwhile, Europe continues to take advantage of the American security umbrella by skimping on their own defense spending.
NATO Soldiers during the opening ceremony of Exercise Saber Strike 2015.
Some Europeans view their relationship with Russia as of strategic importance for bilateral relations, especially trade.
Therefore, it is easier for the United States to impose sanctions against Russia.
These opposing opinions collide behind the scenes of the most important transatlantic organization.
Simultaneously, it is situated in the complex and stormy love-hate relationship between the United States and Europe.
These are the continuation of their leading role in the region, a decrease of the financial burden to NATO to more equality, a stronger burden sharing Europe, and projecting a strong counterweight policy against a rising Russia.
And, by analyzing the interests of the United States and Europe, the differences become clear.
To keep NATO relevant, both entities must show willingness to change and to invest politically, financially, and also mentally.
To stay a global leader, the United States must accept that it has to share power with other power centers.
Finally, it must be prepared to accept to sometimes ""agree to disagree"" with the European partners.
They need to take responsibility for their security as they do for their economic development.
NATO needs increased political dialogue and public diplomacy; Article 4 of the North Atlantic Treaty provides a perfect basis for this.
NATO can support national interests both in the United States and in European NATO countries.
There seems to be dissatisfaction about the consensus decision76 making policy and questions about its ability to respond with military quickly.
Therefore, scholars question the internal structures, like the Supreme Allied Commander Europe's role and the budgets, especially the way NATO covers its military missions and operations.
Simultaneously, there also seems to be less commitment for enhanced engagement and participation, according to the United States, especially with NATO's European members.
On the other hand, there has been commotion in Europe since the United States' ""pivot to Asia"" declaration.
It looks like NATO is situated in a political impasse with no visible incentive from countries to change.
The sudden deterioration of the relationship with Russia, after the annexation of Crimea and its interference in Ukraine, makes conditions even more difficult.
This is especially true for the European NATO members, because for them a stable relationship with Russia is essential.
Against this background, one wonders if NATO is able to take control of the situation.
The relationship between NATO and Russia is essential for NATO's future and still central to defining the EuropeanTransatlantic regional and global security configuration.
To achieve this, NATO needs adjustments not only in the military domain, but also in the political, financial, and cultural domains.
To increase readiness, responsiveness, and commitment to contribute, NATO should reconsider some of its internal affairs.
A better way to share the financial burden for missions and operations amongst all member states needs a review of the financial process.
Probably more ""common funding"" in those cases will increase into a willingness to contribute.
Without the loss of civilian decision power, NATO should consider empowering the role and authority of SACEUR in the military process.
For example, they should be able to execute an alert-exercise for the NATO Response Force /Very High Readiness Joint Task Force once a year or start a planning process without North Atlantic Council approval.
NATO, together with its member states, must start the discussion about quicker national approval processes for force employment and the use of force.
It is understandable that a national NRF/VJTF contribution does not mean a complete transfer of authority to NATO without any restrictions.
However, these processes need to be streamlined and better aligned with the current readiness and environmental requirements.
Finally, NATO should make clear to all member countries that its survival depends on their willingness to make it a success.
The organization seems stymied due to transatlantic political differences and disagreements.
Both the United States and Europe should understand the vital importance of this transatlantic link, and they must act and contribute accordingly.
For the United States, this means accepting Europe's different view and the importance of including Russia in future solutions.
Europe should show that they can cope with some issues themselves, and show 77 their willingness to commit.
That makes it possible for the United States to decrease its disproportionate contribution.
However, it is essential to increase all European defense budgets to at least 2% Gross Domestic Product as soon as possible, as was pledged during the Wales Summit in 2014.
Together, with the continuing United States commitment and its unique capabilities, NATO not only stays relevant, but can be an even more significant actor than it was before.
Colonel Joseph Barber, United States Army The principle of collective defense is at the heart of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's founding treaty.
NATO invoked Article 5 for the first time in its history after the 9/11 terrorist attacks against the United States; NATO has also taken collective defense measures on several occasions without invoking Article 5, for instance in response to the situation in Syria and in the wake of the Ukraine crisis.
What is similar in all of these instances is that the attacks or incursions were conventional from one state to another state.
With the recent increase in cyber-threats, espionage, and activities, especially by states unfriendly to NATO, the question is if NATO will invoke Article 5 for a cyberattack, and what constitutes such an attack.
NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg told a key alliance planning summit in mid-March of 2015 that ""cyber is now a central part of virtually all crisis and conflicts.
Some view Stoltenberg's comments as bravado in invoking Article 5 over cyberattacks.
Defining Nation State Cyber-Espionage; Defining Nation State Cyberattacks; and Development of Defense Strategies.
Many NATO nations and international bodies abroad have their own definitions, but none have narrowed it down to a single consensus.
Factors like the extent and nature of the damage caused by the attack , the identity of the attack, and how the stolen information is used all influence the perception of cyber.
One set of guidelines for nation-state cyberwarfare, the Tallinn Manual, attempts to provide definitions, procedures, and rules governing international cyber-operations.
For the purposes of International Law, the Tallinn Manual definition is appropriate and provides the basis to build upon and be ratified under International Tribunal.
However, the obstacles facing nation-states now are legal and political ones, which is making it difficult for nation-states to defend themselves against cyberattacks.
Cyberattackers are exploiting legal and political loopholes to conduct attacks against weaker nation-states 79 without consequence.
The Tallinn Manual definition needs to be updated to become an all-encompassing definition to allow victim states to take appropriate countermeasures for even the slightest cyber-intrusion.
This will assist in providing a definition to the difference between a host nation and individual cyberattack.
Although, in science fiction movies, cyber is used to conduct physical harm to a nation-state, which is a clear attack, in reality, 99% of cyberattacks are not physical and deal with loss of service, information, or communication.
Additionally, it is hard to ascertain in many instances where and who exactly conducted the attack.
There are several types of attacks; one type of these is Distributed Denial of Service , which is mainly used to disrupt a nation-state's communication systems.
DDoS is favored as it requires little resources against a larger, more powerful victim.
Another type of attack encompasses using malware, such as viruses, worms, Trojan horses, etc., for disrupting or destroying information, collecting information, or disrupting normal operations.
Another type of cyberattack uses ""logic"" bombs, which lie dormant until a specific time or are triggered by an event, disguising themselves to access private information without the users consent.
The final type of cyberattack is the manipulation of video/ audio technology to listen in on conversations or watch operations in real time.
Open sources suggest that the most famous cyberattack in recent years is the Stuxnet virus, which was discovered in 2010.
Stuxnet allegedly targeted Iranian nuclear facilities and was unique because it was the first major cyberattack that could inflict damage on the physical world as well as the digital world.
In 2008, before Russia sent troops into Georgia, it used DDoS to shut-down communication systems, cutting off Georgia from the outside world.
Lastly, in 2014, Russia used DDoS to disable Ukraine's mobile phone communications network before employing traditional battlefield methods.
Cyber-espionage and cyberattacks do not take place in the realm of warfare.
They may be seen as criminally based, but NATO, under the grand strategy, needs to take aim at making all cyber-intrusions illegal and look for countermeasures to prevent attacks.
Deterrence is a useful counter-cyber/espionage strategy for NATO and its nationstates, provided under Article 5, as long as they garner the authority and the resources to carry it out.
Deterrence in reference to cyber is when a nation or NATO convinces its enemy that it is willing and able to respond to cyber-intrusions using military force.
The purpose for most nation-states is to use NATO's might, under Article 5, to scare other nation-states from committing cyberattacks in the first place and thus preventing the need for retaliation.
However, in the case of Russia and their use of cyber, the advantage clearly lies in an active defense.
According to Article 5, defensive force must be ""necessary and proportionate"" to the attack that gave rise to the right.
An active defensive network with counter-attack capabilities could provide a deterrence for Russia, if NATO responded quid pro quo.
The response does not always need to be large-scale to be 80 successful.
For example, in 2007, Estonia responded to Russia's DDoS attack simply by suspending certain services to computers with Russian Internet Protocol addresses.
This simple defensive measure completely stopped all Russian cyber-incursions.
For NATO to invoke Article 5 of the Washington Treaty due to a cyberattack, it must first clearly define cyber-espionage/ activity and have Jeffits definitions written into International Law.
Second, they need to clearly articulate what constitutes an attack as defined by International Law.
Lastly, they need to develop a playbook of defensive and offensive strategies to protect NATO countries from cyber-threats, with the invocation of Article 5 being a last resort.
NATO has a way to go, especially just to catch up with the technology of modern times.
Cyber has become an inherent form and part of warfare that nation-states are actively using and will into the future.
Understanding this medium of warfare is inherent to establish International Law to prosecute individuals and hold nation-states accountable for transgressions.
Getting all of NATO on a grand strategy will be the first step in being able to invoke Article 5 against a hostile nation.
A NEW NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION APPROACH: THE VERY HIGH READINESS TASK FORCE Lithuanian Soldiers at the 7th Army's Joint Multinational Training Command's Hohenfels Training Area.
Colonel Kevin Copsey, Officer of the British Empire , British Army NATO is facing a complexity of security challenges that threatens the alliance and the security of those countries who contribute to its collective defense.
Russia's interest in Ukraine altered the security landscape in Eastern Europe, and NATO has once again returned to its core task, Article 5 —the ability to unite 28 countries if a member is attacked.
Today, Europe's security environment is more complex and more unpredictable than for a generation.
We face a more assertive Russia which is destabilising the European security order.
The rise in global tension led NATO to develop a strategy to realign the Alliance with the challenges stated by the Secretary General.
The United Kingdom has declared it will contribute 3,000 personnel to the VJTF when it assumes the lead of the Task Force in 2017.
The VJTF, and the increase in rotational forces, is designed to deter Russia.
The creation of the VJTF is a result of NATO's adaptation, which not only provides deterrence, but also a strategic level of assurance to those states that are susceptible to Russia's aggressive, authoritarian, and nationalistic activity.
Although designed as a Joint force, the AMF was based around a land component of Brigade strength.
It had the ability to deploy rapidly to Norway or Turkey to swiftly deter any Russian aggression.
Like the VJTF, the AMF was a political tool to demonstrate Alliance solidarity.
The VJTF is a modified concept of the AMF, designed to counter the security challenges in the North.
Conversely, the VJTF is an important statement of political unity that is part of a larger and more capable force that can deter or intervene in a crisis.
The VJTF is the lead brigade in one of three multinational brigades within the NRF construct, with each one rotating annually into the high-readiness role.
Once deployed, it will operate under a NATO Joint Force Headquarters at Brunssum or Naples with the capability to conduct three distinct roles.
Firstly, the VJTF is to provide an immediate collective defense response capability prior to NATO ordering a full mobilization.
The VJTF is a deliberate show of force and deterrent aimed directly at the Russian Government.
Secondly, the Task Force provides assurance to those smaller NATO countries in Eastern Europe that are most concerned about Russia's stance in international affairs a move that is painfully evident in the Ukraine crisis.
Should a crisis continue to escalate, thereby requiring the NRF to deploy, then it would no longer be political symbolism, but warfighting, where the capability and not the nationality of the force will count.
The VJTF and NRF are tools to ensure escalation dominance, and implicit deterrence, similar to those used during the Cold War.
The VJTF is but one activity 87 within a larger NATO demonstration of solidarity but these notable initiatives are not part of a long-term strategy.
Although the crisis has been debated amongst the NAC, there is little political appetite for NATO to become embroiled with European Union domestic concerns.
Until now, NATO has been expanding without identifying the capabilities needed to defend its new Alliance partners.
FACING THE THREAT TO SOVEREIGNTY NOT TERRITORY The Wales Summit in September 2012 focused on avoiding an unlikely scenario —an unprovoked Russian military attack against a NATO member.
NATO has yet to refine how it will address the advent of hybrid threats.
In terms of capacities, the EU is able to focus on a crisis where the state is threatened and extremist fighting continues.
The reinvigorated NATO that emerged from the 2014 Wales Summit is already expanding to include intelligence, early warning, increased cyber-defenses, and an efficient decision-making process for the Alliance.
These developments will complement any EU initiative that is designed to counter a hybrid threat.
In addition, the deployment of the VJTF will reduce pressure on a host government, theoretically allowing that 89 government to concentrate on non-military aspects of the threat it faces.
For example, the VJTF could bolster domestic police forces to maintain internal security, provide improved border defenses, SOF, or humanitarian support, thereby denying an actor, such as Russia, the pretense it needs to ""protect"" the Russian diaspora.
NATO needs to refine the VJTF and RAP strategy to counter the hybrid threats in the north and south.
The Alliance should also seek to broaden its perspective and cooperate with civilian organizations and be less militarized in its thinking.
However, NATO must not try to replicate those civilian capabilities and tasks that the EU is able to implement to counter a hybrid threat.
Such concern is warranted, hence the need to ensure any decision to deploy the VJTF/NRF is swift, well-thought-out, and legitimate.
COMMAND AND CONTROL OF THE VJTF Analysts question if the 2-7 days to deploy the VJTF is quick enough, especially since it took only 30 hours for Russia to seize its operational and strategic objectives in Crimea.
Given the operational agility demonstrated by Russia, a week to decide if NATO should deploy to reinforce a member of the Alliance is simply too long.
Therefore, NATO must find a way to speed up its decision-making process.
The decision to deploy the VJTF lies with the NAC, a 28-nation political decisionmaking organization based in Brussels, Belgium.
The VJTF consists of many countries, with each one providing a vital capability that is interdependent on the other.
The force is so integrated that, should an Alliance VJTF member veto the mission, the deployment of the Task Force is stopped in its tracks.
The NAC is aware of this challenge, and as a result, SACEUR has been granted the authority to ""alert, stage, and prepare"" forces prior to seeking NAC approval.
The NAC would then assume political control of the escalating situation and give direction on the deployment of the remaining NRF brigades.
Although encouraging, this move does not compress the lengthy decisionmaking process.
One option is to delegate the deployment of the VJTF to the Secretary General.
This would be a variation to the 1999 Kosovo crisis where the Secretary General was delegated the authority to expand the target lists.
Despite the challenges, there are reasons to be optimistic —NATO took less than a day to agree on an Article 5 response following 9/11.
However, should the Alliance be faced with less stark aggression, the need for consensus may slow any appropriate military response against a quicker adversary.
Article 5 of the Washington Treaty is supported by Article 51 of the UN Charter — the right of individual or collective selfdefense in the event of armed attack.
Conversely, any NATO sub-Article 5 deployment must be kept away from the UN where Russia could use its veto against military activity.
The absence of UN legitimacy to deploy may concern some European NATO members.
HOW TO OVERCOME THE LOGISTICAL COMPLEXITY A rapidly deployable intervention force is needed to project NATO's power quickly.
Creating the VJTF is a good start; however, the follow-on forces are just as critical.
Like other expeditionary operations, the initial force package must have the ability to be self-sustainable for a period before it requires replenishment.
The arrival of a larger follow-on force will only increase the demand on NATO's logistical apparatus, as well as stretch the patience and capability of whichever NATO country Task Force is deployed.
This issue has been partially resolved through the generation of eight new NATO Force Integration Units that have been established in Eastern European countries to support planning, training, and reinforcements.
Multinational Corps North East, a revitalized NATO headquarters based in Szczecin, Poland, is coordinating NFIC implementation.
However, as NATO learned during the Cold War, the pre-positioning of stock can also hamper the allies since it determines an area of deployment and a key node that may be targeted.
In addition to pre-positioning stock, the force must have the ability to swiftly deploy once the NAC gives authorization.
The United States currently does not provide forces for the VJTF (these are European only), although the Pentagon has pledged to deploy the Task Force using American strategic airlift if required.
The strategic movement of the AMF was a significant weakness —one that was never resolved.
The AMF did not have troops rotating through the commitment; some NATO countries designated them, with each one operating in nationally defined areas of operation.
Conversely, the VJTF consists of multinational forces that rotate every year with little or no consistency in the capabilities being offered.
Also, being multinational, the force must deploy from various countries and come together as a coherent force.
Although there are concerns, the VJTF is necessary to face NATO's uncertain security dilemmas.
Importantly, the VJTF demonstrates Alliance cohesion and resolve at a time when NATO may be deemed irrelevant.
Any such armed attack and all measures taken as a result thereof shall immediately be reported to the Security Council.
Such measures shall be terminated when the Security Council has taken the measures necessary to restore and maintain international peace and security.
As Russia has ably demonstrated in Ukraine, it is able to create an ""inner decay"" of a victim country, which negates the need for a conventional Russian incursion.
NATO should end the distinction between the two Articles, not in legal and decisionmaking terms, but in the ways and means to fulfill its strategic objectives.
Moreover, NATO should move away from the pure military style of deployment and seek a more whole-of-society approach, in order to have greater interaction and coordination with the EU, which is better suited to work alongside NATO in the European neighborhood.
As a result, a more robust and adaptable VJTF is needed to tackle the kaleidoscope of security challenges the Alliance now faces.
The role of the United States — politically and militarily — in NATO is vital for the existence of the Alliance.
These capabilities are already based in Europe and would be re-assigned from the United States European Command as part of a larger military investment in Europe.
Indeed, NATO's new ""deterrent"" posture coincided with a recent announcement by the United States Secretary of Defense, Ash Carter, that the Pentagon will provide $3. billion of funding for forces stationed and training in Europe.
The SACEUR is also the commander of the United States European Command.
He 93 has the requisite legal authorities to reduce readiness and commence a deployment of United States Army Europe elements, with its commander assuming the immediate role of NATO Land Component Commander, which would be augmented by NRF elements as they deploy.
Yet, despite their size, these NATO members have demonstrated their commitment to the Alliance by contributing significantly to the NATO mission in Afghanistan, and the generation of the VJTF and the NFIUs.
Elsewhere, other NATO countries such as Turkey, Italy, Greece, and Spain have all deployed significant assets to stem the consequences of the protracted conflicts in Syria, Iraq, and Libya.
It is because NATO's European states are distracted by the migrant and Eurozone crisis that it is important the United States plays an active role in the strategic deterrence of Russia.
Although maintaining such a presence is expensive, the rewards of peace and stability in Europe is worth it.
MANAGING THE RUSSIAN REACTION TO THE VJTF The deployment of the VJTF and its exercises in Eastern Europe will lead to a direct increase in the NATO military footprint, which is a particular sore spot for Russia.
Some European countries worry that Russia will see the RAP as a provocative measure that will only escalate the already high tension in the region.
The Russian's claim that, ever since the re-unification of Germany, NATO has abandoned the agreements made in the Conventional Forces Europe Treaty, which states that forces would not be based alongside Russia's border.
The NRF/VJTF and other NATO initiatives are, as Moscow sees it, a breach of trust.
In addition, the expansion of NATO members and recent United States announcement to increase rotational deployments along NATO's eastern flank is playing to Putin's mindset of being right.
Over the same period, Russia had deployed 100,000 across the Russian border with Europe.
Added to this impressive figure is an unknown number based in Crimea and subversively operating in Eastern Ukraine.
Although a considerable force, it is assessed that the Russian military operating along Europe's border include significant numbers of unmotivated, non-paid or scarcely trained conscripts.
On one hand, NATO's RAP, which includes the VJTF, sends a strong message of assurance to the newer members of NATO such as the Baltic States and Poland.
Conversely, Putin does not see the RAP as a reason to de-escalate in the region, hence the Russian military transformation.
Therefore, NATO must continue to engage in a transparent manner and maintain a balance between being ""convincing"" without ""provoking"" Russia.
Clearly, the RAP must not be abolished because of Russia's sensitivities.
To do so would demonstrate a sign of weakness amongst the Alliance, a fracture that Putin would exploit.
The ultimate goal, however, would be to discredit NATO, thereby threatening the security of the Baltic States.
ISSUES FOR NATO TO CONSIDER Although NATO has been involved in costly adventures in Afghanistan, Libya, and the Balkans, the Alliance has now returned to its original core role of Article 5 of the Washington treaty.
VJTF/NRF commitment is the most significant initiative by NATO in adapting to its security challenges.
Although preparing for the Article 5 contingency, NATO must recognize that most risk occurs at the Article 4 level through hybrid activity.
To make the VJTF credible, more work is required to mobilize the full diplomatic, military, economic, finance, and law enforcement capabilities of NATO, especially if faced with a hybrid threat.
The challenges of command, control, and logistics of a diverse multinational force are formidable, but NATO has continually adapted over its 65-year history.
However, with Russia-NATO relations at their lowest point since the Cold War, it is critical the Alliance reiterates the intentions of the NRF to ensure no Russian backlash.
NATO has already proven itself in the most demanding of operational environments.
The Alliance brought peace and stability to the Balkans and Kosovo, and came out of the Afghan International Security Assistance Force mission stronger and refined by fire.
Here, on the Afghan fields of battle, the new NATO members proved their military capability and political resolve as dedicated supporters of the Alliance.
ADAPTING POLICY TO THE NEW RUSSIA Russian Military Parade at Red Square in 2016.
Colonel Ryan Wolfgram, United States Army When former President Obama took office in 2009, he instituted a new approach toward Russia.
Yet, President Medvedev and President Obama seemingly advanced this so-called reset and promoted a foreign policy that appeared somewhat neoliberal.
These forced the United States to reevaluate its foreign policy toward Russia.
Two actions conducted by Russia's military have validated Vladimir Putin's agenda as well as provided some insight into his grand strategy.
Quite surprisingly for the Russian governing elite the intervention in Georgia generated a massive outflow of capital from the Russian market resulting in a huge drop of indexes on the Moscow Stock Exchange and depreciation of the Russian ruble.
The outflow reached about $130 billion at the end of 2008 and Russian attempts to stabilize ruble largely failed.
Tactical and operational planning was poor and inflexible, as was leadership.
The policy completely collapsed with the annexation of Crimea and the ongoing Russian-led war in Eastern Ukraine.
EXPANSIONIST AGENDA REVISITED The encroachment of Eastern Ukraine was the next step in Mr Putin's grand strategy for an expansionist, revanchist agenda.
To gain insight as to why Vladimir Putin is pursuing this agenda, it is helpful to consider a recent study that looked at the population of ethnic Russians now living in Ukraine.
The study stated, ""Most people living in the eastern part of the country hardly knew any Ukrainian and preferred to speak Russian.
In an instant 25 million Russian people found themselves beyond the borders of the Russian state, although they were living within the borders of the Soviet Union.
And all of a sudden, they turned out to be outside the borders of the country.
The Russian president is using the diaspora to exploit a vulnerability in the region via a proxy separatist movement.
He makes the important comment that non-military measures are occurring at a rate of 4:1 over military operations.
This is an important point, and one that encourages the use of surrogates.
Covert operations, to include information warfare measures and special operations forces , accompany such methods.
Though this strategy is not new, it brilliantly exploits ethnic divides to create a line of buffer zones around Russia's borders.
Understanding this expansionist agenda, in light of the insolvent United States reset policy, demonstrates that the West is overdue for a viable policy and strategy.
This reevaluation is necessary not only because of the war in Ukraine and the occupation of Crimea, but also Russia's continued violation of treaties and agreements.
United States POLICIES In light of the breach of treaties and violations of international borders, the United States must act swiftly to counter this assertive Russian policy.
Before being able to grapple with this, however, the United States needs to act to get its own house in order.
Among the chief obstacle is its annual budget as encapsulated by sequestration or better known as the Budget Control Act of 2011.
If a follow-on budget does not pass, then the constraints listed in the BCA of 2011 will reduce the Department of Defense's ability to accomplish United States objectives during the remaining years.
This will affect modernization and training and trigger additional reductions in force structure, thereby creating an opportunity for a potential adversary to challenge the United States.
In this manner, Russia has withdrawn from the treaty that it suspended back in 2007.
The two interests listed in the QDR and the NMS, ""the security, confidence, and reliability of our allies; and the preservation and extension of universal values,"" are vital to the United States.
BPC is the United States military working with allies and partners to provide for the defense of their interests while protecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of their homeland.
The United States enables this capability through exercises and training designed to assist in raising the level of proficiency for these militaries.
ELEMENTS OF NATIONAL POWER In reviewing these three separate policies, it is clear how each can have a direct or indirect impact on the overall United States foreign policy toward Russia.
What does require a little more explanation is how all the elements of national power (diplomatic, informational, military, and economic instruments ) have proven ineffective in addressing Russia's aggression.
Concerning the diplomatic element, President Putin has continually shown a nuanced interpretation for every violation of a treaty, violation of sovereignty and territorial integrity, and disregard for human rights.
In each of these, the diplomatic element of power, whether it is the United States President, Secretary of State, or the Secretary of Defense, produced nothing and actually strengthened the image and popularity of Vladimir Putin.
With the informational element of power, Russia presents Western powers as the evildoers by continually spinning the information and creating a common enemy for the people of Russia to unite.
The United States struggles to dominate the information domain and has little success in moving public opinion unless Mr Putin miscalculates and crosses a line with his own population.
The economic sanctions imposed after the invasion of the Crimea peninsula have produced deeper damage than anyone expected . . . western countries prevented Russian companies from raising money in Europe and the United States and have also blocked arms trades.
It is noteworthy that military actions carried out by the United States continue to assure our allies and partners in the region of its commitment to create a capability focused on interoperability between national militaries.
The NATO 'Allied Shield' exercise conducted in June 2015, which brought under one framework four distinct exercises taking place along the Eastern flank of the Alliance, totaling 15,000 personnel from 19 Members states and three partner states.
THE DRIVERS OF INSTABILITY Western economic sanctions are having an effect on the Russian way of life for its citizens.
Pew Research demonstrates this, and the articles from Wilson and Gressel validate the impact to society and the military.
The concern is in the identification of the tipping point, for this driver of instability.
Mr Wilson states, ""The drop in the value of trade is indicative of the collapse in economic activity.
This leads to the next driver of instability — President Vladimir Putin.
He was the master puppeteer of Russia during his first two terms as president.
Then, Putin worked behind the scenes as the Prime Minister of Russia before re-ascending to where he is again president.
Mr Putin is a driver of instability because of how he views the region.
His overall end state is the establishment of Russia as a de facto regional hegemony.
RISK There are three risks that challenge the credibility of United States foreign policy.
The first of these is not implementing a coherent strategy that safeguards the credibility of the NATO alliance.
The second risk is Russian exploitation of disparate United States policies.
The impact of these risks, if not properly addressed, will have disastrous consequences and will open the door for Russia to openly challenge NATO's Article 5 and the global reach of the United States.
So if, in such a moment, you ever ask again, 'who will come to help/ you'll know the answer — the NATO Alliance, including the Armed Forces of the United States of America.
To ensure the credibility of the United States and its obligations under Article 5 of the NATO Treaty, it is imperative that a comprehensive strategy materialize.
Yet, Russia continues to prepare its military for rapid notice deployments against NATO members in Eastern Europe.
Any action initiated by Russia requires a response, and if the United States action is slow or perceived as a show of non-support to its NATO members, then the credibility of United States foreign policy is threatened.
Risks of disparate or contradictory policies, when taken collectively, reduce the effectiveness of an overarching United States foreign policy.
The recurring congressional policy on funding unnecessarily threatens the United States military by placing self-induced domestic pressure that reduces the combat effectiveness of the United States military.
United States Defense Policy and Russia's disregard for the CFE and INF treaties places selfimposed constraints on the other treaty signatories and limits the United States' ability to show assurance in times of conflict by not providing a substantial force to ensure a credible deterrence.
Then there are the United States national strategic documents that mention how the approach of BPC limits deterrence through increased assurance.
The remaining risk is in not implementing a revised strategy that allows a whole of government approach to work toward a clear strategic end state.
This end should counter Russian aggression in a proactive manner, vice the typical reaction to Russian acts of violation of sovereignty and territorial integrity after the fact.
It is this researcher's assessment that for the next 12 months the United States is vulnerable to belligerent actors testing the will of the political leaders of this country.
RISK MITIGATION To mitigate the risks delineated above, there is a requirement to synchronize all factors affecting United States foreign policy toward Russia.
There must be a unifying effort by the National Security Council to support the synchronization of these policies through the development of a strategy to focus the elements of national power.
To bring these disparate policies in line, there must be discussion on dissolving the CFE or at least modifying it to allow for the movement and basing of military forces and equipment in the Eastern European region to better assure our allies threatened by the Russian Zapad and Lagoda exercises.
The United States needs to reinforce the Budapest memorandum with its own style of hybrid warfare.
This will reestablish the damaged credibility of the United States by not conducting a visible counter action to Russia's violation of Ukrainian and Georgian sovereignty and territorial integrity.
There has been sufficient use of the diplomatic and the economic ele106 merits of power, but what is lacking is the use of military force and an effort to counter Russia's antagonistic information campaign.
Western media proved to be particularly vulnerable to Russian information warfare operations because, in line with the principle of providing balanced opinions, enough airtime had to be provided for the Russian narratives as well, even if they were blatantly false, often selfcontradictory interpretations.
The policy of reset has failed, and the current U.S.Russia policy of assurance, deterrence, and cooperation needs expansion.
In reviewing all three disparate policies affecting foreign policy, it is easy to see the impact, but it was not until this discussion that the seams became visible; and therefore, United States credibility is at stake.
In discussing the risks, the articulation of a few mitigation actions can suggest ways for incorporating two underutilized elements of DIME — the information and military elements.
The current United States foreign policy is ineffective because of the constraints established in these underlying policies.
This produces an uncoordinated effort preventing the credibility of an effective and comprehensive foreign policy.
This, along with the element of time, presents a vulnerability for the United States and a corresponding opportunity for belligerent actors to capitalize on an assessed weakness.
To salvage the credibility of United States foreign policy, senior leaders must address the lack of synchronization.
Policy fratricide will continue if there is no unifying effort orchestrated by the NSC to support the synchronization of disparate policies.
For example, with an unsupported CFE, the United States could move and base military forces and equipment in Eastern Europe and thereby ensure the NSC addresses all three disparate policies by modifying each to support the overall foreign policy of assurance and deterrence.
The NSC Deputies meeting is the appropriate entity to ensure a coherent, coordinated, and credible foreign policy because the appropriate leaders in attendance can represent the interests for the underlying policies affecting the overarching foreign policy.
At this meeting, identification of the seams will show the gaps requiring corrections.
Sending these corrected gaps to the NSC Primaries meeting will guarantee implementation actions ensuring that underlying policies are correct and produce a focused comprehensive foreign policy.
The second area to ensure credibility is by incorporating the United States media establishment and social media conglomerates to join in the fight and contribute to blocking Russian narratives.
A way to implement this recommendation is through the creation of joint venture between the Department of Defense and United States companies.
This acknowledges that the United States military cannot win in the information arena without the assistance of industry.
The final recommendation is to protect against the element of time by immediately supporting the two previous recommendations.
With a non-supported CFE, the United States can permanently base a division headquarters, with enablers, in Eastern Europe to provide the appropriate synchronization of forces and efforts within the region.
This might look like a Division Tactical Action Center under the command of a onestar general officer forward positioned in Latvia.
This will send the appropriate message to Russia and reinforce the United States foreign policy of deterrence.
The NSC should convene to approve the moving and basing of a DTAC to Latvia while ensuring it has the requisite enablers to be a credible and effective tool for the President to counter any expansionist agenda by Russia.
Protecting the credibility of the United States requires the implementation of the aforementioned mitigation strategies and recommendations by the senior leaders within the government.
Otherwise, President Putin will continue with his expansionist agenda, and the United States will lose its standing as a global hegemony.
This will forever change the security situation in Europe and undermine the 70 years of general peace and stability that the United States, in concert with its allies, has provided the region.
Failure to act with determination could forever damage United States and European relations and cooperation.
Such a breach of trust could have catastrophic economic effects that would be impossible for Washington, D.C. to overcome.
ANSWERING THE HARD QUESTIONS FACING THE BALTICS Researchers: Officers and Soldiers of the Estonian Defense Forces Headquarters, under the direction of Lieutenant Colonel Vahur Murulaid In ancient Egyptian and Greek mythology, a fearsome beast called the Sphinx roamed the region around Thebes wreaking havoc and killing any who could not answer its riddle.
At long last, the tragic Greek hero Oedipus faced the Sphinx, answered its riddle and secured his throne.
If these go unanswered, or incorrectly responded to, there could be severe consequences.
Lieutenant Colonel Vahur Karus answers the top five questions facing the region created by a hostile aggressive Russian foreign policy.
Western values such as democracy, pluralism, transparency, human rights, freedom, and the rule of law would be a death knell to a kleptocratic authoritarian regime.
Moscow viewed with great alarm the ""color revolutions"" that led to freedom in Georgia, Ukraine, and elsewhere.
Fearing that this was in store for the regime in Russia, the Kremlin set out to delegitimize, discredit, and undermine Western policies and institutions as well as the entire post-Cold War security order.
With such a perspective, the Russian National Security Strategy describes NATO and the West as a threat to its regional and global ambitions.
The Kremlin's strategic end state is to restore Russia's status as a great power with the associated benefit of dominating Eastern Europe.
Moscow uses its military to not only flex its muscles, but to also deflect attention from Russia's economic troubles and the regime's growing domestic repression.
Not unlike how Hitler used military adventurism to rally Germany, or when Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands; Putin is leveraging his military to exploit Russian patriotism to foster national unity and continued political support.
European and transatlantic institutions and the entire European security architecture stand in the way of fulfilling Russia's main strategic aim —so Moscow is determined to abolish them.
Paradoxically, Moscow accuses NATO of encircling Russia and preparing for a military aggression against it, even though its military footprint is modest, particularly in comparison with Russia's military forces.
Russia has demonstrated its penchant for dangerous adventurism, while it manages to keep the West off balance and continuously scans for and exploits weaknesses.
Moscow is aggressively opportunistic when advancing its interests, and its modus operandi is to seize the initiative and achieve a fait accompli that the West would be unwilling or unable to challenge.
It is weakness rather than strength which provokes Russia into action, just as it was in the case of Crimea, where the Ukrainian state, weakened by domestic turmoil, was unable to defend itself.
However, the regime respects strength and tends to back down to avoid a direct collision with determined and resourceful opponents.
A case in point is the swift and determined United States response to Russia's invasion of Georgia in 2008, when Russian troops stopped their march toward Tbilisi after the United States deployed its warships to the Black Sea, while also promising substantial logistical support to the Georgian armed forces.
Russia has demonstrated a penchant to use military force, or its threat, when exploiting weaknesses.
This also involves provocative military behavior to test the responses of the Alliance and individual allies, as in the case of dangerous overflights of USS Donald Cook in the Baltic Sea in April 2016.
It is a matter of great concern that, when it comes to the use of force, Moscow's decision-making circle has shrunk to just President Putin and no more than two or three of his most trusted members of the regime.
When making decisions, he is not constrained by constitutional checks and balances or the rule of law.
Putin has the military and security apparatus ready to execute his will.
Russian military parade during the May 9, 2016 Victory Day Celebration in the Red Square.
Russia's use of a wide range of instruments in recent conflicts has generated discussions in NATO on how best to deter future aggression.
It is often considered in NATO capitals that Russia would not dare attack a NATO member by means of a direct and overt act of military aggression, but would rather choose an indirect approach described by its Chief of General Staff, or 'hybrid warfare' tactics, to challenge the Alliance and its collective defense guarantees.
Moscow retains an immense advantage with military force in the Baltic region.
Its military power is the hard currency that poses a serious or even existential threat to the most exposed of NATO allies —the Baltic States.
Russia's military modernization and build-up (particularly in the Western Military District); its Anti-Access Area Denial capabilities; nuclear strategy; continuous exercises; and, the uncertainty surrounding the Kremlin's intent.
Its priorities are modernizing nuclear weapons, introducing new systems into the Aerospace Forces, and the Navy and Ground Forces units, in that order.
This push for military modernization by President Putin is underpinned by significant investments into developing, producing, and fielding new weapon systems, or upgrading legacy systems, which are steadily giving a new qualitative edge to Russia's Armed Forces.
Although economic woes may force Russia to reassess some of its choices, cuts in military spending are a last resort, and their effect on the re-armament program would only come after years of recession.
Western sanctions that restrict access to certain technologies certainly act as a factor to slow the pace of the military modernization, but they are unable to stop it.
Russia's ability to apply lessons learned from past operations, such as the war against Georgia in 2008 or more recent campaigns in Ukraine and Syria, is also noteworthy.
As a result, Russia has made steady advances in improving command and control, increasing intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance capabilities, making various units and formations more cohesive and effective in warfighting, and improving logistics.
Militarily, Russia is certainly no longer a decaying post-Cold War power with obsolete or vanishing capabilities.
Qualitative improvements are accompanied by significant quantitative increases.
The ground forces established eight new brigades in 2015, and in January 2016, the Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu announced plans to form three new divisions in the Western Military District adjacent to the Baltic States.
These changes signal a move back to a Cold War-like military posture, where it was in preparation for high-intensity large-scale combined arms warfare.
Although, at the Munich Security Conference, Russia's Prime Minister Dmitri Medvedev accused the West of taking the world back to the Cold War, it is Russia that continues to do this in terms of ongoing changes in its military posture.
Some of the most capable formations in Russia's Armed Forces are located in the Western Military District, and in any actions involving the Baltic States they could quickly bring considerable force to bear.
In addition to the existing maneuver brigades and the announced formation of new divisions, a number of niche force developments are especially relevant regarding the Baltic region.
This increases the speed, agility, and flexibility of the forces that can be employed against the Baltic States.
Even if a larger concentration of forces are deemed necessary for an overwhelming attack, Russia's military campaigns demonstrate its ability to move substantial forces across vast distances and to sustain them for prolonged periods of time.
ANTI-ACCESS AREA DENIAL Russia has an array of stand-off weapons systems including multi-layered air defense, mobile coastal defense, land, sea, and air-launched cruise missiles, and tactical ballistic missile platforms that give it an ability to implement an A2/ AD approach.
A2 is a strategic and game-changing problem as it means that those zones are difficult to penetrate —by land, sea, or air.
This would make moving NATO reinforcements into the Baltic region dangerous and costly.
The AD part is the operational side of the problem, as it makes it more difficult to operate forces inside such zones.
Countering A2/AD is fraught with a high risk of escalation, as well as with significant loss of lives, time, and capabilities.
The Baltic States, parts of Poland and Finland, and large swathes of the Baltic Sea are areas under A2/AD threat due to Russia's capabilities in the Kaliningrad enclave and along Russia's border with Estonia and Latvia as well as Russia's alliance with Belarus.
Russia's advanced air defense systems S-300/S-400, deployed in the Kaliningrad enclave and near St.
Petersburg in Russia, and the integration of these systems with the corresponding air defense systems in Belarus, create an overlapping air defense engagement area over the Baltic States capable of threatening aircraft flying in this airspace.
Given the importance of air superiority in any conflict, this is a serious impediment to reinforcing and defending the Baltic States.
Russia's short-range ballistic missiles ""Iskander"" , if positioned in Kaliningrad, are capable of targeting infrastructure, bases, and troop concentrations in Poland, Lithuania, and southern Latvia.
In conjunction with the same type of systems based on the western fringes of the Western Military District, this capability extends to targets in Estonia and the rest of Latvia.
Such systems can destroy critical nodes (ports, airports) and infrastructure required for the reception, staging, onward movement, and integration of the Allied forces deployed to the Baltic States, thus further complicating NATO's rapid deployment operations.
Taking also into account the airand sea-launched cruise missile capability, Russia has the capacity to significantly raise the costs of reinforcing the Baltic States.
While sharing about 1000 km of land border with Russia and Belarus, the Baltic States are linked to the rest of the Alliance just by a 65 km-wide gap between the Kaliningrad enclave and Belarus, which has only two roads and one railway line passing through it from Poland to Lithuania.
Establishing control over this gap would cut the Baltic States from the rest of the Alliance.
NUCLEAR STRATEGY Moscow places great stock on its nuclear deterrent and uses it to dissuade opponents from intervening in the conflicts where Russia has important interests at stake or from pursuing policies seen as detrimental to Russia's geopolitical interests.
Moscow will use the threat of nuclear escalation to dissuade NATO allies from attempting to reinforce and defend the Baltic States.
MILITARY EXERCISES The Kremlin uses military exercises for launching operations and intimidating its neighbors.
These exercises represent a way of camouflaging intent, should Moscow decide to launch a surprise attack.
The exercise tempo of the Russian military demonstrates that they are continuously readying themselves for conflicts of varying scale and intensity.
A striking feature is that many of the military exercises conducted by Russia are offensive scenarios, including the invasion of the Baltic States and Poland and targeting the Nordic countries.
Attention is being paid to improving interoperability with the armed forces of Belarus.
The large exercise Zapad 2013 is a good example of Russia's focus on developing synergy rehearsing joint actions using modern technologies, which combine civilian agencies and the military in a mobilized format that heavily features the experimental use of automated command and control.
The exercise was staged jointly with Belarus and followed an established pattern by rehearsing offensive operations in a Western direction, including against the Baltic States.
Above all, Northern Fleet submarine activity , with the nuclear forces exercise that President Putin ordered, demonstrates that Moscow includes first use of nuclear weapons as a ""demonstration strike"" to induce an enemy to negotiate —in other words, the operational use of tactical or other nuclear weapons to ""de-escalate"" a conflict.
After the demise of the Soviet Union, the allies assumed that Russia was interested in a partnership with NATO and therefore sought a dialogue.
Despite the progress made since 2014, NATO lacks a cohesive strategy and suitable deterrence and defense posture to deal with a resurgent Russia, and the problem is most severe in the Baltic area.
There are four fundamental challenges that NATO as an Alliance must address.
STRATEGY NATO's Strategic Concept adopted in 2010, while not perfect, is adequate in the current environment.
Furthermore, allies have made it clear that NATO's focus is on collective defense, reducing the need to open this document to time-consuming discussions.
The Alliance is returning to the dual-track approach of deterrence and dialogue first introduced by the Harmel report of 1967.
While the notion of combining dialogue and deterrence is valid, the circumstances faced today differ significantly.
In the 1960s, the threat to NATO was the Soviet Union over-running the entire European continent.
The focus of NATO therefore needs to be on deterrence, because Russia's military aim is no longer to over-run Europe.
There are fears that strengthening deterrence would increase the likelihood of escalation, while history tells us a different story—weakness emboldens Russia and strength deters Russia.
Russia employs an aggressive anti-Western narrative and accuses NATO of escalating the situation and encircling Russia —a claim that is unfounded but effective in influencing some NATO allies.
The bottom line is that Russia portrays NATO as its main enemy, which means that tensions between NATO and Russia will continue regardless of what actions the Alliance undertakes.
The safest course for NATO is to demonstrate, both in words and deeds, its resolve and ability to defend every ally against every form of aggression while remaining open for dialogue.
STRATEGIC ANTICIPATION There is both a cognitive and a resource-related side to NATO's limited strategic anticipation.
This is due to difficulties associated with reading the intent and plans of the Kremlin regime.
On the other hand, Russia rarely disguises its true political and grand strategic intentions.
Quite to the contrary, it has proclaimed them publicly, but the West has chosen to not believe Russia's declarations.
The West misunderstands Russia by thinking that it will obey the rules.
However, Moscow's logic is that, when given a chance to further its interests, it will use the opportunity to carry out its plans without hesitation.
Doing this is rational behavior for Russia as long as it can assume the West will opt for cooperation rather than confrontation.
Combat forces with firepower were replaced with light capabilities better suited for expeditionary crisis response and counter-insurgency operations.
Meanwhile, NATO's maritime efforts have been focused to the southern part of the Alliance.
Defense expenditures across NATO are not sufficient to rebuild the range of capabilities necessary to deter a resurgent and aggressive Russia.
Consequently, there is a tendency in some parts of NATO to make the threat fit our existing posture and capabilities.
It is easier to make the threat look less acute so as to not have to undergo changes in capabilities and raise defense expenditures.
Although tasks of the NATO Command Structure have proliferated since the end of the Cold War, its size has shrunk drastically.
NATO'S POSTURE IN THE BALTIC STATES The numbers of host nation and Allied forces in the Baltics are far inferior to the Russian forces in Western Military District.
The Baltic States lack strategic and operational depth, which makes giving up space for time impossible.
A limited incursion creating a fait accompli in the Baltic States could be undertaken by Russia with the forces already stationed in the vicinity of their border and hence with limited early warning.
NATO's conventional military posture in the Baltic States should be able to convince Russia that it is able to delay and bog down an invading force and inflict unacceptable damage to it.
This force is not required to win the war, but it must be able to fight alongside the host nation forces to buy NATO time for reinforcements.
The length of the shared border between Russia and the Baltic States offers the Russians the ability to claim territory without possibly even having to fire a shot at NATO forces, thus rendering the value of the forward-based forces void.
The uncertainty surrounding their decisions and actions—with regard to both Russia and the Alliance —complicates NATO's plans and response options in the Baltics.
Without these two countries in NATO or having very close cooperation with the Alliance in the context of collective defense, NATO lacks strategic and operational depth in the region.
Should Russia compel Stockholm and Helsinki to stay out of a conflict, NATO's response options, particularly given the A2/ AD threat, would be limited even further.
Even if Moscow has no intent to challenge NATO directly, this may change overnight and can be implemented with great speed, following already prepared plans.
This might come at the time NATO and the EU are distracted by another crisis or a misperception of NATO's activities and miscalculation of the Alliance's resolve.
Russia is capable of surprising the West, as happened in Ukraine and Syria.
A military fait accompli in the Baltic States could easily become one of such surprises — with fatal consequences to the Alliance.
Credible deterrence is thus key, but the critical question is how NATO's deterrence posture fares in its most vulnerable spot—the Baltic States.
The Alliance should move toward a threat-focused rather than a capability-focused approach.
It should concentrate on what capabilities are needed, not what capabilities are available.
In addition, we must look at asymmetric , conventional, and nuclear weapons as part of a single strategy, and strengthen NATO-EU cooperation to make deterrence more credible.
NATO must regain capabilities lost after the Cold War and develop new capabilities taking into account Russia's military modernization and build-up.
They must invest in the necessary R&D and cutting-edge technology, especially in the framework of the United States ""Third Offset"" Strategy in which a proper link with the European allies should be developed.
Allies should step up their investments on capabilities that are required to counter the A2/AD challenge, deal with asymmetric threats, as well as conduct largescale combined arms warfare.
To resource this re-generation of capabilities, NATO must increase defense spending.
Eastern flank states should consider going over the 2% benchmark in their defense spending like Estonia has.
This would send a message to the United States that they are serious about facing the real threat that Russia poses to them.
Other allies should make a clear statement of intent to move toward the 2% benchmark significantly faster than the promise of trying to do so within a decade.
It will be necessary to work with Sweden and Finland to secure overflight permissions, gain access to the use of their air bases, and develop Host Nation Support arrangements already in peacetime.
The Alliance should also conduct prudent planning for defending Sweden and Finland, as a way of reassuring them that their support to the Alliance would not leave them exposed to Russia's punitive military action.
PRESENCE The only way to guarantee the security of the Baltic States against a conventional Russian military threat is by having a capable military force in these countries.
They must be able to prevent a fait accompli by Russia and, should an attack occur, delay the opposing forces for NATO to deploy additional units and capabilities to the region.
While we agree with both the former and current Supreme Allied Commander Europe , General Breedlove and General Scaparrotti, who would prefer permanent forces in Europe, the debate about permanence should not be at the forefront if the continuous presence of combat-capable forces can be ensured through rotations.
LAND FORCES The United States units rotating through the Baltic States, while strengthening assurance, are not enough for credible deterrence and defense.
Ideally, this would require one brigade in each of the Baltic States that would, along with host nation forces, be able to significantly delay the opposing forces and help counter the Russian A2/AD threat —if Russian forces are unable to act with impunity on land, they are more vulnerable to Allied air power.
Allied brigades in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania would be able to cover more territory by having their constituent battalions conduct simultaneous independent operations.
Furthermore, since a Very High Readiness Joint Task Force is not regionally focused, an equivalent-sized force in each of the Baltic States would hedge against the possibility of VJTF being unavailable due to it being deployed elsewhere.
AIR FORCES Air force capabilities are needed to provide protection for Baltic and Allied forces, and to prevent Russian aircraft from freely operating over NATO's territory.
The Alliance's aim must be to maintain or establish conditions for local , and then general, air superiority in the airspace of the Baltic region.
NAVAL FORCES As significant Allied reinforcements are brought by sea, it is crucial that access to the Baltic Sea is maintained or re-established quickly.
The Baltic States need capabilities in and adjacent to the Baltic Sea that could effectively limit Russia's freedom of maneuver and degrade their capabilities.
This requires a continuous combat-capable presence with high firepower, high survivability, and the plans, rules of engagement, and authorization to act immediately in response to aggression.
To effectively counter Russia's A2/ AD, for example, sea-based air defense , anti-submarine warfare capabilities, as well as surface ships and submarines with long-range strike capabilities are needed.
Allocating an AEGIS-equipped ship for the Baltic Sea area would significantly enhance deterrence.
They would be of high importance in defending the Baltics and, therefore, their presence would send a strong deterrent signal to Moscow.
As the Baltic States are in the most vulnerable situation in NATO, we propose relocating some of the United States Marines Black Sea rotational force to the Baltic States.
In the Baltics, the footprint and familiarity with local conditions of the United States Marines is modest and mainly gained through the Baltic Operations exercise.
As the SOF troops are able to operate behind enemy lines and conduct special reconnaissance missions, they would be instrumental in providing information both to the Allied defense establishments as well as to the wider public.
We, therefore, propose embedding strategic communication/information officers with the SOF teams operating in the region who could record and disseminate information.
REINFORCEMENT NATO's high readiness forces need to be more robust and adequately trained to stand the rigors of war.
This means a well-trained and highly cohesive force able to operate in a non-permissive environment with proper enablers, well-drilled and taut command and control, and the soundest logistic foundations.
A multinational force containing up to 14 nations that have never trained together will not be capable of deterring, let alone fighting.
The VJTF must be less focused on hybrid conflicts and more suited for high-end warfare.
PREPOSITIONING Prepositioning the stocks of armaments and munitions is needed to speed up the Allied reinforcements.
We recommend that at least a battalion-worth of heavy equipment be prepositioned in each Baltic State to be able to quickly surge the presence of Allied troops when necessary.
As a priority, heavy maneuver vehicles, artillery, anti-armor and air defense assets, and munition stocks should be prepositioned.
The Alliance's success in defending the Baltic States depends on the efforts of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania as much as on the contribution of the other allies.
This entails ensuring high readiness of their defense forces; conducting frequent exercises to test this readiness; investing into new capabilities; and, working to facilitate freedom of movement of the Allied forces into and between the Baltic States.
Since most of it (airports, harbors, railways, roads, and bridges) is the responsibility of the civilian authorities, they should pay greater attention to the additional requirements for handling movement of large and heavy military forces.
Although the security challenge that NATO faces is formidable, it is not impossible to overcome.
The assessments of this section offer a way for NATO to preserve the peace for a bright and prosperous future.
THE WAY AHEAD AND RECOMMENDATIONS A Bradley Fighting Vehicle of the United States Army 3rd Infantry Division at Tapa, Estonia.
The world is in turmoil; the geostrategic security environment is rapidly changing as witnessed by the new and adaptive threats facing the NATO Alliance.
On the southern periphery are the expansive Islamic State and a refugee/migration crisis of Biblical proportions.
Meanwhile, the unparalleled peace and stability experienced by most of Europe since 1945 is at risk with the rise of a hostile Russia.
However, it is the peril posed by the Kremlin that should keep NATO senior leaders up at night.
Indeed, Russia's advantage in geography in Eastern Europe and its emerging adaptive, hybrid approach to war poses an existential threat to the Alliance.
The key component of the Kremlin's emerging adaptive approach to conflict is the application of ambiguity.
This cloak of ambiguity has been used to confound North American and European decision makers.
Thus was the case in 2014, when so-called ""little green men"" appeared in Crimea.
Although there was no doubt that these were Russian forces, Vladimir Putin denied the obvious, with key leaders in the West dithering on how to respond.
Moscow's gambit worked, with Putin declaring the annexation of Crimea only a month after the ""little green men"" appeared.
This was followed by a separatist movement in Eastern Ukraine that was inspired and led by Moscow.
Although Russia's involvement in this conflict is indisputable, the response from Europe and the United States has been sluggish and inconsistent at best.
Even after the downing of a civilian airliner in July 2014, the resolve of Western leaders to blunt Russian aggression in Ukraine is still in question.
More than 2 years later, Ukraine remains in the midst of a bloody war, and an increasingly frustrated Putin is turning up his bellicose rhetoric.
Targeting both his domestic audience and the Russian ethnic populations residing in NATO nations, Putin blames his woes on ""the West"" and has put together a powerful information operations campaign to manipulate the minds of his people.
In the midst of this, Moscow announced that it will modernize both its nuclear and armed forces.
Although the Russians today have a large conventional force, Moscow has demonstrated for the moment that it would rather avoid a direct confrontation with the West by employing a ""strategy"" of ambiguity.
This ambiguity undercuts decision making and provides Putin with plausible deniability of being behind any crisis.
Using Eastern Ukraine as the example, Russia employs ""local"" proxy forces, bolstered by Russian Special Forces in ethnic Russian zones.
These are supported by small groups of conventional assets to wage its war.
The Baltic States suffered terrible depravations and ethnic cleansing under the Soviets and do not want a repeat of this.
Faced with this threat, the 28 NATO member nations continue to wrestle with an appropriate response to the belligerent Russian behavior in the region.
The United States took the first action in early 2014 by rotating small units of Army Soldiers through the region.
Now dubbed ""Atlantic Resolve,"" this force is designed to reassure the Baltic States of NATO support.
This was followed by a NATO announcement in September 2014 that it would create a force capable of rapidly deploying anywhere in the region.
Most recently, at its July 2016 summit in Warsaw, the Alliance announced the deployment of four battalions of NATO forces by early 2017.
These battalions will be stationed in Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia.
There are specific measures that NATO should take to mitigate the rising threat that Russia poses to the Alliance.
The recommendations in this article focus on the military element of power.
However, any strategy must apply a comprehensive approach that includes diplomatic, economic, and informational aspects of power.
The following five proposals are a starting place to build credible deterrence in the Baltics.
The nature of the Russian threat to the sovereignty of the Baltic nations goes beyond a hybrid ethnic uprising.
There is also a formidable Russian conventional capability literally on the border of each state.
The Kremlin has demonstrated this capability through aggressive activities by its air, sea, and ground forces.
These unannounced training events have increased in scope and scale over the past year and demonstrate that NATO would have virtually no early warning to prepare for the unthinkable.
The reality of the changing strategic environment demonstrates the need for NATO to take concerted action to reduce the element of surprise.
This can be done by stationing forward a modest early warning intelligence capability.
This should include a linguist element, equipped with electronic warfare intercept capability, UAVs, and other intelligence assets to monitor military activity in both Russia and Belarus.
NATO's Intelligence Fusion Center should provide the oversight and synchronization of this forward Baltic Intelligence Center , which would reduce duplicative and costly ""national"" capabilities.
The focus of the collection and analysis would be on the regional Russian military activities of the Western Military District.
Although the idea of employing so-called ""reach-back"" capability from headquarters in Western Europe is popular, nothing can surpass having a forward presence, where analysts will be able to both see and feel the Russian threat.
There must be a forward and robust intelligence and early warning capability in the Baltic region.
The BIC should be commanded by a United States Army Colonel with extensive intelligence and NATO experience.
All too often, senior United States officers with little to no experience working with NATO are assigned to key positions in the Alliance, which puts them and the Alliance at a distinct disadvantage.
The focus and mission of the G2's task is to provide both real world analysis and long range reporting on the disposition, capabilities, and assessment of Russian forces in the region.
This G2 will not only need to provide more than near-term intelligence, but also long-range forecasting that understands and predicts the application of both its conventional and hybrid capabilities.
The bottom line is that the BIC will be NATO's expert on Russia's emerging doctrine and approach to war.
All three of the Baltic States have increased their defense spending since Russia's invasion of Crimea and its subsequent war in Ukraine.
Estonia is making great strides to improve the size, mobility, survivability, and lethality of their forces; Latvia has also increased its defense spending; and Lithuania has taken the bold decision to reintroduce conscription.
However, all three of these nations must have a robust force capable of responding to both conventional and unconventional threats to create strategic depth.
The place to begin is here to create time, space, and depth for a larger, survivable, and mobile force.
Such a force must be capable of contending with an ""ethnic uprising,"" while also being able to secure vital infrastructure from conventional threats.
However, of the Baltic nations, only Estonia is exceeding the agreed upon 2% of its Gross Domestic Product on defense.
The increase in national defense is of key importance in that it provides tangible evidence of the Baltic Nation's commitment to their own defense.
Additionally, it will enable them to expand their military infrastructure to support the modest increase of forward stationed forces and assets.
The United States could provide the nations in the Baltic region surplus United States Military equipment sitting in depots in North America.
These can be provided at a cost and used to improve the lethality, survivability, and mobility of their indigenous forces.
However, maintaining and employing these assets comes with a cost, something that the increase in national defense spending could compensate.
The nature of the emerging Russian use of hybrid warfare makes a purely conventional capability ill-suited.
In addition to building a robust conventional force, the Baltic States must also have a complimentary Special Forces capacity.
This should be an adaptive element that works effectively with local security forces and other NATO Special Forces, and is interoperable with NATO conventional units.
Additionally, this force should build relationships in the ethnic Russian zones of their respective countries and thus be positioned to detect an exported Moscow inspired ethnic Russian separatist movement.
NATO should also establish a permanent forward multinational NATO Special Forces presence in the region.
These can support the training and development of a local Special Forces capability, while also building relationships that can be leveraged in a crisis.
Additionally, these forward assets should be tied into local security units, and can provide an early warning should Putin set his gaze upon the region in the form of some sort of Moscow directed exported ""ethnic"" uprising.
Finally, if deterrence fails, Baltic Special Forces could form the core of an unconventional warfare capability that would keep occupying Russian forces off-balance and insecure until NATO can mount a conventional effort to liberate its Baltic allies.
Although the United States and several other nations are rotating small military units through the region, there should be a decision by NATO to create a permanent forward presence of ground forces.
There is no greater deterrence than for NATO nations to commit a modest force forward in the Baltics.
This would dramatically alter the strategic calculus for Vladimir Putin, so that if he should ever seek to assert influence over the Baltics, the price would perhaps be too high.
Any Russian adventurism would have to contend with the reality of having NATO troops already forward, and an attack on them would guarantee a response.
This permanent forward force would have far-reaching ramifications beyond deterrence and would also serve as the nucleus for follow-on NATO forces to build and expand.
Building on NATO's decision to station a battalion in Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia, an expanded permanent forward force should be a three-brigade element, one in each Baltic nation.
Additionally, these brigades would make their task bloody and difficult to accomplish.
Simply put, the cost/benefit analysis was too high for Moscow to try a violent seizure of West Berlin.
This is the same end desired for the Baltic nations of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
The three-brigade Baltic force will not stop a Russian attack, but it would make their task difficult to accomplish.
More importantly, however, the risk of attacking the Baltic nations, and thereby fighting professional ground forces from the United States and the rest of NATO, would be too risky and would ensure the commitment of the entire Alli133 ance to come to the defense of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
There would be no question of resolve and no chance of a successful gamble from the Kremlin with a forward ground force in the region.
To support planning and coordination of this three-brigade multinational force, the United States should create a permanent two-star headquarters in the Baltic region.
The headquarters would serve as the command and control of the division size multinational force in the Baltics and would oversee contingency planning, coordination, and integration of NATO forces into this organization.
Additionally, this would serve as the basis to expand from a division level headquarters to a Combined Joint Lorces Land Component Command should there be a large multi-division exercise or contingency in the region.
The headquarters should be centrally located in Riga to facilitate command and control, but prepared to move to either Estonia or Lithuania to support NATO training.
During the Cold War, the most important annual training event was ""Return of Lorces to Germany,"" or RELORGER in military language.
REFORGER exercised the ability of forces from outside of continental Europe to arrive in Western Europe, receive their equipment at the ports or man their forward equipment sets, and then rapidly deploy to the region of Germany where the large exercise culminated with a force-on-force training scenario.
The REFORGER units would join forward deployed units (those forces already stationed in Germany) in a complex series of training events that replicated a NATO response to a Soviet attack into West Germany.
In the spirit of REFORGER, an annual exercise of a deployment of ""over the horizon"" forces from across NATO should be implemented in the Baltics.
Perhaps naming it ""Deploy Forces to the Baltic ,"" this annual training event would encompass a robust force that would arrive from Western Europe and North America to exercise and demonstrate the ability to quickly respond to a threat to the sovereignty of the East European allies.
The lack of geographic depth in the Baltics means that NATO must respond to any crisis with exceptional rapidity, which is not normally a characteristic of NATO decision-making.
The concern is that it will be in the midst of a crisis that a NATO forward joint and multinational force will have difficulty operating as a joint and multinational team.
Additionally, the ever-shrinking defense budgets in most of Europe mean smaller armies, which equals a lack of strategic depth from the Alliance at large.
An annual DEFORTIC would allow NATO's Very High Readiness Task Force and follow-on NATO Response Forces to exercise their ability to deploy forward into the Baltics.
As to interoperability, an annual DEFORTIC exercise would help deployable NATO forces to refine this important skill set and build a team able to operate in a joint/multinational environment.
As previously discussed, there are concerted measures that the Baltic nations and NATO should take now to deter Russian aggression.
The question is whether NATO will take advantage of its window of opportunity to prevent the unthinkable from happening.
With ever-decreasing budgets and shrinking military forces, a preponderance of NATO nations are facing the changing security environment from a position of weakness.
It is such weakness that historically results in war —with a cost far higher than what prudent defensive measures in peace could have otherwise averted.
The response from Moscow regarding any measures that NATO takes to ensure the security and independence of the Baltic nations will be predictably filled with umbrage and condemnation.
So-called Russian trolls and their boosters in the West already attack anyone advocating Baltic defense as warmongers.
However, even if NATO adopts the recommendation of stationing a 3-brigade division in the region comprised of 9 maneuver battalions, it will be out-numbered, facing nearly 30 Russian ground maneuver battalions.
The idea that this force is provocative or a threat to Russia is preposterous.
The purpose of this forward multinational NATO division is to both assure the Baltic allies and to deter Russian aggression.
However, should the unthinkable happen, it would make any adventurism from Moscow costly and bloody.
More importantly, this force guarantees that there would be no chance of Russia permanently reasserting control over these NATO members.
The saying that freedom requires eternal vigilance seems particularly pertinent to us today.
Such deterrence should come in the form of forward deployed forces, an early warning capability, larger and more lethal Baltic forces, a Special Forces presence, and an annual Deploy Forces to the Baltic exercise that demonstrates a NATO capability to defend its eastern allies.
The key is that these prudent measures can avert World War III by materially demonstrating resolve and strength that would remove any doubt or uncertainty of NATO's commitment to protect its members from any sort of foreign intervention, whether conventional or hybrid.
The Western powers experimented with appeasement in the 1930s, and the result was a horrific and costly war that placed the world on a precipice of peril.
Now is the time for resolve and strength in the face of an aggressive and assertive Russian foreign policy bent on dominating the region.
The measures recommended in this paper are not provocative; in fact, they are defensive in nature.
Indeed, a little action now can go a long way to assure the eastern allies, and deter Russian aggression.
History demonstrates that the certain path to war is passivity and appeasement.
Now is the time for all of the NATO members to demonstrate resolve and strength.
The simple measures offered in this paper lay out a clear path for the alliance to prevent war and to maintain the security and stability of the continent.
More importantly, it will protect entire populations from depravations and destruction.
The map of Europe has been the battlefield of countless battles and wars.
Often, those who pay the ultimate price are not the leaders who give into weakness and indecision; it is the people.
America and its allies stand for freedom and against all forms of tyranny.
Indeed, what we do in life matters, it echoes across the generations and into eternity.
Our challenge today is to make decisions that will pass on to our heirs a better and safer world.
This can only be achieved by eternal vigilance and responsible strength.
This is not the first time that the United States and NATO have faced a rising foe in the east.
This is a proven strategy and our answer for the modern version of this old adversary.
History indeed gives a long list of lessons that weakness and appeasement invite war.
You and I know and do not believe that life is so dear and peace so sweet as to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery.
The martyrs of history were not fools, and our honored dead who gave their lives to stop the advance of the Nazis didn't die in vain.
Winston Churchill said, 'Tire destiny of man is not measured by material computations.
Radio broadcast given by Winston Churchill, October 1,1939, available from www.churchiU-societylondon.org.uk/RusnEnig.html, accessed on August 3, 2016.
Richard Cavendish, ""The Battle of Narva,"" History Today, Vol., Iss., November 2000, available from www.historytoday.com/richard-cavendish/battle-narva, accessed on February 25, 2015.
More of Lieutenant Colonel Setser's portion of this article is included in the Recommendation and Conclusion section of this research project.
Prevent • Shape • Win, Ver..2, May 28,2014, available from www.eur.army.mil/2020/files/USAREUR_2020_vl-2_28May2014.pdf, accessed on January 25, 2016.
The Swiss Approach,"" RAND Corporation Study, available from www.rand. org/pubs/perspectives/PE179.html, accessed on August 1, 2016; Lieutenant Colonel Sean Berg, ""Countering Russian Aggression in the Baltics and Eastern Europe,"" Strategy Research Project, Carlisle, PA: United States Army War College, April 1, 2015.
Interview with Lieutenant Colonel Eugenius Lastauskas, Lithuanian Army by Douglas Mastriano, June 27, 2016.
Frank Smitha, ""Sweden, Russia and the Great Northern War,"" available from www. conflicts.rem33.com/images/The%20Baltic%20States/nordkrieg.htm, accessed on June 29, 2016.
The Diplomat, June 17, 2015, available from thediplomat.com/2015/06/russia-to-add-40-new-icbms-should-the-west-be-worried/, accessed on June 20, 2016.
Moscow's Military Trump Card,"" Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, June 18, 2015, available from www.rferl.org/content/kaliningrad-russia-nato-west-strategic/27079655. html, accessed on June 20, 2016.
Vladimir Putin, Russian National Security Strategy, Moscow, Russia, December 2015, 15.
Economic Implications, Washington, DC: United States Library of Congress, Congressional Research Service, February 4, 2015, 8.
Pavel Polityuk, ""Ukraine to Probe Suspected Russian Cyber Attack on Grid,"" Reuters, December 31, 2015, available from www.reuters.com/article/us-iikraine-crisis-malware-idUSKBN0UE0ZZ20151231, accessed on January 31, 2016.
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, ""Latest from OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, based on information received as of 19:30hrs, 31 January 2016,"" OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine Online, February 1, 2016, available from www.osce.org/ukraine-smm/ 219716, accessed on February 1, 2016.
Mark N Katz, ""Ukraine and the Future of NATO,"" Aljazeera Centre For Studies Online, September 15, 2015, available from studies.aljazeera.net/en/reports/2015/09/20159151557797698.htm, accessed on January 31, 2016.
The World Post, May 20, 2014, available from www.hujfingtonpost.com/hugh-williamson/iohats-at-stake-for-osce-i_b_5356361 html, accessed on January 30, 2016.
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, ""The Crisis in and Around Ukraine,"" January 31, 2016, available from www.osce.org/ukrainecrisis, accessed on January 31, 2016.
Pavel Koshkin, ""The OSCE May Not be Perfect, but it Works Well Enough in Ukraine,"" Russia Direct, September 25, 2014, available from www.russia-direct.org/analysis/osce-may-not-be-perfect-it-works-goodenough-ukraine, accessed on January 30, 2016.
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Home Page, available from www.osce.org, accessed on January 30, 2016.
The Free Dictionary, Idioms, ""If you want peace, prepare for war,"" available from encyclopedia, thefreedictionary.com/If+you+want+peace%2c+prepare+for+war, accessed on February 2, 2016.
Military Budget,"" GlobalSecurity.org, available from www.globalsecurity.org/military/ world/ukraine/budget.htm, accessed on February 2, 2016.
Blenckner, ""Military spending in Europe in the wake of the Ukrainian crisis,"" 1.
Oleksandr Turchynov, ""In Donbas we confront the military units of the regular army of the Russian Federation, formed by the model of 'Waffen-SS',"" National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine, August 27, 2015, available from www.rnbo.gov.ua/en/news/2244.html, accessed on February 3, 2015.
Stepan Poltorak, Minister of Defense of Ukraine, ""Reborn of the Ukrainian Army,"" December 4, 2015, available from www.mil.gov.ua/en/speeches/2015/12/04/reborn-of-the-ukrainian-army/, accessed on February 6, 2016.
Pieter D Wezeman and Siemon T Wezeman, ""Trends in International Arms Transfers, 2014,"" SIPRI Fact Sheet, Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, March 2015, available from books.sipri.org/files/ FS/SIPRIFS1503.pdf, accessed on February 6, 2016.
Putin agrees with emperor that Russia's only allies are Army and Navy, Interview to TASS, Russian News Agency, April 16, 2015, available from tass.ru/en/russia/789866, accessed on February 7, 2016.
The term ""near abroad"" is used by the Russian Federation to refer to the 14 Soviet successor states other than Russia.
During the Yeltsin era, Russia had to cope with the collapse of Communism, the transition to a market economy, the end of the Cold War, and the loss of superpower status.
This caused a national identity crisis that engendered key shifts in Russian foreign policy toward what it designates the near abroad.
See ""Near Abroad,"" Encyclopedia of Russian History, The Gale Group Incorporated, 2004, available from www.encyclopedia.com/doc/lG2-3404100894.html, accessed on May 22, 2016.
Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, ""Putin could attack Baltic states warns former NATO chief,"" The Telegraph, available from www.telegraph.co.uk/nezvs/zvorldnews/europe/russia/11393707/Putin-could-attack-Balticstates-warns-former-Nato-chief.html, accessed on May 20, 2016.
The Kaliningrad region is surrounded by Lithuania and Poland, two NATO and EU members.
Alpo Juntunen, ""The Baltic Sea in Russian Strategy,"" Diskussion&Dcbatt, Nr4, November/December 2010, 120, available from www.kkrva.se/wp-content/uploads/Artiklar/104/kkrvaht_4_2010_12.pdf accessed on May 20, 2016.
Alexander Dugin's 'Fourth Political Theory',"" The Washington Free Beacon, September 5, 2015, available fromfreebeacon.com/culture/putins-brainand-the-future-of-russia/, accessed on May 22, 2016.
Olga Oliker, ""Unpacking Russia's New National Security Strategy,"" Center for Strategic & International Studies , January 7, 2016, available from csis.org/publication/unpacking-russias-new-nationalsecurity-strategy, accessed on May 20, 2016.
Stephen Lendman, ""Russia's New National Security Strategy,"" Global Research, January 1, 2016, available from www.globalresearch.ca/russias-new-national-security-strategy/5498735, accessed on May 20, 2016.
English translation from the Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation, 2014, provided by this chapter's researcher.
This is how in early 2013 the media dubbed the ideas presented by Valery Gerasimov, a Russian general and the Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Russia.
Publishing Section of the General Affairs Department of the Ministry of National Defence, 2015, 18.
Translation from Russian language provided by this chapter's researcher, Lieutenant Colonel Algimantas Misiunas, Lithuanian Army.
The chart was published in a Russian weekly newspaper; see ""The Military Industrial Complex.
The Armed Forces,"" VPK News, available from www.vpk-news.ru, accessed on February 18, 2016.
Daniel McLaughlin, ""Putin's Pride at 'Returning' Crimea to Russia Still Costing the Country Dear,"" Irish Times, 2015.
Michael Birnbaum, ""Russia Bears Down on Nervous Baltics; In Latvia, Citizens View Events in Ukraine with Growing Unease,"" The Ottawa Citizen, 2014.
Neil Buckley and Roman Olearchyk, ""Hunt for Yanukovich as Tymoshenko Pushes for New Coalition,"" Financial Times, 2014, available from ft.com.
Putin Says Russia Will Protect the Rights of Russians Abroad,"" The Washington Post, March 18, 2014.
How the Kremlin Weaponizes Information, Culture and Money,"" The Interpreter, November 22, 2014, available from www.interpretermag. com/wp-content/uploads/2014/ll/The_Menace_of_Unreality_Final.pdf accessed January 29, 2016.
How the Kremlin Weaponizes Culture,"" The Wall Street Journal, October 31, 2014.
Tal Kopan and Jim Sciutto, "" United States Deploys Predator Drones to Latvia,"" CNN, August 31,2015, available from www.cnn.com/2015/08/31/politics/u-s-deploys-predator-drones-latvia/, accessed on Pebruary 1, 2016.
Matthew Luxmoore, ""Latvia Struggles with Restive Russian Minority Amid Regional Tensions,"" Aljazeera, June 13, 2015, available from america.aljazeera.com/artides/2015/6/13/latvia-resists-russian-softpower.hhnl, accessed on Pebruary 1, 2016.
Damien McGuinness, ""Crimea Crisis Sharpens Latvia Ethnic Tensions,"" BBC News, March 26, 2014, available from www.bbc.com/news/world-africa~26720549, accessed on January 27, 2016.
United States News and World Report, April 9, 2015, available from www.usnews.eom/news/articles/2015/04/09/russias-round-2-a-new-conflictin-eastern-europe, accessed on January 31, 2016.
The Center for Eastern Studies, January 23, 2015, available from www.osw.ivaiv.pl/en/publikacie/osw-commentary/2015-01-23/ baltic-states-conflict-ukraine, accessed January 29, 2016.
Frederik Van Fokeren, ""Countering the Information War in the Baltic States,"" Baltic Defense blog, April 2, 2015, available from balticdefense.blogspot.com/2015/04/countering-information-war-in-baltic.html, accessed January 28, 2016.
European Dialogue, ""Energy Independence — Common Goal of the Baltics,"" available from www. eurodialogue.eu/energy-security/Energy-lndependence-Common-Goal-Of-The-Baltics, accessed February 1, 2016.
NATO Air Policing mission being the preeminent example of NATO covering such gaps.
Latvian Institute of International Affairs, December 5, 2014, available from liia.lv/en/analysis/2-of-gdp-for-defence-414, accessed on May 19, 2016.
Jaroslaw Adamowski, ""Latvia, Lithuania To Raise Defense Spending,"" Defense News, July 29, 2015, available from www.defensenews.eom/story/defense/intemational/europe/2015/07/29/latvia-lithuania-raisedefense-spending/30843863/, accessed on May 21, 2016.
Lithuanian Ministry of National Defense, ""Guidelines of the Minister of National Defense for 20162021,"" December 29, 2015, 2.
Nicholas de Larrinaga, ""Lithuania orders German PzH 2000s,"" IHS Jane's 360, September 30, 2015, available from www.janes.com/article/54876/lithuania-orders-gennan-pzli-2000s, accessed on May 20, 2016.
International Campaign to Ban Landmines Home Page, available from www.icbl.org/en-gb/home. aspx, accessed on February 12, 2017.
Council on Foreign Relations — International Institutions and Global Governance Program, February 2010, 20.
A Briefing Memo, Washington, DC: Center for Strategic & International Studies, Russia and Eurasia Program, January 2015, 3.
Obama, The National Security Strategy of the United States of America, 25.
NATO Press & Media, June 22, 2015, 6, available from www.nato.int/nato_static_fl2014/ assets/pdf/pdf_2015_06/20150622_PR_CP_2015_093-v2.pdf, accessed on January 6, 2016.
Obama, The National Security Strategy of the United States of America, Introduction.
Understanding Multinationalism to Shape the Operational Environment,"" Carlisle Barracks, PA: United States Army War College, February 2016, 6.
Former NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen, ""Why NATO Matters to America,"" Speech at the Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, March 19, 2014, available from www.brookings.edu/~/ media/events/2014/3/19%20rasmussen%20nato/20140319_nato_rasmussen_prepared_remarks.pdf accessed on March 15, 2016.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, ""The North Atlantic Treaty,"" signed in Washington, D.C. on April 4, 1949, last updated March 21, 2016, available from www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/official_texts_17120. htm, accessed on January 12, 2017.
An Introduction to Theory and History, 8th ed., Boston, MA: Longman, 2011, 40.
Graves, ""Multinational Operations,"" 2; Graves, ""Seek, Develop, and Share,"" 4.
Instilling Cultural Change through the United States Army Combat Training Centers,"" Carlisle Barracks, PA: United States Army War College, October 2015, 4.
School for Command Preparation, Command and General Staff College Press, 2001, 19.
United States Department of the Army, May 2012, includes Change 2, March 12, 2014, 3.
Graves, ""Seek, Develop, and Share,"" 8; Graves, ""Multinational Operations,"" 2.
Transforming Organizational Community to Strengthen People, Purpose, and Performance, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, 2011, 177; Maranian, 2.
United States Department of the Army, Mission Command, 3; Graves, ""Mission Command,"" 6.
Strategic Concept for the Defence and Security of the Members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation adopted by Heads of State and Government in Lisbon,"" November 19, 2010.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Financial and Economic Data Relating to NATO Defence.
Kamp, ""From Wales to Warsaw,"" 362; North Atlantic Treaty Organization, ""Active Engagement, Modem Defence,"" 10.
Moscow effectively uses deception and disinformation to generate ambiguity as a means to prevent a quick response from the West.
Such was the case in Crimea, where despite evidence to the contrary, Putin denied that the Tittle green men' were his soldiers until after he had completed annexation of the region.
With this approach, Putin operated inside the decision-making cycle of NATO and thus gained the initiative.
This approach exploited fissures between NATO and the EU, as each European nation must conduct a costbenefit analysis on the prospect of responding to Russian aggression and enduring the potential economic consequences.
When Putin believes that employing conventional forces is too risky, he resorts to using forces unconventionally, scaled and adapted to the strategic environment.
NATO has a new 'spearhead force', known as the Very High Readiness Joint Task Force , which the Alliance has started to test.
The VJTF is a brigade that will be able to deploy within 48 hours and will eventually include 5,000 troops.
It is part of the NATO Response Force , NATO's high-readiness force comprising land, air, sea and Special Forces units capable of rapid deployment wherever needed.
Both the NRF and its new 'spearhead force' aim to strengthen the Alliance's collective defence capability and ensure that NATO has the right forces in the right place at the right time.
They are a key component of what has been called the 'Readiness Action Plan' agreed by NATO leaders at the Wales Summit in September 2014.
Keeping NATO Strong,"" in Jens Stoltenberg, The Secretary General’s Annual Report 2014, Brussels, Belgium: North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Public Diplomacy Division, January 2015, available from www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/opinions_116854.htm, accessed on May 18, 2015.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, ""Active Engagement, Modem Defence,"" 35.
Germany Is the Backbone for the Alliance's Military Reorganisation,"" SWP Comments, Vol., Berlin: Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik, German Institute for International and Security Affairs, March 2015, 1.
Strategic Opportunities and Imperatives in a Globalized World,"" Washington, DC: The Atlantic Council of the United States, March 2013, 3.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Public Diplomacy Division, January 2016, 7, available from www.nato.int/nato_static_fl2014/assets/pdf/pdf_2016_01/20160128_SG_AnnualReport_2015_en.pdf, accessed on January 30, 2016.
The Atlantic Council, February 23, 2010, 1, available from www.atlanticcouncil.org/publications/issue-briefs/nato-reform-and-decisionmaking, accessed on December 29, 2015.
Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Iceland, Italy, Luxemburg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
United States Commander,"" The Age, March 5, 2015, available from www.theage.com.au/world/russian-president-vladimir-putin-trying-todestroy-nato-us-commander-20150304-13vm69, accessed on December 28, 2015; Stephen Szabo, ""Divide and Conquer,"" United States News & World Report, March 5, 2015, available from www.usnews.com/opinion/blogs/worldreport/2015/03/05/vladimir-putin-wants-to-break-up-the-us-german-partnership, accessed on December 28,2015.
These countries are situated in a comparable stage of development and represent in the current global environment a political and economic organization of growing importance.
Alexey Khlebnikov, ""For Europe, a relationship with Russia is of vital importance,"" Russia Direct, April 14, 2015, available from www.russia-direct.org/qa/europe-relationship-russia-vital-importance, accessed on January 24, 2016.
The National Interest, January 11, 2016, available from nationalinterest.org/blog/the-skeptics/why-are-americas-allies-so-persistently-pathetic-14870, accessed on January 31, 2016.
Jamie Shea, ""NATO Going Global —Or Almost,"" Brussels Journal of International Studies, Vol., 2005.
Margriet Drent, Rob Hendriks, and Dick Zandee, ""New Threats, New EU and NATO Responses,"" Netherlands Institute of International Relations, Clingendael Institute the Hague, the Netherlands, July 2015, 7, available from www.clingendael.nl/sites/default/files/New%20Threats_New%20EU_ Nato%o20Responses_Clingendael_July2015.pdf accessed on May 3, 2016.
NATO's Response to the 21st Century Security Environment,"" The NATO association of Canada, April 3, 2016, available from natoassociation.ca/adaptation-andassurance-natos-response-to-the-21st-century-security-environment/, accessed on May 3, 2016.
NATO Response Force,"" January 2016, available from www.shape.nato.int/page349011837, accessed on May 3, 2016.
Havard Sandvik, ""Two reasons why the NATO Spearhead still matters,"" Young Professionals in Foreign Policy, Brussels, December 3, 2015, available from www.ypfp.org/two_reasons_why_the_nato_spearhead_still_matters, accessed on May 3, 2016.
Brooks Tigner, ""NATO agrees to boost NRF, but lacks 'southern' strategy,"" jane’s Defense Weekly, October 9, 2015.
Richard Weitz, ""Russia vs. the new NATO,"" Russia Direct, September 12, 2014, available from www.russia-direct.org/opinion/russia-vs-new-nato, accessed on May 3, 2016.
Photo source, available from www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/news_112460.htm, accessed on May 23, 2016.
Jim Garamone, ""NATO Commander Breedlove Discusses Implications of Hybrid War,"" Small War Journal, March 15, 2015, available from smallwarsjournal.com/blog/nato-commander-breedlove-discussesimplications-of-hybrid-war, accessed on May 16, 2016.
Associated Press, ""New NATO Commander Says Military Alliance Still Vital,"" Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, May 4, 2016, available from www.rferl.mobi/a/nato-new-commander-says-alliance-stillvital/27716164.html, accessed on May 6, 2016.
Photo source, available from www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/topics_49755.htm, accessed on May 23, 2016.
Associated Press, ""Kremlin Creating New Military Divisions To Counter 'NATO Buildup',"" Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, May 4, 2016, available from www.rferl.mobi/a/russia-new-militarydivisions-nato/27715405.html, accessed on May 6, 2016.
Joe Biden, ""Remarks at the 45th Munich conference on security policy,"" 2009, available from www. whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/remarks-vice-president-biden-45thmunich-conference-security-policy, accessed on April 17, 2012.
European Council on Foreign Relations , October 2015, 13, available from www.ecfr. eu/page/-/Russias_Quiet_Military_Revolution.pdf, accessed on December 12, 2015.
Josh Rogin, ""US Reluctant to Disclose to All NATO Allies that Russia is Violating INF Treaty,"" The Atlantic Council, December 7, 2013, available from www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/natosource/us-disclosed-tosome-but-not-all-nato-allies-that-russia-violated-inf-treaty, accessed on December 12, 2015.
Russian Direct, November 11, 2015, available from www.russia-direct.org/opinion/russian-diaspora-tooTsoft-power, accessed on November 21,2015.
New Challenges Demand Rethinking the Forms and Methods of Carrying Out Combat Operations,"" Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer, February 26, 2013, available from vpk-news.ru/articles/14632, quoted in Timothy Thomas, ""Russia's Military Strategy & Ukraine: Indirect, Asymmetric — and Putin Led,"" Journal of Slavic Military Studies, Vol., September 2015, 454.
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2011, 100, available from carnegieendowment.org/pdf/book/post-imperium.pdf accessed on November 21, 2015.
Artem Kureev, ""The real reason why Russia finally left the CFE Treaty,"" Russia Direct, March 17, 2015, available from www.russia-direct.org/opinion/real-reason-why-russia-finally-left-cfe-treaty, accessed on December 12, 2015.
In Russia, Anti-Western Views and Support for Putin Surge,"" Washington, DC: Pew Research Center, June 2015, 28.
The National Interest, November 10, 2015, available from nationalinterest.org/blog/the-buzz/russias-economy-what-do-the-numbers-tellus-14300, accessed on December 13, 2015.
A Reassessment,"" Perspectives, Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2015, 21.
Discussion with Office of the Secretary of Defense -Policy personnel, telephone discussion, Washington, DC, November 2, 2015.
Henry R Nau, ""Obama's Foreign Policy,"" Policy Review, April-May 2010, 36.
How NATO Can Deter the 'Goliath' Russian Challenge to the Baltics,"" Small Wars journal, October 24, 2015, available from smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/five-smooth-stones-how-nato-can-deter-the%E2% 80%9Cgoliath%E2 % 80%9D-russian-challenge-to-the-baltics.
Interview with Rolands Henins, Director of Latvian Defense Policy, June 27, 2016.
Interview with Colonel Dalius Polekauskas, Chief of Staff of the Lithuanian Army, June 28, 2016.
Steven K Metz Project Leader Colonel Douglas Mastriano Editor for Production Dr.
