Lessons for EU‘s Foreign and Defence Policy INTRODUCTION BY ELISA LIRONI When the Ukrainian crisis started in strategy when dealing with European Policy and Advocacy 2013, with the EuroMaidan protestors security, defence and external action.
Officer at the Union of flooding the whole country from European Federalists east to west, the EU was baffled and In addition, the EU has taken measures uncertain on how to react.
After more to support the Ukrainian government than one year from its beginning, the in implementing economic and crisis has led the EU to take concrete political reforms.
Although many steps actions and rethink its relations with have been made, the EU’s support still Ukraine and Russia, but it has also falls short of what is required in terms revealed the limits of EU’s foreign and of financial assistance and helping security policy.
However, it has been to foster solid relations with its eastern unable to push Russia to withdraw neighbours, and analyse how to reits troops from eastern Ukraine and engage with Russia in a cooperative to completely respect the ceasefire, way.  nor to negotiate a stable long-term solution for the country and the region.
The crisis in Ukraine began in NovemTHE ANNEXATION OF CRIMEA BY EASTERN UKRAINE IS STILL UNSTABLE ber 2013 when Ukraine’s former PresTHE RUSSIAN FEDERATION REMAINS ident Viktor Yanukovych decided to A FACT After the annexation of Crimea, walk away from an EU Association pro-Russian insurgents, occupying arAgreement in favour of stronger ties In the beginning of March 2014, when eas in and around the east Ukrainian with Russia.
The Association AgreeRussian troops had already started occities Donetsk and Luhansk (part of the ment was meant to set up a framecupying Crimea, tensions increased Donbass region), also started calling work for EU-Ukraine bilateral relations, when a Crimean referendum on joinfor a referendum on independence. providing a deep political association ing the Russian Federation was supThe results of their secession referenand economic integration with muposedly backed by 97% of voters.
Mr Yanukthough the EU and the United States declared the by EU Member States, the US, Ukraine ovych’s refusal to sign the deal with vote illegal and to have taken place and Russia.
Air and sea links to DIFFICULTIES IN THE CEASEFIRE of the police and Crimea have been PERSIST the use of violence against journalists, badly affected, which has led to the Association Agreement became difficulty, for example, in delivering A first ceasefire agreed between secondary and the demonstrations food.
Furthermore, there are deep Ukraine and pro-Russian rebels in Sepstarted focusing on the resignation of concerns about Russia building militember 2014 in Minsk was violated four the Ukrainian president.
In February tary capabilities in Crimea making it days after it was signed.
The violations 2014, the peaceful demonstrations into a platform for power projection of the truce were found in different turned into a bloodbath with almost in the area.
Most importantly, Rusparts of eastern Ukraine mainly in the a hundred victims in 48 hours in Kiev sia has effectively annexed Crimea, surroundings of the Donetsk airport. alone.
This was merely the beginning breaching the national sovereignThe fierce battle for ground in the reof numerous tragedies which have ty of Ukraine and international law. gion intensified until a new ceasefire brought to a change in the geopoMeanwhile, EU Member States seem was proposed in February 20155 in the litical situation and an intensifying of to have acquiesced in the situation. hope that this time peace could be tensions between Russia and the EU. achieved.
Although the fighting largely stopped after the official ceaseOver one year after the events that fire, it continued in Debaltseve6 until ousted President Yanukovych and pro-Russian troops took the city.
Moreover, eastern countries as being within Mosthe EU needs to create a new solid cow’s sphere of influence and those neighbourhood strategy and find a Although the Association Agreement who consider them having a possicooperative way to reengage with was signed in June 2014, which is the ble Euro-Atlantic future.
EU Member Russia. first important step in EU-Ukraine reStates must go beyond nationalistic lations, the EU’s support for Ukraine thinking and start learning to speak has been rather slow.
The referendum ed. the continuous struggle against the was organised in three weeks without pro-Russians in the Donetsk and Lubeing supported by the Ukrainian gov3.
Deing economic criThe annexation of spite what people may believe, lansis.
The European Crimea was not guage should not automatically be “Any Russian attempt Union must keep a legal and did not regarded as a factor of division bestrong position on to create a frozen comply with intertween the Ukrainians and the pro-Rusall of these matters, conflict on Ukrainian national law. sians.
The EuroMaidan protestors were which have tragterritory should be not only Ukrainian speakers as some ically affected its condemned by the 2.
This by starting with the illegal equipment should debunk the myth that the Rusconsider federalism as firm condemnation from Ukrainian terrisian speaking population of Ukraine is a part of the solution for of certain actions tory and the respect unequivocally pro-Russian.
Moreover, taken by the Rusthe enhancement and of the ceasefire by the values of the Maidan were not only sian Federation. stabilisation process of all parties are manconcentrated in the Ukrainian capital, the Ukrainian state.” datory.
The violation of Ukraine’s territorial inmediate ceasefire, failed to stop the the solution for the enhancement and tegrity and the annexation of Crimea fighting in Donbass.
In February 2015, stabilisation process of the Ukrainian and Sevastopol by the Russian Federa new Minsk agreement was reached state, as it would allow to peacefully ation is unacceptable.
The referenthrough talks between Russian Presimanage conflicts and guarantee the dum held on the 16th of March 2014 dent Putin, Ukrainian President Poroprotection of minorities.  was organised by a self-proclaimed shenko, German Chancellor Merkel head of Crimea, Sergey Aksenov, and French President Hollande.
Once 4 | UEF May 2015 | REFLECTION PAPER THE EU’S ECONOMIC AND the Ukrainians build a modern country Furthermore, additional economic supPOLITICAL SUPPORT TO UKRAINE based on a functioning market econport will come from the International omy.
Ukraine’s economy has been unMonetary Fund in a new fourder pressure since the start of the crisis year economic reform programme The results of the Ukrainian elections on with Russia threatening to impose sancto help Ukraine’s economic stabilisa26 October, with the victory of three tions and cuts to gas supplies.
Although it low state-controlled prices and marAlthough the EU has is ambitious, EU ofket prices.
However, energy arbitrage internal economic troubles of its own to ficials have declared themselves ophas also been one of the worst sourcdeal with, investing in Ukraine’s future is timistic because the Ukrainians have es of corruption for Ukraine.
Hence, in of uttermost importance not only for Eudemonstrated their commitment to the current situation, the main reform ropean security but also for European reform by maintaining strong fiscal disfrom the new Ukrainian government fundamental values, as the Ukrainians cipline, adopting a flexible exchange could consist of raising energy prices fought and are fighting for them. rate regime and fighting corruption to the international market level and and money laundering. eliminating fuel subsidies.
At the same The EU’s financial assistance must fotime, various reforms should be made cus on the reconstruction of Ukrainian Second, the EU should also focus on in order to solve the country’s public infrastructures and support the reformgiving political support to Ukraine’s redebt problem since the current budget ing of the country’s energy sector by forms and stabilisation process, espedeficit is unsustainable and expanding also dismantling oligarchs’ networks. cially on the fight against corruption, rapidly.
This would mean simplifying the The adoption of the EU-Ukraine Associon decentralisation and on reform of current tax system, decentralising pubation Agreement on 27 June 2014 is to the justice and security sectors.
Ukraine lic finances to regions and local aube considered the first important step should not only be a recipient of aid, thorities and introducing competitive forward in this direction and should but mostly a place where investment public procurement to open public be encouraged with a full and rapid is possible and considered an opportenders for both Ukrainians and foreign implementation of the agreement, as tunity.
If the new government is comcompanies. well as a prompt ratification by all EU mitted to tackling corruption, then it Member States.
With this agreement, must take into consideration building Ukraine will not manage to apply ambithe EU officially commits itself to supnew institutions from scratch, reforming tious reforms on its own.
This is why the porting Ukraine in its transformation public administration with ministers who EU has an important role in supporting into a modern democracy by giving are both accountable and responsible the economic and political reforms it political support and establishing an and building a strong civil sector where needed for Ukraine’s stabilisation proeconomic and financial cooperation civil servants are paid a decent wage cess. which will ultimately lead to Deep and in order to exclude briberies.
Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFFirst, the EU should provide the necesTA), on 1 January 2016.11 As for the Ukrainian people’s safety, the sary financial assistance in the order launch of the EU Advisory Mission for of a ‘Marshall Plan’ for Ukraine, to reCivilian Security Sector Reform Ukraine build stability and peace.
The EU and in July 2014, a civilian European governments should help 5 | UEF May 2015 | REFLECTION PAPER mission under the EU’s Common Securileft the streets, they did not stop being The EU should encourage them to proty and Defence Policy, has been highly engaged.
According to several intermote exchanges and people mobility welcomed and will support the Ukrainviews, civic and neighbourhood organbetween Ukraine and the EU Member ian authorities in civilian security sector isations continued their work by being States, acknowledging the fact that it reform and help strengthen the rule of more institutionalised through a strongwill be Ukraine’s younger generation of law. er and more coordinated civil society pro-democracy activists who will play a sector.
These professionalised networks fundamental role in bringing change to It is of fundamental importance that the and civil assemblies which have been their current conditions.
RESTRUCTURING THE EU’S CFSP AND Baltic States have stressed their conthe lack of interoperability of capabiliCSDP cerns about the situation, especially ties in certain aspects.
If the EU aspires because the Kremlin could one day to have influence on the global levThe Ukrainian crisis and Russia’s provtarget their large ethnic Russian comel, Member States should go beyond ocations to EU Member States have munities. national interests by empowering EU clearly shown the lack of rapid Euroinstitutions in assuming a leading role pean response and the EU’s inability to It is high-time EU leaders realise that and adopting a comprehensive apcounter external threats.
In response NATO cannot be the only security proach to ensure the coherent use to the annexation of Crimea and the provider in Europe.
If the main goal of all tools in the fields of diplomacy, crisis in eastern Ukraine, the EU and the should be to make enlargement, deUS have imposed a series of sanctions European citizens “It is high-time EU fence (with the on Russia, mainly by targeting key secsafe, only the enpossibility of creatleaders realise that tors of the Russian economy, which hancement of the ing one European NATO cannot be the are closely linked to the ruling elite.
Common Foreign single army), develAlthough the sanctions are sending and Security Policy only security provider opment, humania strong signal to Mr Putin and his alwill enable in Europe. only tarian assistance, lies, it remains doubtful to what extent the EU to act as the enhancement of trade and all the they can be considered an effective a security providthe CFSP will enable other sectors linked method of solving the Ukrainian crisis. er and to restore the EU to act as a to EU foreign policy.
Until now, the Russian President has trust in the EU and In this regard, it is security provider and overlooked both the sanctions and among Member important to comto restore trust in the EU the diplomatic efforts of the EU, which States. plete the Economhas led to an escalation of the conand among Member ic and Monetary flict in south-eastern Ukraine.
The EaP is a multo re-engage with Russia in order to The difficulties in the EaP were caused tilateral forum built in the framework end this period of instability.
It is time to by a lack of political leadership over of the European Neighbourhood Polrethink the security architecture of the the project.
The EU’s actual ambition icy , which was created in 2004 European continent and finally agree to modify the situation in the post-Sowith the aim of supporting the deep on a common EU strategy towards viet space was very low and while structural transformation of EU partner Russia based on international law and Mr Putin had a clear idea of what he countries by promoting international institutions.
More for example by supporting its memprecisely, the ENP its instruments and an countries’ intebership of the G8 and its entry to the enhancing its credibility gration with the EU. can allow partner World Trade Organisation.
As much as countries to have by overcoming the the EU has put Russia at the centre of The EU needs to better access to image of a simply its activities, this approach appeared rebuild the framethe EU’s internal techno-bureaucratic work of the EaP to have failed since President Putin market through the seems to have led the country today scheme without any by strengthening Deep and Compreto be more internally autocratic and political project behind its instruments and hensive Free Trade externally aggressive than ever.
Area and it.” enhancing its credibility by overcomalthough accession Increased re-engagement with Russia ing the image of a to the EU is not promised, it can be could help the transition of the country simply techno-bureaucratic scheme considered a step towards EU memto move from the current political situwithout any political project behind bership. ation, with its strong sense of nationalit.
This means an EaP fully supported ism, to more consolidated democraby the EU and its Member States, with The EaP, launched in 2009 between cy.
Mr Putin’s hostility and fears may a stronger leadership of the EU and a the EU, EU Member States and the be based on the fact that not only deeper engagement with other intereastern European partner countries, former Soviet countries like Ukraine but national actors.
The High Representawas created to give the ENP a more also the Russian people will one day tive of the Union for Foreign Affairs & specific regional approach.
It was a realise that liberal democracy with Security Policy/Vice-President of the Polish initiative, as Poland was conmarket economy can be an alternaEuropean Commission must continue cerned about the dangers in its neightive to autocratic regimes.
Hence, as exploring on how to reframe this funbourhood and saw this framework as much as economic sanctions may damental EU tool and to make it a a way to stabilise Ukraine and othbe a way of pushing back Mr Putin’s viable economic and political project er countries in the region.
In order of European defence capabilities. ern neighbours, until now it has been to do so, the EU must continue cona weak tool lacking strong political demning Russia’s behaviour when The EU can help the Ukrainian governleadership from EU Member States. it breaks international law, as in the ment implement economic and politiThe project has been seen as a techcase of the annexation of Crimea.
First, the EU can no-bureaucratic scheme with its Euis important to insist on the full withprovide financial assistance, through ropean politicians prioritising bilateral drawal of Russian forces and illegal the Association Agreement and the relations with external countries, inequipment from Ukrainian territory, IMF, to assure that Ukraine reaches cluding Russia.
It is high time the EU reurging for the respect of the ceaseeconomic growth and is more attracthinks its strategy in foreign policy and fire by all actors involved.
At the same tive on the European and global level. realises that it will not manage to be time, the EU should stop relying only Second, the EU will constantly need to a credible global player if it does not on NATO and start restructuring its support Ukraine politically, especiallearn to speak with one single voice.  foreign and security policy by overly in tackling corruption and reformcoming the intergovernmental mething the justice and security sectors. od in this field, assuring that the Union 8 | UEF May 2015 | REFLECTION PAPER REFERENCES 1.
We have some ideas how to deal with www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-27308526 Russian propaganda, EurActiv, 2 December 2014, www.euractiv.com/sections/eu8.
What have we learned in the year since ropes-east/hahn-we-have-some-ideas-how2.
Russia is turning Crimea into a forward operUkraine’s EuroMaidan?, The Washington Post, deal-russia-propaganda-310477 ating base against NATO, Business Insider UK, 26 November 2014, www.washingtonpost.
An economic strategy to save Ukraine, Kyiv may be ‘considerably higher’ – UN, 23 Janpost, 14 November 2014, www.kyivpost.com/ 16.
