Then, in June 2016, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan apologised and called for the two countries to patch things up.Andrew Roth and Erin Cunningham, “Turkish president apologizes for downing of Russian warplane last year”, The Washington Post, 27 June 2016.
Hide Footnote Russian President Vladimir Putin’s support for Erdoğan in the aftermath of the July 2016 coup attempt paved the way for rapprochement.
In 2016, when the downing of the Su-24 and Russia-Turkey relations hitting rock bottom coincided with a flare-up of the Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh, Moscow and Ankara avoided a broader escalation over the disputed enclave.The April 2016 escalation saw the deadliest fighting between Armenian and Azerbaijani forces since the 1994 ceasefire.
New Opening or More Peril?, 4 July 2016; and N°244, Nagorno-Karabakh’s Gathering War Clouds, 1 June 2017.
Hide Footnote In other areas, too, cooperation perhaps could contribute to greater stability.
Preventing Another War in Syria, 7 February 2018; and N°187, Keeping the Calm in Southern Syria, 21 June 2018; as well as Crisis Group Middle East Briefings N°47, Russia’s Choice in Syria, 30 March 2016; N°49, Steps Toward Stabilising Syria’s Northern Border, 8 April 2016; N°53, Fighting ISIS: The Road to and Beyond Raqqa, 28 April 2017; and N°56, Averting Disaster in Syria’s Idlib Province, 9 February 2018.
Hide Footnote Turkey’s downing of the Russian plane in November that year marked a low point in Turkey-Russia relations.
Crisis Group Middle East Report N°176, The PKK’s Fateful Choice in Northern Syria, 4 May 2017.
Russian bombing raids in February 2016, for example, allowed the YPG to capture the town of Tel Rifaat in the Aleppo governorate from Ahrar al-Sham, a militia supported by Turkey.
Turkish exports to Russia shrank by 40 per cent while Russia saw a decrease of only 19 per cent.
Hide Footnote The slump was even more dramatic in sectors such as tourism and construction, given that Russian gas exports, accounting for the bulk of overall commerce, continued without restrictions.
In early 2014, massive anti-government demonstrations, known as the Maidan revolution, and clashes between protesters and security forces in the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv, prompted Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych, a Kremlin ally, to flee the country.Crisis Group Europe Report N°231, Ukraine Running Out of Time, 14 May 2014.
Hide Footnote Moscow labelled Yanukovych’s ouster a coup, and shortly afterward annexed Crimea, where a referendum on whether to join Russia was held on 16 March 2014.
After Russian authorities had initially attempted, without much success, to co-opt the Mejlis, in April 2016, Crimea’s Supreme Court outlawed the body as an “extremist organisation”, pointing to its links with Turkish ultra-nationalist groups such as the Grey Wolves as well as the pan-Islamist Hizb ut-Tahrir.The Russian Federation’s Supreme Court confirmed the ruling on 29 September 2016.
Hide Footnote Moscow also has pursued a divide-and-rule strategy toward the Tatars.
Erdoğan negotiates release of Crimean Tatar leaders imprisoned by Russia”, Eurasia Net, 26 October 2017.
Hide Footnote Their release suggests Turkey’s quiet diplomacy and persistence can pay off – at least on some issues.
When Erdoğan slammed Putin for commemorating the centennial of the Armenian genocide in late April 2015, he pointed to Russia’s invasion of Crimea and interference in Donbas.Semih Idiz, “Russia’s recognition of Armenian genocide strains ties with Turkey”, Al-Monitor, 28 April 2015.
Little Russia’ proclamation violates Ukraine’s territorial integrity, foreign ministry says”, Daily Sabah, 20 July 2017.
Hide Footnote Moreover, while Moscow uses the Donbas conflict as leverage to keep Kyiv in check, Ankara prefers a stronger Ukraine which could act as an ally in the region.
After March 2014, Russia’s de facto coastline grew from 475km to 1,200km or about 25 per cent of the sea’s total shorefront.That does not count the 300km of coastline belonging to Abkhazia, a region that broke away from Georgia in 1999 and declared independence.
Russia deployed S-300 batteries to this region when reinforcing its military presence in Crimea.
Crisis Group interview, de facto Abkhazian official, Sukhumi, August 2017.
For more about the Russian military presence in Abkhazia, see David Batashvili, “Russia troop deployments menace Georgia”, Civil.ge, 4 April 2017.
Hide Footnote That nearly equals the length of Turkey’s shore, which is 1,785km or about 35 per cent of the total coastline.
For now, Turkey acknowledges Russia’s advantage, and avoids direct confrontation even as it deepens cooperation with Azerbaijan and Georgia.During Russia’s short war against Georgia over South Ossetia in August 2008, Ankara chose not to directly challenge Moscow, despite its close ties to Georgia.
Erdoğan opted for conciliation, through the Caucasus Stability and Cooperation Platform aimed at restarting multilateral dialogue, and sought to keep the United States away from the Black Sea to avoid escalation.Hide Footnote While broader Russia-Turkey rapprochement is unlikely to signal major shifts in a region in which the two countries largely compete, it might offer opportunities to reduce risks of another flare-up between Armenia and Azerbaijan over the contested enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh.
New Opening or More Peril?, op. cit.Hide Footnote The escalation, facilitated by Baku’s beefed-up military capabilities, unleashed a war of words between Russia and Turkey at a time when the Su-24 downing had already soured relations.
In 2007-2009, Russia supported Turkey’s and Armenia’s “football diplomacy”, culminating in the effort to normalise ties and unblock the border that Ankara closed in 1993 in connection to the war over Nagorno-Karabakh.Technically, the border was never open; there was only one weekly train between Kars and Gyumri in Soviet times.
In April 1994, Ankara decided not to sign the protocol that would have opened the border.Hide Footnote That temporary thaw between Yerevan and Ankara led to the October 2009 signing of the two Zurich protocols, which envisaged the normalisation of diplomatic relations between the two countries and the opening of the Turkey-Armenia border.
He is broadly seen as espousing a tough stance on Nagorno-Karabakh and unwilling to consider any return of land to Azerbaijan, Ankara’s main precondition for continuing its process of normalising relations with Yerevan and a non-negotiable requirement for any rapprochement with Baku.Eduard Abrahamyan, “Pashinyan stiffens Armenia’s posture toward Karabakh”, Eurasia Daily Monitor, 10 May 2018.
Armenia ready to establish diplomatic relations with Turkey”, NEWS.am, 9 May 2018.
Hide Footnote He also mentioned his determination to press for “international recognition of Armenian genocide” – massacres that took place on the territory of present Turkey a century ago, another sticking point between Yerevan and Ankara, which denies the events amounted to genocide.Ibid.Hide Footnote Ankara has reacted cautiously to Pashinyan.
During a talk at Chatham House, a London think tank, Erdoğan appealed to the Armenian government to show “common sense” and work for the region’s stability.Ayla Jean Yackley, “Erdoğan calls for ‘common sense’ from new Armenian government”, Eurasia Net, 17 May 2018.
MHP leader Bahceli hails ‘historic’ success in Turkey’s elections”, Hürriyet Daily News, 25 June 2018.
Hide Footnote Besides, he is more likely to expend political capital with nationalists over the more pressing Kurdish issue rather than opening a second front over Armenia.
Hide Footnote Deterring the sides from the use of force and even pushing behind the scenes for substantive and honest discussions of a possible peace deal might be feasible.
Turkish companies have done business in Chechnya despite being subjected to forms of pressure and extortion by the republican leadership.Crisis Group interview, Russian expert, May 2017.
Hide Footnote In an apparent quid pro quo, Russia abstained from supporting the PKK; in late 1998, it refused PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan asylum, shortly before his capture by Turkish commandos in Kenya.
Mairbek Vatchagaev, “Another Chechen emigré murdered in Turkey”, Eurasia Daily Monitor, 6 March 2015.
New frictions in Iraq and Syria threaten Ankara and Tehran’s usually peaceful management of their Middle East rivalries.
To rebuild trust and avert open conflict, they should coordinate de-escalation, exchange intelligence and designate representatives to open a new channel between their leaders.
For nearly two centuries and despite their fierce geopolitical competition from the Levant to Iraq and the Caucasus, Turkey and Iran have kept the peace between themselves, compartmentalised growing energy and commercial relations and even cooperated regionally when their interests converged.
Yet today, while their economies are increasingly intertwined, a profound disagreement over core interests in Iraq and Syria is putting these two former empires on a collision course.
Overlapping ethnicities and cultures can at times make the two countries seem like two sides of the same coin, but Iran is a leading regional proponent of both Shiite Islam and theocratic governance, while Turkey’s secular constitution is built on a bedrock of Sunni Islamic practice.
As their officials and diplomats attest, Turkey and Iran generally concur on the strength of the relationship they have carefully nurtured during a long history of cohabitation.
Their inability to accommodate each other has the potential to undermine or even undo their strong ties.
Both have empowered local partners and proxies on the battlefields of Mosul, Tel Afar, Aleppo and Raqqa that are forcefully positioning themselves to control whatever emerges from the debris of today’s wars.
Though both have attempted to build on shared interests – defeating or at least marginalising Islamic State and curbing the rise of autonomy-minded Syrian Kurds – deep suspicions about the other’s ambitions to benefit from the chaos have stopped them from reaching an arrangement that could lower the flames.
The dynamics instead point toward deepening sectarian tensions, greater bloodshed, growing instability across the region and greater risks of direct – even if inadvertent – military confrontation between them where their spheres of influence collide.
The possibility that an Iranian-made drone killed four Turkish soldiers in northern Syria on 24 November 2016, as Ankara alleges, points toward perilous escalation.
To reverse course and avoid worse, they need to overcome mutual mistrust.
To this end, and as a pressing priority, they should establish a channel for continuous high-level negotiations over their regional postures.
President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan of Turkey and Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei of Iran should designate personal representatives with the authority to manage the diplomatic channel.
If they do this, and to demonstrate seriousness and goodwill, the governments should also take confidence-building steps, from more intelligence cooperation to coordinated de-escalation where conflict is most acute.
In northern Iraq, Iran might thus offer as a first step to rein in Shiite militias deployed in Ninewa governorate, even as units nominally accountable to the Iraqi prime minister in his capacity as commander-in-chief, in return for Turkey agreeing to withdraw its tanks and other heavy weapons from the area.
Confidence-building measures, if well executed, could pave the way for agreed principles of good neighbourliness, mutual recognition of each other’s core interests and legitimate security concerns in the region and an articulation of clear red lines with respect to actions each deems hostile.
The United States and Russia, which have strong military ties with Turkey and Iran respectively, as well as in each case disagreements and conflicting interests, should support such steps.
For now, Turkey and Iran remain caught in the web of RussiaUnited States relations, manoeuvring to create space for autonomous decisions; they will be able to succeed only to the extent they find a way to work together.
Only by finding common ground can Turkey and Iran contribute to a more stable and secure region.
De-escalation and increased Ankara-Tehran cooperation are necessary but insufficient to resolve the metastasising, intersecting crises involving many actors and heightened sectarian passions.
Electoral calendars in both countries and the imperatives of domestic politics and balancing ties with regional partners wary of a rapprochement could hinder progress.
But the effort would be important and should be pursued; it could at least help reduce the sectarian tensions fanned by unhelpful rhetoric from both leaderships.
The alternative – crystallised in the zero-sum dynamic that marks Iran’s relations with the region’s other major Sunni power, Saudi Arabia – is even greater disorder and suffering.
As two of the region’s strongest non-Arab states, with similar geographic and demographic sizes and tradition of statehood, Turkey and Iran have not perceived one another as an existential threat.
Yet, their myriad social, political, religious and ethnic differences have often pitted them against each other, as has geostrategic orientation, particularly Turkey’s ties with the United States and Israel and Iran’s hostility toward both.Turkey has spent most of the past century writing European laws into its statute books in support of explicitly republican, secular constitutions, while Iran has experienced first absolute monarchy and then theocratic rule.
Nearly a quarter of Iran’s population are ethnic Azeris, who speak a Turkic mother tongue.
NATO radar in Turkey serves to protect Israel”, Associated Press, 5 October 2011; “Leader’s advisor: Iran should reconsider relations with Turkey”, Mehr News, 28 April 2016.
Hide Footnote However, they also share deep historic, cultural and economic ties.
Over the past two decades, their economies have become increasingly intertwined.
Iran supplies nearly a fifth of Turkey’s oil and natural gas; Turkey is its neighbour’s gateway to Europe, with more than a fifth of Iran’s land trade transiting its territory.
This link became a lifeline for Iran during its most vulnerable recent periods, the 1980-1988 war with Iraq and the peak of nuclear sanctions in 2011-2013.
According to Turkey’s Petroleum Pipeline Corporation , Iran is Turkey’s main gas provider after Russia, some ten billion cubic metres annually, while after Iraq, Iran is Turkey’s largest oil supplier.
Between March 2014 and March 2015, more than 110,000 trucks carried goods through the Bazargan border post, compared to nearly 45,000 crossing Iran’s border with Afghanistan during that period.
With Iran’s economy unburdened from nuclear-related sanctions due to the 2015 nuclear accord, both countries appear committed to boosting their nearly $10 billion bilateral trade, while fencing off their geostrategic differences.Data from Turkish Statistical Institute.
Bilateral trade peaked at $21. billion in 2012, mostly from a twelve-fold increase in Turkish gold exports.
Onur Ant, “Iran, secret gold and the mystery trade boosting Turkish exports”, Bloomberg, 13 April 2015.
Crisis Group interviews, Mohammad Ebrahim Taherian, Iran’s ambassador to Turkey; Mesut Özcan, director, Diplomatic Academy, Turkish foreign ministry, both Ankara, 4 April 2016.
The former might draw them closer, the latter could drive them further apart – while uncertainty over the fate of the nuclear deal under the incoming United States administration, which appears keen on curbing Tehran’s regional influence, underlines their economic link’s vital importance and casts a shadow over their overall relationship.
The KDPI and another group, Komalah, continued low-level insurgency until 1996, when they put down their arms.
In dealing with pan-Kurdish nationalist sentiment, Iran and Turkey have often cooperated, but they have been at loggerheads for the past five years.Between 1991 and 2003, the two, along with Syria, consulted closely to prevent emergence of an autonomous Kurdish region in Iraq.
In 1998, Iran mediated between Turkey and Syria, which were on the verge of military confrontation over the latter’s sheltering of PKK leader Abdallah Öcalan and his fighters.
Tehran backs Barzani’s rival, Jalal Talabani’s Patriotic Union of Kurdistan , the Movement for Change and the PKK, which has expanded its presence in northern Iraq, including Sinjar and south of Kirkuk.
Even if Iran and the PKK share a short-term tactical interest in defeating IS while consolidating ties with partners and affiliates in Iraq and Syria, their long-term interests do not align.
The former seeks to preserve the existing order; the latter strives to overturn it to carve out a Kurdish state.
Kurdish-Iranian leader has eyes on ultimate goal”, Middle East Eye, 1 October 2016; Ali Hashem, “Iranian Kurds fighting IS in Iraq put Tehran on alert”, Al-Monitor, 28 November 2016.
Hide Footnote That confidence may well be inflated, and their pursuit of further territorial objectives could put them on a collision course with Turkey and Iran if and when IS is dislodged from the places it currently holds.
Despite their long relationship, Turkey and Iran harbour deep mutual mistrust.
Suspicions are evident even in the bilateral economic realm.In the mid-2000s, Iranian authorities annulled major contracts with Turkey’s TAV Airports Holding and TurkCell communications that threatened vested interests of powerful stakeholders in Iran.
The two also bitterly disputed the price of Iran’s natural gas exports.
A preferential trade deal, ten years in negotiation, was widely criticised in Iran as undermining domestic industries in 2015.
Iran decries Turkey’s active support of the opposition in its attempt to bring down the Syrian regime, thus endangering Iran’s strategic link with Hizbollah in Lebanon, and accuses it of supporting Sunni jihadist groups in Syria and allowing IS recruits to transit its territory on their way to Syria and Iraq.
It deems these developments a direct threat to the stability of its borders with Syria and Iraq and the area’s Sunni inhabitants.
After nearly three years of mutual escalation in Syria, a second chance for Turco-Iranian dialogue appeared following the July 2016 failed coup in Turkey.
Quoted in “Iran’s foreign minister boosts ties during Ankara visit”, Voice of America, 12 August 2016.
Hide Footnote Turkish-Russian reconciliation, fuelled in part by YPG advances in northern Syria, probably also contributed to Ankara’s rethinking of its Syria policy.
Assad’s fate.Describing the motivation behind Turkey’s deployment of forces in Syria, Erdoğan said, “we do not have an eye on Syrian soil.
Hide Footnote Tehran continued to insist that a swift transition away from Assad before stabilising the country would lead to state collapse and chaos that could only benefit Sunni jihadists.
Hide Footnote But after two high-level rounds, Turkey’s military intervention in northern Syria, Operation Euphrates Shield, disrupted the talks and exacerbated mistrust.
With each failure to find an accommodation, the context of Turkey’s and Iran’s rivalry has become more complex and disagreements more intractable.
What they have in common in Syria is that neither can tolerate a divided country or complete disorder.
While Turkey would like to see Assad gone and a more inclusive Sunni-led order emerge in Damascus that would be friendlier, its absolute priority is to have a stable border and a curb on PKK-led Kurdish aspirations.
Both seek to preserve Iraq’s territorial integrity as well, but ensuring Shiite-majority rule is as critical for Iran as a more inclusive role for Sunnis in governance is for Turkey.
For now, there are more reasons to believe the two will persist on their current path than change course.
The looming United States transition is another incentive for Turkey and Iran to create as many facts on the ground as possible before a new administration sets its Iraq and Syria policies.
This may explain the Russian-Iranian-Syrian push to subdue east Aleppo and Turkey’s attempt to establish a de facto safe zone in northern Syria.
Equally important may be the domestic appeal of bold nationalistic rhetoric in the run-up to the constitutional referendum on whether to grant Erdoğan more executive powers, anticipated in mid-2017, and Iran’s May presidential election.
Rivalry has exposed the limits of Turkey’s and Iran’s power projection instead of expanding their clout.
Hide Footnote Iran has shouldered the burden of military protection and financial support of a pivotal ally at risk, at the price of incurring the Sunni world’s enmity.
Inability to work together has diminished their ability to influence extra-regional partners that instead of taking their interests into account have tried to contain their aspirations.
Ultimately Turkey and Iran, as neighbours, will have to live with the outcome of the conflicts now burning around them.
Any sustainable solution will require a regional power balance tolerable for both.
This can only be achieved if they cooperate, rein in their proxies and recognise one another’s core strategic and security interests in Syria and Iraq.
Today’s geostrategic competition between Turkey and Iran is the latest iteration of an old power game, but with an increasingly ominous twist as they warily eye each other’s moves in Iraq and Syria, prime their proxies and, in Turkey’s case, prepare to escalate direct military involvement.
How the two choose to deploy their power, with whom they align and whether they can manage or overcome their differences is vitally important not only to them, but also to their neighbours and other states with a stake in the Middle East.
Among the actors involved in the region’s wars, however, no two are more suited to identify ways toward renewed mutual accommodation than Turkey and Iran.
They have extensive communication channels and long experience in striking geostrategic deals, engage in intensive trade and importantly share a core interest in preserving their neighbours’ territorial integrity.
As the region’s conflicts worsen, the future becomes more unpredictable, with no actor insulated from potential harm.
Today’s seductive opportunities may become tomorrow’s smothering traps.
It should be an interest of those that have the ability, maturity and long history of peaceful relations not to allow themselves to be sucked further into an uncertain future but to agree to a critical course correction that, while not settling all conflicts, could at least help lessen overall tensions.
The United States and Russia should adopt a coherent, supportive approach toward the two regional powers and their conflicting aspirations for primacy, pressing their respective allies to take steps that can help avoid an escalation that would be in neither Russian nor United States interests.
In sum, Turkey and Iran need to set in motion a virtuous dynamic that, by enabling negotiation of a sustainable modus vivendi, could stabilise their relationship and start reducing the flames burning in the region.
This requires difficult reciprocal concessions and confidence-building steps but would protect their interests far better than continuation of a highly unstable and unpredictable status quo or, worse still, escalation and direct military confrontation.
