Ukraine has accused Russia of waging a disinformation war to create social unrest; the population’s attitudes toward Russia has hardened over the past five years, with about two-thirds of the population viewing Russia as an aggressor.
And the outcome remains difficult to predict, with polls indicating that the none of the three front-runners — the incumbent Petro Poroshenko, the political veteran Yulia Tymoshenko and the comedian-turned-politician Volodymyr Zelensky — are on a clear path to victory.
Here’s what to know about how each of them might impact Ukraine-Russia relations.
A Poroshenko presidency is the most ‘comfortable’ and ‘convenient’ choice for the Kremlin, says Leschenko.
There is “little hope of the status quo changing” if Poroshenko is re-elected, says Mikhail Minakov, Principal Investigator at a research center, the Kennan Institute and editor-in-chief of Focus Ukraine, the institute’s Ukraine focused blog.
Now, he no longer gives a time frame for ceasefire and the Kremlin said it refuses to talk with Ukraine until there is a change in leadership.
Despite Poroshenko vowing to demolish the system of crony capitalism that flourished under Viktor Yanukovych and his predecessor, the culture of impunity surrounding corrupt elites continues to thrive.
Ordinary Ukrainians are stuck at a monthly average wage of $350 and one in six Ukrainians of working age migrate to Europe to work either temporarily or full time.
And according to the Razumkov Center, 76 percent of Ukrainians think the country is headed in the wrong direction.
The politically fierce Tymoshenko presents herself as someone who can bring Russia back to the negotiating table, says Korbut, the Chatham House analyst.
Once the hero of a 2004 popular uprising against election fraud, nicknamed the “gas princess” for her 2009 gas deal with Russia, and imprisoned for two and half years by Yanukovych, Tymoshenko has a strong political reputation.
She served as Prime Minister for eight months in 2005, and just over 2 years between 2007 and 2010.
She recently proposed a new format of negotiations, the ‘Budapest Plus’ — for ending the war in Donbas and returning Crimea to Ukraine — by holding talks with leaders from the U.S., France, Germany, the E.U., China and Russia.
Korbut says the talks could give Russia the chance to make concessions without looking weak, including indirectly allowing Russia to exit Donbas while saving face.
And in Ukraine, the dream of E.U. membership remains strong, with at least half the population in favor.
The fresh-faced Zelensky, 41, appeals to many Ukrainians who are tired of the political class.
But with his political experience confined to playing the president in a popular TV show and his stance on Russia unclear, many analysts fear he could enter into an agreement that favors Russia more than Ukraine.
The comment prompted criticism, with some denouncing his views on Ukraine’s sovereignty.
This is beneficial to the Kremlin,” says Irina Busygina, a professor at Moscow’s Higher School of Economics.
The Kremlin wants to make an example out of Ukraine to Russians watching at home.
Against this backdrop, Russia’s current course would look safe and stable.
His approval ratings have recently dropped to a 13 year-low of 64 percent amid increasing frustrations over inflation, falling wages and a reduction in social welfare, according to the Levada Center, a Moscow-based independent polling agency.
It marks a steep decline from his approval ratings of 89 percent following the annexation of Crimea.
In July 2018, 40 percent of respondents said the government was going in the wrong direction, up from 14 percent in May 2014.
As long as Putinism is alive, Russia will try to control Ukraine, says Russian political scientist Andrei Piontkovsky.
But most Ukrainians are unwilling to sacrifice their government’s independence.
Putin seems determined not to make any deals that would enhance Ukraine’s sovereignty, and Ukraine won’t make any deal to diminish sovereignty.
That means the only way to end the stalemate would be if Ukraine’s next president chooses to redefine the red lines.
