The president of Russia called the Kerch tragedy as a result of shootings in United States schools.
Ukraine will not be able to conduct joint training with NATO in the Sea of ​​Azov, as this requires the consent of the RF, Lavrov.
Vice Prime Minister of Italy has promised in Russia to say no to sanctions.
Russia in 2016 became the world leader in ""modern slavery"" the Council of Europe.
Russians will be imprisoned for violating the rules of entry into Ukraine.
Bloomberg spoke about new sanctions that the United States is preparing against Russia.
Canada strongly condemns ""insidious act of violence against young people"" in occupied Kerch.
President of the country-aggressor Vladimir Putin said that Russia is ready to use nuclear weapons only after it is convinced that a potential enemy strikes on it.
According to Putin, young people "" grab this surrogate of heroism "" because they do not create ""the necessary, interesting and useful content "" and accuses globalization and the Internet of this.
In social networks, the Internet community set goals"" , he said. -Recall that on October 17, an explosion at the Polytechnic College broke out in Kerch in a Russian-occupied Crimea.
At first, there were 10 dead and 50 wounded. -A version of a possible gas explosion appeared in the media, but later the Russian authorities announced a terrorist attack by blasting an explosive device. -Witnesses said that in addition to the explosion they heard shooting , some allegedly saw people with automatic machines.
It was also reported that three suspects were detained and another wanted. -Later it was reported that the body of the alleged executor of the terrorist attack was found in the building.
Suppose he committed suicide. -Due to events in Kerch Ukraine has stepped up security measures on the border with Crimea.
Poroshenko expressed condolences to the Ukrainians who lost their loved ones. -The number of victims as a result of the explosion and firing at the college of occupied Kerch has increased to 21.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov considers it unrealistic to carry out exercises of ships of Ukraine and NATO in the Azov Sea.
According to the head of the Russian Foreign Ministry, NATO's actions on Russian borders are provocative.
The Russian Foreign Minister also added that the placement of an American division on a permanent basis in Poland would be a direct violation of the NATO-Russia Basic Act, and Russia will monitor such processes, because it concerns its security.
Recall Ukraine intensified the grouping of the Armed Forces in the Azov direction in response to the aggressive actions of the Russian Federation.
At the meeting of September 6, the National Security and Defense Council approved a package of measures aimed at protecting national interests in the southern regions, waters of the Azov and Black Seas.
In particular, it is about strengthening the naval presence in the Azov Sea, creating a ship-naval grouping of the Navy of the Armed Forces, developing the appropriate infrastructure, providing coast defense units with the latest high-precision rocket weapons, etc.
The death toll in the slaughter at the Polytechnic College in the Russian-occupied Crimea's Kerch has reached 21 people.
According to other media reports, a girl has also died after the attack.
As reported, an explosion hit the Polytechnic College in the Russian-occupied Crimea's Kerch on Wednesday.
Some 18 people were killed and at least 50 wounded, when an unidentified explosive device detonated.
Witnesses reported the terror attack and automatic shooting in the college.
With such a statement, he spoke during a business conference in Moscow on Wednesday, reports Reuters.
The EU introduced economic sanctions against Russia in 2014 after the annexation of the Crimea and incitement to the conflict in the Donbas.
Leaders are expected to vote for an extension of economic sanctions against Russia for another six months at the next EU summit, which will be held on December 13, and Italy may offer a proposal to finance the Russian small business as a condition for supporting the prolongation of sanctions.
As the Cenzor.NET, outlined in a statement to the press service of the State Duma.
The State Duma states that the historic responsibility for the course of the rupture of Russian-Ukrainian relations lies with the leadership of modern Ukraine.
According to the Council of Europe, in Russia in the so-called ""modern slavery"" 8 million people were kept.
The term"" modern slavery ""is increasingly used to identify a wide range of human rights violations, including sexual exploitation, forced labor, detention , domestic violence, trafficking in human beings, and the exploitation of children and forced marriage, ""the Council of Europe said.
Statistics of the Council of Europe indicate that in 2016, 16. million people were registered in the world, whose terms were subject to the term ""modern slavery"", of which about 15 million are in Europe, including 8 million in Russia. -Recall that in September 2018 in the Carpathian region detained a gang that forced more than 30 people into labor slavery.
The same acts committed repeatedly or by a group of persons shall be punishable by imprisonment for a term of 3 to 5 years, and for the illegal crossing of the Ukrainian border with the use of weapons, shall be imprisoned for a term of 5 to 8 years.
The law is to be signed by the Verkhovna Rada Speaker and the President of Ukraine.
It should be noted that entry into the temporarily occupied territories of Luhansk, Donetsk and Crimea through closed entry points in uncontrolled areas of Ukraine is also a violation of Ukrainian legislation.
Recall that from the beginning of 2018, Russian citizens should pass their biometric data when entering Ukraine.
In the United States, they are proposing to hand over the Ukrainian Navy frigates such as Oliver Hazard Perry, the ""Ukrainian Military Portal"" The United States sent a letter to the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine on the provision of military technical assistance to the Armed Forces of Ukraine, among other things, for the Naval Forces of the Armed Forces of Ukraine through the military attache of the United States Embassy.
The publication observes that the said ships can significantly increase the defense capabilities of the Armed Forces of Ukraine in the Black Sea and Azov Opera Theater.
In the 2000s, Ukrainian ships were trained on these ships, and on March 25, 2009, a frigate of this type, the USS Klakring , went to Sevastopol.
In total, 71 frigates were built at the US, Spain, Australia and Taiwan basements.
Turkey 8 units; Taiwan 8 units; Australia 6 units; Spain 6 units; Egypt 4 units; Poland 2 units; Bahrain 1 frigate; Pakistan 1 frigate.
Recall that at the end of September in the United States a ceremony for the transfer of two patrol boats in the class of Iceland took place.
US Congress is preparing to introduce restrictions for Russian state-owned banks.
Then they will not be able to deal with financial organizations abroad.
The United States Congress is considering extending United States sanctions against Russia.
It is proposed to introduce restrictions for large Russian state banks.
It looks like a Rusal case, but sometimes worse,"" says Alexis Rodzianko, president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Russia, commenting on the possible simultaneous imposition of sanctions against all Russian state lenders.
According to him, striking a bank that dominates the Russian financial sector and working closely with energy exporters of the country will be equivalent to ""tactics of scorched earth"" for diplomacy.
This is not to be expected before the mid-term elections in the USA scheduled for November 6th.
But the desire to increase the pressure on Moscow is widespread in both parties.
Rodzianko is convinced that it is unlikely that a new American strike will cover all state banks.
Through them is the majority of transactions related to the export of Russian oil and gas.
This trend only increased after more restrictive sanctions were imposed in 2014 against Rosneft and Gazprom.
Exporters may try to transfer their business to services of other Russian banks that will not be subject to sanctions or to seek help from foreign financial institutions.
It will be a big commitment,"" said Alexander Daniilov, an analyst at Fitch.
The publication also reminds that in addition to the Senate also proposes to prohibit investors from buying securities of the Russian government.
This was stated by the first deputy director of the FSB Sergey Smirnov, reports Censor.NET with reference to Rain.
Without this, we can not guarantee the proper security of information security and successfully counter current terrorist threats,"" Smirnov said.
He noted that the issue was related to terrorism, extremism and organized crime.
In Bishkek, at a meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization , they agreed to cooperate more closely with intelligence agencies in monitoring the Internet for such threats, Smirnov said.
The meeting created a secure communications channel for the exchange of information on terrorists and extremists, discussed the expansion of data banks about such organizations and developed recommendations for questioning suspects in terrorism.
In the summer of 2018, the British human rights organization Article 19 stated in the UN about the threat of Russia's freedom of internet users around the world.
According to the organization, in Russia, regularly adopting laws that are contrary to international standards for the right to information and privacy, and the authorities are putting undue pressure on Internet companies.
Human rights activists have warned that if these processes continue in Russia, the free flow of information on the Internet will be severely restricted throughout the world.
The organizer of the attack on college a 22-year-old resident of Kerch, he committed suicide.
Employees of the State Border Guard Service of Ukraine took a number of measures to enhance security at the administrative border with the temporarily occupied territory of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea in connection with the explosion in Kerch.
The Prosecutor's Office of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea opened a criminal investigation into a terrorist act in connection with an explosion in Kerch.
Canada expressed its condolences to the relatives of those killed during firing at the Polytechnic College of Kerch in the temporarily occupied Crimea.
This was stated by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada Christine Friland, according to Censor.NET with reference to Ukrinform.
At the same time, Friland noted that Canada continues to condemn the illegal occupation of the Crimea by Russia.
We reaffirm our condemnation of illegal occupation and Russia's invasion of Crimea,"" the head of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Canada noted.
The UEFA Trial Chamber has decided that the Kazan club will be excluded from the European Cup if it succeeds in its results in the Russian championship during the next two seasons.
The decision was made by the UEFA Arbitration Chamber for financial control over the fact that Rubin violated the terms of the agreement to comply with the rules of financial fair play.
In ""Ruby"" remains the right to appeal the verdict in the Sports Arbitrage Court. -UEFA may disqualify the Portuguese ""Benfica"" for financial manipulation of the Portuguese club's leadership. -Previously, Milan won the European Arbitral Tribunal for Disqualification from the European Arbitrazh Court.
