The United States has identified four Russian reconnaissance aircraft off the coast of Alaska.
Great Britain will send the Royal Marine Corps and Fleet to Ukraine to stop the Cold War.
Proponents of Zyuganov throughout Russia protest against pension reform.
As reported earlier, the British and French air force fighters climbed into the air for intercepting Russian military aircraft flying over the North Sea on Thursday.
Before that, on August 23, a British military Typhoon fighter from a base in Romania intercepted the Russian naval patrol aircraft Be-12 over the Black Sea.
On August 26, two British fighter jets Eurofighter Typhoon intercepted the Russian An-26s and Be-12s over the Black Sea.
As it was reported, the United Kingdom will expand its military presence in Ukraine by the end of the year.
Great Britain is going to send the Royal Marine Corps and patrols of the Royal Navy to Ukraine, substantially expanding its military presence in the country.
In particular, by the end of the year, the UK will send the Royal Marine Corps to the country, and in 2019 it will expand its presence in the Black Sea.
This is not the behavior we are expecting from any state, especially from a permanent member of the Security Council, Russia is becoming a rogue state,"" says Williamson.
At the same time, he stressed the importance of the United Kingdom and Ukraine sharing ""common values"" and are ready to fight for them.
In particular, it was about a law-based international order, which, according to the minister, Russia does not adhere.
We must clearly make it clear that such actions will have to be paid,"" says Williamson's publication.
Recall, it became known before that the British minister visited the forefront of the OEC zone.
Gavin Williamson was struck by the persistence and courage of Ukrainian soldiers.
He stated this in an interview with the Russian channel RT, reports Weekly.
We need honest and direct discussion about whether sanctions have been successful.
Let's analyze the facts of whether sanctions were helping the European economy or the Russian economy, or, on the contrary, helped to put pressure on the Russian economy, whether they helped to comply with the Minsk Agreements.
Having honestly answered these questions, we must decide on our future, ""said Siayardto.
At the same time, he said, Hungary will never violate the unity of the EU in this matter.
As reported, Klimkin told what would happen to the Hungarian consul after the issue of passports.
In Moscow, about 3,000 people gathered in the ""Social march of millions"" announced.
It is timed to the upcoming consideration by the State Duma of Russia in the second reading of the bill on raising the retirement age, reports Tsensor.
Actions against raising the retirement age are taking place this Saturday in other cities of Russia as well as in the occupied Crimea.
Recall July 19, the State Duma of Russia approved in the first reading a bill on raising the retirement age.
He assumes that women in Russia will be able to retire at 63 years, and men at age 65.
The Donetsk Regional Prosecutor's Office is about to abolish the decision of the local council during the presidency of Viktor Yanukovych to recognize the Russian language as a regional one.
This is reported by the press service of the Prosecutor's Office of the region.
It is also specified that the regional prosecutor's office filed six lawsuits concerning the abolition of similar decisions in Konstantinovka, Slavyansk, Kramatorsk, Volnovasy.
Thus, the Lviv Regional Council adopted a decision on a moratorium on the public use of Russian-language cultural product in the territory of the Lviv region.
Presidents of Belarus and Russia, Alexander Lukashenko and Volodymyr Putin, during talks in Sochi on September 21, discussed political interaction and Ukrainian issues.
A very positive dialogue was a dialogue, ""Lukashenko said at a meeting on Saturday in Minsk.
The Belarusian leader said that in a one-to-one format, political issues, relations between Russia and Belarus within the framework of the IEA, CIS, CSTO and further development of the Union state were discussed.
Lukashenko also said that on the Russian side there was no refusal to provide state credit for $1 billion.
According to her, the alliance is grateful for the contribution Georgia contributes to the NATO operation.
We always say that Georgia will be a member of NATO, and I want to say these words to you now.
Of course, there is still a lot to do and still steps have to be made. on the way to joining, but NATO's position is firm and clear that Georgia will become a member of the Alliance, ""said the Under-Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Alliance.
According to her, NATO has challenges, such as what happened in Ukraine in 2014.
Russia annexed the Crimea and the destabilization of the situation in the Donbass continues.
We still have to cope with the results and the crisis,"" he said. noted Goethejuller.
According to her, the crisis began much earlier and nobody knows about it better than Georgia.
We firmly support you and say that Russia should withdraw this decision, as well as fulfill the obligations assumed by itself in within the limits of the cease-fire agreement, signed by the European Union, ""added Goetheiller.
In August 2018, Lithuania's Foreign Minister Linas Linkevičius stated that Georgia and Ukraine would not join NATO in the near future.
During the current day, from 7:00 to 18:00, Russia's mercenaries fired 7 times the positions of the United Nations forces operations in the Donbas.
In the afternoon, the enemy opened a targeted fire with grenade launchers of various systems, large-caliber machine guns and small arms in positions of the Joint Forces in the area of ​​settlements of Crimea, Zolotye, Novoselovka Druha, Pavlopil, Gnutov and Lebedinsk.
In the case of life threatening troops commanders decided to carry out a fire impact on the enemy, forcing him to stop the shelling.
Losses among the troops of the Joint Forces have not been allowed during this day.
The situation in the area of ​​operation remains under the control of the United Force,""said in a statement.
One of the leaders of the Russian opposition, Vyacheslav Maltsev, who currently lives in France, said this on his YouTube channel.
The politician comes from the Russian airbase of Saratov and is also an expert on aviation and aeronautics.
Konoshenkov says that IL-20 did not protect the system ""Itself is a stranger"", the S-200 was sold to Syrians, and those C-200s who sell abroad do not install this system because they will work abroad.
If it were equipped with this system, they would not ""cover"" themselves.
Note that after the head of the Israeli Air Forces Norkin arrived in Moscow and provided certain secret documents, the Kremlin urgently waived the ""Israeli"" version of the obstruction of the IL-20.
At the same time, as Maltsev drew attention, Bashar Assad did not call Putin, but sent an official telegram.
Maltsev emphasized that even supposing that Israeli pilots were ""sheltered"" from the missile by the Russian Il-20 aircraft, this is ""the top of professionalism"", rather than the alleged evidence of their ""unprofessionalism"", as spoken by the spokesman of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the RF Zakharov.
No bombs, why they came at a low altitude, throwing and leaving at the same height at a low elevation faster, faster, and then go up and go to their own place, so an Israeli air force attack was arranged.
The President of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko, said in an interview with the German newspaper Rheinische Post that Russia does not cease efforts to interfere in internal affairs in Ukraine, in particular, it affects both political forces and will interfere in future elections.
The President stressed that over the past few years Ukraine has been able to implement more reforms than was done 20 years before.
To a large extent, this is the merit of Angela Merkel, who proved that he is not only a successful federal chancellor, but also a great European leader.
We will never forget about this help. on its part and on the part of the German people, ""said Petro Poroshenko.
Today, the North Atlantic Alliance remains the only guarantee of Ukraine's security, since Russia, as a permanent member of the UN Security Council, does not respect international peace and order.
For us, the goal of future EU membership is a powerful motivation to continue the reform process.
On the way to the West, the West, with which we are ""said Petro Poroshenko, reports TCensor.NET with reference to Interfax-Ukraine.
We are struggling not only for ourselves, but for Europe, democracy, the West and its values,"" the President emphasized.
Britain intends to send marines and ships to the Black Sea for patrolling to Ukraine by the end of the year.
British Defense Minister Gavin Williamson reported this, according to The Daily Telegraph.
The British defense minister noted the unacceptable behavior of Russia, which attacks Ukraine not only in the Donbass, but also in the waters of the seas.
For this purpose, British instructors will train Ukrainian soldiers so that they are ready to confront threats and at sea.
As long as the danger persists, we will continue to stand with you side by side.
The safer here you are, the safer we are in the UK,"" Williamson told Ukrainian soldiers during his visit to Donetsk.
Russia promises Germany to assume all financing of ""North flow-2"" Thus, Moscow is convinced by Berlin not to fear the United States sanctions for the construction of the gas pipeline.
Russia is ready to fully finance the construction of the North Stream 2 gas pipeline if the United States imposes sanctions against consortium members implementing this project.
This is Saturday, September 22, reports Censor.NET with reference to the German edition Süddeutsche Zeitung.
According to the publication, Putin informed about these plans the German government during his visit to Mezeburg on August 18, where he met with Chancellor Angela Merkel.
Now the construction of the ""North Stream-2"" is being conducted by an international consortium, the main investor is Russian Gazprom.
Among the participants in the consortium is the daughter of the German concern BASF Wintershall, Uniper and Shell.
In July, a senator from Wyoming, Republican John Barrasso submitted to the United States Congress a bill on sanctions against North Stream 2.
United States Energy Secretary Rick Perry did not deny that Russia would introduce new restrictive measures that would affect North Stream 2.
US President Donald Trump sharply criticizes the German government for saying that, on the one hand, this country is supporting economic sanctions against Russia, and on the other hand, Gazprom buys gas billions of dollars annually.
Trump on North Stream 2: The fact that Germany pays billions of dollars in Russia is inappropriate and funny.
The White House considers the North Stream 2 a politically motivated project, the realization of which will only increase the energy dependence of the European Union on Russia.
In addition, Ukraine risks losing the status of a transit country of gas to Europe.
The length of the route more than 1200 km, the capacity of the new pipeline will be 55 billion m³ of gas per year.
The cost of the project € 9. billion, it is financed in half by Russian Gazprom and five European companies.
Gazprom predicts that the North Stream 2 will be put into operation by the end of 2019.
Germany, Finland and Sweden allowed to pipeline through their territory, Denmark no.
The authorities of Ukraine, Poland, Hungary, Moldova, Romania, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia consider the Nord Stream 2 as a threat to Europe's energy security.
In the network there was a video of the destruction of two units of armored vehicles by Ukrainian troops.
An AFP officer Anatoly Stefan shared the corresponding video on Facebook.
On the frames of the video it is visible how the fighters are striking 2 attacks on the technique of the enemy.
The first projectile fell next to the target, after which pro-Russian militants apparently threw combat vehicles those stopped.
The second shell destroyed the equipment, provoking a powerful explosion.
However, social network users wrote in comments to the video that it was taken about 2 years ago.
Also, in the comments, they are interested in which weapons the shot was made.
