Liu Heung Shing/AP Images Amid the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Ukraine votes for independence in a referendum, with 92 percent of Ukrainians supporting independence, and elects Leonid Kravchuk as president.
AP Images The Russian, Ukrainian, and United States presidents sign a statement that reaffirms Ukraine’s commitment to transfer all strategic nuclear warheads to Russia and dismantle strategic launchers in its territory.
Viktor Korotayev/Reuters Former Prime Minister Leonid Kuchma defeats incumbent President Leonid Kravchuk.
It theoretically requires separation of powers, but the president holds significant sway.
Blake Sell/Reuters Kuchma meets with NATO leaders in Madrid, where they sign a document establishing a distinctive partnership between Ukraine and the defense alliance.
Gleb Garanich/Reuters On September 16, Heorhiy Gongadze, a Ukrainian journalist investigating alleged corruption in the Kuchma administration, disappears.
Mikhail Chernichkin/Reuters The parliament passes a no-confidence motion against Prime Minister Viktor Yushchenko, who steps down.
Sergey Supinski/AFP/Getty Images The 2004 presidential race pits Western-oriented Yushchenko against Viktor Yanukovych.
Ivan Chernichkin/Reuters A pricing and transit dispute between the Yushchenko government and Russia’s state-owned Gazprom results in a gas cutoff, lasting a couple of days and quickly causing supply drops in European countries that import Russian gas via Ukraine.
Natalia Kolesnikova/AFP/Getty Images NATO begins its twenty-second summit amid a debate about whether it should offer Membership Action Plans —forerunners to membership—to Croatia, Georgia, and Ukraine.
Gleb Garanich/Reuters Russian troops invade Georgia following a Georgian military operation against a South Ossetian separatist stronghold.
Sergei Supinsky/AFP/Getty Images Yanukovych narrowly defeats Tymoshenko, prime minister at the time, in a presidential election that most international observers view as free and fair.
Sergei Svetlitsky/AFP/Getty Images Yanukovych has Tymoshenko arrested for “abuse of office,” and she is sentenced to seven years in prison.
Sergei Karpukhin/Reuters The Ukrainian government states that it will not sign the association agreement at an upcoming EU-Ukraine summit in Lithuania.
Reuters Ukrainians turn out in large numbers to protest Yanukovych’s announcement on EU ties.
Viktor Drachev/AFP/Getty Images Pro-Russia forces, including so-called little green men—Russian soldiers in Russian uniforms, but with identifying insignia removed—seize control of Crimea, a Ukrainian peninsula where the majority of residents are ethnically Russian.
Alexander Khudoteply/AFP/Getty Images Russia provokes an armed separatist movement to seize government buildings across eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region.
Sergei Supinsky/AFP/Getty Images Petro Poroshenko, a pro-West oligarch, wins an outright majority in the first round of Ukraine’s presidential election, surprising many.
Anatolii Stepanov/AFP/Getty Images Russian units enter Ukraine to push back Ukrainian forces that were on the verge of regaining control of Donbas.
Grigory Dukor/Reuters Putin and Poroshenko meet in Minsk to negotiate a cease-fire in eastern Ukraine.
Gleb Garanich/Reuters Under President Donald J Trump, the United States approves lethal arms sales to Ukraine, moving beyond the nonlethal military assistance that the Obama administration had allowed.
Murad Sezer/Reuters The Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, the leading authority for Orthodox Christianity, recognizes the independence of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, formally severing it from the Russian Orthodox Church, which has close reported ties to the Kremlin and had overseen the Ukrainian church for centuries.
Valentyn Ogirenko/Reuters Volodymyr Zelensky, a television comedian and political novice, wins a presidential runoff with more than 70 percent of the vote, defeating Poroshenko.
Jonathan Ernst/Reuters Trump and Zelensky have a phone conversation that later becomes the focus of an impeachment inquiry by the United States Congress into abuse of power and obstruction of justice.
Anna Marchenko/TASS/Getty Images Zelensky orders a series of measures against oligarchs, notably Viktor Medvedchuk, a businessman, chairman of Ukraine’s largest pro-Russia political party, and close friend of Putin’s.
Reuters Officials from Ukraine and EU member states warn about recent Russian deployments near Ukrainian border areas and in Crimea.
Peter Kovalev/TASS/Getty Images The Russian energy firm Gazprom finishes construction of the Nord Stream 2, a pipeline that is set to deliver natural gas under the Baltic Sea to Germany and could cut off a major source of income for Ukraine, a current transit country.
Pavlo Palamarchuk/Reuters Russia launches a multi-pronged assault on Ukraine, including an invasion by Russian forces from neighboring Belarus.
In a series of addresses to the nation, Putin reiterates his claim that Ukraine is part of Russia and calls the government in Kyiv a fascist “puppet regime” run by foreign powers.
He frames his intervention as a mission to “demilitarize” and “de-Nazify” the country and protect its Russian-speaking population in the east from genocide.
The invasion draws broad international condemnation, including from the United States, European Union, and the United Nations, and Washington and Brussels promise “severe” sanctions on Russia.
However, Biden rules out any involvement of United States troops in Ukraine.
