With the occupation and annexation of Crimea now confirmed in the March 16 referendum, Putin’s Russia moved on to the next stage of its invasion of Ukraine.
No fewer than five provinces of Ukraine were considered to be vulnerable to Russian invasion.
The ease by which Crimea was taken was an irresistible invitation to further incursion.
Putin understood better than baffled Western analysts why no real resistance was offered against his aggressions.
The gradual destruction of the world’s former fourth largest military power needs to be told to better understand this second phase of the Russian invasion and the de facto Ukrainian-Russian War.
Strangely, he also agreed to the division of the Black Sea Fleet on a proportional basis, forgetting to also include the Soviet Union’s entire navy in that proportion.
Instead of keeping the entire BSF, he agreed to a mere 18.3% of it and allowed Russia to base their lion’s share of the Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol on sovereign Ukrainian territory.
In just two decades the army was optimized, reduced, reformed, restructured, and ultimately left unprepared for combat.
Decades later Kravchuk’s mixed loyalties, or rather his lack of them, would have a price.
Minister of Defense, Oleksandr Kuzmuk , sold the partly completed Soviet-era Kyiv-class aircraft carrier Varyah for scrap to China.
This so-called scrap metal was launched by China as the aircraft carrier Liaoning in 2011.
Similarly, under the Minister of Defense Volodymyr Shkidchenko , the Guided Missile Cruiser Ukrayina that was already 95% complete was mothballed at the Mykolayiv Shipyard.
President Yushchenko decided to, “upgrade the military to NATO standards,” and so reduced this force even further to 210, 000.
Similarly, the upper echelons of command were riddled with Pro-Russian patriots.
The language of command and control in Ukraine’s military apparently remained Russian despite twenty-three years of independence.
The leadership and self-defence of the Maidan Ukrainian Revolution set an example for Ukraine’s much blunted military when Ukraine came under threat this year.
Contrary to all Western media logic, an alliance between Yarosh and the newly appointed Jewish-Ukrainian oligarch Governor of Dnipropetrovsk, Igor Kolomoysky, allowed for the formation, training, and equipment of a citizen’s fighting force.
This force consisted of several colorfully named battalions under the umbrella designation of the National Guard.
In the first weeks of the war it was the Aidar, Azov, and Donbas battalions, as well as the original “Right Sector,” that would see the heaviest fighting and would take the greatest number of casualties.
Russian diplomatic threats included Putin’s statement about revising the Bialowieza Accords —an agreement to split up the USSR set out on December 6, 1991.
As early as 19 March 2014, Ukraine’s Sluzhba Bezpeky Ukrayiny Security Service of Ukraine intercepted diversionary groups in the Luhansk oblast.
A report of the event states that other similar intercepted groups were comprised of Russian citizens including operatives of its special forces.
Among confiscated items were rifled firearms, firearm instructions, lists of members of the group, as well as currency.
The center of the pro-Russian occupation was the town of Slovyansk, located on a major highway at the halfway point between Donetsk and Kharkiv.
Other towns occupied within a 30km radius included Krasnyi, Kramatorsk, Kostyantynivka, as well as Krasnoarmiisk which is situated on the major highway from Dnipropetrovsk.
Ukrainian aircraft and helicopters at the Kramatorsk airfield had to be scrambled to prevent their capture as the military attempted to fight off the assault.
An attempt by Ukrainian forces to retake Slovyansk, on 1 May 2014, resulted in the downing of a Ukraine helicopter and the capture of its wounded pilot.
This was the first of many helicopter losses by Ukraine and a clear indication of the sophisticated armaments that Russia was willing to supply to their surrogates in Ukraine.
By 14 April 2014, Ukraine was dealing with widespread Russian aggression led by Moscow’s intelligence and diversional operatives.
In town after town, armed men bearing no identification other than that of the infamous orange and black striped Georgian ribbons, were taking over police stations and municipal buildings.
These assaults were met with little resistance from local police—a direct result of the corruption of “civil servants” who had been supplementing their meagre salaries through protection rackets, extortion and often, drug trafficking.
Similarly, much of the civilian populace of eastern Ukraine that had been shielded from western and central Ukrainian influence continued to be supporters of Victor Yanukovych, their deposed leader.
The so-called “separatist” movement also attracted the local crime world who were also afraid of the threat of post-revolutionary Kyiv’s anti-corruption reforms.
The deeply criminalised world of Yanukovych’s wild Donbas were a force to be reckoned with.
As a result, the Russian infiltration initially met with some active support and very little resistance.
On 2 May 2014, an event occurred in the city of Odesa, located hundreds of kilometers away from the occupied zone that may prove to be pivotal to Russia’s planned occupation of several oblast’s of Ukraine.
Odesa, originally the Ottoman town of Hacibey, had been conquered by Catherine II of Russia, making it the Russian Empire’s only warm water port.
Reconquering Odesa would be a great source of pride for Putin’s imperial ambitions.
Keeping Ukraine dependent on Russian energy sources had long been Putin’s means of control over the empire’s former colony.
This made it a threat to the dependence on Russian oil that Putin wanted to keep in place.
Lastly, a recent history of anti-Ukrainian violence in Odesa was seen as an invitation to Russian annexation.
The Russian military buildup in Crimea already included the additional naval forces that could threaten and take Odesa.
And yet, on 2 May 2014 what began as a march of football fans showed that there was actually very little popular support for Russian annexation.
On 2 May 2014, Odesa’s Chornomorets were scheduled to play Kharkiv’s Metalist.
Football fans of both clubs united in a march of solidarity in support of Ukraine.
This march was intercepted by a pro-Russian crowd in what appeared to be a planned provocation.
At least some units of local police appeared to be in league with the pro-Russian provocateurs.
At one point the pro-Russian demonstrators fired at the pro-Ukrainian crowd from behind a row of police holding shields.
There were tents on that field left over from an earlier pro-Russian manifestation.
This action was met by bullets and Molotov cocktails from men that had already been waiting on the building’s rooftop.
A fire appeared on an upper floor of the building—a height beyond easy reach of hand thrown bottles.
After the fire was extinguished, there were some thirty dead found inside.
Later investigation suggested asphyxiation due to chloroform poisoning.
Early reports stated that among the dead were a number of Russian nationals as well as some from Transdnistria, but this was later denied.
On 6 May 2014, four days after this tragedy that had counted at least forty-two dead , including one police officer, the Prosecutor General determined that some police were co-conspirators in the provocation.
He was the brother of the former Minister of the Interior of that Russian puppet state.
However, the patriotism exhibited by the “ultras” football fans and the Odesa public in general may have saved Odesa from a provocation and a pretext to Russian invasion.
Despite pro-Russian sympathies on the part of officials and the police, Odesa’s football fans and most of its citizens would have no part of that.
In eastern Ukraine the Russian invaders tried to occupy as much territory as possible before the 25 May 2014 elections.
Doing so would prevent a vote from taking place there and so cast doubt on the legitimacy of the result.
As Donetsk was occupied, he raided the local hospital taking up to 60 wounded men as prisoner.
In Luhansk, civilians were being shot in the streets by the invaders and their collaborators.
For example, the “separatist” battalion, Vostok, was formed of Ossetians and Chechens with experience in the Georgian war of 2008, disgraced members of Ukraine’s Alpha and Berkut Interior Troops, as well as local collaborators.
Russian extremist theories of world dominance see warfare from a perspective which could be unusual for Western audiences.
The information war was launched at home in Russia to drum up support and inoculate the populace against any competing viewpoints.
For the first time in Ukraine’s history there was a clear winner in the first round of elections.
Petro Poroshenko was declared the outright winner with 54.7% of the vote.
This avoided the possibility of Russian disruption of a run-off election.
It legitimized the Ukrainian Revolution in the eyes of western democrats.
Shortly after, in early June, Bulgaria called a halt to its portion of the South Stream pipeline project.
European Union rules and American sanctions were having an impact, although they still could not kill the project altogether.
Among the many obstacles the sanctions created was the fact that a company under sanctions by the USA had been awarded a South Stream pipeline contract.
Putin’s primary plan for the collapse and annexation of Ukraine was stalled although not scrapped altogether.
The Anti-Terrorist Operation , as president Poroshenko officially called the war, continued with heavy losses on both sides.
Ukraine’s front line troops felt that their every move was somehow known ahead of time by the enemy; this feeling was confirmed by pro-Russian fighters.
Ukraine’s National Guard volunteer battalions felt that they were safer when not coordinating their activity with Ukraine’s military.
It was hit by a missile but continued its approach until it succumbed to heavy machine gun fire.
It was not surprising then, that on 15 June 2014 General Oleksandr Shutov of the General Staff was relieved of his duties on directions from the President himself.
Under pressure from the EU, President Poroshenko declared a unilateral seven day cease fire that began on June 20.
He then extended the cease fire three more days, during which 9 more Ukrainians were killed.
After the cease fire Ukrainian forces began a major offensive that by 5 July 2014 had liberated Slovyansk and Kramatorsk and forced Strelkov and his men to retreat to Donetsk.
On 2 July 2014, President Petro Poroshenko appointed Valeriy Geletey as Minister of Defense.
They had both recently led a victorious assault on Karachun—a strategic hill overlooking Slovyansk.
After the successful liberation of Slovyansk and Kramatorsk, the ATO began to pursue two objectives.
The first was to surround Luhansk and the second was to re-establish control over the border with Russia.
However, a week later there was still a gap in the border directly east of Luhansk that included two major highways that were wide open to fresh invaders.
Ukrainian forces controlled the border south of that, but were trapped in a very narrow pocket with the terrorists on one side and the Russian border with the ever present and ever more active Russian regulars on the other.
The ATO had success in early July and had squeezed the pro-Russian forces into an area less than half of what they had once occupied.
Furthermore, the nearly completed closure of the border was eliciting a response from the regular Russian forces sitting on Ukraine’s border.
The 24th motorized brigade from Yavoriv and the 79th Air Mobile brigade came under a brutal missile attack in Zelenopillia at 4:30am of 11 July 2014.
They were hit by a hail of Grad missiles from the direction of the Russian border.
In addition to this shelling by Russian missile batteries, at noon on 12 July 201, four armored columns proudly displaying Russian flags crossed the border heading for Luhansk.
The next day, a concentration of Russian troops and vehicles displaying the Russian flag were seen near Heyivka in the Luhansk oblast’ near the Russian border.
They appeared to be allowing for the rotation of pro-Russian troops from Luhansk.
That same day a Ukrainian Su-25 ground attack fighter was hit and damaged by a MANPADS surface-to-air missile.
The attempt by the ATO to surround Luhansk was later abandoned lest those Ukrainian troops find themselves trapped in a pocket facing fresh troops from Russia.
On 16 July 2014 the terrorists in the area of Saur Mohyla began a massive attack from the village of Stepanivka.
The attack against the Ukrainian post employed tanks, mortars, and portable missiles.
The National Guard fought off the attack and pushed the enemy back to Stepanivka.
The previous night the forces of the ATO had been attacked by Grad missiles, mortars, and self-propelled 122mm guns.
It was flying at about 6400 m when it was hit by what experts conclude was a Buk surface-to-air missile.
Ukrainian officials concluded that the surface-to-air missile had to be fired from inside Russian territory.
It is likely that the transport plane was involved in a resupply mission for the beleaguered forces at the border.
It may be that it was at this point that Strelkov’s terrorists asked Russia to supply them with their own Buk anti-aircraft missiles.
The Buk system consists of 4 missiles mounted on a tracked vehicle chassis equipped with an integral radar system.
Infrared guidance of the missiles provides them with a fire-and-forget capability that reduces the vulnerability of the vehicle to anti-radar missile attack.
Given the altitude of the airliner, only a sophisticated Buk surface to-air-missile could have brought it down.
Monitors of the internet had recorded Strelkov, the self-appointed ex-GRU Minister of Defense of the terrorists, bragging on Twitter about bringing down a Ukrainian AN-26 transport plane following the crash.
At present, the terrorist site Russka Vesna continues to claim that they hit a Ukrainian military aircraft that day.
The following is a translation of a conversation just as the plane was hit.
In subsequent days several sources confirmed that Malaysian Airlines MH-17 was shot down by a Buk M1 surface-to-air missile launched from inside terrorist territory between Snizhne and Saur Mohyla, and crashed near the town of Torez.
Intelligence from civilians with pictures and video evidence, combined with SBU intercepted phone conversations, allow us to paint a picture of this infamous Buk missile battery.
It was transported by tractor trailer on 17 July 2014 to an area just south of the town of Snizhne.
Sergei Nikolaevich Petrovskiy, Officer of Main Intelligence Directorate of Russian Federation, Deputy Chief of Igor Girkin on Intelligence; at the time of the interception he was in Donetsk.
Don’t put in anywhere… I’ll tell now where it should go, it will go together with “Vostok” tanks.
Sanych, the point is that my “BUK–M” will go with yours, it is on a tug.
Listen to me carefully, behind the circle near “Motel” there will be you know what.
Bring inside only those, who just came back, only as much as you need for the convoy.
Your task is reserve, plus protection of this piece, which you will drive now.
They are now in Zelenopillja, trying to break free, but their way out is only through me.
What can I say, if you need anything, call me – and I’ll arrive immediately.
They have also noted that the systems have been quickly shipped back to Russia.
Meanwhile, the crash site which is near the village of Hrabove directly north of Torez on the Donetsk-Luhansk oblast’ border, was poorly secured.
They took the plane’s black-boxes and threatened to send them to Moscow.
It was on the fourth day, only after a UN Security Council resolution on the subject that international experts were allowed to perform their work.
Ignoring world opinion and scrapping any pretense of non-involvement in actual combat, on that same 17 July 2014 Russian forces scrambled a MiG-29 fighter across the border and fired a missile at a Ukrainian Su-25 ground attack aircraft.
The misguided missile attack on flight MH17 was likely part of the terrorists’ supply interdiction tactics in the Saur Mohyla battle with Ukrainian forces.
The events of 17 July 2014 came just a day after the United States boosted the level of its sanctions on Russia.
This included, for the first time, sectoral sanctions against specific companies including Rosneft, Gazprombank, Vnesheconombank, VEB, but they stopped short of freezing their assets.
On 21 July 2014 Canada’s Minister of Foreign Affairs, John Baird, announced that Canada is expediting new sanctions against both individuals and entities.
Russia appears to be oblivious to sanctions, international law, and world opinion in pursuing an imperial goal that should have no place in the 21st century.
So far, much of the world had been able to turn a blind eye to events in Ukraine.
The shoot-down of the Malaysian aircraft has brought the world’s attention to Russia’s hybrid war on Ukraine.
Nearly a century ago it took the sinking of the Lusitania to bring America into a stalemated war.
