The Ukrainian parliament approved a new pro-reform, pro-Western government on February 27.
Russia has condemned the new government in Kyiv as illegitimate and responded by sending troops to seize Ukraine’s Crimea region.
Ignoring international condemnation, Russian annexed Crimea on March 18.
In April and May 2014, armed men seized government buildings in several cities in eastern Ukraine, mainly in the Donbas region.
United States and Ukrainian officials charge that Russian intelligence officers in Ukraine are coordinating the unrest.
United States officials have expressed concern that Russia’s efforts to destabilize eastern Ukraine may be the prelude to an invasion by an estimated 40,000 Russian troops on Ukraine’s borders.
In the near term, the government’s dwindling foreign exchange reserves raised the prospect of a default on sovereign debt later this year.
The United States is working with the EU, the IMF, and other international financial organizations to support a new Ukrainian government committed to reforms.
In May 2014, the Ukrainian government received the first installment of a $17 billion IMF loan.
The European Union has unveiled an 11.175 billion Euro aid package for Ukraine.
The EU has also imposed sanctions on 48 persons from Ukraine and Russia held responsible for undermining Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The Administration requested funding from Congress for $ 1 billion in loan guarantees for Ukraine.
Other United States aid will also help Ukraine stabilize its finances and hold free and fair presidential and local elections on May 25, 2014.
In April, the Administration added seven senior Russian officials and 17 companies.
Congressional action has focused on providing assistance to the new Ukrainian government and supporting sanctions against Russia for its occupation of Crimea.
On March 27, the Senate approved an amended version of H.R. 4152 by voice vote.
The bill also “encourages” the President to impose these sanctions on Russian figures responsible for corruption in Russia and requires an annual report by the Secretary of Defense on military and security developments involving the Russian Federation.
On April 3, President Obama signed H.R. 4152 into law, as well as S 2183, a related bill requiring Radio Free Europe-Radio Liberty and Voice of America to increase broadcasting in eastern Ukraine, Crimea, and Moldova.
Reaction to the Russian Annexation of and Efforts to Destabilize Ukraine.
President Viktor Yanukovych, who was elected in February 2010, drew his main support from oligarchs from the Donets Basin region of eastern Ukraine.
His government that was criticized massive high-level corruption, in part committed by Yanukovych’s own family and associates.
United States and EU officials also expressed strong concern over the government’s human rights record, especially the targeting of opposition leaders for selective prosecution.
In the most prominent case, Yuliya Tymoshenko, Yanukovych’s opponent in the 2010 presidential vote, was convicted of abuse of power in 2011 arising out of her role in signing a natural gas supply agreement with Russia and sentenced to seven years in prison.
Many observers have believed that, despite growing dissatisfaction with the government, there was little likelihood of public unrest in Ukraine, given widespread disillusionment with the political class as a whole.
However, in November 2013, the government made a last-minute decision to not sign an Association Agreement with the European Union, due to Russian pressure.
On November 30, Ukrainian special police attacked and viciously beat peaceful protestors (many of them young people) in Kyiv’s central Maidan Nezalezhnosti, or Independence Square.
Observers noted that demonstrators were not just protesting against Ukraine’s failure to sign the Association Agreement, but against the government’s lack of respect for the basic human dignity of Ukraine’s citizens.
Through the next three months, the Yanukovych government alternated between attempted crackdowns and conciliatory gestures, the latter apparently made in an effort to play for time.
On February 18 the government embarked on its most violent crackdown attempt against the Maidan, one that quickly resulted in the regime’s own demise.
Elite “ Berkut ” riot police attempted to clear protestors from the Maidan and other areas of Kyiv, with the support of roving gangs of street thugs hired by the government.
Yanukoyvch and man of his supporters in the government and parliament fled the capital by February 21.
After the flight of Yanukovych and his supporters, the Ukrainian parliament, now composed mainly of opposition deputies, rapidly passed sweeping measures with little or no opposition.
Oleksandr Turchynov, a long-time top aide of Tymoshenko, was elected as speaker of the parliament and made acting president until new presidential elections are held, which the parliament set for May 25.
The government includes members of Fatherland and Freedom, as well as Maidan activists, but no key figures from the former ruling regime.
Nevertheless, many Maidan protestors view the new governing parties very skeptically, suspecting that they are nearly as opportunistic and corrupt as the Yanukovych regime, as demonstrated by the failure of the Orange Revolution 10 years earlier.
On March 21, the government announced that it would disarm the armed groups.
Government officials hope at least some of the men will join the army or a new National Guard that has been created.
There have been several disturbing incidents involving Pravy Sektor and other nationalist groups since March 21, including clashes in central Kyiv.
Russia responded to the change of government in Kyiv by seizing Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula.
In April 2014, Putin admitted that Russian Federation military forces did in fact invade Crimea.
In addition to Russia’s annexation of Crimea, the Ukrainian government has been struggling to establish control over eastern and southern Ukraine.
In March 2014, thousands of pro-Russian protestors demonstrated in the region, especially in the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk in the Donbas region and in Kharkiv.
Some demonstrators favor union with Russia, others only greater autonomy from the government in Kyiv.
Policy Current Political Situation Unrest in eastern Ukraine has taken an even more ominous turn since April 2014.
Armed men stormed and occupied key government buildings and broadcast facilities in the key cities of Donetsk and Luhansk, as well in Slovyansk and at least 13 other towns in the Donbas region.
Perhaps following the Crimean scenario, the demonstrators in Donetsk and Luhansk have raised Russian flags, proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk “People’s Republics,” and called for Russia to send troops to protect them.
The leadership of the “republics” preparing to hold referendums on independence from Ukraine on May 11.
Philip Breedlove have also said that they believe Russia is directing the activities of the armed separatist groups in eastern Ukraine.
Russia may be using the threat of invasion to deter Ukraine from using its armed forces to neutralize the armed groups within Ukraine, thereby permitting them to continue their efforts at destabilization unhindered.
After Ukraine re-launched an “anti-terrorist operation” on April 23 (after setbacks on a first attempt) that resulted in several dead and wounded among the separatists, Russia announced it would hold military exercises near Ukraine’s borders.
Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu warned that if Ukraine did not halt its operations and large numbers of casualties resulted, Russia would have to react.
One striking factor in the conflict noted by Ukraine’s acting President Oleksandr Turchynov, Prime Minister Yatsenyuk and other Ukrainian leaders is the repeated failure Ukrainian police and security forces to maintain or restore order in eastern and southern Ukraine.
Turchynov has admitted that local police in Donetsk and Luhansk regions are “helpless” against separatist forces.
Since the collapse of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, scores of deputies have left the party, with most of the rest apparently unwilling or unable to offer serious resistance to the new leadership, at least for now.
Former party leader Arseniy Yatsenyuk is Prime Minister in the new government.
Policy professionalism among the police; covert political games played by oligarchs once affiliated with the previous regime; sympathy for the separatists; and payoffs by Russian agents.
Efforts by elite security forces to restore order have often met with humiliating failure and substantial casualties.
Moreover, both Ukrainian and Western experts believe Ukrainian intelligence and security forces are thoroughly penetrated by Russian agents.
Ukrainian leaders may increasingly support the use of armed volunteers to supplement the regular security forces.
Most of those killed were pro-Russian demonstrators, who died when the building in which they had sheltered during the fighting was set on fire by pro-Ukraine demonstrators or accidently by the pro-Russian protestors themselves, according to conflicting sources.
Moreover, 67 pro-Russian demonstrators who were arrested for participating in the violence were released by police under threats from pro-Russian rioters.
The government says that it is tightening border security to stop Russian demonstrators from entering Ukraine, but apparently with limited effect.
As another part of its strategy, the government has tried to enlist the support of some oligarchs to try to quiet the situation in the Donbas, Kharkiv, Dnipropetrovsk, and other areas where they own large businesses, also with mixed success.
According to opinion polls, the leading candidate by far is pro-Western billionaire Petro Poroshenko, who held high-ranking government posts during Yushchenko’s presidency, but also under Yanukovych.
At present, it appears likely that Poroshenko and Tymoshenko will enter a runoff in June unless Poroshe nk o gets the winning majority in the first round.
Local elections will be held at the same time as the presidential vote.
However, it is uncertain whether the situation in eastern Ukraine will be stable enough to permit the holding of elections there.
Preventing the holding of the elections is one of the stated goals of the leaders of separatist leaders in eastern Ukraine.
Current Economic Situation Ukraine is much poorer than other European countries, despite advantages such as rich soil, a strategic location, and a substantial heavy industrial sector.
Ukraine’s real GDP growth was a mere 0.2% in 2012, due to a downturn in the EU and Russia.
By late 2013, Ukraine’s foreign exchange reserves had dropped to dangerously low levels, raising fears that Ukraine could default on its sovereign debt in 2014.
The weak currency hurts ordinary Ukrainians, in part because it makes imported consumer items more expensive.
Policy On April 30, 2014, the IMF approved a $17 billion loan for Ukraine.
Including the IMF loan, the accord is expected to unlock $27 billion in international aid to Ukraine over two years.
One of the main goals features of the IMF-supported reform plan is to reduce Ukraine’s deficits.
The reform plan will involve significant expenditure cuts, including cancelling wage and pension increases, cutting government employment and social spending, and cutting back on corruption through a new government procurement law.
Tax increases are also envisioned, including ending tax evasion schemes and other frauds.
Naftogaz’s deficit is targeted for elimination by 2018, partly by reforming the company, and partly by substantial increases in currently heavily subsidized domestic natural gas prices.
Ukraine is obliged to keep a “flexible” exchange rate, which will likely mean a weak currency for the near future, although the IMF loan may restore some degree of confidence in the currency.
Prime Minister Yatsenyuk has said that his is a “kamikaze” government, given the political unpopularity of some of the decisions that are required as part of the IMF-mandated reform program.
Ukraine’s government already announced that natural gas prices for domestic consumers would increase by 73% starting May 1, and further increases are planned.
IMF officials claim that the amount of fiscal consolidation required of Ukraine is moderate; under the plan budget deficits are permitted to increase this year over last year, due to the poor performance of Ukraine’s economy, before being required to head down in 2015.
Among other provisions, the signatories affirmed that they would refrain from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of Ukraine, and that none of their weapons will ever be used against Ukraine except in self-defense or otherwise in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Kyiv is also seeking urgent international assistance to ameliorate the country’s dire economic situation.
The government strongly supports European Union integration for Ukraine, but says that NATO membership aspirations are not a current priority.
NATO has agreed to support the country’s defense reforms, including advice on the protection of critical infrastructure.
The Association Agreement is the EU’s main instrument to promote European values and deepen economic ties with Ukraine and other former Soviet countries.
Under intense pressure from Russia, which strongly opposed Ukraine’s intention to sign the AA, the Ukrainian government announced on November 21 that it would not sign the agreement, the start in a series of events that led to the regime’s demise three months later.
EU officials and officials of EU member governments condemned violence by the former Ukrainian government and their allies against peaceful protestors.
After a sharp escalation of the violence on February 18 and 19, the EU decided to impose a visa ban and asset freezes on Ukrainian officials responsible for violence.
The EU and Ukraine signed the parts of Ukraine’s Association Agreement dealing with political issues on March 21, 2014.
The parts of the A A dealing with economic issues are expected to be signed in June, after the new Ukrainian President takes office.
However, the EU has lifted tariffs from almost all Ukrainian through November 2014, when the economic parts of the DCFTA will have come into force.
On March 5, the European Commission unveiled an 11.175 billion Euro aid package for Ukraine.
The package includes 1. billion Euro in macro financial assistance loans to support Ukraine’s government finances.
The EU will also provide 1.565 billion Euro in grant aid between 2014 and 2020 to assist Ukraine’s reform efforts.
The package includes up to 3 billion Euro in loans from the European Investment Ra nk and 5 billion Euro from the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Policy On March 17, the day after Crimean authorities held a referendum on joining Russia, the European Union imposed a visa ban and an asset freeze on 21 figures from Ukraine and Russia who played roles in Russia’s seizure of Crimea.
On March 21, the EU imposed sanctions on 12 additional Russian leading figures, after President Putin signed an agreement with Crimean leaders incoiporating the region into Russia.
The EU list includes some senior government officials and members of the Russian parliament, but also fairly low-level figures directly involved in the Crimea operation and efforts to destabilize Ukraine.
Some EU countries have reportedly been reluctant to do so, given the important economic ties many EU countries have with such persons and institutions.
Russia In some ways, recent Russian actions in Ukraine are the culmination of longstanding Russian resentment of the outcome of the Cold War.
Russian leaders have also asserted that the post-Soviet region is an area of privileged interests of Russia.
Eastern Orthodox civilization, in which Russians see themselves as the leading force, got its start in Kievan Rus (a state centered on what is now part of Ukraine) when Prince Vladimir converted to Christianity in 988.
Russians often point out that their ancestors spilled a great deal of their blood to incorporate most of what is now Ukraine into the Russian empire, and a great deal more to keep it within the empire through many wars.
Ethnic Russians make up 17.3% of Ukraine’s population, according to the 2001 Ukrainian census They are concentrated in the southern and eastern parts of the country.
In addition, many ethnic Ukrainians in the east and south also tend to be Russian-speaking, are suspicious of Ukrainian nationalism, and support close ties with Russia.
Nevertheless, until the collapse of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, Putin preferred using indirect methods of influence in Ukraine.
Policy economic sanctions and using Russia media to attack uncooperative leaders.
Russia reacted with great hostility to the emergence of a new, more pro-Westem leadership.
Moscow has not recognized the new government in Kyiv as legitimate, and still recognizes Yanukovych, now residing in Russia, as President.
Russian forces invaded Ukraine’s Crimea region in February 2014 and annexed in March.
Russia has also made strident demands on the subject of Ukraine’s political future.
In an interview on Russian television on March 29, Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov called for the disarming of Pravy Sektor and other armed Ukrainian nationalist forces; making Russia the second official language in Ukraine; that constitutional reforms on “federalization” of Ukraine should begin under which the regions woidd have wide autonomy in the areas of the economy, finances, culture, language, education, and external economic and cultural ties with neighboring countries or regions.
Legitimate election could only occur after such constitutional changes are made, according to Lavrov.
Russia still considers Viktor Yanukovych to be the legitimate President of Ukraine.
Ukraine has rejected a “federalization” of Ukraine that would give very broad autonomy to the eastern and southern parts of Ukraine, which Ukrainian leaders fear could be used by leaders there to break up the country eventually.
However, Kyiv has signaled that it is willing to make Russian an official language in the constitution and to give the regions more powers in some areas, but only in a political process among Ukraine’s citizens, not one dictated by Moscow.
Russia’s federalization proposal appears to some analysts to be an effort to permanently cripple the central government in Kyiv, giving forces in eastern Ukraine under Moscow’s sway a veto power over important decisions, including on Ukraine’s current pro-Westem orientation.
Federalization could also be used to give Russia enhanced control over key economic assets in the east, including defense industries.
From statements by Russian officials, as well as its actions in Crimea and eastern Ukraine, many analysts have deduced that one of Russia’s real goals in Ukraine appears to be to stir up trouble to discredit and delegitimize the current government in Kyiv.
Creating a chaotic situation makes the government look weak and may help Moscow claim that the May 25 presidential elections in Ukraine will be illegitimate, particularly elections are not held in eastern Ukraine or there is low turnout due to potential violence and intimidation.
He also claimed that Russian troops had been pulled back from Ukraine’s border to their permanent bases.
United States and NATO officials say they have seen no signs of a Russian pullback and it is unclear whether Putin’s statement signals a genuine desire to compromise or merely an effort allow himself to deny responsibility for ongoing Russian efforts to destabilize Ukraine.
Policy If Moscow cannot pressure Kyiv to agree to its federalization plans, some analysts believe Russia may use the same tactics it has used in other former Soviet territories, including Transnistria in Moldova, and South Ossetia and Abkhazia in Georgia; to set up a self-declared independent state that Russia would support and protect, leaving open the option of recognizing it later or even incorporating it into Russia.
However, if such support and protection would include the introduction of alleged “peacekeeping forces” from Russia (also on the Moldova and Georgia model), Ukraine would be likely to resist militarily (including perhaps in the form of a guerrilla war) and Russia could face much stronger Western sanctions, including against key sectors of Russia’s economy.
Russia has taken other steps against Ukraine, including imposing some de facto trade sanctions against Ukrainian imports.
Russia could decide to expand these sanctions into economic warfare against Ukraine.
Ukrainian government servers have been hit by sophisticated cyberattacks, which may have come from Russia, although no proof of this has been publicly disclosed so far.
Russia could harass or expel some of the large number of Ukrainian citizens living and working in Russia.
Past Russian efforts to greatly increase gas prices for Ukraine provoked a crisis that resulted in cutoff of Russian gas to Western Europe for several days in January 2006.
Its efforts have been unsuccessful, due to Kyiv’s refusal to cede control of one of its key economic assets.
Ukraine’s reduced share of gas transport to Europe may have led Russia to feel it would have a freer hand to put greater pressure on Ukraine on other issues, including political ones.
Key West European countries may also feel they have less of a stake in Ukraine’s future, if they, like Russia, were no longer dependent on Ukrainian gas transport infrastructure.
Indeed, in March 2014, Oettinger said that only 14% of the EU’s natural gas consumption came from Russia via Ukraine, and that fact, along with gas storage facilities and pipeline interconnections in EU countries, has diminished Russia’s leverage over the EU in a possible gas crisis.
Policy Russia continue to deteriorate, South Stream could be scrapped, and West European countries could take more serious steps to find alternatives to Russian gas.
On March 31, the Russian parliament renounced the 2010 Kharkiv agreements, which provided Ukraine a natural gas price discount in exchange for basing rights for the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Crimea.
Gazprom then said it would start charging Ukraine $485 per thousand cubic meters of gas, about a third more than it charges any other country in Europe.
In April, President Putin warned that if Ukraine does not pay its debt for natural gas, Russia would start demanding that Ukraine pay in advance for gas, and to cut off supplies if Kyiv did not pay.
Putin warned European leaders that in such a case Ukraine could siphon off Russian gas supplies meant for Western Europe.
Such a move by Gazprom could spark a third natural gas crisis in Europe in less than 10 years.
On April 30, Gazprom officials estimated Ukraine’s debt to Gazprom at $3. billion.
The best hope is to import cheaper gas from central Europe, using the former Soviet gas transit pipelines in “reverse flow” mode.
Kyiv is seeking gas supply agreements with Hungary and Romania as well.
However, a significant dent in Ukraine’s dependence on Russia cannot be made unless Kyiv can reach agreement with Slovakia, since the biggest capacity pipelines run through that country.
In April 2014, the two sides reached agreement for Slovakia to supply a modest amount of gas to Ukraine, but Slovakia has declined so far to supply Ukraine with the much larger amounts of gas it needs, due to fear of retaliation from Gazprom.
In the long term, Ukraine could develop its own shale gas reserves, improve exploitation of its own domestic gas reserves, import liquefied natural gas, or import gas from Azerbaijan, Central Asia, and elsewhere via pipelines through the EU’s planned Southern Energy Corridor.
Ukraine will also to have to make much greater strides in energy conservation; it currently consumes about as much Russian gas as Germany, but with a much smaller economy.
United States Policy During Ukraine’s political upheaval in late 2013 and early 2014, statements by Obama Administration officials urged Ukrainian leaders and the protestors to find a peaceful, democratic solution to the crisis.
President Obama and Administration officials tried to reassure Russia, with little success, that the United States was not in a geopolitical competition with Moscow over Ukraine.
Policy Reaction to the Russian Annexation of and Efforts to Destabilize Ukraine The United States has strongly condemned the Russian military invasion of Crimea.
President Obama acknowledged Russian ties to Ukraine, adding that “all of those interests 1 think can be recognized.
The United States has suspended some bilateral cooperation with Russia.
On April 2, the Administration announced that it was suspending several projects planned under the aegis of the U.S.-Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission as well as some law enforcement cooperation activities and planned to use that funding for aid to Ukraine.
On March 16 and 20, after Russia moved to annex Crimea, the Administration issued two additional Executive Orders expanding the scope of sanctions.
On April 28, the Administration imposed asset freezes on additional 7 senior Russian officials.
The companies appear to have been chosen due to their links to sanctioned persons in Putin’s inner circle, such as energy trader Genneddy Timchenko, bankers Arkady and Boris Rotenberg or to Bank Rossiya.
He added that Russia has not yet chosen to move forward, and these sanctions represent the next stage in a calibrated effort to change Russia’s behavior.
And that’s why the next phase if, in fact, we saw further Russian aggression towards Ukraine could be sectoral sanctions, less narrowly targeted, addressing sectors like banking or the defense industry.,11 The sanctions imposed so far appear to have had little on Russian behavior.
Indeed, Russian-supported gunmen accelerated their seizures of buildings in the Donbas after the sanctions were imposed.
United States officials have accused Russia of organizing the seizure of buildings and the erection of roadblocks in eastern Ukraine.
On April 13, United States Ambassador to the United Nations Samantha Power noted that the dress, equipment, and the well-planned and synchronized actions of the pro-Russian gunmen in eastern Ukraine were similar to those who occupied Crimea.
Moreover, she noted, the towns and roads appeared to be chosen for seizure by the gunmen to cut off Donetsk and Luhansk from Kyiv.
Secretary Kerry and other United States officials have repeatedly called for the estimated 40,000 Russian troops on Ukraine’s borders to be returned to their barracks immediately.
Despite this intensification of Russian efforts to destabilize and possibly dismember Ukraine, the Administration continues to seek a diplomatic solution to the crisis.
On April 17 in Geneva, Switzerland, Secretary of State John Kerry reached agreement with Foreign Minister Lavrov, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Andrei Deshchytsia, and EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton on an agreement aimed at de-escalating the Ukraine crisis.
It called for illegal armed groups to be disarmed, illegally occupied buildings and roadblocks cleared, amnesty to be given to demonstrators who give up arms and occupied places, an OSCE military mission monitor compliance with the agreement, and an “inclusive, transparent, and accountable” constitutional reform process.
In a speech at the Atlantic Council on April 29, Secretary Kerry praised Ukraine’s efforts to comply with the agreement and sharply condemned Russia for not taking a single step to implement the accord, but instead trying to exacerbate the crisis.
Policy In its FY2015 Congressional Budget Justification, likely drafted before the crisis in Ukraine, the Administration requested $57 million in Economic Support Fund assistance for Ukraine.
Ukraine is also expected to receive $6. million in USAID Global Health funding, $22 million in State Global Health Funding, $2. million in INCLE law enforcement aid, $1. in IMET military training assistance, and $2 million in Foreign Military Financing.
In March, the Administration unveiled the first details of an aid package for the new Ukrainian government.
A reduction in energy subsidies is one of the most politically sensitive conditions the IMF is likely to place on a loan for Ukraine.
The United States is also providing technical advisors to help the Ukrainian government deal with its financial crisis and to implement energy sector reforms.
Other technical assistance would be provided to help Ukraine recover assets stolen by the previous regime and fight corruption.
The United States would also provide help so that Ukraine can hold free and fair presidential elections in May 2014.
The United States would provide technical assistance on how Ukraine can use its rights as a WTO member to combat potential Russian trade sanctions.
The Administration package would also provide advice and financing to help Ukrainian firms find new export markets and to enhance Ukraine’s energy efficiency, so that it can reduce its dependence on Russia.
On April 21, the Administration unveiled a new aid package totaling $50 million.
Of this amount, $11. million is being used to help Ukraine hold free and fair elections on May 25 and send experts to Ukraine on such issues as constitutional reform, local governance, public participation, and judiciary reform.
The Administration package includes additional technical assistance to Ukraine to help the country on economic reform issues.
In addition to three banking advisors already in Kyiv, the Administration says it will send additional advisors in such areas as public debt management, macroeconomic policy, and budget and tax administration.
United States experts are advising Ukraine on securing reverse flows of natural gas from Poland, Hungary, and Slovakia; increasing its domestic conventional gas supply; implementing contracts signed in 2013 for shale gas development in Ukraine; and improving energy efficiency.
The United States will expand technical help to Ukraine on fighting corruption and will help coordinate international efforts to repatriate to Ukraine funds stolen by members of the Yanukovych regime.
To improve people to people ties, the United States plans to extend the validity of visas for businesspeople and tourists from ten years from the current five.
Policy ammunition, communications gear, intelligence support, aviation fuel, night-vision goggles, mine-clearing equipment, vehicles, medical gear, and other items.
The Administration has declined so far to send lethal military aid to Ukraine, out of concern that it could make a diplomatic settlement of the crisis more difficult.
In an April 2014 fact sheet, the White House detailed an $18 million security assistance package for Ukraine.
The amount includes 300,000 Meals Ready to Eat to Ukraine in March, as a cost of about $3 million.
The Administration is also providing an additional nearly $7 million in health and welfare assistance to Ukraine’s armed forces.
An additional $8 million in non-lethal includes explosive ordinance disposal equipment and handheld radios for Ukraine’s military and engineering equipment, communications equipment, vehicles, and non-lethal individual tactical gear for Ukraine’s border guards.
The Administration says it is “actively reviewing” other Ukrainian requests.
Among other provisions, the resolution sponsored by Senator Murphy urges the United States and EU to work together to promote a peaceful resolution of the crisis that moves Ukraine toward a future in the Euro-Atlantic community; encourages all parties to avoid violence and engage in dialogue; and states that, in the event of further government violence against peaceful protestors, the President and Congress shoidd consider whether to apply targeted sanctions, including visa bans and asset freezes, against individuals responsible for ordering or carrying out the violence.
Policy Economic Support Fund, and from unobligated balances for State Department and Foreign Operations funding for prior years.
On March 27, the Senate approved an amended version of FI.R. 4152 by voice vote.
The bill includes the loan guarantees for Ukraine, but also provisions of S 2124, which had been approved by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on March 12.
On April 1, the House also passed S 2183, which requires Radio Free Europe-Radio Liberty and Voice of American to start a programming “surge” to provide accurate information to eastern Ukraine, Crimea, and Moldova in order to counteract inflammatory Russian propaganda.
The bill authorizes up to $10 million in appropriations for this effort.
The provisions of S 2183 were originally part of H.R. 4278, and were passed by the Senate as a separate bill on March 27 by unanimous consent.
The measure seeks to impose wide-ranging economic and diplomatic sanctions on Russia, to take steps to strengthen NATO, and to support Ukraine and other states of the former Soviet Union currently or potentially faced with Russian aggression.
The United States and other countries have ruled out military action to eject Russian forces from Crimea or even stop an invasion of eastern Ukraine.
The United States and its NATO allies have limited their military actions so far to a modest increase in air assets and troop deployments o the Baltic states and Poland to signal NATO’s resolve to defend its member states.
The main tool at the disposal of United States policy makers to pressure Russia to negotiate its withdrawal from Crimea is far-reaching financial sanctions against the Russian political and financial elite.
Indeed, long before the recent events in Crimea, many observers believed or hoped that Russia would not take the steps that it has already taken, for fear that the Russian elite could lose its vast assets in Europe and elsewhere.
Policy However, now that the deterrent effect of possible sanctions has failed, policy makers may be faced with the possibility that the implementation of sanctions may not be powerful enough to compel Russia’s compliance.
The sanctions would then be mainly in effect a mechanism to show Russia the “cost” of its violation of international norms or perhaps to deter it from occupying additional Ukrainian territory.
However, given Russia’s economic importance, particularly for Europe but also for some United States firms, the cost could also be substantial for those imposing it.
Cooperation between Russia and the United States on other issues, such as Iran, Syria, and the withdrawal of United States military cargoes from Afghanistan, could also come to an end.
The prospect of an open-ended new Cold War with Russia may be enough for United States and EU policy makers to be reluctant to impose serious sanctions on Russia, or to lift or weaken them later.
A related issue is whether additional sanctions should attack key Russian businessmen, banks, and energy and other companies, which could have a serious impact on Russia’s economy.
Alternatively, one could continue to limit sanctions to a few of Putin’s most outspoken advisors and subordinates, which could have a mainly symbolic impact.
Once they are imposed, United States and EU policy makers might feel compelled to keep sanctions in place, even if they seem unlikely to achieve their goals, fearing the loss of credibility that could result if they do not.
Some observers continue to call for trying to engage with Russia to stabilize Ukraine, due to a lack of workable alternatives.
They assert that Russia will always have the superior means and stronger motives to influence Ukraine than Western countries will.
Those arguing for such aid say the United States needs to show resolve in the face of Russian aggression against Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.
They argue such aid could serve to deter Putin from invading eastern Ukraine.
Some objections to military aid for Ukraine are that it could foreclose a diplomatic solution to the crisis; that it could actually provoke Putin to attack eastern Ukraine; and that it could end U.S.-Russian cooperation in such issues as the withdrawal of United States equipment from Afghanistan.
There could also be concerns in the near term about the aid absorption capacity of Ukraine’s armed forces, which are in a poor state at present.
