On the Sources of the Donbas ""Insurgency"" While agreeing that “structural feasibility” and “group emotions” are important variables in explaining the case, I oppose the claim that the armed conflict in the Donbas has domestic sources.
Moreover, I believe, this well written memo is misleading for at least two reasons.
Second, the language Kudelia uses establishes a problematic frame for the perception of recent events in Ukraine.
I will start with questioning the logical consequences of Kudelia’s argument.
If the admixture of the structural and agency-based variables constitutes a sufficient condition for the eruption of separatist conflict in one region, we may well expect it should have launched secessionist movements in similar regions.
Similarly, Odesa went through violent clashes between pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian activists that resulted in the deaths of more than forty people.
The resentment to, and fear of, “fascists” from Kyiv should have brought about the same results there as they did in Donetsk and Luhansk.
Drawing on the literature of ethnic conflict, Kudelia mentions resentment and fear as emotions instrumental for the beginning of the internal conflict.
Relying on figures from an opinion poll without asking where the fear came from and why there are variations in responses to this question across the South East of Ukraine is shortsighted.
The poll, actually, reveals quite ambivalent attitudes of the respondents of Donetsk and Luhansk regions to the Right Sector.
While 36 percent of respondents in Donetsk and 40 percent in Luhansk sees the Right Sector as one of a dozen marginal groups having little weight in the political process, 50 and 42 percent of respondents of the same regions believed that the Right Sector is a large and influential military formation that poses a threat to citizens and the country's integrity.
The questions on the role of Russia in the conflict reflect quite interesting opinions, which Kudelia prefers not to discuss.
These figures demonstrate that roughly 50 percent of respondents of these two regions agree that Russia does play a role in the conflict.
We also know that the first seeds of resentment were planted in the Ukraine’s south and east by Russian “political technologists” back in 2004.
Considering that Victor Yanukovych remained connected with Vladislav Surkov, a once-close advisor to Putin, and several other high ranking Russian figures over the entire period of crisis, the idea of spreading fear may well belong to Kremlin pundits.
While we all choose terms that best serve our research purposes, the word choices we make reflect not only our vision, but also the perception of the subject by the reader.
Such terms as “the violent regime change,” “state fragmentation,” and “capture of power” create an impression that there was a coup and resulting civil war in Ukraine, a point mentioned in Umland’s comment.
Alternative terms like “revolution,” “political revolution,” “multiple sovereignty,” and “transfer of power” might have produced quite an opposite picture of the political process in Ukraine.
I am sure Kudelia is aware that part of Russia’s war in Ukraine is psychological warfare waged in the public sphere.
The Russian authorities and media present the Ukrainian events exclusively in terms of illegal actions undertaken by protesters and their leaders, where “coup” is a key term.
To sum up, the lack of documented evidence of Russia’s role in initiating the crisis should not preclude us from taking into account the numerous facts that indicate who the perpetrator is.
As Putin himself conceded in May, the Russian military was indeed in Crimea.
The same, I am sure, will sooner or later be released about the Donbas.
Andreas Umland is a Senior Research Fellow at the Institute for Euro-Atlantic Cooperation, Kyiv.
Reply to Andreas Umland: The Donbas Insurgency Began At Home by Serhiy Kudelia.
These are Dmitri Kukikov, Timofei Sergeitsev and Vladimir Granovski, who worked for Andriy Kluev, the head of the shadow electoral team of Victor Yanukovych during the 2004 presidential elections.
