Most things regarding the conflict in Ukraine are dealt with entirely propagandistic here in Sweden.
On other issues our “Pravda” – Dagens Nyheter – usually lets through an occasional dissident voice, if only to get an alibi and at the same time by contrast enhance the proscribed view.
What happens now in Ukraine is confirmed to be a war of aggression, and the sole aggressor is Russia.
There is no ambiguity about the Ukrainian government’s right to use force against its own citizens.
No one suggests that there would have been no war had the Ukrainian army not launched the attacks against their own citizens in Donbas.
Despite that nobody suspected the independence forces in the Donbas area for any plans to conquer the rest of Ukraine.
We obviously find it quite appropriate that one of these two parts rule over the other, even when there is no agreement on such a regime.
And even when the suppressed part convincingly argues that the opponent has seized power trough an illegal street coup, spearheaded by Nazi elements, at that.
Very little is reported here about the way government forces conduct the battles; their indiscriminate firing of shells and rockets into cities, blowing innocent civilians to pieces and thus scaring away their own citizens, creating hundreds of thousands of refugees.
But we had the guts to demonize and ridicule the Russians for sending a convoy of trucks with necessities to help those human beings in their neighboring country.
There was much fuss about the first convoy; now at least five more have followed, obviously giving substantial relief for many people.
It thus turned out that the Russians had benign intentions, a circumstance that immediately killed our media’s interest.
It’s fascinating and revealing to compare the identical events in Crimea and earlier in Kosovo.
When a part of Serbia inhabited by a large group of Albanians wanted to secede from its motherland, USA and EU immediately engaged fully with the secessionists.
It’s notable that the ethnic cleansing performed by Serbia in Kosovo started as a reaction to the bombings, not the other way around.
When “we” intervened in Serbia it was under the auspices of R2P – responsibility to protect – a concept invented to justify the violent actions we for the moment are prone to engage in.
Thus the very same kind of action, on identical pretexts, that we praised ourselves for as morally exemplary in Kosovo, we deemed Russia for as the most unlawful atrocity in Crimea.
We can live with that since we have grown accustomed to our own hypocrisy, the worst kind of that one can think of.
This entry was posted in Crimea, Dagens Nyheter, NATO, Propaganda, Russia, War on November 21, 2014 by larsschaff.
On this International Workers Holiday in my small town of 10 thousand people there will be a march with perhaps a dozen participants, and a speech by some local Social Democrat.
The daily topic in our papers is still Ukraine, or rather the dictatorial Putin with his insidious plans to revive Russian greatness from the Soviet era by enlarging his territory.
No arguments are shallow or stupid enough not to find their way to the printed pages or web editions.
Sweden must increase its military budget substantially, everyone here says.
The Baltic States, with their Russian speaking minorities, should fear Putin’s next step.
It’s naturally claimed that uprisings in eastern Ukraine are instigated by Putin, while the corresponding riots in Kiev, strongly exacerbated by pure Nazi groups , were legitimate protests against a corrupt regime.
Let’s assume that we seriously believe Russia capable to go on willfully conquering countries.
The question is then only if it’s we or Putin who suffer from insanity.
If the Russian leadership was collectively suicidal, yes, then it would be plausible to expect any substantial challenge to NATO power.
We seem to be back in the old Cold War era with its nonsensical propaganda arguments.
True to that tradition most manifestations of real knowledge are banned from discussion.
In a small, provincial country like Sweden this reaches parodical heights.
In times like these it’s a relief to have access to United States media on the Internet.
One distinguished voice on Russian issues is Professor Stephen Cohen, who has spent a professional lifetime studying his subject.
He is a contributor to The Nation and is often interviewed in other media.
First of all Ukraine is not one country, it’s at least two; one leaning towards the western world and one towards Russia.
When EU approached Ukraine with a proposition for cooperation it was attached with an ultimatum that no agreement with Russia would be allowed.
Putin on the other hand proposed a three-party settlement including EU for supporting Ukraine.
Faced with the EU ultimatum Yanukovych choose an agreement with Russia, and there it all started.
In the thousand pages thick EU proposition one could read that Ukraine’s future rapprochement with EU and NATO would lie in the pipeline.
With this background it’s practically inevitable that Russia had to annex Crimea.
It’s a basic moral principle that we submit to ourselves the same standards we apply on others.
But, of course, moral has no place in political propaganda and brain-washing.
This entry was posted in Cold War, Crimea, Propaganda, Putin, Russia, USA on May 1, 2014 by larsschaff.
