Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM Enclosed please find informational materials that were forwarded to United States media outlets in connection with Wiley Rein’s Aveiro LP representation.
Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM NEWSLETTER V BATbKIBLUMHA ISSUE 18,18 February 2019 BATKIVSHCHYNA PARTY NEWS 1.
Yulia Tymoshenko meets with representatives of anti-corruption civic organizations 6.
For his part, Kurt Volker confirmed United States support for the sovereignty and independence of our state, noting that the United States would continue to make efforts for the reestablishment of the territorial integrity of Ukraine and establishment of peace in the east.
You named the war a “war” and do not leave us alone to face the aggressor country, Russia.
We are sincerely grateful for everything you have done for us and for your help,” Yulia Tymoshenko stressed.
We are ready to further support your country together with experts, representatives of civil society and business community members to draw our country out of the current crisis.
I have stressed that the ongoing reforms process in Ukraine has to be irreversible.
NO COMPROMISE WITH THE ENEMY ON THE ISSUE OF ENDING THE WAR The new government will not agree to any compromise with the Kremlin that will allow for an end to the war at the expense of Ukraine’s interests.
This was the message from Yulia Tymoshenko during her speech at the third Ukrainian Lunch that took place within the framework of the Munich Security Conference.
She stressed that the economic prosperity of Ukraine would be an additional weapon in the fight against the 3 Yulia Tymoshenko met with Lithuanian Minister of Foreign Affairs Linas Linkevicius The parties discussed the political, social and economic situation in Ukraine, as well as the European aspirations of our country and issues of bilateral cooperation between Lithuania and Ukraine.
Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM NEWSLETTER V BATbKIBLUMHA ISSUE 18,18 February 2019 Russian aggressor.
This could be secured by the adoption of a new Constitution and realization of a new economic course.
It is worth noting that the participants of the Ukrainian Lunch included President of Estonia Kersti Kaljulaid, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Canada Chrystia Freeland, United States Special Representative for Ukraine Kurt Volker and others.
YULIA TYMOSHENKO: UKRAINE HEADING FOR RESET 1 OF GOVERNMENT Ukraine needs a leader who would drive the country's ""transformation,"" Ukraine's presidential candidate Yulia Tymoshenko told DW in Munich.
With presidential elections in Ukraine coming up in March, the country is set to see changes at the top, Ukraine's former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko told DW on the sidelines of the Munich Security Conference.
Tymoshenko is one of the key candidates ahead of the March 31 poll, alongside current President Petro Poroshenko.
While both of them are currently trailing behind political outsider Volodymyr Zelensky, analysts still believe the 41year-old comedian is unlikely to triumph against Poroshenko or Tymoshenko in a run-off vote.
However, Tymoshenko told DW that there are some obvious differences between her and the current president.
Bypassing Kyiv with Nord Stream 2 Speaking to DW, Tymoshenko also commented on the controversial Nord Stream 2 project to deliver gas from Russia directly to Germany.
Ukraine opposes the project for fear of losing its role as a gas transit nation.
With the project completed, Russia would be able to shut off the pipelines passing through Ukraine and deny Kyiv lucrative gas fees, without jeopardizing its buyers in Germany.
In Munich, Tymoshenko said that Nord Stream 2 was unnecessary and ran against Ukraine's interests in terms of its energy economics.
That is why it is very regrettable that ^ THE NEW COURSE FOR UKRAINE Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM NEWSLETTER V BATbKIBLUMHA ISSUE 18,18 February 2019 everything is being decided without consulting Ukraine,"" she said.
From prime minister to prisoner Ukraine's association agreement with the EU repeatedly states that Kyiv should be consulted over such issues, according to Tymoshenko.
Tymoshenko first grabbed international headlines as one of the leaders of Ukraine's 2004 Orange revolution, before serving as the country's first female prime minister between 2007 and 2010.
Tymoshenko ran for president in 2010, losing to pro-Russian leader Viktor Yanukovych.
She was subsequently sentenced for corruption in a trial that was regarded in the West as politically motivated.
The politician was released from prison in the final days of the 2014 Maidan uprising, as Yanukovych fled the country.
This happened during the TV show “The Right to Power” on 1+1 TVchannel.
They also discussed parallel vote counting with a view to preventing any falsifications during the presidential elections on 31 March.
Yulia Tymoshenko reminded that fair elections are a core EU and NATO value, but said the head of state and his entourage pose a threat to a fair vote.
YULIA TYMOSHENKO MEETS WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF ANTICORRUPTION CIVIC ORGANIZATIONS On 7 February, Yulia Tymoshenko met with representatives of the AntiCorruption Agenda initiative that unites 23 anti-corruption civic organizations.
Meeting participants discussed the key problems of Ukraine’s anti-corruption policy such as the functioning of anticorruption agencies and the need to protect them from the influence of politicians.
UKRAINE HAS LOWER QUALITY OF LIFE THAN NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES Ukraine occupies the 62nd position in the 2019 Quality of Life Index for Country study prepared yearly by Numbeo service, a lower ranking than all neighboring countries.
Numbeo According to the study, the first three positions in the Quality of Life Index are taken by Denmark, Switzerland, and Finland.
Germany is 8th, with Japan and the United States 12th and 13th correspondingly.
At the same time, Russia and Ukraine are substantially lagging behind Belarus.
UKRAINIAN LAWMAKER CLAIMS POROSHENKO “MAKES DEALS” WITH PUTIN ON A DAILY BASIS 74 February , 2079 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko strikes a deal with Russian President Vladimir Putin every day, according to Serhiy Leshchenko, a Ukrainian politician and former investigative journalist currently serving in parliament as member of Petro Poroshenko’s Bloc.
Leshchenko serves on the parliamentary committee on Corruption Prevention and Counteraction and is one of the president’s loudest critics.
He was formally the Deputy Editor-in-Chief for the Ukrayinska Pravda publication and is known for his work on corruption. “ is Viktor Medvedchuk, one of the worst examples of the political, let's say, zoo in Ukraine.
He's a political animal, and he's a member of Putin’s family, and he's a member of Poroshenko’s team.
Journalists founded and run the organisation , and the funding comes from non-profit organisations.
E-mail us at nlysova@gmail.com THE NEW COURSE FOR UKRAINE 7 Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM NEWSLETTER V BATbKIBLUMHA ISSUE 21,11 MARCH 2019 BATKIVSHCHYNA PARTY NEWS 1.
For the first time, we need to vote not for individuals, but for real, serious, well-founded programs of action 4.
YULIA TYMOSHENKO SIGNS A COMMITMENT TO UKRAINIANS On 7 March, Yulia Tymoshenko signed a Presidential Candidate Commitment to Every Ukrainian Citizen.
First of all, the parties discussed the situation in eastern Ukraine and annexed Crimea.
In this regard, Yulia Tymoshenko called for a strengthening of sanctions against Russia and stressed that Crimea must be returned to Ukraine, while at the same time underlining that her team was not prepared to make any concessions to Russia’s President Vladimir Putin.
She underlined the need to initiate new negotiations on the war in the Donbas within a new Budapest* format while preserving the Minsk format of negotiations.
She thanked the United States for the support provided to our state in its fight for peace, independence and the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Yulia Tymoshenko also informed the Under Secretary about the political and social and economic situation in Ukraine and the process of reform implementation, in particular, the fight against corruption.
This is the worst corruption at a moment when we are lS THE NEW COURSE FOR UKRAINE opposing Russian aggression, at a moment when our citizens who barely survive in the harsh economic conditions pay army tax.
The whole Ukrainian nation now knows that top government officials are using this money for its corrupt purposes and that concerns all spheres of life,” Yulia Tymoshenko said.
FOR THE FIRST TIME, WE NEED TO VOTE NOT FOR INDIVIDUALS, BUT FOR REAL, SERIOUS, WELLFOUNDED PROGRAMS OF ACTION March 4, 2019 Matthias Williams , Pavel Polityuk KIEV Yulia Tymoshenko has been Ukraine’s prime minister twice, was the global face of a revolution, imprisoned by two different presidents, and the target of an operation to discredit her by President Donald Trump’s former campaign manager.
Now the 58-year-old known for her fiery rhetoric and, once upon a time, for her peasant braid hairstyle, hopes to unseat her old rival Petro Poroshenko in a tightly fought presidential vote on March 31.
Her campaign is a difficult balancing act, promising reforms and continued cooperation with the International Monetary Fund while pledging to reverse sharp increases in the price of gas used for home heating that the IMF set as a condition for more loans.
At stake is the chance to lead Ukraine five years after the Maidan street protests ousted a Kremlin-backed leader and set the country on a pro-Western course and bloody confrontation with Russia.
For ordinary people, “virtually all of their income is wiped out through exorbitant, unreasonably high gas prices, this means that people have no money left to support the Ukrainian economy”, she said.
Her plan for dealing with Russia is to persevere with the Minsk peace talks, which have staunched but not ended the bloodshed in the Donbas.
She also called for wider negotiations involving the United States, Britain and the European Union.
She compares the attacks from Poroshenko’s camp to that time of Yanukovych’s rule.
She called for his impeachment in February over corruption allegations involving the son of one of Poroshenko’s close allies, which were made by an investigative journalist network.
UKRAINE IS THE LAST IN THE 2019 DOING BUSINESS RATING The EuCham has published BEST EUROPEAN COUNTRIES FOR BUSINESS 2019 rating.
It confirms that Ukraine needs change and real reforms, not their imitations.
PRESIDENT POROSHENKO USES POLITICAL CLONES AGAINST HIS COMPETITORS The number of candidates in this year’s elections in Ukraine represents an absolute record in Ukraine’s history.
Among the candidates there are classical technical candidates who run in the elections to decrease the electoral support of the likely front-runners.
They copy the slogans of their competitor, his/her rhetoric, and draw voters over to their side by relentlessly criticizing their “victim” and underlining his/her weaknesses.
They are typical clones who have the same or similar name and initials.
On the ballot paper, voters can easily confuse them with the candidate they support and vote for them by mistake.
The candidate used by the current President Poroshenko against Yulia Tymoshenko is Yuri Tymoshenko.
He has the same initials as Yulia Tymoshenko and was elected to the Parliament in 2014 with the support of the People’s Front.
E-mail us at nlysova@gmail.com THE NEW COURSE FOR UKRAINE 5 Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM V BATbKIBLUMHA NEWSLETTER ISSUE 22,18 MARCH 2019 BATKIVSHCHYNA PARTY NEWS 1.
The Batkivshchyna party reveals plans for massive election fraud by President Poroshenko 2.
Yulia Tymoshenko discusses with the Head of EU Delegation to Ukraine massive violations during the election campaign 7.
Yulia Tymoshenko will win the presidential elections poll of 2. million Ukrainians RESULTS OF THE POLL OF 2.
THE BATKIVSHCHYNA PARTY REVEALS PLANS FOR MASSIVE ELECTION FRAUD BY PRESIDENT POROSHENKO The following methods of massive fraud initiated by President Poroshenko and implemented throughout Ukraine have Fair democratic elections are a national security issue for Ukraine.
Elections that will be considered unfair by Ukrainians can provoke unrest, which can in turn be used by the aggressor-state to further destabilize the situation in Ukraine.
The candidate used by the current President Poroshenko against Yulia Tymoshenko is Yuri Tymoshenko). • contract public opinion polls to distort the assessment of real support among voters for one or another presidential candidate.
At the same time, other candidates have 17 senior positions on the average). • use of law enforcement bodies • concerns over election fraud extend to a range of additional issues.
Minister of the Interior of Ukraine Arsen Avakov said that the campaign office of a pro-government candidate allegedly tried to buy votes of pensioners in Kyiv, Kyiv region and one more region with the help of administrative resources and at the expense of a budget programme.
KP ON POROSHENKO’S VIOLATIONS DURING THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN Editorials March 7, 2019 A month before the election, Poroshenko ordered one-time payments of $90 to the poorest pensioners.
But pensioners are the most actively voting group in Ukraine, so what the heck.
Starting March, or right before the election, the 2 Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM NEWSLETTER ISSUE 22,18 MARCH 2019 government will pay utility subsidies to low-income households in cash, instead of providing a discount as it used to.
Editorial February 15, 2019 Ukraine is still not Turkmenistan, where people hail the great leader and hang his picture in every office or school.
But for Ukraine to have democracy, its presidential candidates must stop going to only scripted events where praise is heaped on them and no important questions are asked.
President Petro Poroshenko is seeking reelection on March 31 by trying to stay above the campaign fray.
He rarely speaks with independent journalists, preferring loyalists and speeches to friendly audiences.
Viktor Yanukovych refused Yulia Tymoshenko in 2010 and Poroshenko did the same in 2014.
A PRESIDENT FOR UAH 1000 March 12, 2019 Ruslan Szoszyn The campaigners hired by the “progovernment campaign office” make a list of the poorest residents and then visit them and ask whether they are ready to support their candidate.
Yulia Tymoshenko told the ambassador about the situation in Ukraine and the presidential campaign, primarily the largescale falsifications organized and carried out by the team of the current President Poroshenko.
There were two 3 Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM NEWSLETTER V BATbKIBLUMHA ISSUE 22,18 MARCH 2019 revolutions in Ukraine for freedom, democracy and European values.
She told the EU Ambassador about the methods of falsification being used by the team of President Petro Poroshenko.
It’s time for the pro-Ukrainian forces to win and to combine our efforts.
He also added that his decision to back Yulia Tymoshenko is a signal for other candidates to think about the country.
MILLION UKRAINIANS March 75 , 2079 The victory of Yulia Tymoshenko in the presidential elections on 31 March is beyond question according to a major nationwide poll.
The survey found that 31.68% of voters will support her in the first round, and in the run-off she confidently defeats both Volodymyr Zelenskiy and Petro Poroshenko.
During February, 2. million citizens were interviewed in all regions, and in most THE NEW COURSE FOR UKRAINE Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM NEWSLETTER V BATbKIBLUMHA ISSUE 22,18 MARCH 2019 cities, towns, and villages across the country.
In the run-off, Yulia Tymoshenko defeats both Volodymyr Zelenskiy 50.53% against 40.55% correspondingly, and Petro Poroshenko by 57.5% against 31.2% RESULTS OF THE POLL OF 2.
All sociological surveys conducted by the respected companies before December proved that Yulia Tymoshenko was the clear leader.
However, since the beginning of the election campaign, signs of dirty manipulations have started to appear in survey results.
E-mail us at nlysova@gmail.com THE NEW COURSE FOR UKRAINE 5 Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM NEW COURSE FOR UKRAINE THE ACTION PROGRAM OF PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE YULIA TYMOSHENKO Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM We, the GREAT UKRAINIAN PEOPLE, need to become a strong and successful nation, an equal among equals on a par with the developed countries.
We have comprehended all the challenges facing us as a country, we know how to pave the right path to peace, to a successful, prosperous life of people.
I am convinced that Ukraine will manage to become a prosperous, powerful European country.
In a modern competitive and rather brutal world, each millimetre of success won back is important.
It gives us that compelling force that will help us pass any test and overcome any obstacles. lit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM Hundreds of thousands of our children leave us and go to other countries.
We need to protect their future, build a country where they would like to live and work.
We must gather all our national forces together and redistribute them to overcoming poverty, corruption and injustice.
We, the Ukrainians, have to be cleansed of everything that prevents us from living happily.
We need to unite and no longer allow anyone to divide us by territorial, linguistic, political, and religious characteristics.
We will stabilize the current situation and pave the way for the further rapid development of Ukraine.
My goal is to build a state where everyone will find their place, their success, their stability and their peace.
Where everyone can live happily, rather than heroically fight every day against the callous, corrupt ruling circles.
The New Course for Ukraine is our real path to the revival, paved by a large team of Ukrainian specialists.
Hundreds of experts, lawyers, economists, representatives of Ukrainian civil society have been working for more than four years on the New Course for Ukraine.
No one will ever destroy our spirit, our soul, our will and our national intellectual level.
We, the Ukrainians, can and we must offer ourselves and the world a fundamentally new way of life for people.
The way which will allow everyone to fully, freely and directly live up to their potential.
Most Ukrainians believe that the country faces a new genocide according a rigorous external plan.
NEW COURSE FOR UKRAINE is a clear step-by-step plan to put an end to disorder and to get on the path of Ukraine’s development.
NEW STRATEGY FOR PEACE AND SECURITY is a real path to peace and restoration of our territorial integrity, to strengthening the national defence capability.
The main goal is the peaceful life and security of every Ukrainian citizen.
NEW PEOPLE’S CONSTITUTION will eliminate the corrupted system of oligarchic clans and return the country to people.
Everyone will be able to directly influence their own lives and the life of their country, making decisions and monitoring their implementation.
NEW ECONOMIC STRATEGY is the transition from the out-dated resource economy to the economy of innovation development with a strong middle class.
NEW SOCIAL DOCTRINE is a gradual attaining European standards for wages and living conditions over five years.
NEW YOUTH POLICY is the creation of conditions for the full realization of the country’s main potential the youth.
NEW STRATEGY FOR PEACE AND SECURITY At the present stage, the task of the Ukrainian army is to restrain the aggressor and build up its forces.
The task of Ukrainian diplomacy, headed by the President, is to take offensive and seek collective international measures to force the aggressor to peace and return Crimea and Donbass.
STRONG DIPLOMACY In 1994, at the request of the entire civilized world, Ukraine refused the third largest nuclear arsenal.
We dared to do that because the strongest countries in the world, the United States, Great Britain and Russia, gave us official international guarantees of inviolability of our borders and the non-use of military aggression against us.
Now we have the right to demand strong and effective actions from countries that gave us these guarantees.
In the modern world, only those guarantees on which the interested party firmly insists are respected and fulfilled.
Since the war began, the President of Ukraine has refused to demand implementation of international guarantees.
Only in this format of negotiations Ukraine, which has fulfilled all its obligations, will have a strong stand and will be able to achieve peace.
We will demand a collective use of measures that are sufficiently effective to force the Russian Federation to peace and liberation of Crimea and Donbass.
We will insist on significant strengthening of international militarytechnical assistance, which is muchneeded by the country to create an effective air defence system, to revive the Naval Forces and to strengthen our capabilities to resist a land-based invasion at the current level.
That is why one of the foundations of our strategy for peace and security is to strengthen the Ukrainian army.
In today’s rigorous and aggressive world, where the struggle for resources is intensifying, it is impossible to secure state independence, the inviolability of borders and the sovereign right to manage one’s life without a strong army.
The war that the aggressor country is leading against us today is a tragic proof of this.
The country needs a professional army that is morally and materially motivated, well-trained, equipped, and well-armed, built on powerful motivations of soldiers and commanders.
The foundation of a strong army is people, respect for the soldier and trust in the commander.
Our task is to make sure that the defining sense of every soldier defending our country was a sense of confidence.
Confidence that the state appreciates and respects its military business.
Confidence that in the rear his family is settled and protected by the state.
Confidence in the reliability of the weapon given to him by the state, confidence in commanders, headquarters and the home front.
Confidence that a soldier living, wounded or dead will not leave on the battlefield and will not be forgotten in captivity.
We will carry out a full modernization of the Armed Forces of Ukraine according to NATO standards and increase our military potential to the level of strong armies in the world.
We will always need a strong army, as a factor of stability and an argument reminding us that Ukraine’s interests must be considered.
De-occupation and reintegration of the temporarily occupied Ukrainian territories are not successive stages, but parallel, interconnected processes that need to be addressed today.
Our team has developed a Ukrainian program for the reintegration of Crimea and Donbass, which is an alternative to the current «Minsk formulae The key task of this program is to destroy the wall of fear, misunderstanding and hatred that is being artificially raised between Ukraine and the occupied territories.
The key task of this program is to bring millions of people out of stress.
Two million Ukrainians forced to flee the war did not go to the aggressor country, not to Europe and not to America.
It was they who refuted the myth about non-Ukrainian Donbass or Crimea.
Internally displaced persons and patriots who endured in occupation are our mainstay and the main personnel reserve for the restoration of Ukrainian power in the Donbass and Crimea.
Supporting and protecting the rights of internally displaced persons is a matter of dignity for Ukraine and an investment in achieving sustainable peace.
Today, the state must stop discrimination of displaced persons, give them the right to vote, provide affordable housing and work, and restore confidence in the future.
The state will create all guaranteed conditions for the unrestricted and safe return of Ukrainians to their homes in the de-occupied territories.
The International Fund for Donbass Restoration and Development will be established, which will involve international donors and investors SOLID SUPPORT TO A SOLDIER Immediately after the presidential election, a new contract for service in the Armed Forces of Ukraine will be approved; a contract drafted on the basis of proposals of thousands of soldiers that will ensure a European level of service conditions for soldiers and officers.
An important part of the new contract will be a motivational package approved by law, which includes guaranteed housing.
If a military signs a 15-year contract to serve in the army, the state provides him/her with an apartment at the beginning of service, provides guaranteed medical insurance, decent pension insurance and other important issues, as well as provides additional benefits for war veterans and members of their families.
The wage of a common contract soldier will be one and a halftimes higher than the average wage in the country.
The entire system of payment for military business will depend on the level of responsibility, qualifications of the soldier, as well as the degree of risk to life.
For each year of soldier’s serving in the operation zone, a required increase in wages will be introduced up to 20% annually.
We are ready to make exhaustive efforts to bring the Russian Federation as an aggressor state to legal accountability.
The purpose of such efforts is to obtain compensation for the damage caused to Ukrainian citizens, Ukrainian business and the Ukrainian state.
We will defend in the courts the rights of the state and citizens that have been violated by the aggressor country the Russian Federation.
LIABILITY OF THOSE RESPONSIBLE FOR CORRUPTION AT WAR Our army is dressed and armed not by presidents, ministers and deputies, but by Ukrainian taxpayers; therefore, every citizen has the right to demand that every penny is used for making enhancements to defence, and not stolen or kept offshore.
With the participation of international experts, we will carry out an integrated, comprehensive, unbiased investigation of illegal corrupt plundering schemes in the defence sector, money laundering through arms trade and blood money “at war” and bring the guilty to the most severe criminal responsibility.
AND WE UKRAINE’S ACCESSION TO NATO WILL DEFEND THEM FIERCELY AND Only a modern, capable army and a full membership of Ukraine in NATO collective security and defence system of the global peace can be the guarantee of security of our country and every Ukrainian family.
NATO spends one trillion dollars a year on military defence of its member countries.
With such expenditures for the army and with such a state of it as today, Ukraine can at any moment become an easy target for any military invasion.
And the war that the aggressor country is currently running against us is proof of that.
It provides for the construction of a society where there will no longer be oligarchic clans; a society where Ukrainians will choose in a referendum such a way of life in which no one will ever be able to violate their rights and freedoms with impunity.
NEW PEOPLE’S CONSTITUTION Today, Ukrainian citizens are not masters in their country.
The fifth article of the Constitution states that the Ukrainian people is the bearer of sovereignty and the only source of power in Ukraine.
The real authority in Ukraine is the corrupt clanbased structure the oligarchy, and all of us, Ukrainians, are their labour force.
The thirteenth article of the Constitution states that the land, its minerals, water and other natural resources are the property of the Ukrainian people.
The rights and freedoms of people are well specified in the Constitution, but they are blatantly ignored by senior officials and civil servants.
Peace judges and judges of local courts will be elected by the people, but without political advertisement.
Courts will be completely separated from any political and power influences.
Citizens will be granted the right to a legislative initiative in the form of petitions.
Public organizations, nation’s moral and spiritual leaders will necessarily be directly involved in the governance of the country.
A new constitutional body the National Strategic Centre of Ukraine will be established, which will be the driving force for the country’s innovation development.
The parliamentary opposition will be endowed with all rights of parliamentary control.
It will appoint members and heads of the Accounting Chamber, temporary investigative commissions, and special parliamentary prosecutors.
It will be entitled to apply directly to the court for the results of inspections.
The New Constitution will provide strong rights and opportunities to local communities.
Communities will be able to completely dispose of land within their borders.
We will be exporting only finished high-tech products instead of exporting raw materials.
We will not allow anyone to use Ukraine as a raw-material appendage of the developed world.
A person, its creativity, intelligence, entrepreneurial initiative and innovative technologies should become the centre of development of the Ukrainian economy.
Yulia Tymoshenko nPE3EHTAlilfl nPOfPAMU HO BUM EKOHOMIHHMM KYPC YKPAIHli 12:26:21 PM it 07/29/2019 3.
NEW ECONOMIC STRATEGY NEW QUALITY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION Based on the New Constitution, we will eliminate the structure of oligarchic clans and demonopolize all sectors of our economic life in order to create equal opportunities for the development of all entrepreneurial initiatives in our country under conditions of genuine competition and a real market.
The administrative rule of terror against entrepreneurs will be immediately and severely stopped.
Power structures will no longer “cover” corporate raiding, extortion, smuggling, and illegal deals, as the new Constitution will place them under real mandatory control of civil society.
On the basis of the New Constitution, through All-Ukrainian associations, representatives of professional circles and civil society will be involved in the governance of the country by investing their experience and intelligence in the public administration system, and by establishing an unwavering public control overall branches of government.
On the basis of the New Constitution, a court system will be established, so that Ukrainian citizens and foreign investors will never have doubts in its justness.
We will restore confidence in the banking system, support the creation and development of Ukrainian banks.
For small businesses and farmers, a loan insurance system instead of collateral will be developed and introduced.
We will change the inefficient policy of the National Bank of Ukraine in the field of monetary, currency and banking regulation.
The work of the Deposit Guarantee Fund will be uncompromising and indepth.
We will restore justice for those people who have lost their bank deposits and property during an illegally organized precipitous fall in the hryvnia exchange rate.
Any official who is guilty of destroying the country’s financial sector, deliberate bankruptcy of Ukrainian banks and Ukrainian entrepreneurs, excessive artificial cheapening of the national currency, as well as corruption in the National Bank, the Ministry of Finance and other financial institutions will be prosecuted.
This means the priority and unhindered lending, the introduction of green technologies for production of electricity and heat.
We will eliminate all bureaucratic obstacles to the development of green energy for small and medium businesses.
A fully-fledged electricity market will be introduced, which will create real competition and reduce electricity tariffs.
We will fully demonopolize gas imports and provide open trade in all kinds of energy resources in Ukraine, which will allow creating transparent prices and will help to reduce energy costs.
In order to ensure energy security, we will rapidly develop our own coal industry instead of importing expensive foreign coal.
All the entrepreneurs will be able to supply imported natural gas to Ukraine freely and without any restrictions on the Ukrainian power exchange.
This will significantly reduce the price of gas for industrial consumers.
We will build LNG terminals for liquefied gas import of non-Russian origin, which will be the second step for reducing the price of gas for industry.
Within five years, we will organize large-scale extraction of our own natural gas and fully meet our needs.
That is how we will fill our gas transportation system with gas for export, and we will not have to count on gas supplies from Russia.
AGRICULTURAL SECTOR AND LAND RELATIONS REFORM We will create conditions for intensive development of the agrarian sector as one of the main resources of the Ukraine’s restoration.
We will define development and comprehensive state support of farms, small and medium-sized agricultural enterprises as the main strategy of agricultural policy.
Today, 2. million farms operate in Poland, thus creating a strong Polish middle class.
We have 20 thousand working farmers; every year sees a decrease in their number because of raiding, overtaxing, lack of loans and access to market outlets.
Family farms will have decent state support, social and pension assistance.
Immediately after the presidential election, a law on the introduction of a single tax per hectare of land for farmers will be adopted.
Affordable medicine first aid stations or OPD with modern equipment and necessary medicines will be available in every village.
We will restore interest-free lending for housing construction in the countryside, especially for young people, teachers, medical staff and cultural workers.
As a result, pensioners in rural areas will receive significantly increased pensions.
WE WILL PROTECT AGRICULTURAL LAND AS A NATIONAL TREASURE FOR REAL FARMERS AND FUTURE GENERATIONS We will provide the state or community with the opportunity to buy shares at market price from villagers willing to sell them.
We will make a complete inventory of agricultural land and adopt a strategy for its effective use.
The agricultural land that has been stolen from the state or people will be returned.
The barbaric exploitation of agricultural land will be stopped and effective control over crop rotation and land processing technologies will be introduced.
We will introduce criminal responsibility for the deliberate destruction of the quality of agricultural land in order to preserve the most precious resource of the Ukrainian nation.
We will protect the right to own or lease land, and punishment for raiding will be harsh and inevitable.
Farmers, small and medium-sized agricultural producers who live and work on their land will be granted an exclusive right to purchase the land they lease at market price on the basis of long-term preferential loans.
We guarantee the owners of land shares a fair quasi rent, as well as the right to land for community workers of the village and ATO veterans. 20 yKPAIHM Received by NSD/FARA Registration Ui lit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM OPPORTUNITIES FOR WORK AND INCOME IN VILLAGES We will introduce a long-term lending to farmers without collateral covered by risk insurance at 3 per cent interest per annum.
Laws will be adopted to stimulate the development of agricultural co-operation, organic fruit and vegetable production, animal husbandry, as well as processing of agrarian raw materials.
Accounting, registration and control will be greatly simplified for family and smallscale farming.
Farmers, small and medium-sized agricultural producers will get easier access to trade networks, guaranteed by law.
ORGANIC AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION Special attention will be paid to organic production.
The lands used for organic farming will receive a special status, and farmers will receive state support and tax incentives.
OPTIMAL SYSTEM OF TAXATION We will reorganize tax authorities and completely liquidate the Tax Militia.
We will liquidate 37 corruptogenic quasitaxes giving officials the opportunity to pressure the business, in particular, state and court fees.
These 37 quasitaxes constitute only 0.5% of budget income, while the work of entrepreneurs becomes dependent on officials.
Access of citizens to justice and property rights cannot be limited due to lack of the necessary amount of money.
We will introduce digital governance and prohibit the tax authorities from contacting taxpayers at the legislative level.
We will simplify the taxation system and drastically reduce aggregate business rates.
NEW SOCIAL DOCTRINE In the global world, the boundaries have long been absent.
If a talented person wants to live and work in any country in the world, it’s possible to do so quickly and freely.
The world’s biggest competition now is the one for strong and smart people, and as of today, we, Ukrainians, have lost it.
EUROPEAN WAGES We aim at gradually achieving the average wage level in Poland expressed in dollars within the following five years.
At this moment you think that this is impossible, but you should open the statistics of Ukraine in previous years, and you will see that after the Orange Revolution from 2004 to the end of 2009, the average wage expressed in dollars has increased by 3. times.
In the current system, an employer makes much larger contributions to a pension fund over a person’s whole working life than this person receives during his or her lifetime in the form of a pension.
Under the new system, pension contributions will be deposited to a private personal account of each person in the state bank during the entire period of employment.
All these accumulated retirement money will belong to a person and will be kept exclusively on his or her private account at the state bank.
Each person’s retirement savings on the account at the state bank will be indexed annually, and the deposit interest will be constantly accrued.
This will lead to an increase in the amount of pension money on each person’s retirement account during the entire period of employment.
The state will guarantee preservation of private retirement accounts with all its resources.
After retirement, a person will be able to dispose of his private retirement account at his or her own discretion.
If a person fails to spend money on his or her retirement account within the lifetime, the amount remaining will be inherited by members of his or her family.
Private retirement accounts of people who have already retired or served out the required part of their work experience will be opened immediately after the adoption of the law on the new pension system.
These accounts will include all pension contributions for the entire period of employment.
These contributions will be adequately indexed with the definition of the terms of use.
Such a pension reform will at least double pensions for those whose social welfare is unfair.
AFFORDABLE MEDICINE The so-called “medical reform” that was conducted is another form of reducing the Ukrainian population.
In 2020, compulsory medical insurance will be introduced at the expense of employers’ funds, while simultaneously reducing the tax burden on their enterprises.
Medical insurance will include the full provision of every citizen with highestquality medical services at all levels, medicines, as well as disease prevention.
The state will make health insurance contributions for underage children, pensioners, people with special needs and disabled persons.
According to a European model, emergency medical services will be provided completely free of charge for each call.
This means that an ambulance car will be equipped with all the necessary medicines and professional physicians, and not with paramedics.
In five years, we will increase the wages of physicians to the level of wages in Poland.
People in rural areas will be provided with affordable high-quality care.
It will not be telemedicine, but care provided directly by a qualified medical officer in a modern outpatient clinic or medical and obstetric centre.
For the most important medicines, state regulation of prices will be introduced by setting manufacturer’s marginal prices and maximum margin levels for resellers.
We will eliminate non-market margins on medicines and arrange drug advertising.
This will significantly, by times, reduce the price of medicines in Ukraine.
A network of laboratories for state monitoring over the quality of medicines in pharmacies will be created.
Severe criminal liability will be introduced for manufacturing and selling medicines of substandard quality.
A special support program for our Ukrainian pharmaceutical manufacturers will be implemented.
This is a question not only of patient safety, but of the state’s national security.
CARE FOR PEOPLE WITH SPECIAL NEEDS Within five years, a national program “Barrier-free space” will be implemented for people with special needs.
We will introduce mechanisms of powerful motivation of entrepreneurs to employ people with special needs.
A tax rate reduction scale will be introduced depending on the number of people with special needs working at the enterprise.
Enterprises created by people with special needs and employing people with disabilities will be exempt from taxation.
People with disabilities will be provided with guaranteed social benefits at the level of average wages.
We will establish free medical insurance for people with special needs at the expense of the state with the provision of the whole spectrum of medical services at the highest level.
Seriously ill, disabled people with special needs will be provided with round-theclock permanent foster care services at the place of residence at public expense.
RESTORATION OF JUSTICE Laws that guaranteed social protection until 2014 to Afghans, Chernobyl victims and other groups of people, and which were cynically repealed in 2014-2018, will be restored.
The state budget for 2019 will be amended to allocate funds for the financial support of these updated provisions.
So, we Education and science is the major priority of the New Course for Ukraine.
And this strategic priority will be secured by the state’s financial resources and organizational capabilities.
Education in Ukraine, from primary to higher education, will be free, as in all developed European countries.
The access of children and young people to all levels of education cannot depend on the wealth of the parents.
We will ensure the absolute equality of all children in access to the most modern and high-quality educational institutions.
Financing of education will be carried out on the basis of a system providing for a single school tax for legal entities and individuals.
At the same time, this will not become a burden for entrepreneurs, as the overall tax burden on them will be reduced.
Taking into account the collected funds, we will introduce a single standard for payment for education in line with European standards.
It doesn’t matter where children are going to study, in a private or state institution, money will follow them.
We will resume free extracurricular programs for children (sports sections and schools, circles, art studios, music schools, etc.) through the introduction of new standards for financing of education. have enough of our own gas for our own needs.
There is nothing more important than the overall development of our children.
The state will have special programs for development and education for especially gifted children.
In five years, we will raise the wages of educators, namely tutors, teachers, librarians and lecturers, to the average European level.
This is one of the major priorities of the educational program, which will restore respect for the profession of teacher, lecturer and scholar, and will attract the best specialists to the pedagogical activity.
We will introduce a separate, multipurpose financing system for science to stimulate the development of universitybased innovation clusters.
Such a system will contribute to the efficient use of scientific research and innovative technologies for rapid economic growth.
Medical facilities will be restored in all educational institutions, thus ensuring control and protection of children’s health.
This is our Ukrainian world, which requires special and careful attitude, protection and development.
This is our unique national code, a cultural code that identifies us as Ukrainians in the world.
We will finally do what the cultural figures are dreaming about Ukrainian culture will be funded not by residual principle.
We will provide sufficient and reliable funding for the newly established Ukrainian Institute and expand powerful centres of Ukrainian presence and culture in the world.
We will create the Fund for financing of foreign language translations of the best Ukrainian literary works, which will support the best foreign specialists in translating them into world languages and popularizing the Ukrainian cultural heritage.
We will finance Ukrainian culture at the level of UAH 8-9 billion annually, responsibly and transparently directing financing on the basis of a broad public discussion of support for our cultural needs.
We will continue the practice of allocating sufficient funds for financing Ukrainian cinema, books, Ukrainian content on radio and television.
We will do our utmost and, in the first place, will financially support the Ukrainian language in all spheres without exception.
The Ukrainian state will support the Orthodox Church of Ukraine which unites Ukrainians and will necessarily receive patriarchate.
We will protect our church, in particular by law; we will foster understanding and tolerance among representatives of different religions and denominations.
For the first time in the history of independent Ukraine, we will place the state’s emphasis on the policy of active development of tourism by familiarizing ourselves with our historical, cultural and architectural heritage.
HIGH-QUALITY AND AFFORDABLE EDUCATION 29 Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM hit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM ENVIRONMENTAL SECURITY OF PEOPLE The entire civilized world is now shifting towards green transformation and introduction of the circular economy.
This means that, without exception, all industrial and household waste is reused or recycled using the latest, environmentally friendly technologies.
The functioning of the circular economy provides additional income for countries, as well as perfectly clean air, water and land.
Immediately after the presidential election, we will start gradually transferring the Ukrainian economy into a circular model and ensure economic growth without harming the environment.
An international audit of all sources of air, water and land pollution in our country will be immediately conducted.
All enterprises polluting the environment will receive preferential long-term loans at an annual interest rate of 3% for upgrading emission control systems and installing online monitoring sensors.
If such modernization is not carried out within the established minimum time, such enterprises will be closed or subject to significant fines.
We will create a branching network of laboratories for monitoring the quality of drinking water and food.
In a short time, genetically modified products, unsafe water and low-quality food will be removed from the market.
We will not allow anyone else to poison us and our children with inconsumable junk.
We will introduce criminal liability for those who produce or sell low-quality water or food.
In case of non-compliance with environmental norms, the state will provide a person with compensation for losses associated with deteriorating health at the expense of those who violate these environmental standards.
We will introduce a moratorium on deforestation at the legislative level and will renew the afforestation program, which was in operation in our country until 1991.
The amount of greenhouse gas emissions will be significantly reduced through the use of “green” technologies in all sectors of the economy with the involvement of international climate finance.
New standards will be set to reduce the maximum permissible content of carbon monoxide in exhaust gases of automobiles, and the “green transport” strategy will be supported.
We will introduce a sorting and environmentally friendly, non-waste, profitable waste recycling technology across our country to exempt it from landfills.
The government’s priority will be popularization of green energy among the population and small and medium businesses.
We will stimulate the development of energy cooperatives and increase financing of state programs for energy-efficient modernization and winterization of people’s houses.
We will introduce the best European environmental standards and implement the UN sustainable development goals in Ukraine.
NEW YOUTH POLICY NEW JOBS The New Economic Strategy for Ukraine which we offer will boost production and help create millions of new jobs with decent wages, including for young people.
Substantial tax incentives will be granted to employers who give jobs to graduates of educational institutions.
Professor Muhammad Yunus received the Nobel Prize for inventing and developing the microcredit system.
According to this law, every commercial bank of Ukraine will be obliged to establish a microfinance department and create a data bank of tens of thousands of business plans that have undergone a banking survey.
Such microcredits will be provided on a long-term basis, without collateral under mandatory risk insurance and no more than at 3% per annum Anyone willing to engage in entrepreneurship will be able to choose a ready-made business plan at the bank, open a credit line and start working.
All financing will be carried out exclusively by targeted transfers according to the components of the business plan under the complete control of the bank.
The return of microcredit and the accrued interest under the control of the bank begins when the new enterprise becomes profitable.
The microfinance program will allow in the short term to create millions of jobs and restore the middle class of entrepreneurs in Ukraine, which has been fully destroyed over the last five years.
Received by NSD/FARA Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM AFFORDABLE HOUSING Affordable housing does not mean cheap, low-quality housing.
A monthly installment for the mortgage repayment will be affordable for the family and will not ruin its financial life; if the family members who are repaying the mortgage have temporarily lost their jobs, then no one will have the right to immediately take the apartment.
Adequate time will be provided for finding a new job, and for that period of time, the payment of the mortgage loan will be suspended It will take some time to search for a new job, and at this time, the mortgage repayment will be suspended.
We will “liberate” the construction sector by removing bureaucratic shackles.
Because of numerous requirements and permissions, builders are forced to hand over up to 50% of the cost price of the object to corrupt officials.
We will immediately stop it by adopting a relevant law together with the builders, which will enable them to work without corruption.
For this purpose, first and foremost, we will bring back benefits for the birth of a child that we had before.
The state will provide many families with special comprehensive support programs.
Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:26:21 PM CONTENTS 1.
NEW STRATEGY FOR PEACE AND SECURITY 7 STRONG DIPLOMACY 7 STRONG ARMY 8 REINTEGRATION AND RESTITUTION OF TERRITORIES FREED FROM OCCUPATION 9 RECOVERY OF DAMAGES FROM RUSSIA 10 UKRAINE’S ACCESSION TO NATO 10 2.
NEW ECONOMIC STRATEGY 17 FINANCIAL STABILITY AND AFFORDABLE CREDITING 18 NEW ENERGY POLICY 18 AGRICULTURAL SECTOR AND LAND RELATIONS REFORM 19 RESTORATION AND NEW QUALITY OF AGRICULTURAL LIFE 20 OPPORTUNITIES FOR WORK AND INCOME IN VILLAGES 23 4.
NEW SOCIAL DOCTRINE 25 EUROPEAN WAGES 25 FAIR PENSIONS 26 AFFORDABLE MEDICINE 26 CARE FOR PEOPLE WITH SPECIAL NEEDS 27 FAIR TARIFFS 28 HIGH-QUALITY AND AFFORDABLE EDUCATION 28 UKRAINIAN SPIRITUALITY AND CULTURE 29 ENVIRONMENTAL SECURITY OF PEOPLE 31 5.
