Russian citizens and soldiers are fighting and dying in a war of their government’s own making.
Russian President Vladimir Putin continues to deny Russian involvement in the fighting, but the evidence is overwhelming and indisputable.
Putin’s War in Ukraine provides irrefutable evidence of direct Russian military involvement in eastern Ukraine.
Satellite images confirm the movement of Russian troops and camp buildups along the Ukrainian border.
Russian training camps stationed along the Ukrainian border are the launching points of Russia’s war in Ukraine.
These camps are the staging ground for Russian military equipment transported into Ukraine, soon to join the separatist arsenal, and for Russian soldiers mobilized across Russia to cross into Ukraine.
Commanders order Russian soldiers to conceal the identifying features of military vehicles, remove insignia from uniforms, and travel across the border to join separatist forces in eastern Ukraine.
A variety of Russian manufactured arms and munitions—not used by the Ukrainian military—have appeared in the hands of separatists, including shoulder launched surface-to-air missiles , various types of rocket launchers, anti-tank guided missiles, landmines, and various small arms.
During key offensives, Russian forces in Ukraine have received cover from Russian territory.
A Kremlin-made war Russian denial of facts Using digital forensics to expose Russia’s war in Ukraine A steady flow of arms and military equipment from Russia to Eastern Ukraine Border camps: preparing for combat Russian troops in the Ukraine Cargo 200: hiding Russia’s dead Cross-border shelling Policy recommendations Casebook Section 1.
Russian cross-border artillery attacks on Ukraine Foreword Return to table of contents﻿ For twenty-five years, prominent members of the Atlantic Council community have worked to advance the vision of a Europe whole, free, and at peace in which Russia enjoys its peaceful place.
In fact, many in our community aspired not only for a strategic partnership with Russia, but envisioned an alliance between Russia and NATO contributing to international stability and security.
Unfortunately, Russian President Vladimir Putin’s actions in Ukraine today mock this vision and threaten the international order established at the end of the Cold War.
In hindsight, the West might have recognized and responded to Mr Putin’s assertiveness much earlier.
Regardless of the moment of origin, however, it became clear in 2014, after Russia’s seizure and annexation of Crimea and its covert war in Ukraine’s east, that this major challenge to international security required a decisive and comprehensive response.
The Atlantic Council responded to this challenge in February 2014 by launching the Ukraine in Europe Initiative, with a focus on enhancing Ukraine’s security, advancing Ukraine’s reform process and economic prospects, and keeping attention on Russian-occupied Crimea.
The Council’s Initiative also aims to counter Moscow’s massive disinformation campaign.
If the international community cannot distinguish fact from fiction, or chooses not to do so in public, it is unlikely to coalesce around an effective strategy to support Ukraine and deter Mr Putin.
Putin’s War in Ukraine, is the Council’s contribution to offer clarity.
In reality, the conflict in Ukraine’s east is a Kremlinmanufactured war—fueled by Russian-made military equipment, fought by Russian soldiers, and supported by Mr Putin.
To reveal the full extent of Russian military intervention in Ukraine, the Atlantic Council has produced this study, using publicly available information and rigorous analysis.
This report is a result of the leadership and vision of Council Executive Vice President Damon Wilson and Director of the Council’s Dinu Patriciu Eurasia Center and former United States Ambassador to Ukraine John Herbst; the dedication and tenacity of Associate Director of the Ukraine in Europe Initiative Dr.
Alina Polyakova and social media savvy Special Assistant Maksymilian Czuperski; and the ingenuity of our key partner in this endeavor, Eliot Higgins of Bellingcat.
The information documented in this report draws on open source data using innovative socialmedia forensics and geolocation and is informed by team visits Ambassador Herbst led to Ukraine in March and April 2015, during which Maks and Alina also visited the conflict zone.
This effort would not have been possible without the support of those who have stood behind the Council’s work on Ukraine, including George Chopivsky and the Chopivsky Family Foundation, Ambassador Julie Finley, Frontera Resources, Ian Ihnatowycz and Marta Witer, Lenna Koszarny and Horizon Capital, James Temerty, the Smith Richardson Foundation, the Ukrainian World Congress led by President Eugene Czolij and Vice President Paul Grod, and the Patriciu family.
Only after the assassination of Boris Nemtsov, steps from the Kremlin, did the Council team learn about his efforts to expose Mr Putin’s war.
Mr Putin led his nation into war against a peaceful neighbor and lied about it.
Executive summary Return to table of contents﻿ Russia is at war with Ukraine.
President Vladimir Putin continues to deny Russian involvement in the fighting, but the evidence is overwhelming and indisputable.
Drawing upon open source information that is “hiding in plain sight,” this report provides irrefutable evidence of direct Russian military involvement in eastern Ukraine.
This report is the result of an Atlantic Council Working Group launched to examine direct Russian military involvement in Ukraine.
Discussions in March 2015 with senior Ukrainian civilian and military officials in Kyiv, investigative journalists, and a fact-finding mission to eastern Ukraine inform the report and its conclusions.
Satellite images confirm the movement of Russian troops and camp buildups along the Ukrainian border.Russian training camps stationed along the Ukrainian border are the launching points of Russia’s war in Ukraine.
These camps are the staging ground for Russian military equipment transported into Ukraine, soon to join the separatist arsenal, and for Russian soldiers mobilized across Russia to cross into Ukraine.Commanders order Russian soldiers to conceal the identifying features of military vehicles, remove insignia from uniforms, and travel across the border to join separatist forces in eastern Ukraine.
A combination of satellite data, crater analysis, and open source materials confirms that many attacks originated in Russia, not in the separatist controlled areas of Ukraine.As a prerequisite for policies that can better deter Russia’s aggression, Western political leaders should speak clearly about Russia’s war against Ukraine, including Russian forces fighting in Ukraine and the Kremlin’s direction of the campaign.
To do otherwise buttresses Putin’s attempt to obfuscate Russia’s direct role in the conflict.
The West must also recognize that Putin has used each lull in combat, now under the cover of the negotiated ceasefire in Minsk, to further reinforce Russian and Russian-backed forces in Ukraine’s east and to prepare for the next stage of fighting.
As Ukrainians struggled to build a new, democratically elected government, mysterious “little green men” began to appear, first in Crimea and later in eastern Ukraine.
To local residents and independent observers, the origins of the “little green men” were far from mysterious; their unmarked Russian military uniforms, Russian regional accents, and Russian-made weapons gave them away at first glance.
Crimea, now formally part of the Russian Federation, was lost to the “little green men” from day one.
Russia’s advanced planning for the operation, combined with its execution at the moment when Ukraine’s new interim leaders were attempting to reestablish authority in Kyiv, presented the new Ukrainian government and the international community with a fait accompli.
While the Kremlin and its sprawling media apparatus maintains that the turmoil in the Donbas is a civil war, Russian leadership was evident from the beginning.
Buying into its own propaganda, the Kremlin believed that providing leadership, money, and weapons would be enough to spark a local rebellion against Kyiv in the Donbas.
Still, Girkin-Strelkov’s operation initially enjoyed success as the provisional government in Kyiv was slow to react to the violence in the east.
From Donetsk and Luhansk, his and other forces moved westward to Slovyansk and Kramatorsk.
On May 25, 2014, Ukraine held a presidential election to replace the interim government set up after the flight of President Yanukovych.
In a strong show of unity, Ukrainians elected Petro Poroshenko with a majority vote.
Ukraine’s newly formed government under President Poroshenko mustered the military capacity to defend itself against the Kremlin-run campaign in the east and from mid-June began to take back territory, including Slovyansk and Kramatorsk.
Moscow responded to the Ukrainian counteroffensive by sending in ever more sophisticated artillery, tanks, and anti-aircraft missiles, including the Buk surface-to-air missile system that was used from Russian-controlled territory in Ukraine to shoot down Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 by mistake on July 17, 2014.
The downing of MH17 compelled Western media and governments to take a serious look at Russia’s military involvement in starting and fomenting the war in eastern Ukraine.
In response to the MH17 tragedy, the transatlantic community imposed strong economic sanctions on Russia.
While these sanctions have taken a considerable toll on the Russian economy, they have not deterred Russia from continuing to supply troops and weapons to eastern Ukraine.
The supply of more and more sophisticated weapons did not impede Ukraine’s counteroffensive operations through July and into August.
Neither did the firing of sophisticated artillery from Russian territory into Ukraine stop Kyiv’s advance.
By mid-August, Kyiv was on the verge of encircling Moscow’s ever smaller enclaves in Donetsk and Luhansk.
In a couple of weeks of fierce fighting, the Russian army soundly defeated Ukrainian forces and forced a retreat.
This sharp Russian escalation prompted additional sectoral sanctions from the European Union and gave impetus to the Minsk negotiations, which led to a ceasefire on September 5, 2014.
Despite the ceasefire, the Kremlin continued to send heavy weapons into eastern Ukraine and conducted a military operation to seize Donetsk Airport from Ukrainian forces.
In the first half of January 2015, following a substantial resupply of heavy equipment from Russia in December, Russian-led forces renewed offensive action aimed at taking the railway hub of Debaltseve.
This uptick of fighting prompted a new round of EU diplomacy, which led to a second Minsk ceasefire in February 2015, signed by the same parties as the first ceasefire agreement and brokered by France and Germany.
The terms of the second agreement were much more favorable to Moscow than to Kyiv, despite the fact that Moscow’s violations of the original Minsk ceasefire enabled it to take over five hundred square kilometers of additional Ukrainian territory.
After that, fighting quieted down and Moscow used this lull to bring in more arms.
Starting in late April 2015, Moscow’s surrogates have begun to ratchet up the violence once more.
April 16, 2015 Annual live broadcast program Direct Line with Vladimir Putin, April 16, 2015.
After all, acknowledging the devastating Russian casualties in eastern Ukraine would mean acknowledging that Russia is at war.
But as the casualties continue to climb, keeping up the charade is becoming increasingly difficult for Putin’s government.
Those who die in eastern Ukraine are not celebrated as heroes, but rather shipped home in body bags by night.
Funerals take place in remote areas of the country in the hopes that they will not catch the public’s attention.
Putin’s hold on power in Russia is dependent on continued high levels of popular support.
The way to end Putin’s aggression toward Ukraine and further intervention in Europe’s East is not through economic sanctions alone; Putin can blame economic pain on the West and avoid the real issue.
The West needs to reveal the lies that Putin is telling his own people.
Russian denial of facts Return to table of contents﻿ The Russian government and military have repeatedly denied involvement in Ukraine.
Russian military forces, weapons, and citizens were active in Ukraine during the annexation of Crimea in February and March of 2014 and at every step of the ongoing war in eastern Ukraine.
The forces fighting in eastern Ukraine are not some rag-tag group of “mine workers” and “farmers,” as Putin asserts.
They are regular Russian soldiers, readied for combat at improvised base camps alongside the Russian-Ukrainian border, backed by a steady flow of arms and equipment and at times supported by the cover of cross-border artillery shelling.
Overwhelming proof of each of these forms of Russian involvement in the Ukrainian conflict can be found through open source information and in-depth digital analysis of the evidence.
Using digital forensics to expose Russia’s war in Ukraine Return to table of contents﻿ While the Kremlin continues to deny the role of regular Russian forces in Ukraine, Russian soldiers fighting in Ukraine and Ukrainian and Russian civilians on both sides of the war are posting photographs and videos of convoys, equipment, and themselves on the Internet.
Satellite imagery captures the movement of Russian troops and camp buildup along the Ukrainian border.
These pieces of evidence create an undeniable—and publicly accessible—record of Russian involvement in Ukraine.
Geolocation differs from “geotagging,”22Many devices with network capability use global-positioning software for popular applications such as Google Maps.
When these media images are then uploaded to social media and other platforms, the geotag remains embedded in the image and can be identified. which is the automated process of adding geographical identification data to various media such as photographs and videos.
Only a fraction of photographs and videos recorded on smartphones, digital cameras, and tablets that are posted online contain an embedded “geotag” of their location.
Geolocation techniques, however, allow an investigator to firmly establish the location of recorded images even without an embedded geotag.
Using photographs posted on various social media sites, in combination with satellite imagery and “street view” images from services such as Google Earth and Yandex Maps, investigative geolocation techniques pinpoint the coordinates of where photographs were taken.Social media sites include YouTube, Twitter, and Russian sites such as VKontakte and Odnoklassniki and local media sources in Ukraine and Russia.
Geolocation is thus a powerful and effective tool for tracking individuals and the images they produce.Other organizations that frequently use geolocation in their work include Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International, and Storyful.
The geolocation methodology used in this report combines multiple sources of open domain information to track the movement of soldiers, vehicles, and cross-border shelling from Russia to Ukraine.
All the sources used in this report are publically available to anyone with access to the Internet, and the techniques used are documented throughout.
The aspect of Russian involvement in Ukraine with the widest breadth of open source information is the movement of heavy military equipment across the border, with hundreds of videos and photographs uploaded by ordinary Russians and Ukrainians who have witnessed direct Russian support of the hostilities in eastern Ukraine.
The map on the right illustrates two cases where the same pieces of uniquely identifiable Russian military equipment have been filmed in both Russia and Ukraine.
The coordinates were verified through geolocation, using satellite and ground imagery available through a Russian online map service.
Taken together, these features strongly suggest that the same unit is present in both videos, and that the unit would have been transferred across the border.
The location of the video has been verified using overhead satellite imagery and the unique landmarks visible in the video.
In the convoy, a BMP-2 infantry fighting vehicle with the painted text “ЛАВИНА”—lavina, meaning “avalanche”—can be seen on a trailer.
In February 2015, a YouTube channel associated with the pro-Russian separatists posted a video from Vuhlehirsk, Ukraine, showing combatants sweeping the town.
These two sightings demonstrate that the unit in question moved across the border from Russia to Ukraine.
Through systematic analysis of material from within the open source domain, it is possible to determine the movements of equipment that is not used by Ukrainian armed forces across the border from Russia to Ukraine.
T-72B modernization, including new sight and fire control system, among other improvements.
Pantsir-S1 anti-air systemEntered service in Russia 2012Modern air defense system, equipped with two dual 30mm autocannons and twelve surface-to-air missiles.
This includes using satellite imagery of the area and matching it with landmarks visible in the media images.
Some of these arms have been captured by the Ukrainian government, including weapons used exclusively by Russian special forces.
While it is impossible to give exact figures on how much equipment has been provided to separatists by the Russian government, it is clear that a wide variety of vehicles and arms—used almost exclusively by the Russian military—are in use in eastern Ukraine.
Not only are these pieces of military equipment transferred from Russia to Ukraine, they are also used by Russians, as in the case of the T-72B tanks used by members of the 5th Tank Battalion who departed from the Kuzminsky border camp in Russia in mid-February of 2015 to engage in the Battle of Debaltseve.Kostyuchenko, “We Were Fully Aware of What We Brought Ourselves to and What Could Happen,” op cit.
These camps are the gathering points for Russian military equipment transported into Ukraine, soon to join the separatist arsenal, and for Russian soldiers mobilized from the far reaches of the country to cross into Ukraine.
Satellite images show the rapid establishment and expansion of those training sites just days after the annexation of Crimea.
A number of these camps were set up alongside Russia’s border with Ukraine shortly after the beginning of the war in Donbas.
Most of them are in the Rostov and Belgorod oblasts, with clear passage into separatist-held territory.
They house thousands of Russian soldiers and pieces of military equipment, including equipment and arms that later appear in Ukraine.
From these camps, hundreds of Russian troops have travelled in large convoys into eastern Ukraine.
In addition to the satellite images, details of Russian troop deployments on the Ukrainian border can be gleaned from accounts of Russian soldiers who were injured or killed in Donbas and their families.Kostyuchenko, “We Were Fully Aware of What We Brought Ourselves to and What Could Happen,” op cit.
Some of these camps served as staging points for cross-border artillery attacks against Ukrainian forces in the summer of 2014.
Extensive analysis of artillery craters in Ukraine and firing points near Pavlovka, Russia shows that artillery firing points were staged fewer than two kilometers from a Russian training camp, which is fewer than four kilometers from the Ukrainian border.
Satellite imagery and the first-hand accounts of Russian soldiers show that the camps are launching points of Russia’s covert war in Ukraine.Kostyuchenko, “We Were Fully Aware of What We Brought Ourselves to and What Could Happen,” op cit.
Kuzminsky Camp The Kuzminisky camp was established only forty-six kilometers from the Ukrainian border and did not exist before 2014.
This camp became the site for hundreds of military vehicles, including tanks from the 5th Tank Brigade from Ulan-Ude.
The Kuzminsky camp in September 2014, with dozens of trucks and military vehicles lined up.
In the satellite photos, similar formations of vehicles can be seen throughout the camp, though the positions of the vehicles were not constant throughout the fall and winter months of 2014 to 2015.
In this photo, dozens of tents, military vehicles, trucks, and fuel tanks are visible.
One of the tank operators deployed to this base on active duty was Bato Dambayev, who fought in Debaltseve with other members of his brigade after departing from the Kuzminskiy camp .47Kostyuchenko, “We Were Fully Aware of What We Brought Ourselves to and What Could Happen,” op cit.
The contributions of Dambayev and other Russian soldiers who were stationed at the Kuzminsky camp were key in the Ukrainian army’s defeat in Debaltseve in mid-February of 2015, just after the second Minsk ceasefire accords were signed.
There have been hundreds, likely thousands, of Russian citizens who have voluntarily crossed the border into Ukraine on their own accord.
What the Russian government denies is that regular Russian soldiers are fighting and dying throughout eastern Ukraine.
Deputy Secretary General, NATO Despite an orchestrated campaign from the Russian government, the coffins arriving from Ukraine cannot be hidden.
These forces contained some separatist soldiers, but the reason for the overpowering victory was a combination of enlisted Russian soldiers and their heavy machinery, including the 5th Tank Brigade from Ulan-Ude, Buryatia60Kostyuchenko, “We Were Fully Aware of What We Brought Ourselves to and What Could Happen,” op. cit. and the 37th Motorized Infantry Brigade from Kyakhta, Buryatia.
Bato Dambayev is one soldier from the 37th Motorized Infantry Brigade and returned home to Buryatia after participating in the fierce fighting in the Debaltseve warzone.
Before fighting in Ukraine, Bato Dambayev trained at a large camp near the Russian city of Kuzminka, just like Dorzhi Batomunkuyev, the Buryat soldier of the 5th Tank Brigade who gave a now infamous interview with the Russian independent newspaper Novaya Gazeta detailing his involvement in Debaltseve.Ibid.
In his interview, Batomunkuyev specifically mentioned that contract soldiers from Kyakhta joined him when crossing the border to fight in Debaltseve.Ibid.
However, they did not stay too long in these camps, as they eventually departed for Ukraine in February to deal a decisive defeat to the Ukrainian forces near Debaltseve.
Bato with a Siberian husky puppy at the Kuzminsky Camp, where he trained before fighting in the Battle of Debaltseve in mid-February.
Numerous other members of the 5th Tank Brigade and 37th Motorized Infantry also photographed themselves with these puppies, which lived at the Kuzminsky camp over the winter of 2014 to 201566.
Since fighting in Debaltseve, Bato has returned to his wife and two-year-old son in Buryatia.
Russian government officials have refused to publicly acknowledge these soldiers’ deaths.
Instead, they often lie by claiming that these soldiers died during exercises at training camps near the Ukrainian border.
The Russian government’s secrecy shows the importance of hiding the truth about the human toll of the Kremlin’s involvement in eastern Ukraine from Russian citizens.
Bato Dambayev near a checkpoint in the eastern city limits of Vuhlehirsk, Ukraine, a city near Debaltseve where Bato and other Russian soldiers fought in mid-February.Source: Dambayev added this photograph of himself as his profile picture on VKontakte on February 23, 2015.
Cross-border shelling Return to table of contents﻿ During key offensives, Russian forces in Ukraine have received cover from shelling from Russian territory.
Despite Russian government denials, with a combination of satellite data, crater analysis, and open source materials, one can establish that many of these attacks originated in Russia and not in the separatist controlled areas of Ukraine.
Satellite imagery from August 8, 2014, showed the crater field near the Dolzhanskaya-Capital mine outside of the Panchenkove village.
The trajectories calculated based on the shape of the craters revealed that there were six separate attacks from five different directions.
The attack occurred on July 16, 2014 in the vicinity of Gukovo, Russia.
Four videos containing geotags filmed in different locations in and around Gukovo showed the launch of rockets, and two of these videos showed burning after the launch of the rockets.
All of the calculated trajectories can be traced to five separate firing positions, with maximum differences of three hundred meters at a shelling distance of fifteen kilometers.
Every one of these—with the exception of the position near Chervonopartyzansk, Ukraine, which is close to the border—is within the territory of Russia.
Following the attacks, a Russian journalist visited Gukovo and spoke to the locals.
Cross-border attacks served as cover for the renewed military incursion in the summer of 2014.
Attacks originating in border towns like Gukovo allowed Russian forces operating inside Ukraine to reverse the tide of the conflict when the Ukrainian military was making headway.
Moscow political consultant Aleksandr Borodai as President of the Donetsk People’s Republic and FSB Colonel Girkin-Strelkov as Defense Minister.
The Kremlin provided financing, arms, volunteer fighters, and regular troops.
Using its control of the Russian media, the Kremlin also launched a massive disinformation campaign to persuade the Russian people and the outside world that Ukraine’s east is the venue of a civil war.
When the Ukrainian government or even Western governments discuss the presence of Russian weapons or soldiers in the east, the media present their statements and then the Russian denial as if they were of equal value, but they are not.
Many exhibited a lack of clarity in their own words, avoiding references to Russia’s war against Ukraine or referring to the so-called separatists as if they were independent Ukrainian actors.
Furthermore, Western governments have been slow to recognize the grave danger posed by the Kremlin’s avowedly revisionist foreign policy.
Moscow is seeking to overturn the peace settlement that ended the Cold War, and it has conducted wars against two of its neighbors, Georgia in 2008 and Ukraine today, to achieve that objective.
As a result of the failure to appraise the nature of the threat, major Western governments are not devoting the necessary resources, including intelligence assets, to the war in Ukraine.
Russian military equipment in use in Ukraine Return to table of contents﻿ Social media is a critical source of information regarding movements of military equipment in Ukraine and in the vicinity of the Ukrainian border with Russia.
Most often, the material is submitted by ordinary people who encounter military equipment and share pictures out of general interest.
Supporters of the separatists and the Russian Federation have also launched their own propaganda news channels on social media, which yield valuable information on the equipment used.
T-72B3 Tanks T-72B3 sightings have been registered in Ukraine since the fall of 2014, but some of the clearest footage of the tanks has come from pro-Russian separatist supporter and British blogger Graham Phillips.
The self-reported description of the video makes reference to Debaltseve, and geolocation yields a strong possible match in the village of Sanzharivka, ten kilometers north of Debaltseve.
Dozor Armored Vehicles Several sightings of the Dozor armored reconnaissance and communications vehicles have also been collected from both sources supporting the separatists and from videos uploaded by locals.
Several of the sightings can be geolocated to the Luhansk area, with two additional sightings further east, in the town of Krasnodon near the border with Russia.
Pantsir-S1 Air Defense System The distinctive-looking Pantsir-S1 close range air defense system has been captured on pictures and video in early 2015 by local residents in Luhansk as well as Makiivka, east of Donetsk.
Rostov oblast with search tools specialized for finding geotagged social media content has also revealed that these systems have been deployed in the vicinity of Ukraine.EchoSec and Yomapic are tools used for locating geotagged content.
Russian soldiers posting pictures of the systems on their social media accounts have corroborated this assessment.
After the initial volley fired in the video, the camera is aimed down while a vehicle exits the formation.
When the camera is raised again, a Grad-K system can be seen driving out of the area, before the older Ural-mounted Grad systems begin firing volleys.
The video can be reliably geolocated to the Kirovskyi district in Donetsk, using the buildings, landmarks, and visible signs.
It is notable that the firing location is inside the city, at an apparent commercial property in the immediate vicinity of residential areas.
Russian training camps on Ukraine’s border Return to table of contents﻿ Starting in 2014, the Russian military began rapidly constructing massive training camps only a few kilometers from the Ukrainian border.
This fact is supported by before and after satellite imagery comparisons and by hundreds of photographs from soldiers’ social media profiles.
Taken together, this evidence irrefutably confirms the existence and development of such camps and shows that they serve as launching pads for Russia’s war against Ukraine.
Two of these camps, near the Russian border towns of Kuybyshevo and Pavlovka, staged artillery attacks from Russian to Ukrainian territory, while a third near the town of Kuzminka housed hundreds of Russian soldiers before they fought in key battles in Ukraine.
This camp was established only forty-six kilometers from the Ukrainian border and did not exist before 2014.
Ever since, it has become the site for hundreds of military vehicles, including tanks from the 5th Tank Brigade from Ulan-Ude, Siberia, which was deployed to the site in October and November of 2014.
Pavlovka Camp Coordinates: 47.939519, 39.846468 The Pavlovka training camp was established only two kilometers from the Ukrainian border and became the site for dozens of military vehicles.
Satellite images from April 2013 show that this base did not exist then but was built up following the Euromaidan protests.
Pavlovka Camp.Source: Stanislav Tarasov’s Odnoklassniki file, captioned “At the border with Ukraine,” posted on June 18, 2014.
He deleted the photograph off of some of these services but reposted the image onto his VKontakte profile in December.
The 7th Airborne Division Unit 54801 was deployed to the Pavlovka base in June 2014.
Photographs uploaded by an active member of this battalion and local residents confirm that this battalion, among others, were at the Pavlovka base in the summer, at the same time as the rapid expansion of the base.
The Grad launchers that conducted artillery strikes against Ukrainian positions in July 2014 were located approximately one kilometer west of the Pavlovka training camp.
Since the beginning of the Ukrainian crisis, this base has grown from nothing to a large base with active heavy artillery.
The firing positions for the Grad launchers that conducted the July 2014 artillery strikes against Ukrainian territory were just west of the town of Kuybyshevo.
There, along the border between Russia and Ukraine, stood our soldiers, a whole unit.
They were living in field camps divided into cordoned-off areas near the villages Russkoye and Kuybyshevo, and the town Kamensk-Shakhtinsky.
They lied to the locals, saying the military was conducting training exercises.
I still remember how one night I drove up to one of the units stationed in Kuybyshevo.
There are many pictures of soldiers at this camp firing artillery shells in the direction of Ukraine.
Russian soldiers in Ukraine Return to table of contents﻿ The Russian military is sending its soldiers across the border to mix with Russian-instigated separatist forces in Ukraine.
Once in eastern Ukraine, these soldiers are no longer considered Russian; rather they are told to refer to themselves as “local defense forces,” aiding the separatist soldiers with additional manpower and Russian equipment.
In addition to Bato Dambayev, two more soldiers, Anton Tumanov and Leonid Kichatkin, profiled in this report represent the routine process of how Russian soldiers train in “exercises” near the Ukrainian border, cross covertly into Ukraine, and fight against Ukrainian soldiers.
Anton Tumanov Russian 18th Motorized Brigade, Unit 27777 Tumanov was sent to Ukraine while on active duty in the Russian military in August 2014.
He perished on August 13, 2014, in Snezhnoe, Ukraine after crossing the border on August 11, 2014.
Life before the War Prior to joining the Russian military, Anton frequently voiced his concerns about the state of the local economy in his hometown of Kozmodemyansk, Russia.
He saw no alternative to joining the military, even knowing the danger of being sent to fight in eastern Ukraine.
His mother did not want him to join the army, but Anton went nonetheless.Ibid.
The twenty-year-old entered Ukraine with over a thousand others and a large column of military equipment, and his smaller group arrived in Snezhnoe late on August 12, 2014.
Tumanov with his fiancée Natasha Chernova in June 2014, before he left for service.Chernova told Novaya Gazeta and Anton talked to her in late July, in which he said that he would soon be leaving for Ukraine to fight “in the role of opolchentsy,” a term that refers to local separatist fighters in eastern Ukraine.
Rolan Ramazanov, the soldier in the middle, shared this image online on August, 26, 2014.99The exact location of this photograph is unknown, but it was taken somewhere in Snezhnoe—likely at or near the Khimmash factory, where an artillery strike killed Anton.
Not coincidentally, Tumanov and his fellow soldiers were photographed with white bands and a BTR-80a in Snezhnoe.
The hatches were open, and as a result— a concussion and minor loss of hearing.
He is buried in his hometown of Kozmodemyansk, Russia, over a thousand kilometers from Snezhnoe, Ukraine.
Leonid Kichatkin Russian 76th Airborne Division, Unit 74268 Like Anton Tumanov, Leonid Kichatkin died in August 2014 while fighting in eastern Ukraine, under direct orders of his commanders in the Russian military.
Before Ukraine Leonid Kichatkin was a Sergeant in the Russian Airborne Troops.
He lived with his wife, Oksana, and children in Pskov, where he was stationed for his military service.
In late July 2014, Ukraine was close to defeating separatist forces as it retook territory, but the separatists were seemingly miraculously reinvigorated.
In mid-August, Oksana would speak to her husband for the last time, as he and other Russian soldiers were ordered into Ukraine where they quickly stopped the Ukrainian counteroffensive.
Lyonya died, the burial will be at 10m., the funeral service in Vybuty.
Whoever wants to bid him farewell, come, we’ll be pleased to see everyone.
Kichatkin’s funeral took place on August 25, as reported in his wife’s message.
In the case of Leonid Kichatkin, the story grows more complicated from this point.
Reporters from both Novaya Gazeta and Echo of Moscow spoke with not only Oksana Kichatkina, but also Leonid Kichatkin himself—or more accurately, someone impersonating the slain soldier.
Novaya Gazeta spoke to a woman claiming to be Oksana Kichatkina on August 24.
Yet, Leonid’s father and uncle came to the funeral, along with Aleksandr Osipov’s father, who grieved the deaths of both soldiers.4Ibid.
Leonid in his paratrooper uniform while visiting the “Stalin Line” museum in Belarus.
Leonid posted this photo on his VKontakte page on Paratrooper Day in 2012.
Added on August 2, 2012 on Kichatkin’s VKontakte page.Coordinates: 54.060218, 27.294158.
Novaya Gazeta/Nina Petlyanova.Since his funeral on August 25, there have been no indications that Kichatkin is alive.
On August 26, reporters from various Russian independent journalism outlets visited the Pskov graves of Kichatkin and Osipov.
Leonid Kichatkin’s and Aleksandr Osipov’s graves can still be found in Pskov, but following the journalists’ inquiries, the nameplates at the soldiers’ graves were removed.
Russian cross-border artillery attacks on Ukraine Return to table of contents﻿ Ukrainian armed forces positioned near the RussianUkrainian border were attacked by artillery fire in the summer of 2014.
Satellite images of eastern Ukraine from July, August, and September of 2014 have enabled the report team to find evidence of these artillery attacks, determine their origin, and compare them with local sources.
Methodology Satellite imagery with a panchromatic resolution of up to 0. meters from eastern Ukraine and its border regions with Russia was examined for visible signs of artillery attacks in reported locations.
Additionally, videos shared on social media capturing the artillery attacks as they occurred were analyzed and geolocated.
In addition to video footage, other open source information was gathered and analyzed.
In examining each area, the research team created a novel analysis method based on internationally-recognized “on-the-ground” procedures to determine the trajectory of the artillery fire.8Gutierrez, Torpey, and Bellingcat, “How Digital Detectives Say They Proved Ukraine Attacks Came from Russia,” op cit.
The trajectory of the projectile is determined by a variety of factors, such as the type and hardness of the impacted ground, wind direction and speed, and the type of projectile.
Satellite imagery from July 16, 2014, shows a corresponding extensive crater field south of Amvrosiivka.
When screening for possible firing positions from this trajectory, a firing position was found 14. kilometers from the crater field.
The Amvrosiivka crater field is located south of the town at 47.76455, 38.513236.
Satellite imagery from July 16 indicates a launch site coinciding in time with the report of the attacks at 47.63709, 38.469355.
Based on the markings at the launch site of the attack, it was possible to determine the type of multiple rocket launcher used and its position in relation to the damage done to the launch site.
The launch site north of Seleznev is showing clear burn marks from multiple rocket launches and track marks from the movement of vehicles in the area.
Ukraine: Battle aftermath litters after Sverdlovsk militia pummels 72nd Motorized Brigade.Source: YouTube screenshot from Ruptly Video.Example 2.
Several abandoned and damaged armored vehicles are visible in this video.
Ukrainian Army BMP-2, MT-LB and rocket launchers were left abandoned near Sverdlovsk on Saturday, after the 72nd Motorized Brigade suffered heavy losses during mortar shelling from the Lugansk People’s Militia122The Lugansk People’s Militia is a Russian-backed separatist group on Friday.
Lugansk People’s Militia has said that heavy losses were suffered by the Ukrainian army in both hardware and personnel after the Kyiv troops were hit by the 12mm mortar shells.
Since the video was released on July 28, 2014 and the description states that the attack occurred on the previous Friday, this places the date of the attack on July 25, 2014.
Using the video footage, it was possible to identify the location of the Ruptly camera as a crater field close to the village of Khmelnytskyi, south of Sverdlovsk.
Using crater analysis, it was possible to determine three primary attack trajectories.
All three trajectories clearly point to firing positions within Russian territory.
These firing positions are directly connected to the military camp of the Russian army near Pavlovka and a smaller firing position close to Malyy.
Alina Polyakova, John E Herbst, and Damon Wilson Conflict Disinformation English French German Human Rights Russia Russian Ukraine Ukrainian Image: Hiding in Plain Sight: Putin's War in Ukraine Join our network Sign up to receive expert analyses from our community on the most important global issues, rapid insights on events as they unfold, and highlights of the Council's best work.
