Russia’s new Internet censorship legislation is dominating media coverage of Russia – its existence reflects the regime’s fear of its own people.
In Russia, ISIS recruitment shifts to ethnic Russian converts, likely as these are less connected with wider Muslim communities that see ISIS for the toxic rabble it is, and thus susceptible.
Russia’s demographic collapse to be addressed by bringing in non-Russian immigrants – ethnic Russians outside Russia are unwanted as they are needed where they are to provide for the Volksdeutsche meddling game.
Much on Russian meddling in Europe, Africa – Egypt to procure 20 x Su-35S FLANKERs.
Prof Blank explains the risks in Ukraine developing and deploying genuine IRBMs and long-range GLCMs.
We still do not know whether Pres Poroshenko was referring to the Sapsan TBM and Korshun GLCM, or newer longer ranging systems.
Russia announces the deployment of a squadron of Tu-22M3 BACKFIRE C in Crimea ostensibly to counter the United States BMD system in Romania.
While the aircraft deployed are the baseline M3 variant, Muscovy was eager to expound on the new M3M upgrade, with an ESA radar, digital avionics, glass cockpit, and other components migrated from the Tu-160M BLACKJACK upgrade, the M3M is armed with the digital Kh-32, itself an upgrade to the classic Kh-22 Burya / AS-4 KITCHEN, the Kh-47M2 Kinzhal hypersonic cruise missile, and other modern Russian PGMs.
Notably, Crimea is problematic as a FOB for the VKS due to its exposure, and challenges in resupply.
President Vladimir Putin signed laws punishing online media and individuals for spreading “fake news” or material that’s considered insulting to Russian officials.
Publishing “unreliable socially significant information” can lead to big fines.
Russian President Vladimir Putin signed a law allowing Moscow to punish and potentially imprison citizens who spread misinformation on the internet.
Critics have labeled the legislation “direct censorship” and yet another step toward autocracy.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has signed into law a series of bills that would criminalize the spreading of “fake news” or “blatant disrespect” for the state, but which critics say is intended to chill free speech critical of the government.
Some of them are convinced that the new arrivals will drive down wages and increase unemployment.
Maslennikov says that Moscow will not be able to attract the highly skilled workers it hopes for but only more of those with fewer skills at the bottom of the socio-economic pyramid.
And Oleg Ivanov, head of the Center for the Resolution of Social Conflicts, says that the newcomers will create a dangerous “demographic imbalance” given that many won’t be able to fit it.
The immigrants who will come, he says, are going to be from Central Asia and the Caucasus, not Ukraine and Belarus as the Kremlin imagines; and the former know Russian less well and are significantly more culturally different.
Leonty Byzov of the Moscow Institute of Sociology says that it will be extremely difficult to acculturate let alone assimilate these people.
And there will be more such places if the Kremlin’s plan goes into effect.
Norway has electronic proof that Russian forces disrupted global positioning system signals during recent NATO war games, and has demanded an explanation from its eastern neighbor, the Nordic country’s defense minister said on Monday.
Both Norway and Finland protested to Russia, which dismissed those allegations when they were first made.
A Czech publication Respekt has just published a story which provides more detail on a recent successful intelligence operation carried out by country’s BIS counterintelligence service, an agency that has been criticized for incompetence by President Miloš Zeman.
These companies got their equipment delivered by vehicles under Russian diplomatic cover.
The weekly says that BIS shut down a group of Russian hackers, who were part of a wider international network, in early 2018, according to Radio Praha.
A few months ago, Czech President Miloš Zeman attacked the Security Information Service , saying that the Czech counterintelligence was incompetent and had not revealed a single Russian or Chinese spy in six years.
Viktor Orban is facing calls for greater scrutiny of his government’s spending of EU funds as tensions between the Hungarian prime minister and the EU near breaking point.
Egypt and Russia have signed a $2 billion dollar contract for the purchase of more than 20 Russian Su-35 multi-role air-defense fighters and air-launched weapons.
The Ethiopian National Defense Force is operating at least one Russian-made Pantsir-S1 anti-aircraft defense systems, footage released on a national TV has confirmed.
Russia’s main arms exporter Rosoboronexport declined to comment when asked about the Pantsir-S1′ delivery to Ethiopia.
People familiar with the talks said that Ethiopia ordered some number of modern and upgraded air defense systems and radars in Russia and Ukraine to increase the capability of its Armed Forces.
The footage aired on national TV showed the recently received Pantsir-S1 air defense missile/gun system that is designed for air defense of small military, administrative and industrial installations and areas against enemy aircraft, helicopters, cruise missiles and precision-guided weapons.
For reference, the Pantsir missile system is a family of self-propelled, medium-range surface-to-air missile systems.
Pantsir-S is a combined short to medium range surface-to-air missile and anti-aircraft artillery weapon system produced by KBP of Tula, Russia.
The system is a further development of 2K22 Tunguska and represents the latest air defense technology by using phased array radars for both target acquisition and tracking.
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko recently advocated building intermediate-range ballistic missiles and cruise missiles to target and presumably use against Russia.
No doubt Poroshenko calculated that he might gain a political advantage during the final days of a tough campaign for reelection by adopting this hawkish stance.
It appeals emotionally to a population that has been fighting Russia for five years with little overt progress.
And since this advocacy casts Poroshenko as an aggressive patriotic defender of Ukraine, this posture might conceivably yield him political dividends.
However, it would be a disastrous decision for both strategic and operational reasons.
In 1993-94 during the height of the controversy over whether or not Ukraine should seek control over the Soviet nuclear weapons it inherited, I argued that doing so would pose an intolerable threat to any Russian government—including a democratic one—that Moscow could not ignore.
Even if Ukraine did not threaten Russia then, the possession of nuclear weapons there constituted a threat as well as an incitement and, de facto, an invitation to Russia to preempt Ukraine and take out those weapons.
Even though today’s situation is vastly different and Ukraine is under attack by Russia, any Ukrainian effort to build intermediate-range ballistic missiles would almost certainly drive Russia to attack it preemptively.
Moreover, no one in Europe would do anything to prevent Moscow from doing so given the weakness that characterizes too much of European defense policy.
Thus strategically, building such missiles, even though it is understandably emotionally satisfying and perfectly within Ukraine’s right after the United States backed out of the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces Treaty, invites a much greater strategic disaster.
Operationally too, this would be a misguided decision because it responds to the wrong threat while overlooking the existing threat.
The correct response to the current threat—a conventional invasion using land and sea forces—is in Ukraine’s hands.
Ukraine has the means to decide to build these capabilities or to obtain them from abroad.
Moscow has steadily reinforced its ground and naval forces confronting Ukraine.
The so-called separatists, in reality Russian forces, are now wholly assimilated into the Russian army.
Russia has also built up twenty-eight tactical battalion groups, naval, and air forces in Crimea and may well be contemplating a new offensive as we approach spring.
If the upcoming Ukrainian election turns out to have negative consequences for Moscow’s interests, a new offensive becomes more likely.
While we cannot be sure that Moscow will attack, Ukraine undoubtably needs major upgrades to its defensive capability to ward off any possible offensive on land or sea.
Rather than high-precision missiles, Ukraine needs land-based short-range missiles, anti-ship, and anti-air missiles and all the elements of a combined arms defense of its maritime borders, including the Sea of Azov and Kerch Strait; it also needs radar and counter-battery mortars along with command and control and intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance equipment to ensure the precision guidance of these missiles.
The combined arms defense of Ukraine’s maritime frontiers should begin with land-based shore defenses and then extend into anti-air and anti-ship capabilities that would impose high costs on the Russian Navy if it attacked.
Producing such capabilities or acquiring them from external powers like the United States would go far to negate Russia’s ability to launch this offensive.
Kyiv is only now taking possession of two United States cutters that have been sitting for years in the Baltimore harbor, where they did nobody any good, due to the government of Ukraine’s obstruction and malfeasance.
Such incompetence is intolerable, especially during war, and is not confined to this episode.
Poroshenko or his successor if he loses the election must make defense reform a priority.
The Ministry of Defense and Ukraine’s defense industrial sector must produce the right capabilities needed to impose severe costs upon Moscow and blunt any possible Russian offensive.
Chasing after chimeras like intermediate-range ballistic missiles achieves nothing operationally or strategically for Kyiv.
Though calling for such aggressive ripostes to Moscow may play well in Kyiv or Odesa, strategy should be made of sterner stuff.
He is the author of numerous foreign policy-related articles, white papers, and monographs focused on the geopolitics and geostrategy of Russia and Eurasia.
He also promised to restore the occupied territories through political and diplomatic means.
Last week Poroshenko announced that Ukraine intends to develop new missile weaponry after Russia and the United States withdraw from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty.
Kyiv is “no longer bound by any missile range limitations,” the president emphasized.
This will make the aggressor more restrained, and our defense more reliable.
For me, the safety of Ukrainians is of utmost importance,” Poroshenko remarked.
He said that the Ukrainian army will receive as many as 20 new models of domestically produced weapons.
In autumn 2018, the Vilkha missile system with adjustable ammunition was adopted into Ukraine’s armament.
The missile aircraft undergo deep modernization; they are capable of destroying any target in Europe, – Chairman of Russia’s State Duma Defense Committee.
The Russian Tupolev Tu-22M3 strategic bombers were deployed in occupied Crimea, as Interfax reported citing Chairman of Russia’s State Duma Defense Committee Vladimir Shamanov.
Viktor Bondarev, the Head of the Defense and Security Committee of the Russian Federation Council, stated that Russia deployed the Tupolev Tu-22M3 supersonic strategic bombers on the peninsula and deployed Iskander mobile short-range ballistic missile system in Crimea as well.
Earlier Russia’s Defense Ministry reported that two Tupolev Tu-22M3 strategic bombers carried the flight over the neutral waters of the Black Sea.
Russia has deployed in the annexed Crimea Tu-22M3 supersonic long-range missile-carrying bombers capable of striking sea and ground targets at a considerable distance from home airfields with guided missiles and aerial bombs. — Ukrinform.
A 3,700-mile endurance, roughly translating into an 1,850-mile range, could allow the upgraded Backfires to strike targets in the mid-Atlantic.
With new weapons, the farther-flying Tu-22M3Ms could pose a new threat to American ships and other targets.
Russia is finalizing the trials of a sophisticated cruise missile designated as Kh-32 and intended to equip the Tupolev Tu-22M3 supersonic long-range bomber fleet, according to the Izvestia daily.
The cutting-edge missile is virtually invulnerable to ground-based air defenses and interceptors of a potential adversary.
Once launched, the product of the Raduga Design Bureau climbs to an altitude of 40 km, to the stratosphere, to dive on the target at a steep angle.
According to famous human rights defender, leaving Crimea is “political hara-kiri” for Putin.
Mustafa Dzhemilev, famous human rights defender, former Chairman of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People, Ukrainian MP and the presidential envoy for the affairs of Crimean Tatar people, stated that Russian President Vladimir Putin expresses regret in his immediate entourage and wishes he hadn’t ordered to occupy Crimea.
By the way, in his immediate entourage he is already speaking about that.
He says – we made a mistake with the Crimea, though we won’t admit it,” Dzhemilev says.
He added that leaving Crimea is “political hara-kiri” for Putin as he chose the role of “the gatherer of the Russian lands”, thus he can’t admit he made a mistake.
Mustafa Abduldzhemil Dzhemilev, is former Chairman of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People and a member of the Ukrainian Parliament since 1998.
He is the recognized leader of the Crimean Tatar National Movement and a former Soviet dissident.
Dzhemilev was born on 13 November 1943 in Ay-Serez, Crimea, at the time under Nazi German occupation.
He was only six months old when his family, with the rest of the Crimean Tatar population, was deported by Soviet authorities in May 1944, soon after Soviet forces retook the peninsula.
Between 1966 and 1986, Dzhemilev was arrested six times for anti-Soviet activities and served time in Soviet prisons and labor camps and lived under surveillance.
Dzhemilev is also remembered for going on the longest hunger strike in the history of human rights movements.
In the 2014 Ukrainian parliamentary election, Dzhemilev who had previously served as the MP was re-elected into parliament after being in the top 10 of the electoral list of Petro Poroshenko’s Bloc.
The famous human rights defender, the former chairman of Mejlis of Crimean Tatars and currently the MP of Ukrainian Parliament, Dzhemilev is well known for fierce support of his people in the Russian-occupied Crimea.
He and other leaders of the Crimean Tatar people strongly condemned the illegitimate ‘referendum’ in the Russian-annexed Crimea in March 2014, demanding that Russia leave the peninsula.
As he was only six months old, he and his family were deported to Central Asia, along with other Crimean Tatars. years after that, he returned.
Now that Russia annexed Crimea, the human rights defender is once again banned to enter the peninsula’, reads the note at the European Parliament’s Website.
The president also commented on Putin’s statement claiming no prospects for any “positive result” in Kyiv-Moscow relations under the current leadership in Ukraine.
The United States, the European Union and other Western countries will periodically impose new sanctions against Russia if it does not stop its aggression against Ukraine. — Ukrinform.
United States Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker says Washington could sell to Kyiv more Javelin anti-tank guided missiles.
The Special Representative also notes the need to boost Ukraine’s air and coastal defenses.
US Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker expressed such a conviction at a video press conference on Monday, an Ukrinform correspondent reports.
It would be a military catastrophe that would lead to the loss of thousands and thousands of people,” the United States representative said.
In this regard, he underscored the need for restoration of the territorial integrity of Ukraine by diplomatic means, as well as the need for the return of the Crimean Tatars to their historic homeland.
Discussing the political process of settling the Russian-Ukrainian conflict, both within the Normandy format and in the context of the UN resolution on Crimea, Kurt Volker emphasized that progress in achieving peace is insufficient, and the West cannot be blamed for this.
Russia continues to control military operations, exercises absolute command control through its regular officers.
It pays money to contract servicemen involved in military operations, it ensures intelligence operations, it finances the leadership of civilian administrations, which it created,” the United States Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations said.
NATO remains a reliable partner of Ukraine in gaining its membership in the Alliance. — Ukrinform.
Ukraine will be ready to apply for the membership in the European Union and NATO by 2023. — Ukrinform.
President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko says Russian divisions deployed along the Ukraine border are ready to invade.
UN Secretary-General António Guterres strongly supports the UN General Assembly resolution, which points to the regional security threats posed by the Russian militarization of Crimea and calls on Russia to cease the occupation of the peninsula. — Ukrinform.
I condemn illegal annexation of Crimea Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt called on Russia to put an end to illegal control over the Crimean peninsula and attempts to redraw European borders.
The UK will never recognise Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and calls on Russia to end attempts to redraw the boundaries of Europe. — Ukrinform.
Japan’s position on non-recognition of the annexation of Ukrainian Crimea by Russia remains unchanged. — Ukrinform.
Australia imposed sanctions against the Russian citizens involved in the seizure of Ukrainian vessels and sailors that were attempting to pass through the Kerch Strait on November 25, 2018, as well as against “leaders” of separatist-held areas of Donetsk and Luhansk regions. — Ukrinform.
Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin has said the Minsk agreements on resolving the situation in the east of Ukraine are in a “coma,” which only Russia can end.
Donbas will see peace only when Russia stops violating Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, the United States Mission to the OSCE said.
Head of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar people, Refat Chubarov, noted the change in the mood of the population in the occupied Crimea five years into the Russian occupation of the peninsula.
The general attitude of Crimeans to the occupation forces is dramatically different from what it was five years ago, the head of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar people said.
INFOGRAPHICS The economy of the world’s biggest energy exporter is more than 10 percent or $150 billion smaller compared with what might have been expected at the end of 2013.
Commander of Ukraine’s Joint Forces Serhiy Nayev says that should Russia wage large-scale war, Ukraine’s victory will depend on the Ukrainian people’s unity and international partners’ consistency.
The Russian army has advantages in terms of personnel and military hardware.
The command of the Joint Forces Operation checked the combat readiness of close support aviation of the Ukrainian Navy.
During the joint drills in the Sea of Azov, the vessel crews repelled a simulated attack from the air and opened fire on the sea targets.
The warships scrambled on alert and reached the designated area in the sea; they performed various maneuvers, too.
In the past 24 hours, Russia’s hybrid military forces mounted three attacks on Ukrainian army positions in Donbas, eastern Ukraine, with one Ukrainian soldier reported as killed in action.
According to intelligence reports, two enemy troops were eliminated and another two were wounded.
The strike was carried out from an anti-tank missile system, resulting in two militants being eliminated.
PHOTOS Ukrainian military brought down self-made Russian drone in Donbas near the positions of the Joint Forces Operation.
Invaders had tried to spot the location of defensive lines of the Ukrainian forces.
The attacks at Ukrainian strong points also involved anti-tank missile systems, various types… View news.
Russia’s hybrid military forces mounted 10 attacks on Ukrainian army positions in Donbas, eastern Ukraine, in the past 24 hours, with one Ukrainian soldier reported as killed in action and another two as wounded in action.
According to intelligence reports, three enemy troops were eliminated and another four were wounded.
President Petro Poroshenko thanked Canada for the decision to extend Operation UNIFIER, the Canadian Armed Forces military training mission in Ukraine. — Ukrinform.
A total of 2,955 Ukrainian servicemen have been killed over the period of Russian aggression against Ukraine, President Petro Poroshenko has said. — Ukrinform.
Local authorities of Luhansk region will appeal to Prime Minister of Ukraine Volodymyr Groysman and National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine concerning the situation with the possible blackout of the mines in the region.
Such decision was made on the results of the session of the regional commission on technogenic environmental issues and emergencies as local authority reported.
Deputy Chairman of the Regional City Administration Yury Klymenko informed that the administration and coal enterprises got the message from Ukrinterenergo about possible stop of energy supply to the Pervomaiskvugillya and Lysychanskvugillya mines.
Considering the fact that the proper enterprises do not have it, the complete blackout can take place.
The most difficult situation is at Pervomaiskvugillya, where blackout can lead to the flooding of the mines from objects situated from another side of the demarcation line,” the message said.
First Deputy Speaker of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine Iryna Gerashchenko has reiterated that people living in the temporarily occupied territories are Ukrainian citizens. — Ukrinform.
Ukraine has only one army, and no private armies can exist. — Ukrinform.
Ukraine does not have and will not have any private armies, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko said.
Earlier Turkey has provided Ukraine with unmanned combat aerial vehicle Bayraktar.
Testing of new military combat drones will take place on Wednesday, March 20.
Ukraine buys advanced Turkish strike drones “The power of the Ukrainian army increase every day, as every week we get new military equipment.
Turkey has provided Ukraine with unmanned combat aerial vehicle Bayraktar.
Ukraine purchases Bayraktar TB2, the combat drones developed by Turkish designers; they can carry missiles and are capable of engaging the naval targets.
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has said newly appointed Deputy Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine Serhiy Kryvonos is preparing a bill to reform Ukraine’s state-owned defense giant Ukroboronprom and increase the level of transparency in the implementation of the state defense order.
The president stressed the NSDC had already made a decision on a full audit at Ukroboronprom enterprises.
The estimates of the volume of exports of weapons and military equipment from Ukraine in 2014-2018 with a 23% share of exports to the Russian Federation, published by the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute in March, are incorrect and do not correspond to the reality, Ukroboronprom state concern has stated, noting that it has not been exporting weapons and military equipment to Russia since 2014.
Ukraine’s state-owned defense giant Ukroboronprom has denied earlier reports claiming Ukraine had allegedly supplied weapons and military equipment to Russia after the start of Russian military aggression against Ukraine in 2014.
Allegations were voiced following a report by Stockholm Peace Research Institute , Obozrevatel wrote.
We should note that the engine manufacturer is a private Zaporizhia-based company Motor Sich, which is not a member of the Ukroboronprom Group of companies.
In addition, contracts for the supply of engines were concluded in 2006, while the actual delivery took place in 2009-2014,” the statement reads.
The notes to the SIPRI research state that, most likely, the engines were supplied until 2014, the year when the ban on arms and military equipment exports to Russia was introduced.
Read alsoNuclear weapon-possessing states developing, modernizing existing systems – SIPRI Ukroboronprom also commented on the reported “deliveries” to Russia of the An-140-100 and An-148-100E aircraft.
In addition, the An-140 and An-148 aircraft were produced in Russia under a license granted by Antonov State Enterprise.
Therefore, SIPRI views them as imports from Ukraine, since there is a legal contract concluded between the parties,” the statement reads.
Ukroboronprom also reported on the naval gas-turbine installations DS-71, produced by the Mykolayiv-based Zorya-Mashproekt, which, according to SIPRI, were imported to the Russian Federation.
Read alsoRussians trying to squeeze Ukrainian defense companies out of Kazakhstan, Indonesia “The delivery was carried out before the ban on the export of weapons and military equipment to the Russian Federation.
The delivery date for the engines and power units is determined by SIPRI experts after the manufacture of certain types of military equipment and armaments has been completed by Russian producers and the aircraft and ships have been transferred to the Russian armed forces, rather than the actual date of delivery of individual components,” the statement explains.
European races this year could offer a taste of what the United States can expect in 2020.
Former Ukrainian Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko, who is a leading candidate in the country’s March 31 presidential election, has defended her support for Kyiv’s 2014 decision not to use military force to resist Russia’s annexation of the Black Sea region of Crimea.
In a sit-down interview to RFE/RL in Kyiv on March 18 Tymoshenko also slammed incumbent Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko – also a candidate — accusing him of embezzling “the defense budget through illegal deals with the aggressor ” and calling on him to resign, a demand she has expressed before.
Fictitious firms have been depositing money with PrivatBank, Ukraine’s largest bank, to buy votes in favor of incumbent President Petro Poroshenko in the upcoming presidential election, Serhiy Sobolev, a deputy head of the Batkivschyna parliamentary faction, said on Monday.
The team of Ukrainian entertainer Volodymyr Zelensky, who is running for president, will keep a parallel count of the votes in the upcoming presidential election.
The presidential elections in Ukraine on March 31 will be held in line with the standards of the European Union, President Petro Poroshenko has stated. — Ukrinform.
An unprecedented number of Ukrainian non-governmental organizations were registered as observers in Ukraine’s upcoming presidential elections, that’s according to a Central Election Commission official Natalia Bernadska.
United States Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker hopes Hungary and Ukraine will settle the issue of Hungarian minority rights in the context of education.
The diplomat expects Hungary to take up a position of full support for Ukraine amid the ongoing Russian aggression.
Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada Committee on Legislative Support of Law Enforcement, Andriy Kozhemyakin, states that the United States and EU ambassadors, as well as the IMF mission, are asking to postpone consideration of bills regarding illegal enrichment.
Ukrainian Finance Minister Oksana Markarova says her ministry has fulfilled all the benchmarks of the program of cooperation with the International Monetary Fund , having implemented the lion’s share of the conditions under the program.
Ukraine has become the first country in the world to diversify the sources of nuclear fuel supply. — Ukrinform.
It is proposed to add Optymistychna Cave, the length of discovered paths of which is 2114 km, to UNESCO World Heritage Sites Ukrainian Ministry of Ecology suggests adding Ternopil region caves to the list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites.
This was announced by the Ecology Minister Ostap Semerak, as the ministry’s press service reports.
I do not think there is a need to persuade anyone that such natural sites belong to more than one country, that they are a natural heritage of mankind, therefore we have initiated the enlistment of Ternopil caves in the UNESCO World Heritage Sites,” Semerak told.
He noted that the ministry held preliminary consultations with the Institute of Geological Sciences of Ukraine and Ternopil Region State Administration was also involved.
Optymistychna Cave is second only after the Mammoth-Flint Ridge Cave System in the United States.
President Petro Poroshenko praised the high number of parishes who have already made their decision to join the new church independent of Russian influence.
Volyn region remains Ukraine’s transition leader with a number of parishes that have switched to the OCU having already exceeded a hundred.
The total number of registered religious communities of the former Moscow Patriarchate in the said region is one of the largest in Ukraine – more than 600, according to the Dukhovniy Front online outlet.
Many parishes also decided to move to the OCU in Vinnytsia, Khmelnytsky, Zhytomyr, Rivne, and Lviv regions.
Speaking at a Freedom of Speech panel show on ICTV, President Petro Poroshenko praised the high number of parishes who have already made their decision to join the new church independent of Russian influence.
Jaroslav Skira talks to Marta Dyczok about the background and significance of the newly created Orthodox Church of Ukraine.
According to court documents, David Udo Hague and Cole Davis Brodovsky, members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints were arrested in Novorossiysk on March 1, 2019.
The Mormons were initially detained in Novorossiysk for violating Russian immigration laws.
According to the court, they allegedly taught English while not having pedagogical education but when they were obtaining visas they said that they intended to do missionary work in Russia.
According to the court’s decision, they preached and distributed leaflets on the streets when Russian law dictated that they could do so only in specially designated areas.
He claimed that he did not preach on the streets of Novorossiysk, but only talked with pedestrians.
Now, the United States citizens are being held in a temporary detention center for foreign citizens in Gulkevichi.
