State policy regarding the use of civilians for the defence of the country, promotion of military service and bringing them into the territorial defence battalions deserve special attention, given the difficult political and economic situation in the country after the Revolution Benefits.
Thus, the experience of Ukraine regarding the formation of the system of territorial defence, and other mechanisms to combat the enemy in a hybrid war can serve as an example for other countries and alliances, in order to avoid similar mistakes and use them in the future for their own defence.
Ukraine, territorial defence, Crimea, Donbas, hybrid warfare, Russia Modern armed forces are impossible to imagine without high-precision weapons, aircraft, tanks, artillery.
However, no item, how automated it would not be, will not replace the human.
The experience of recent armed conflicts XX – early XXI centuries shows that, where the regular army is powerless to successfully operate guerrilla groups.
Therefore, today virtually all countries of the world pays special attention to issues of territorial defence.
This term is a modern interpretation of the well-proven in the past, people's militias and guerrilla movements.
Since time immemorial, when still only laid the foundation of regular armies, militias have existed.
They were formed mainly of peasants, who, in spite of the poorly armed (often military weapons became agriculture implements – pitchforks, scythes, etc.) and the lack of proficiency demonstrated bravery and courage in defence of their native land.
Where regular troops turned to flee, the enemy met Draught ordinary men or even runaway serfs, ready to give their lives for their land1.
In many states, the experience of guerrilla warfare counted and multiplied.
In the context of armed conflicts that take place in Ukraine in recent years, especially with hybrid war, the formation of the territorial defence system became one of the most important decisions that allowed stopping the advance of military operations deep into the territory of Ukraine.
Since the Ukrainian army for a long time after the declaration of their independence was in a very difficult conditions of existence and some of its divisions, which is on the eastern borders of the country to be influenced by the Russian security services and units of the Black Sea Fleet in Crimea, Ukraine was not ready to conduct military operations against fighters that were supported by the Russian army in the Donbas and Crimea.
The concept of a hybrid war is actively used by the Russian Federation against the Ukrainian government on its south-eastern borders.
Hybrid warfare, in fact, a mixture of classic warfare with the use of irregular armed groups.
The state leads hybrid war makes a deal with non-performers – the militants, local community groups, organizations, and the relationship is formally completely denied.
These performers can do things that may not make the state itself, because every State is obliged to comply with the terms of the Geneva and the Hague Conventions on the Laws of War on Land, as well as agreements with other countries.
All the dirty work in such a situation can be passed on to non-State actors.
Against this background, artificially created by inter-ethnic hysteria, which initially provided a powerful propaganda through the media and abundant financing mercenaries with weapons and instructors, and then the military equipment and professional military.
On the one hand, use the regular army, albeit only with the aim to scare – from now to the border with Ukraine tightened around 40,000 Russian soldiers.
Thus, Ukraine is a strong pressure in the event of incorrect or inappropriate policy actions can be a full-scale intervention of the troops.
On the other hand, in Ukraine there are groups that are managed from Russia.
When the boundary of the adjacent state crosses the army troops or tank division, everything is clear, but in this case nothing is done.
Instead, it is silent annexation, with the involvement of militants and ethnic groups on the ground, according to the agreement and under the supervision of the Russian Federation.
Clearly the nature of a new type of war, demonstrated first Russian annexation of the territory in the spring of 2014 the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, and then – to support local radical elements and full-scale invasion of Russian troops in the eastern regions of Ukraine.
America and Europe will always continue to say that they do not recognize the annexation of Crimea to Russia, that is, it will be another frozen conflict, the same as Nagorny Karabakh.
But, even though legally we do not recognize, the de facto annexation of Crimea happened – Crimea became part of Russia, and Vladimir Putin he got what he wanted.
The international community is saying We do not recognize, but the fact of accession has already taken place.
In the short term this is a very successful tactic when it will be possible to capture new territory without firing a shot.
As for the events in the Donbas, the purpose of hybrid warfare is not the conquest and destruction, but the economic destruction of the country.
Destruction of the country is an acceptable goal, that this area became no man's land of chaos.
Victory in this war – a long-term instability and the ongoing process of the war.
That, over time, should enable the ""Moderator War"" get the approval of the international community in the role of peacemaker.
In modern conditions of hybrid warfare – it's quick and cheap way to destroy the country, or complete submission of its foreign interests.
The terrorist army are cheap, fairly numerous, and most importantly effective, because it does not adhere to its own legal norms and international agreements.
This army does not belong to anyone, therefore no way to strike back strike on the aggressor.
It is cost effective – one thousand trained fighters rapidly cheaper dozen trained soldiers armed with modern tools for combat.
The difficulty of doing hybrid war is that in the ordinary course of the war the army is fighting against the army, and in the course of a hybrid war fighters under the banner of protecting the rights of the people of the region are fighting in their territory, namely with their statehood.
In such circumstances, when the share of the population supported the militants deceived, no army is unable to protect the state from the territory of a gang formations, without causing loss and damage to their populations.
Where the armed forces are destroying their own fighters, where the town , destroyed and killed civilians, militants and enhances them closer to the target ""moderator"" goal – the destruction of the country2.
Events in the south and east of Ukraine raises the question of revaluation in society views on the effectiveness of taken at the beginning of the century the political course for the development of the national army.
The level of threats to national security – one of the main factors that affect the format of the content of the regular army.
So when in peacetime combat capability of the armed forces is reduced, usually by reducing their numbers, the relevance of the territorial defence of the country should significantly increase and intensify.
It should be noted that the preservation of defence capabilities is a rational combination of these, interconnected, constituting the state's defence capability, the implementation of which is based on the national historical and socio-economic opportunities.
Of course, the core of Defence of Ukraine were and will be the Armed Forces.
But the more the army becomes a high standing for the budget, that is, high-tech, mobile and professional , but due to the significant investment remains small in number, the stronger must be the state policy in the sphere of territorial defence.
State policy regarding the use of civilians for the defence of the country, promotion of military service and bringing them into the territorial defence battalions are particularly noteworthy, given that the formation of the territorial defence system will prevent the development of a military crisis in the region and strengthen the position of the Ukrainian military.
From the outset, the anti-terrorist operation conducted in eastern Ukraine, and until now, attention multimillion Ukrainian public is continuously focused on the activities of volunteer battalions, organize themselves in support of the National Guard of Ukraine.
Sincere concern about the fate of fighters from the population manifested in the material support the call of the heart, without any involvement of the state, multi-million society patriotic citizens alone has equipped and equip combat volunteer group, and the invaluable support of thousands of volunteers, working in real time fundraising for the purchase, transport and delivery to the ATO zone necessities.
Due to objective reasons – lack of effective protection of the state border, the action plan of the General Staff in the case of intervention and effective combat-ready army to be mobilized as soon as possible in parallel with the preparation of the units of the Ukrainian army to the anti-terrorist operation in the east, and began the formation of volunteer battalions3.
On Approval of the Instruction on the organization of the implementation of the Regulations on passing military service by citizens of Ukraine in the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
By the formation of the battalions of the territorial defence of Ukraine Armed Forces of Ukraine were involved activists of Self-Defence Maidan.
In the following months it was formed volunteer battalions ""Donbas"", ""OUN"", ""Right Sector"", ""Azov"", ""Dnepr"", and others.
Information, sometimes quite contradictory, about the activities of volunteer battalions many civilian people sincerely concerned about the fate of the country, is not always clear.
And find out where the true reality displayed, and where not quite, quite difficult.
Since the territorial defence forces responsible for the fulfilment of a number of important tasks in the field of national defence, that these units need to pay much more attention than has been done until now.
Analysis and generalization of practice of application of territorial defence battalions in the area of the fighting in the east of Ukraine gives grounds to assert that these military units carried out non-core functions.
At that time, senior government officials had a distorted view of the place and role of territorial defence battalions in the system to ensure the country's defence.
They just plugged the hole and used as a conventional military units, despite the fact that in most cases in a real combat soldiers territorial defence forces were not ready to carry out their tasks.
The exception is perhaps that the 24 territorial defence battalions ""Aydar"", which was formed in the Lugansk region in early 2014, but this unit can only formally be considered a battalion of territorial defence.
Almost the entire personnel of the Battalion ""Aydar"" was formed from volunteers coming from different regions of Ukraine , and many fighters in the past have had the experience of taking part in the hostilities.
That is why the Battalion ""Aydar"" from the outset not performed support functions, as provided for by law, and participated in the fighting as an ordinary assault unit of the regular armed forces.
In this regard, it can be argued that today in Ukraine is practically no experience in organizing and targeted use of the territorial defence forces.
Military experts believe that one of the main problems is that there is still no comprehensive security sector reform started, which would encompass all security forces.
Along with the Ministry of Defence initiatives in the Interior Ministry said that on the ground it is necessary to create a municipal police.
Also in preparation of the State Service for Emergency Situations of the reform, which wants to establish rapid response teams in emergencies.
It is not known whether these three types of troops somehow coordinate their activities, whether they are in the same structure.
In addition, in light of the announced large-scale administrative reform and decentralization, it can be assumed that the question of their maintenance will be entrusted mainly to local authorities.
Based on the features of the conduct of hostilities in the east of Ukraine, it is worth noting the need to find new ways and mechanisms for a substantial renovation of the territorial defence system in Ukraine, enhancing its effectiveness and functioning.
Hybrid warfare makes revision plan of formation of the armed forces, and especially the formation of mobile military units that must differ from stationary.
This requires a change in thinking and in relation to the type of future conflicts and threats counteraction to select tracks.
Thus, the improvement of the territorial defence system in Ukraine should become one of the most efficient and expedient way to achieve and maintain a high level of the state's defence capability.
In the sphere of organization of territorial defence advisable to develop the institution of military service in the military reserve, which must be entered in order to prepare the citizens of Ukraine to carry out territorial defence tasks in the administrative-territorial units, as well as targeted training for the acquisition of the Armed Forces of Ukraine and other military forces personnel.
Also require a legislative definition of the way the citizens of motivation to undergo military service in the reserve, as well as the issue of improving the organization of service in the military reserve.
The current military-political situation in which our country is the subject of a hybrid war by Russia, shows that rethinking approaches to the understanding of national security have an critical important task.
Thus, Ukraine needs to harmoniously combine state policy on the development of professional, mobile, high-tech regular Armed Forces to the development of territorial defence.
A condition in which turned out to Ukraine and its actions in specific situations, gives reason to assert the importance of the study of modern practices and conduct opposition hybrid warfare.
Thus, the experience of Ukraine regarding the formation of the system of territorial defence, and other mechanisms to combat the enemy in a hybrid war can serve as an example for other countries and alliances in order to avoid similar mistakes and use these tools in the future to improve its own defences.
