Russia's intervention in Crimea and Donbas was open violation of security assurances given by great powers to denuclearized Ukraine.
It undermined credibility of great powers and created dangerous precedents for South Korea, Japan, and other United States allies in Asia.
It increased tension in East and South China Seas as well as in the Korean Peninsula, making Pyongyang rely more on nuclear weapons.
Trying to avoid Western sanctions and isolation, Russia moved closer to China.
But this rapprochement and opening of Asian markets to Russia have limitations due to security concerns of United States allies and present sanctions.
Annexation of Crimea and Russia's drift to China increase the role of United States commitment to its allies.
Western sectoral sanctions should be preserved until Minsk-2 agreement is fulfilled and Russian regular troops and ""volunteers"" leave Ukraine.
According to the 1994 Budapest memorandum, Kyiv gave up its nuclear arsenal (then third largest in the world) in exchange for ""security assurances"" (but not ""security guarantees"") of territorial integrity from the U.S., the UK, and Russia * The author would like to thank Ambassador Mykola Kulynych, Daisuke Kitade, Nicu Popesku, Stanislav Secrieru, and Andreas Umland for their materials and advices in preparing this article as well as his frequent co-author Petro Burkovsky.
Tire parties agreed to respect Ukraine's borders, to abstain from the use or threat of force against Ukraine, to support Ukraine where an attempt is made to place pressure on it by economic coercion and to bring any incident of aggression by a nuclear power before the UN Security Council.
However, in March 2014, Russia annexed Crimea in violation of both the Budapest memorandum and the 1997 Russian-Ukrainian treaty which recognized the inviolability of borders, and then started inter­ vening in Donbas, the east of Ukraine.
Change of borders by force in Europe created a dangerous precedent for the whole international sys­ tem, including Northeast Asia, and led to Western sanctions against Russia.
In this article, we begin with brief analyses on how post-Soviet space started to disintegrate geopolitically since 1991.
While main­ taining ""multi-vector"" approach, Kyiv gradually drifted to Europe.
Moreover, Ukrainian political system appeared to be more balanced than the Russian one which created opportunities for democratic opposition.
It quickly transformed into a protest against the corrupt authoritarian president.
Instead, with M oscow 's m ilitary intervention Russia started undeclared ""hybrid war"" against Ukraine.
In the final section, we analyze the influence of the crisis on Northeast Asia, namely China, Japan, and two Koreas.
It increased tension in East and South China Seas as well as in the Korean Penin­ sula making Pyongyang rely more on nuclear weapons and the U.S. allies seek additional guarantees from Washington.
Since the formation of the Commonwealth of Independent States , Moscow and Kyiv held opposite views of its future — ""reintegra­ tion"" and ""civilized divorce"" respectively.
The 1993 free trade agreement between Ukraine and Russia actually was nullified through numerous exemptions introduced by Moscow.
In reality, twenty-five years of the CIS existence were marked by reorientation toward other geopolitical players.
Import from the CIS countries decreased from 46 percent in 2000 to 22 percent in 2014.2 Kyiv has followed a ""multi-vector"" foreign policy.
Under President Kuchma, in the wake of Russia's rapprochement with the West after 9/11, Ukrainian parliament adopted in 2003 the law on the principles of national security, which stipulates Ukraine's membership in the NATO and the EU as strategic goals.
Yet, before the 2004 Orange Revolution, the post-Soviet space was viewed by many policy-makers as a sphere of Russian influence.
The revolution was non-violent, marked by inter-ethnic and inter-confessional tolerance.
The main accomplishments of the Orange Revolution were politi­ cal freedom and free and fair elections.
Ukraine was recognized in the ratings of Freedom House as the only ""free country"" in the CIS space.
The paradox was that Yanukovych benefitted from democratic freedom by exploiting the populist opposition niche.
In the wake of mounting Russian pressure, Yanukovych made a huge geo-strategic concession.
In April 2010, Moscow agreed to decrease the price of gas sold to Ukraine by one-third in exchange for leasing the Russian naval base in Sevastopol, Crimea, for another 25 years and for additional five-year terms thereafter.
However, these concessions did not meet Moscow's expectations, while Kyiv was disappointed with the lack of reciprocity in the eco­ nomic, especially energy, spheres.
Kyiv did not abandon plans to sign the association agreement with the EU which includes a deep and comprehensive free trade area and to introduce a visa-free regime.
Immediately, Moscow declared that if Ukraine joins the Customs Union, it would be given more preferential treat­ ment.
Therefore, in the summer of 2013, Moscow started economic and psychological warfare against Yanukovych to prevent signing of AA planned for November 2013.
The ominous sign came in early September 2013 when Armenia, which planned to initial AA with the EU, suddenly declared under Russian pressure that country would join the Customs Union.
According to the 1996 Ukrainian Constitution, there should be no foreign bases on Ukrainian soil.
Because of Sevastopol base, ""transitional clauses"" of the Constitution contained the special article on ""temporary"" foreign bases.
When Yanukovych responded with violence, Euro­ maidan quickly moved beyond its initial slogans and demanded the president's resignation.
In February 2014, after security forces started to shoot protesters, Ukraine became, perhaps, the only country where in the center of a capital people died under the EU flags.
In this context, according to the agreement signed on February 21, 2014 between the opposition and Yanukovych (with Western intermediaries; Russia participated as well but in the end decided not to sign), the parliament reinstated the 2004 constitutional reform which was among the main demands of Euromaidan.
And the West started sanctions against Yanukovych and his entourage only after he had left the country.
In the same way as after the Orange Revolution, regional authorities in Crimea and Donetsk appointed under Yanukovych quickly recog­ nized the new regime in Kyiv.
For good account on Euromaidan and the beginning of Russian intervention, see Andrew Wilson, Ukraine Crisis.
Russian soldiers without insignia moved from the base in Sevastopol to other strategic points in Crimea.
Putin denied the involvement of Russian soldiers, but acknowledged it in a documentary which aired on Russian TV a year later.
Under armed occupation, the pseudo-referendum was held on March 16, 2014, in contradiction to all Ukrainian laws and international procedures.
It was a clear violation of the 1994 Budapest memorandum and the 1997 Ukrainian-Russian treaty.
It raised doubts in the credibility of ""security assurances"" provided by great powers, especially for those countries which were deciding whether to adhere to nuclear non-proliferation.
Many commentators compared it to the 1938 German Anschluss of Austria and Sudetenland or the 1990 Iraqi occupation of Kuwait.
The Russian Federation Sent to Crimea Detachments of Military Intelligence Directorate and Marines to Disarm Ukrainian Military"" , Russia Today, March 15,2015.
Crimean Tatars, deported from Crimea by Stalin in 1944, were not allowed to come back until 1990.
After the annexation in 2014, leaders of Crimean Tatars are not allowed to return to Crimea once again.
Among them is Mustafa Cemilev, who spent 15 years in Soviet prisons and then was head of Mejlis, Crimean Tatar self-government, for 25 years.
There was hope that nations which fought for independence could understand Ukraine's struggle against terrorism, armed separatism supported from outside, and direct foreign aggression.
But India, China, Vietnam, Pakistan, and Afghanistan were among 58 countries abstained and 24 countries were absent.
In some cases, given the huge Russian pressure on Kazakhstan and other Central Asian countries, their decision not to vote ""against"" one may interpret as a sign of disagreement with Russia.
Their first reaction was to cancel the G8 Summit in Sochi, to freeze Russia's participation in G8, and to suspend the EU talks with Russia on visa issues and on new EU-Russia agreement.
After ""referendum"" in Crimea, Western countries introduced visa bans for individuals and froze assets of individuals and legal entities involved in annexa­ tion.
Then the ban was imposed on import from Crimea, investment into Crimea, and export of certain goods and technology, which con­ cern the transport, telecommunications and energy sectors.
Yet, this response looked weak for Putin and he decided to repeat ""Crimean scenario"" in other Ukrainian southern and eastern regions.
However, Putin's view that Ukrainians and Russians are ""one nation, one ethnos""10 was a huge mistake.
Therefore, his plans to either control all of Ukraine or at least to split it have failed.
The contemporary Ukrainian state pro­ claimed in 1991 is based more on the territorial, ""inclusive"" nationalism 9.
Ukraine, compared to Balkan Peninsula, Caucasus, and Russia, avoided ethnic conflicts until 2014.
The paradox is that despite the war in Donbas, Putin's aggression actually cemented Ukrainian political identity.
The poll conducted by the respectable Kyiv International Insti­ tute of Sociology in April 2014 confirmed that separatism did not have support from the south and east of the country with the excep­ tion of Donbas, but even there its supporters were in minority.
Even in Donbas, polls confirmed that the majority favored decentralization, but not federalization.
The map below clearly shows that it was not a civil war, and by August 2014, pro-Russian fighters were on the verge of collapse.
They were saved only by the invasion of regular Russian troops which was part of Moscow's undeclared ""hybrid"" war against Ukraine.
However, even after that, the occupied areas of Donbas comprise only 3 percent of the Ukrainian territory.
Russian-speakers and locals from Donbas comprise substantial part of the Army and volunteer battalions fighting in Donbas for integrity of Ukraine.
The nationalist center-right Svoboda also did not overcome the barrier.
The Area Controlled by Russia's Proxies by August 24, 2014 org/media/photogallery/26547529.htm Putin's aggression contributed to a dramatic shift in the Ukrainian society.
Previously, in Ukraine, supporters of NATO membership were always a minority but now Ukrainians, in potential referendum, would say ""yes"" to NATO.14 As the non-bloc status introduced under Yanukovych did not prevent Ukraine from Russian aggression, it has been cancelled by tbe new parliament in December 2014.
At the same time, there is an understanding among Ukrainian politicians and experts that NATO and the EU membership are not on the agenda right now.
Ilemocratic Initia lives Foundation, ""Support for Joining NATO Considerably Increases in Ukraine — Poll,"" August 3, 2015, h ttp://d if.org.ua/en/m ass_ media/support-lor-joining-n.htm.
Russia's military infiltration in Donbas and deaths of three hundred civilians on Malaysian MH17 flight shot down on July 17,2014 in the separatist-controlled area led to West's sectoral sanctions, designed to hit financial, energy and military sectors of Russia.
Export licenses are prohibited for deep water oil and arctic oil explo­ ration and production, and shale oil projects in Russia.
The EU and the United States sanctions were joined by Canada, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, Norway, and Switzerland, although to a different extent.
Gas production and delivery were not directly restrict­ ed by the EU (as the EU imports one-third of its consumed gas from Russia), but the United States sanctioned Gazprom.
While Poland, Romania, Sweden, Denmark, and the Baltic States demanded strong reaction, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Austria, Greece, Cyprus, and Luxembourg were against restrictions due to strong trade, financial and energy ties, and the southern Portugal, Spain, and Italy did not consider security threat from Russia to be seri­ ous.
There were strong business lobbyists in Germany and France who were against sanctions.
But the leaders of France, Germany, and Great Britain decided to go ahead (evolution of German Chancellor 15.
Assessing Damages, Scrutinizing Adaptation & Evasion (Warsaw: Polish Institute of International Relations, November 2015), 25.
France cancelled the delivery of two Mistral aircraft carriers to Russia.
However, Moscow not only views sanctions as part of regime change in Russia but uses it as a pretext for further authoritarian consolidation and for intensification of its anti-Western rhetoric.
However, by August 2015, the EU agro-exports grew by 5 per­ cent due to flexibility of farmers (+15% to U.S., +30.8% to South Korea, +21.7% to Egypt) and EU's Commission assistance to lift trade barriers .18 Expanded sanctions aggravated Russia's economic problems.
On ""Black Tuesday,"" Decem ber 16, 2014, ruble depreciated by 20 percent and by June 2015, official exchange rate dollar/ruble increased by 1. times.
Facing increase of sanctions and trying to split the Western allies, Moscow has agreed with negotiations.
But the format of consulta­ tions between the U.S., the UK, Ukraine and Russia provided by the Budapest memorandum did not work.
In September 2014 and in February 2015 after negotiations by ""Normandy four,"" two Minsk Trilateral Agreements were signed by Ukraine, Russia, and the OSCE,20 supported by the United States and UN Secu­ rity Council.
The Agreements, though in a contradictory and compli­ cated way, outlined the ceasefire, exchange of prisoners, withdrawal of foreign troops and illegal military formations from Ukraine, and Ukraine's control over border with Russia.
It will continue to not only ruin Russia's economy but also exacerbate unfavorable com­ parison of situation in the ""people's republics"" and Ukraine-controlled territories.
To achieve it, Moscow may use Clause 11 with additional notes imposed on Kyiv by Minsk-2 accords.
In con­ trast to the Ukrainian Constitution, it demands more power to the separatist-held areas in Donbas while formally keeping them inside the Ukrainian state and making Kyiv and the West pay for the recon­ struction of the destroyed Donbas economy.
Leaders of separatists signed it as well, but neither their position, nor ""people's republics"" were mentioned, only names.
Kyiv stresses that it can have dialogue only with those representatives of the occupied areas who are legitimately elected, that is, according to Clause 9, under Ukrainian laws and OSCE moni­ toring.
Economic successes of Israel, West Germany, and South Korea could be examples for Ukraine,24 if Western economic and security assistance provides a necessary framework.
Influence on Northeast Asia Despite the Obama administration's decision to withdraw United States troops from Afghanistan and Iraq, the wars still continue there, and the war in Syria has been intensified.
Russian aggression in Ukraine and the consequent tension between the West and Russia also divert the U.S. attention and efforts from Asia.
Washington was unable to establish clearly defined ""red lines"" regarding the war in Syria, North Korean nuclear issue, and Chinese behavior in the sea.
This became even more visible when president Obama excluded military support for Ukraine from the very begin­ ning of the conflict.
The United States reaction to the annexation of Crimea, instead of creating ""red line,"" was seen by Russia as ""red carpet"" for 23.
It definitely increased concerns of the United States allies in Asia, full of territorial and border issues.
China Tire inability of the West to react quickly to the fait accompli created by Russia's actions in Crimea may provide additional opportunities for Chinese policy and increase threats, both real and perceived.
For many years, the Chinese military advocated the capability to achieve a ""quick and decisive victory by winning the first battle,"" especially in the case of Taiwan.
China is creating a gray-zone in the East China Sea by regularly sending ships and aircrafts.
Surely, dangerous developments happened before the Crimean crisis as well.
Back in 2012, China captured Scarborough Shoal within the Philippines' exclusive economic zone, despite a U.S.-brokered deal under which China and the Philippines agreed to withdraw their vessels from the area and despite the 1951 U.S.-Philippines Mutual Defense Treaty.
Another accident happened on March 9,2015 , when two Chinese coast guard cutters blocked two Filipino transport vessels carrying supplies to the vessel marooned on the Ayungin/Renai Shoal.
China declines any attempt by the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea to resolve China's disputes with the Philippines.
Back in November 2013, China declared the air defense identifi­ cation zone that covered a large territory of the East China 25.
Moreover, Chinese officials said that establishing a second ADIZ over the South China Sea would be in the country's interest.
But despite the declared disapproval regarding ADIZ in the East China Sea, Washington did not postpone Vice President Joe Biden's trip to Beijing.
Despite some predictions that Asian countries will compete to woo Putin as an immediate result of the crisis after the annexation of Crimea, the United States allies are seeking additional assurances from Washington.
Support of the Asian allies for the United States position on Crimea may also help Washington's policy in Asia.
Therefore, the role of allies for United States policy in the region has also increased.
Fjodor Lukjanow, ""Wenn Russen und Chinesen Gemeinsam Marschieren,"" Die Welt, March 30, 2015.
Beijing is afraid of Western support to Chinese dissidents which in perspective could lead to regime change.
Thus, it somehow followed Russian argumentation of Western involvement in ""regime change"" in Ukraine.
In return, Russia can support China's steps towards Taiwan, however, the key factor here is not Russian, but the United States position.
Moreover, China needs to be cautious about references to ""self-deter­ mination of Crimean people"" because of the debate over proclamation of independence of Taiwan, and the problems of Tibet and Xinjiang.
Therefore, sticking to the principle of territorial integrity, Beijing had to freeze its economic projects in annexed Crimea.
What is much more important for Beijing in practical terms is the fact that it benefits a lot from Russia's isolation in the West and Russia's potential transformation into ""younger partner"" of China.
In its turn, Russia can definitely blackmail the West by its rapprochement with China.
This rapprochement started long before the Crimea crisis but since the crisis began, it has moved to another level.
Kremlin presented it as a failure of Western sanctions, the ""policy of isolation of Russia,"" and ""Russia's Asia pivot,"" but in reality China managed to secure prices for Russian gas, lower than what Russia's European customers pay.
Moreover, the exports will start not earlier than 2019 (with five billion cubic meters in the first stage), and will require at least USD 55 billion of investment on the Russian side.
Because of Western sanctions, Russian companies paid special attention to Hong Kong and the Shanghai Stock Exchange.
Moscow initiated a shift to bilateral trade with China in national currencies.
Also, Russia and Ukraine are the largest sup­ pliers of modem weapons and military technologies to China.
While Ukrainian producers are not under sanctions, but Moscow hopes that problems in the war-tom Ukrainian economy could increase the role of Russia in this sector.
President Xi Jinping visited Moscow on May 8-10, 2015 and participated in the celebration of 70th anniversary of Nazi Germany's defeat.
Russian soldiers participated in the parade in Beijing as previ­ ously did Chinese soldiers in Moscow's May 9 parade.
Most major Western leaders as well as Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko did not visit Moscow's military parade because of Russia's intervention in Ukraine.
Despite the importance of China to Ukraine in both political and economic terms, Ukrainian president appeared in the same group with Western leaders and Japan who decided not to attend the memorial parade in Beijing because of China's activity in East and South China Seas, though the reasons for Ukraine's absence were different.
The latest summits of these two organizations symbolically coincided in Ufa, the capital of Bashkortostan in Russia on July 9-10, 2015.
However, as Andreas Umland suggests, economic crisis heightening in Russia, its interna­ tional isolation, and the decline in energy prices could lead to dimin­ ishing Russia's influence even within the BRICS group.
And when India joins the Shanghai Cooperation Orga­ nization , it could not only increase the role of the SCO in Asia, but also diminish the cen­ trality of Russia in this organization.
Three sets of factors, according to Umland, limit Russian-Chinese rapprochement.
The first one is declining political and economic weight of Russia which in connection with erratic political behavior, makes the country a more unpredictable partner not only for the West, but also for Japan, South Korea, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and Israel.
Xia Yishan, ""China Visit Good Opportunity to Relieve Ukraine's Internal Woes,"" The Global Times, July 29,2015.
Russians may consider themselves as separate civilization laying both in Europe and Asia but not as part of ""Greater Asia,"" although Dmitri Trenin plays with this idea as a substitute of ""Greater Europe"" for Russia.38 Not only Trenin but more importantly Patriarch Kirill of Moscow, one of the founders of the ""Russian world"" concept, refer to the role of Prince St.
Alexander Nevsky who fought with Catholic German knights while being loyal vassal to the Asian-born Golden Horde.
Kirill stresses that Western influence was ""hypocritical,"" undermining Russia's spiritual strength, and thus more dangerous than the Golden Horde.
However, Russkii mir with an accent on Asia will inevitably lose Slavic Ukraine and Belarus — that is, historic Kyiv Rus' — which is considered in Russia, rightly or wrongly, as the background for Russian identity.
Thirdly, Russia and China will intensify their latent competition in the Far East and more openly in Central Asia controlled by Russia for centuries.
But in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization created in 2001 (Russia, China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan), Russia had already lost its centrality.
Kiril personally presented ""Alexander N evsky"" in 2008 TV project ""The Name of Russia"" where Prince Alexander appeared on the first place in the list.
Vice versa, in the first half of 2015, the mutual trade com­ prised USD 21. billion, which is only 74 percent of that of the first half of 2014 and USD 10 billion less than Russian-Chinese trade.
For Kazakhstan, import from the CIS countries fell from 54 percent in 2000 to 42 percent in 2014, while export dropped dramatically from 27 to 13 percent.
Even for Russia, the main protagonist of integration in the post-Soviet space, import from the CIS countries fell during the same period from 34 to 11 per­ cent while export only remains at the level of 13 percent.
Belarus and Kazakhstan refused to support Russia's counter-sanctions on food against the EU which led to exchange of retaliatory measures between EEU partners.
From 2003 to 2012, it grew annu­ ally by 26. percent and in 2010 China became Russia's second trade 40.
However, in the first half of 2015, bilateral trade decreased by 31. percent and comprised only USD 31 billion.
While contraction of Russia's export to a great extent is connected to the drop of oil prices, contraction of Russia's import is explained by the economic crisis in Russia.
Western sanctions also hit the Russian economy and prevented active cooperation with Chinese commercial banks, including Industrial and Commercial Bank of China and Bank of China which have their subsidiary banks in the U.S.43 Although Moscow finally allowed Chinese to buy minority shares in strategic raw fields of oil, gas, etc. and infrastructure projects, the level of direct investments from China to Russia decreased during the first seven months of 2015 by 20 percent.
Also, there is a danger that China emerges as a monopolist in buying Russia's goods, first of all, energy resources.
But when Moscow started its strategic shift to Asia in 2014, too many competitors were already in the market; Russian export lacked necessary infrastruc­ ture; the sanctions and overly cautious approach by the United States allies significantly complicated this process.
Although Russia claims that about forty states and international organizations are interested to liberalize trade with the EEU, and currently conducts consultations on FTA with Egypt, India and Iran, only one agreement was signed with Vietnam so far.
Instead of Moscow's suggestion to conclude FTA between China and the EEU, Beijing proposed to negotiate a less ambitious trade and economic cooperation agreement.
How China's Economic Difficulties Threaten Russia"" , (Carnegie Moscow Center, August 13, 2015), h ttp ://cam egie.ru /2015/08/13/ru-61009/iem 46.
First, after the Fukushima nuclear accident in 2011 and consequent shutdown of nuclear power plants in Japan (the first one resumed operation in August 2015), the country badly needed new energy supplies.
Second, Russia could become an im portant partner for Japan in offsetting the rise of China.
In July 2013, Abe arrived in Moscow for the first state visit to Russia by a Japanese leader in a decade.
Symbolically, on February 7,2014 , Abe visited the opening ceremony of Sochi Olympic Games, despite the absence of major Western leaders.
Nevertheless, as Shigeki Hakamada, chairman of the academic Council on National Security Problems ""Anpoken,"" stated, Putin's line regarding ""northern territories"" hardened.
Hakamada describes it as a clear ""revision"" of history and joint declarations.
Japan as a member of the G7 could not avoid some sanctions, but at first immediately after the annexation of Crimea, Tokyo only intro­ duced light sanctions against Russia.
Moscow noted Japan's caution and in turn, did not introduce a food embargo against Japan.
More­ over, as Yoko Hirose suggests this ""soft approach regarding Russia's annexation of Crimea was inconsistent with the Japanese policy to recover the entire Northern Territories,"" and ""although Putin and 47.
However, opportunities for dialogue with Russia on Kuril Islands are narrowing not because of sanctions, as some Russian analysts suggested, but because of the rise of chauvinism in Russia after the annexation of Crimea.
The second factor which complicates Russian-Japanese relations is Moscow's rapprochement with Beijing.
Russian and Chinese navies held joint maneuvers in the East China Sea in May 2014 and in 2015.
In the course of 2014, Russian air forces exceeded the Chinese ones in terms of the number of incidents that created dangerous situations and made Japanese air forces fly for their interception due to the violation of Japanese airspace.
Given the rapprochement between Russia and China, Tokyo eased the ban on military related exports to stimulate joint arms develop­ ment with allies and arms exports.
On June 6, 2015, Abe made the first ever visit to Ukraine as the Japanese prime minister.
Japan decided to provide Ukraine with USD 1. billion of financial aid when Kyiv fulfills IMF demands.
And imme­ diately on June 9, Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu announced that Moscow would accelerate the construction of military facilities 48.
Russia's prime minister's trip to Kuril Islands in August 2015 complicated the situation but both sides still have plans for Putin's visit to Japan before the end of 2015.
If it happens while Russian troops are still in Ukraine, it may become a symbolic success of Russian diplomacy and a wrong message from Japan's side.
Korean Peninsula Seoul condemned Russia's aggression in Ukraine and decided to provide USD 500,000 humanitarian assistance to Ukraine through a UN organization and the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Nevertheless, Moscow hoped that relations with Republic of Korea would not suffer as much as its relations with Japan, and Seoul would continue its own game aimed at the unification of the country.
President Park and President Putin were the highest officials to attend the m ilitary parade in Beijing on September 3,2015.
After Crimea's annexation, Moscow decided to invest in major gas pipeline that will run from Sakhalin Island through the Korean Peninsula.
South Korea showed interest in this project and in other initiatives connecting its transportation network to the Trans-Siberian Railway.
Russian coal was delivered for the first time to South Korea by rail from Khasan via the North Korean port of Rajin in late 2014.51 51.
The underlying idea was participation of South Korean business in the projects in the Far East which could become a platform for trilateral cooperation with North Korea.
However, Dmitri Trenin believes that as in the case of the U.S.-Japanese relations, after annexation of Crimea and Russian-Chinese rapprochement, South Korea has no other choice than to certify additional United States assurances and to join Western sanctions.
Crimea's annexation presented to North Korea additional arguments to stick to its nuclear weapons.
Moreover, annexation of Crimea was seen in North Korea as a chance to increase the margin of provocations in the Peninsula.
These actions by North Korea raised stakes for the debates to restore the six-party talks, and prospects of these talks deteriorated even further.
In reaction to elevated tension in East Asia, the United States announced a decision to deploy two Navy destroyers equipped with missile defense systems and the second X-band missile defense radar in Japan.
The U.S., Japan, and South Korea had a summit meeting on the sidelines of the Nuclear Security Summit in the Netherlands.
The summit was held on March 24, 2014, with Japan pledging to return to the United January 19,2015.
At the same time, Russia will likely continue to adhere to the status quo on the Korean Peninsula.
A domestic crisis in the North could lead to de facto Chinese control over North or hypothetical emergence of united Korea which would be strong, more assertive and pro-American.
South Korea has been disappointed by Washington's lack of lever­ age over Beijing.
And China in dealing with South Korea speculates that red lines are not clearly defined by the United States (and Crimean crisis can be seen in this context).56 In its turn, Moscow will continue to play in Pyongyang to have more leverage for dealing with the United States and South Korea.
Clearly, the previous level of Pyongyang-Moscow relations cannot be restored but the two countries moved closer to each other.
On the symbolical level, ""year of friendship"" between Russia and Democratic People's Republic of Korea was declared from May 2015 to May 2016.
During last year, the num ber of visits of high-level Russian officials to Pyongyang and vice versa was higher than that over the whole previ­ ous decade.
The peak had to be Kim Jong-un's first ever trip abroad — for May 9 parade in Moscow.
Pyongyang is interested to diminish dependence on China which comprises 70 per­ cent of the North Korean trade turnover.
But political interests from both sides are not supported by the weak North Korean economy and the lack of financial resources from the Russian side to provide politically motivated support.
Therefore, in reality while North Kore­ an trade with China is growing, that with Russia has been gradually shrinking for two decades.
One more consequence of Russia's confrontation with the West over Ukraine is Moscow's desire to use conflicts in other parts of the world for playing global chess with the West.
On the one hand, Putin raised suspicion that it may synchronize tensions in other regions with offensive in Ukraine to lessen Western ability to react.
On the other hand, increasing tension in other regions (first of all military presence in Syria which was dramatically intensi­ fied in September 2015 and the refugee crisis in the EU) is being used by Russia to demonstrate its importance for both the West and China and to bargain over Ukraine in an attempt to reduce Western sanc­ tions.
This is the game Putin has started to play in late September 2015 when Russian air forces appeared in Syria (formally to fight the self-proclaimed ""Islamic State"" but in reality supporting Assad regime against Syrian opposition).58 57.
Despite Russia's attempt to present 2013-2014 Euromaidan as a ""Western plot,"" it was a domestic mass protest to prevent president Yanukovych from sliding into authori­ tarianism and into Russia-led Customs Union.
Subsequent Russia's intervention in Crimea and Donbas was open violation of international obligations and security assurances given by great powers to Ukraine.
From strategic partner, first of all in energy sphere, Russia turned into a strategic rival.
This crisis undermined the credibility of great powers' guarantees to denuclearized states, thus having created dangerous precedents for both Koreas, Japan and other United States allies in Asia.
There was a need for a strong Western response but first sanc­ tions introduced after Crimea were weak.
Nevertheless, increased and sectoral Western sanctions, although belated, started to work.
In the Asia-Pacific region, the sanctions were joined by Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada.
These sectoral sanctions are conditioned on full implementation of Minsk-2 agreement which includes demand for withdrawal of foreign troops and ""volunteers"" from Ukraine.
Moscow tries to bargain globally with the West, using rapproche­ ment with China and the situation in the Korean Peninsula, Syria, and Iran.
Opening of Asian markets to Russia also has limitations due to security concerns of United States allies and current Western sanctions.
Ukrainian-Russian Conflict and Its Implications for Northeast Asia 1 55 drift to China, and new opportunities for Beijing increase the role of United States commitments to its allies in Asia which strengthens the necessity of alliance with Washington.
South Korea has not joined economic sanctions, nevertheless it is viewed in Ukrainian social media as an example of how to ""live with the enemy"" and simultaneously successfully modernize its economy, anny, and political system.
August 17, 2015. h ttp ://w w w . eurasiancom m ission.org/ru/act/integr_i_m akroec/dep_stat/trades tat/ analytics/Docum ents/express/June2015.pdf.
