Me, I’ll keep doing what I am doing, and those who have ears will at one point hear.
Most people were in shock and couldn’t understand how something like this was possible in Ukraine.
Many had to flee because their lives were threatened, and some disappeared to never be heard from again.
Later, there will be historic vote by the Duma and decision by the Russian President Vladimir Putin to accept Crimea and Sevastopol as two new subjects of the Russian Federation.
And in 2014 I wrote about how United States tried to turn Crimea into its mega-base against Russia.
In it I calibrate and discuss the country and current leader Lenin Moreno’s calibrations, along with Ecuadorian economy, sovereignty, solvency and more.
As a bonus, I also compare current calibrations of the country and leader with past leader Rafael Correa and country calibrations several years ago.
What you’ll hear Slavoj Žižek say in the beginning of his interview, resonates strongly with what I wrote about Ecuador in my book.
But my calibrations and analysis go a lot deeper, broader, being more precise and touching upon many things never discussed in the media, nor by those who are considered world authorities on various subjects.
I’ll also consider posting free the Assange piece and perhaps more excerpts – if I get a good support from followers and readers.
Back in 2014-15 on FT I dubbed what was happening under Poroshenko and the junta the Crazy Asylum called Ukraine.
Boiko, as I wrote in a previous report on Ukraine elections , is in 4th-5th position in the polls.
Other two very prominent founding members of this alternative political force, Rabinovich and Muraev, recently had a squabble with the rest and left, thus weakening and splintering the electoral base of the party.
But it must be stressed that polls are very likely falsified in Ukraine, anyway.
Medvedchuk is considered the most prominent and well-known name among all those I mentioned above.
He is also considered an honest, beyond reproach politician by those who are for friendship between Russia and Ukraine.
Since 2014 Medvedchuk has participated in Minsk process with a humanitarian mission, negotiating mutual return of Ukraine-Donbass POWs, and he became widely respected for this.
I also have to note that of all active Ukraine politicians, he is the highest calibrated.
Just compare that to Poroshenko, whose world’s lowest head of state QC is at 40, GUILT, as calibrated in my new book.
The meeting with Medvedev, per reports, centered around the fact that Gazprom may offer Ukraine the 25% off discount on gas, plus a guarantee of some percentage of transit to continue flowing through Ukraine after Nord Stream-2 is built.
Ukraine pipe is managed cooperatively by Naftogaz-Ukraine and Russian Gazprom.
Boiko, as ex-Naftogaz CEO, is in good position to negotiate. 70% of Ukrainians do not believe elections will be honest.
As you recall, in 2014 I predicted that Ukraine will slowly turn back to Russia, and that Russia will never attack or invade Ukraine, as it was called on to do by so many.
Instead, I said that Russia will slowly and carefully re-mold the situation in Ukraine.
I also said that the timing is contingent upon several things, including the complete destruction of Ukraine’s economy and upon the end of construction of the pipelines around Ukraine, namely, Nord Stream-2 and TurkStream.
Once the pipelines are complete, Ukraine becomes a lot less valuable to the United States because Germany, Austria and the rest of EU, not to mention Russia, won’t be manipulated any more via the Ukraine gas transit blackmail.
There is no official announcement yet, but the leak already created a media storm.
They will first be handed out to LDNR officials, self-defence officers and members, police and state security.
I can’t even begin describing how long-awaited this news is for many people.
There was an announcement that Russia is preparing a series of surprises before Ukraine elections, whose first round begins on March 31.
Ukraine also banned Russian monitors from the elections, a violation of international law.
At the same time, the number of ballots printed exceeds the real number of voters by at least 15 million.
This means widely expected violations, when millions of the ‘dead soul’ ballots will be entered.
Another ‘surprise’ move awaited by many, is that Russia will disavow the results of Ukraine election, unless Russia sees a marked difference in new president’s approach.
This however, is practically impossible due to the double pressure from both United States and ukro-nazis.
Az is all fired up to do more regular podcasts on various serious topics.
Some of these will be current events, geopolitics and global economy oriented.
As a matter of fact, Az wants us to record a series on the dirty secrets of the United States healthcare and education, with both his and my insights.
We’ll be very grateful if you also pass along the links to ESP and my YT Channel to others.
