Pundits continue to debate whether economic shocks, public discontent at home, and isolation abroad will shake President Vladimir Putin’s regime.
Much of the commentary on Putin’s survival strategies has focused on repression and aggressive military posturing.
The former treats protest as an instance of undesirable chaos whereas the latter characterizes it as a legitimate and even desirable expression of public sentiment.
Higher values indicate more use of the freedom to protest frame while lower values reflect greater employment of the disorder frame for a given day between October 2011 and December 2013.
As seen below, there are major fluctuations in how the Kremlin-controlled media covered protest in Russia during this period.
There are four spikes in the overall quantity of news stories about protest, each indicated by a vertical dotted line labeled S1-S4.
The trend line connecting these spikes clearly shows a shift toward the freedom to protest frame between S1, the onset of mass protests in December 2011, and S2, the May 2012 Bolotnaya Square mass anti-regime protests, which featured skirmishes between protesters and police that triggered an unprecedented wave of repression against the political opposition.
S2 also coincides with Putin’s inauguration for a third presidential term.
During this period, media stories were overwhelmingly concerned with “exposing” and “preventing” alleged plots of another mass uprising, ostensibly supported by agents of former Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili and his Western backers abroad.
This can be referred to as “fabricating protest,” whereby the media deliberately planted misinformation into the public domain about the threats protests pose to public order.
Following S3, there is a gradual upward shift in the direction of the freedom to protest frame roughly until the fourth spike in protest coverage is reached; this is S4, the October 2013 Biryulyovo anti-migrant riots in Moscow.
After this period, however, there is not a significant dip in the direction of the disorder frame.
This is despite the fact that the Biryulyovo disturbances featured traits that would fit the disorder narrative well.
These include vandalism, right-wing extremist slogans, and public expressions of xenophobia and racism.
The work of Christopher Hutchings and Vera Tolz, who have analyzed nationalist discourses on Russian television for an earlier time period, helps shed light on these findings.
They observe that beginning in 2012, the leading state-controlled channels intensified narratives stigmatizing non-Russian migrants and ethnic and religious minority groups, thereby pandering to exclusive forms of Russian nationalism.
This observation is in line with arguments that the Kremlin adapted nationalist rhetoric following the regime’s realization of the unlikely alliance between nationalists and political liberals during the 2011-2012 mass protests.
The tactic of stigmatizing anti-regime political protests while tacitly endorsing expressions of Russian nationalist sentiments is replicated in the Russian government-controlled media’s coverage of Ukraine’s Euromaidan protests.
Here, the average framing of Kremlin media is represented by a red line , and the average framing of the independent media is captured by the black line.
A significant deviation of the Kremlin’s frame from the frames employed by non-Kremlin media toward the protests-as-disorder narrative is observed only after the fall of the former President Viktor Yanukovych government and his flight from Kiev in February 2014.
In fact, the framing of protests by state-controlled sources and independent media tended to be in line with each other until mid-February 2014.
Only at that point, did framing of protests in Russia’s state-controlled media become more negative and significantly different from that of the non-Kremlin controlled media.
The study gained leverage on this question by performing a series of simple key-word searches to identify trends in vocabulary alluding to the plight of ethnic Russians in Ukraine.
In this chart, following Yanukovych’s departure and coinciding with the annexation of Crimea, Russia’s state-controlled media began to employ legalistic jargon about “federalization,” “referendum,” and the status of the Russian language and of ethnic Russians frequently in ways differing from coverage by sources not under the Kremlin’s control.
However, the Kremlin promptly abandons these strategies by the end of April.
This coincides with its disastrous failure to replicate the relatively peaceful Crimea annexation scenario in the Donbas.
By many accounts, there was a significant minority of residents in Donestsk and Luhansk regions whose sentiments favored joining Russia.
Yet, public opinion surveys revealed that the overwhelming majority there—let alone in the other territories that Russia briefly referred to as Novorossiya, namely Dnipropetrovsk, Zaporizhzhya, Kherson, and Mykolayiv—showed a preference for an undivided Ukraine.
Furthermore, in Russia too, an influx of migrants into regions bordering Ukraine and war casualties served to dampen the public euphoria surrounding Crimea’s annexation.
The Kremlin media’s abandonment of these key terms may also be explained by the fact that protests also began to appear within Russia, demanding the “federalization,” or outright secession, of Siberian and other regions within Russia itself.
These demands represented the Russian political opposition’s thinly veiled references to the Kremlin’s hypocrisy inherent in fomenting separatist sentiment abroad while depriving Russia’s own regions of meaningful decision-making powers.
Kremlin-controlled media have adeptly altered the coverage of public discontent at home and abroad in ways meant to undermine dissent, or, alternatively, cater to public sentiment thereby increasing citizen support for the Putin regime.
Rather than being witness to a grand strategy, tactical shifts implemented, abandoned, or altered rapidly as events unfolded.
These trends in the framing of protests indicate that media analysis could be a useful tool for exploring shifts in Russia’s domestic and foreign policy.
It may also help ascertain not just the sources of regime strength, but also its weaknesses and vulnerabilities.
Tomila Lankina is Associate Professor at The London School of Economics and Political Science.
The information presented and arguments made are based on in-depth analysis of media data using a methodological tool developed with my research colleagues at The London School of Economics and Political Science.
I would like to thank in particular Kohei Watanabe for performing the media analysis part of the study; Katerina Tertytchnaya for her help with Russian protest data analysis; and Yulia Netesova for her assistance with analyzing Russian and Ukrainian media sources.
We obtained 28,531 news stories in total for the period between January 1, 2011, and December 31, 2013.
With the help of these stories, we developed a Russian-language dictionary of media framing of protest.
The dictionary-generation process involved human coding of news by three native Russian-speakers to capture the tone of media coverage of street rallies.
It also involved a machine analysis component—the computer program that we created can “learn” from human coders what scores to assign to words found in thousands of media stories on protest.
For the analysis of non-Kremlin-controlled media under protests in Ukraine, we did a similar analysis of stories on protest in Russia.
The total number of news stories harvested for the period November 1, 2013 to December 31, 2014 is 22,568.
