King one of the most tenacious detectors of ""things that don’t add up"" in the world today.
FOREWORD — PLANET ROTHSCHILD By Jeff Rense For over the past 30 years, I've worked in many key positions in broadcast journalism, as a TV news reporter, news director, anchorman, and, for the past 20 years, the producer and host of my own talk radio program.
It has been quite a journey and all during that times I really never stop wanting to know the realities of news stories, large and small.
When applying those timeless questions towards the crucial subject of History, I have seldom been satisfied with the 'official explanations' for my inquiries and questions.
Though I am generally cautious in bestowing blessings upon the work of others, 'NWO Forbidden History’ caught my attention for a number of reasons.
Through his writings submitted to Rense.com, and also from his ‘tour d' force' guest appearance on my show, King's mastery of the subject, formidable writing talent, and unique ability to break down the complex into simple bites were already known to me.
I was pleased when I learned of his project to reformat his Internet Classic into a hard copy version.
As my regular listeners and readers are by now well aware, the world situation becomes gloomier by the day.
It is only through a clear understanding of the past, that we can truly understand the present, and the dark future that is being planned for us.
By distilling conspiratorial history into easy-to-understand, illustrated mini essays, “Planet Rothschild” serves as the perfect reference guide to help you navigate through the sea of lies which have been fed to us since childhood, and continue to be fed to us each day.
The politicians are the actors and the TV talking heads are the narrators.
The audience is humanity itself — most of which, unfortunately, have no idea that a rigged show has been, and still is, playing out before their eyes.
It is a global monster-scam of unimaginable dimensions in which humanity is the target.
It is a unique ""blurb by blurb"" chronological and photographical review that will enrich your depth of historical and economic knowledge like no other work of its kind.
This life-changing work is ideal as a permanent reference & study guide.
But you won’t be able to refute any of it; and nor will you ever look at world events in the same light ever again.
To alleviate the threat in the east, German Foreign Minister Ribbentrop and Russian Foreign Minister Molotov sign the Molotov-Ribbentrop NonAggression Pact.
Hitler understands what kind of monster Stalin is, but he hopes that if he can at least keep the peace with the USSR, the scheming warmongers of Britain and France can be prevented from drawing the USSR into a war against Germany.
Western Globalists are annoyed with Stalin over this pact with Germany.
Rather than fight Germany now, he wants Germany and the Anglo-French Alliance to weaken each other first, in preparation for the day when his Red Army can take all of Europe.
Seem WONDER How LONG THE HONEYMooN we Last” Western cartoons mock the idea of a Hitler-Stalin pact AUGUST 25, 1939 BRITAIN & POLAND AGREE TO A MILITARY ALLIANCE The Polish-British Common Defense Pact contains promises of British military assistance in the event that Poland is attacked by another European country.
This builds upon a previous agreement between the two countries, and also with France, by specifically committing to military action in the event of an attack.
With this agreement, Zionist-Globalist forces in the UK have trapped the reluctant Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, as well as France.
All that is left to do now is for Polish-Jewish border thugs, under the protection of Marshal Edward Rydz-Smigly, to deliberately provoke Germany into action and get the war started.
On the nights of August 25 to August 31 inclusive, there occur many violent attacks on German civilians as well as German officials and property.
Under heavy pressure, Chamberlain was manipulated into a UK-Poland Defense pact.
AUGUST 28, 1939 HITLER ISSUES AN OPEN PEACE LETTER TO THE PRESIDENT OF FRANCE Now emboldened by Britain, France and, from ‘behind the — scenes’, Roosevelt, Poland’s’ relentless and murderous abuse of its captive German Poland population reaches the breaking point. pawig Hitler is prepared for war with Poland but is still attempting to preserve peace, especially with France and Britain.
I, too, have never overlooked the grave responsibilities which are imposed upon those who are in charge of the fate of nations.
Guided by this attitude and experience, I have tried to remove all matters that might cause conflict between our two peoples.
As you could judge for yourself during your last visit here, the German people, in the knowledge of its own behavior held and holds no ill feelings, much less hatred, for its one-time brave opponent.
On the contrary, the pacification of our western frontier led to an increasing sympathy.
I am deeply convinced that if, especially, England at that time had, instead of starting a wild campaign against Germany in the press and instead of launching rumors of a German mobilization, somehow talked the Poles into being reasonable, Europe today and for twenty-five years could enjoy a condition of deepest peace.
As things were, Polish public opinion was excited by a lie about German aggression.
Polish public opinion, convinced that England and France would now fight for Poland, began to make demands one might possibly stigmatize as laughable insanity were they not so tremendously dangerous.
At that point an unbearable terror, a physical and economic persecution of the Germans although they numbered more than a million and a half began in the regions ceded by the Reich.
I see no way of persuading Poland, which feels herself as unassailable, now that she enjoys the protection of her guarantees, to accept a peaceful solution.
If our two countries on that account should be destined to meet again on the field of battle, there would nevertheless be a difference in the motives.
The front page carried the full text of the thoughtful and logical letter which Hitler wrote to French President Edouard Daladier a letter which The Times cannot now deny.
William Joyce, Irish defector to Germany AUGUST 31, 1939 ‘THE GLEIWITZ’ BORDER ATTACKS / JEWISH-POLISH GUERILLAS ATTACK GERMAN RADIO STATION Overestimating their strength, underestimating German strength, and believing that France and the UK would now back him, Marshal Smigly allows Polish-Jewish partisan terrorists to cross the border and attack a German radio station in Germany.
It is actually the latest in a string of deliberate border instigations against Germany.
The ""Poles"" then broadcast a message urging others to take up arms and start killing Germans.
German police quickly arrive and retake the station, killing one of the Red terrorists.
Modern fake historians claim that the Gleiwitz incident was staged by Germans dressed as Polish terrorists.
But as is the case with the Reichstag Fire conspiracy theory, they offer no evidence to support this oft-repeated lie, to support this theory — a theory that ignores the outrageous and repeated pattern of provocations directed at Hitler's Germany ever since 1933, the numerous border incidents, the murders of Germans and also Hitler’s sincere attempts to negotiate a resolution to the Corridor and Danzig controversies.
OFA) D The Gleiwitz radio station was attacked and calls to kill German residents of Poland were broadcast.
FORBIDDEN HISTORY QUOTE TO REMEMBER ""IT lived in Germany during the 1980's when many people who lived during the war were still alive.
I sought out anyone who lived near Poland in 1939 and was lucky enough to meet several people.
One was a customs official who said it was so bad on the border they were armed and also had grenades in their office ready for attacks.
Another told me his farm animals were often stolen by Polish terrorists.
Another told of his niece being raped by a Pole who crossed the border.
He told me in 1940 they caught the man and showed me a copy of the death order signed by Heydrich, in which he ordered the man be put to death.
This is just one of many stories told to me by German civilians who witnessed these border incursions just like had happened in 1919-1928.
One thing many people fail to see is that Poland openly attacked Germany right after World War I, which led to many border battles.
Once Germany started pressing Poland to work out a solution to the corridor, the attacks started again.
And one thing that is clear to me is that Germany did not make up these attacks."" George H Ohio, USA Hitler has had about all he could take from Poland.
As the German army advances eastward, the badly GERMANY INVADES beaten Polish forces POLAND withdraw rapidly, SEPT 3,1939 | 81 Q0DY SUNDAY’ Red Jewish terrorists rape, torture and massacre 3000+ BOLSHEVIKS MURDER | German civilians in the town 3000+ GERMAN of Bromberg, Poland.
British Duke Arthur Wellesley was the great grandson of the famous Duke of Wellington who defeated Napoleon.
SEPTEMBER 7-16, 1939 THE SAAR OFFENSIVE / FRANCE INVADES GERMANY The Saar Offensive is a French ground invasion into Saarland, Germany.
The large scale assault is to be carried out by 40 divisions and 40 tank battalions.
According to the Franco-Polish military convention, the French Army was to gain control over the area between the French border and the Siegfried Line of German defense.
Much to the dismay of the fools in Poland, the full 40-division all-out assault never materializes.
The empty promises of empire were just an Allied trick just to get stupid Marshal Smigly to start the fight with Germany.
But a limited invasion and occupation of Germany’s Saar region does indeed occur.
On October 16 & 17, the German army, now reinforced with troops returning from the Polish campaign, conducts a counter-offensive which retakes the lost territory from the invading French.
So you see, dear reader, the Anglo-French Allies not only instigated the war, and not only were the first to declare war, they also drew first blood upon Germany.
The advancing Reds carry out massacres, the most infamous being the Katyn Forest Massacre in which 10,000 Polish Army officers are shot in the head.
Other than the pre-Versailles German areas which Germany reclaims, the Soviets will eventually take all of Poland.
In a shocking double-standard, the anti-German, FDR, France & the UK remain oddly silent about this brutal Soviet aggression.
Poland appeals to Britain and France for help, citing the Poland-British Defense Pact just signed a few weeks ago.
The Polish ambassador in London contacts the British Foreign Office pointing out that clause 1 of the agreement, which concerned an ""aggression by a European power"" on Poland, should apply to the Soviet invasion.
The UK Foreign Secretary responds with hostility, stating that it was Britain's decision whether to declare war on the Soviet Union.
They only used its stupid ultra-nationalist leader (who by now has shamelessly abandoned his troops and fled to Romania), to instigate Hitler so they could have their war.
The Soviets massacred 10,000 Polish officers after the rat Smigly abandoned his armies.
SEPTEMBER 17, 1939 GERMANY DEFEATS POLAND / DANZIG AND ALL OF PRUSSIA REUNITED WITH THE REST OF GERMANY Within a few weeks, the German-Polish War is already over.
I do not know what England would have said about a similar peace solution at its expense or how America or France would have accepted it.
I submitted this attempt to the Polish rulers in the form of verbal proposals.
Thereupon wild terror was initiated, and my request to the Polish Foreign Minister to visit me in Berlin once more to discuss these questions was refused.
OCTOBER, 1939 — MAY, 1940 HITLER PLEADS FOR PEACE WITH BRITAIN & FRANCE The German-Polish War has ended quickly.
The French actually invade Germany on September 7th, advancing 8 km before stopping.
During this time, Hitler pleads for the Allies to withdraw their war declarations.
Hitler’s pleas for peace are ignored as the allies begin to mobilize more than 2,000,000 troops in Northern France.
Plans are openly discussed to advance eastward upon Germany, via “neutral” Belgium and Holland, as well as establishing operations in “neutral” Norway and Denmark, with or without their consent.
Hitler will send no warning — so always carry your gas mask During his speech of October 6, 1939, Hitler pleaded for peace.
Meanwhile, the British government shamelessly frightened its own people with idiotic tales of imminent German gas attacks.
NOVEMBER, 1939 FDR REPEALS THE NEUTRALITY ACTS The Neutrality Acts prohibited the United States from selling arms to warring nations.
The purpose of these acts was to prevent the United States from again becoming involved in Europe's wars.
Throughout the 1930's, FDR and his Zionist advisor Bernard Baruch (who had also been an advisor to Woodrow Wilson), anticipating a new war against Germany, had unsuccessfully tried to amend the previous Neutrality Acts.
Soon after Germany and Poland began fighting, FDR again urges Congress to repeal the Neutrality Acts.
The scheming FDR has taken a big step towards involving America in a war that his Zio-Globo handlers have long been agitating for.
With help from the Jewish Press and Jewish Hollywood newsreels, Jewish Money King Bernard Baruch and his puppet FDR undid the previous Neutrality Acts.
ZIONISTS SINK A SHIP FULL OF FELLOW JEWS IN ORDER TO GAIN SYMPATHY The Patria is carrying 1800 Jewish émigrés, originally from Europe, whom British authorities are deporting from Palestine to Mauritius (island off of southern African coast) because they lack entry permits.
The Zionist ""Haganah"" terror-military group claims that the passengers blew up the ship as a suicide protest against British refusal to let them arrive in Palestine.
The truth eventually comes out and it is revealed that Haganah planted the bomb which sank the ship in just 15 minutes.
Hard core Zionists would rather see Jewish passengers die than be relocated to Mauritius.
The propaganda value of a “mass suicide protest” would outweigh the value of even Jewish lives.
The “official story” today is that Haganah only wanted to cripple the ship, not sink it.
As he had with Poland, Stalin breaks another 1932 non-aggression pact he had agreed to; The Soviet-Finnish Non Aggression Pact of 1932.
The invasion is massive, with 21 Soviet divisions consisting of 450,000 Red Army troops.
Stalin expects to overwhelm Finland in a matter of weeks and install a government of Finnish Communists currently waiting in Moscow, but the brave and outnumbered Finns stage a heroic defense of their homeland.
A treaty is signed the following March, but the Finns are forced to give up some territory.
The ""International Community"" verbally condemns the Soviet invasion and makes some symbolic economic gestures, but once again, there are no calls for boycotts, nor any declaration of war against the USSR as there was against Germany.
Hitler is also forced to remain silent about Stalin’s actions because he does not want a two-front war.
The brave Finns put up a fierce resistance against the Soviet aggressors.
APRIL 9, 1940 GERMANY IS FORCED INTO PRE-EMPTIVE, LIMITED OCCUPATIONS OF NORWAY & DENMARK The Allied plan of attack is to disrupt Germany’s iron ore imports from Sweden by illegally mining Norwegian waters, and then occupying the important Norwegian port of Narvik.
Plans are also made for imposing a base of operations in Denmark, Germany’s neutral neighbor to its north.
Sympathetic to Germany, and not wanting his country to become a battlefield, Quisling informs Hitler of the Anglo-French plot to wage war from the two Scandinavian countries.
Germany moves quickly to secure the Norwegian port of Narvik just before the British can place their mines, and also to occupy Denmark.
German diplomats assure the leaders of both Scandinavian nations that Germany seeks neither conquest nor interference in internal affairs.
Life under limited German occupation goes on quietly for the Scandinavians during the war.
Quisling’s name is now a dictionary word in the English language, synonymous with “traitor” — a totally unfair characterization.
It begins on May 10, 1940 (the same day that Churchill comes to power) with British troops disembarking in the Capital City of Reykjavik.
The British quickly move inland, disabling communications networks and securing landing locations.
The government of Iceland protests the violation of their neutrality, but to no avail.
This force is then subsequently augmented, to a final strength of 25,000.
The recently thwarted British occupations of neutral Denmark and Norway, and the successful occupation of neutral Iceland, show that Rothschild Britain is the true aggressor of the coming war in Western Europe.
Although FDR, up until December 1941, promises that America will remain non-belligerent, 30,000 United States troops will relieve the British and occupy Iceland in spring of 1941.
MAY 10, 1940 WINSTON CHURCHILL BECOMES UK’s PRIME MINISTER With the preparations for war in place, the reluctant warrior Neville Chamberlain is finally pushed aside as the lunatic, drunken, cigar chomping Winston Churchill takes his place.
Churchill, and his wealthy London Zionist backers, have been advocating for war with Germany for the past 6 years.
But now, with the Zionist press of Britain misrepresenting the facts surrounding the GermanPolish War, Churchill is portrayed as some sort of wise prophet.
With Chamberlain gone and Churchill now in power, Hitler now knows for certain that ""the Phony War"" is about to become very real.
Churchill and his criminal crew of Kingsley Wood & Anthony Eden are now out in the open as UK’*s ruling war party.
FORBIDDEN HISTORY QUOTE TO REMEMBER ""T emphasized that the defeat of Germany and Japan and their elimination from world trade would give Britain a tremendous opportunity to swell her foreign commerce in both volume and profit."" Bernard M Baruch MAY 10, 1940 GERMANY LAUNCHES PRE-EMPTIVE INVASION OF ‘LOW COUNTRIES’ Hitler’s pleas for peace have been repeatedly ignored as 400,000 British and at least 2,000,000 French troops mass in northern France.
On the same day that Churchill comes to power, and that the UK invades Iceland, as an act of national self-defense, Germany takes the fight to the Allies before they can bring it to German soil and reinstitute a 2™ Versailles Treaty.
In a stunning advance westward, the German Blitzkrieg quickly overtakes the smaller nations (known as the Low Countries because of their geography) and pushes the Allied armies into a full retreat towards the beaches of northern France.
But the menacing presence of the massive Allied force on Germany’s industrial frontier is conveniently ignored, as is the undeniable and extensive collaboration between the “neutral” Low Countries and the Allies.
The western press and modern court-historians have buried these allegations.
MAY 10, 1940 ALLIES BOMB GERMAN TOWN OF FRIEBURG/ 20 CHILDREN KILLEDINA PLAYGROUND The medieval and non-strategic German town of Freiburg is located just 20 miles from the French border.
In the opening hours of the war in the west, new Prime Minister Churchill and his French allies waste no time in murdering civilians.
About 60 bombs are dropped on or near Freiburg; killing 50 civilians including 20 children who were playing outside.
In order to whitewash this horrific deed from the pages of history; and to maintain the historical myth that it was Germany that initiated the bombings of civilians; court historians have long promoted the ridiculous lie that the Germans accidentally bombed their own town and then blamed the event on the Allies in order to cover up the mistake.
Subsequent terror bombings of German civilians will dispel any doubt that Churchill was indeed capable of deliberately exterminating civilians. “fem ) The New fork Times.
MAY, 1940 HITLER TRIES FOR PEACE THROUGH A SWEDISH CHANNEL After having just defeated the French and British invaders, Hitler, via a Swedish third party, proposes generous peace terms to Britain.
The Germans contact the British ambassador in Sweden, Victor Mallet, through Sweden’s Supreme Court Judge Ekeberg, who is known to Hitler’s legal advisor, Ludwig Weissauer.
Hitler's peace proposal demands nothing of Great Britain and implies that the states currently occupied by Germany would be de-occupied; as Germany's occupation was only due to the present war situation.
The discussion soon moves to that of Italian mediation between the Allies and Germany.
Halifax responds very favorably to the idea and takes it to the British War Cabinet.
The following morning Halifax reports to the War Cabinet, summarizing his meeting with Bastianini and urging his colleagues to consider Italian mediation.
For several days, Halifax continues to press for the Mussolini mediation.
In an apparent attempt to placate Halifax, Churchill states that he doubts whether anything would come of an approach to Italy, but that the matter was one which the War Cabinet should consider.
Never once did Churchill even consider Mussolini's offer to mediate peace between Britain and Germany.
The matter eventually dies after Churchill outmaneuvers the peace-seeking Halifax.
MAY 27 -— JUNE 4, 1940 AS A SIGN OF FRIENDSHIP, HITLER ALLOWS THE ALLIED ARMIES TO ESCAPE AT DUNKIRK After Germany’s stunning advance, the Allies are trapped on the beaches of Dunkirk, France.
The entire force can be easily captured, but Hitler issues a halt order.
As a show of good faith towards his western tormentors, Hitler believes that the British will be more likely to make peace if they can escape with their dignity intact.
A massive boat lift involving British fishermen ferries the troops across the English Channel back to England.
The cigar-chomping, Zionist-owned, alcoholic Winston Churchill vows to keep fighting as he frightens the British people with tales of imminent German invasion.
He compared the British Empire with the Catholic Church saying they were both essential elements of stability in the world.
He said that all he wanted from Britain was that she should acknowledge Germany's position on the Continent.
The Reds annex the tiny defenseless Baltic states of Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia.
Yet, the western Globalists only remain obsessed with attacking Germany, whose leader, just like the Kaiser had two decades earlier, continues to plead for peace.
Stalin swallowed up the tiny Baltic states of Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia JUNE, 1940 AFTER GERMANY’S DEFEAT OF THE ALLIES, MUSSOLINI’s ITALY JOINS THE WAR Upon seeing Germany's stunning victory in 1940, Benito Mussolini, the opportunistic, ego-driven Leader of Italy, ends Italy’s neutrality and allies himself with Germany.
Unlike Hitler’s defensive war, Mussolini dreams of conquest, hoping to restore a new Roman Empire in North Africa.
In September, Italy invades Egypt, which has been occupied by the British since a 1936 Treaty to protect the Suez Canal.
In picking a fight with Britain, Mussolini bites off far more than the unimpressive Italian military can chew.
The superior British land and naval forces dominate their Italian adversaries, giving Churchill a potential continental opening to invade a now non-neutral Italy from North Africa.
Oo French land Land under British control [ } Italian land Eritrea Sudan Colonial Italy clashed with colonial Britain over Africa.
Though a solid anti-Communist, Mussolini's imperialist ego will cost Germany & Italy dearly.
JUNE 22, 1940 NEW GOVERNMENT OF FRANCE MAKES PEACE WITH HITLER As the fleeing French government collapses, the Germans enter undefended Paris on June 14 ' 40.
The new government is headed by the World War I hero Marshal Philippe Petain, who agrees to make peace with Germany.
Unlike the brutality of the Versailles Treaty, the terms of this Armistice are very light, requiring only that Germany continues to occupy northern France as a defensive measure against a British invasion of the continent.
The new French government has its administrative offices in the southern city of Vichy.
Other than the strategic occupation in the north, France remains a sovereign nation.
German soldiers establish an excellent reputation for good behavior, and charm with the French ladies.
Meanwhile in the UK, Churchill and French General Charles De Gaulle fume over Marshal Petain’s refusal to continue fighting.
Hitler wants Petain to ally his country with Germany, but Mussolini’s war declaration upon France leaves such a bad taste in the mouths of Frenchmen that they cannot possibly join a German-Italian alliance.
We have no Continental army which can defeat the German military power.. ...there is one thing that will bring him down, and that is an absolutely devastating, exterminating attack by very heavy bombers from this country upon the Nazi homeland.
Finally, in September; Hitler is forced to declare that any more British bombings of civilian areas will be met with a similar response.
As he had done with the orchestrated sinking of the Lusitania in 1915, Winston Churchill has again deliberately brought on the deaths of innocent men, women, and children in order to achieve political goals.
Germans were killed and left homeless by Churchill's heavy terror bombers.
With Germany in total control of the continent and the war situation, Hitler responds to Churchill’s bombs by dropping mass quantities of leaflets over London.
The 4-page broadsheet contains an English language summary of Hitler’s recent speech before the Reichstag.
I consider myself in a position to make this appeal, since I am not the vanquished, begging favors, but the victor speaking in the name of reason.
Possibly Mr Churchill again will brush aside this statement of mine by saying that it is merely born of fear and of doubt in our final victory.
The British respond to Hitler’s sincere plea with mockery, threats, and more bombs.
A LAST sll ng TO REASON ADOLF HITLER Speech before the Reichstag, 19% July, 1940 Ignorant British soldier laughs as he reads Hitler’s air-dropped leaflet.
AUGUST, 1940 THE MADAGSCAR PLAN / HITLER PLANS TO ESTABLISH A JEWISH HOMELAND ON MADAGASCAR For centuries, Europeans and Jews have had problems living together.
Hitler was content to leave them alone and live as resident aliens of Germany.
For those who wanted to live in Palestine, the 1933 ""Transfer Agreement’ between the German government and the Zionists facilitated that.
From 1933-1940, about 40% of Germany's Jews immigrated to Palestine with all of their wealth intact.
When World War II prevents further cooperation between the Germans and the Zionists, it becomes clear that a new “final solution” is needed.
The plan Hitler envisions is to create a homeland for the Jews on the beautiful island of Madagascar, off the coast of southern Africa, and resettle one million Jews per year under German protection and supervision.
The idea of a Jewish homeland on Madagascar had actually been circulating throughout Europe since the 1880’s.
The Madagascar Plan is scrapped when the British invade the island in 1942, taking control away from Vichy France after the Battle of Madagascar.
A Jewish Madagascar would have been a win-win solution for Jews and Europeans and would have spared the poor Palestinians, and other Arab nations, all of the horrors they would endure after the illegitimate founding of Israel in 1948.
The Transfer _— Agreement FiINMAt | SOLUTION 1Jewish author Edwin Black’s ‘The Transfer Agreement” reveals the full extent of the cooperation between the Germans and Zionist émigrés.
Hitler’s ‘Final Solution” was to relocate the Jews to a homeland of their own, not kill them.
SEPTEMBER 16, 1940 FDR INSTITUTES FIRST EVER PEACETIME DRAFT IN AMERICA While publicly insisting that American boys ""will not be going to foreign wars"", FDR continues to secretly prepare for entry into the Globalists' World War.
The unlucky draftees are told that they will serve a 12 month term, based in either the Western Hemisphere, or a United States territory.
By the summer of 1941, the deceitful FDR (who is planning to trick America into the war by way of a Japanese provocation) decrees that the terms be lengthened.
Outraged draftees protest FDR's broken promise and threaten to desert when their 12 months are up.
But most will obey the order and continue to serve past the promised October 1941 release date, and right up until the ""surprise attack"" upon Pearl Harbor in December of 1941.
Le os 1“What’s the Joke?” 1940 Postcard mocks FDR for laughing as he signs Draft Bill.
SEPTEMBER, 1940 ‘AXIS’ NATIONS OF GERMANY, ITALY, & JAPAN SIGN ‘TRIPARTITE PACT / HOPE TO KEEP THE United States OUT OF THE WAR Germany and Japan are suspicious of FDR’s true intentions.
Japan, Germany, and Italy agree to assist one another with all political, economic and military means if one of the contracting nations is attacked by a nation at present not involved in the European War or in the JapaneseChinese conflict.
Ironically, the defense pact will end up actually facilitating FDR’s scheme to draw America in.
What the 5 Billionaire Rothschild Brothers of the 1800's were to the European branch of the New World Order, the 5 Billionaire Rockefeller Brothers of the 1900's will be to the American branch.
Former CFR Director, Founder of the Tri-Lateral Commission 1The Third Generation.
OCTOBER, 1940 ROMANIA ACCEPTS GERMAN PROTECTION OF ITS OIL FIELDS The Soviets have already annexed parts of anti-Communist Romania.
The Red Army now sits dangerously close to the Ploesti oil fields upon which Germany depends.
With the approval of Romania, German troops arrive to protect the oil fields from the Soviet threat.
It is from this area of Europe that Churchill and Stalin will play their ""chess games"" against Germany.
As they had during their losing days of World War I, British politicians reach out to international Jewry for help.
During World War I, Britain's ‘Balfour Declaration’ promised Palestine to the Jews in exchange for bringing about United States entry.
But there is no chance of British victory unless the United States can be dragged into the conflict.
The promise of a 'New World Order' is clearly intended to further encourage American Jewish support for entering the war.
Arthur Greenwood member without portfolio in the British War Cabinet assured the Jews of the United States that when victory was achieved an effort would be made to found a New World Order” OCTOBER 28, 1940 ITALY INVADES GREECE Italy had occupied tiny Albania in the spring of 1939.
Greece has good relations with Germany, but Mussolini wants to claim the Ionian Islands.
Italy’s invasion of Greece is completely unrelated to Germany’s war and creates unexpected problems for Hitler.
Churchill now has an opening on the European mainland from which he can move north towards Germany and eastward towards Romania and the crucial oil fields which supply Germany.
NOVEMBER, 1940 AFTER LYING ABOUT HIS INTENTIONS, FDR WINS REELECTION OVER GLOBALIST STRAW-MAN WENDELL WILKIE Throughout the Election year of 1940, nationalist Republicans warn that FDR is plotting to bring the United States into war.
Because the public is strongly opposed to entry in another war, FDR reassures voters that the “isolationists” are misrepresenting his intentions.
The peace-seeking Vatican and peace-seeking Germany remained in contact as the war raged.
This was not even a deal worked out through a process of hard negotiation.
It was Hitler's opening gambit....an offer so generous and pragmatic that it would be very tempting to anyone who genuinely wanted peace.
His offer of such remarkable concessions was an extremely threatening development.
Neither the Pope's prayers nor his emissaries could soften the black hearts of Churchill and his gang of warmongers.
FEBRUARY, 1941 GERMANS ARRIVE IN AFRICA TO BAIL OUT THE ITALIANS The first units of the German 'AfrikaKorps' arrive to rescue the collapsing Italian war effort in February of 1941.
General Erwin Rommel, known as the Desert Fox, commands the German force in North Africa.
Rommel will eventually establish the upper hand in Africa, but this diversion of manpower and resources to Africa proves to be a costly hindrance for Germany.
Kaufman calls for the complete extermination of the German people through forced sterilization and total dismemberment and reapportionment of German territory.
Though not widely distributed in America, Germany Must Perish is read throughout Germany.
Kaufman's evil work openly calls for the extinction of the German people and the absorbing of all German territory.
Churchill will not listen to reason because, behind the scenes, FDR is reassuring him that the United States will support the UK at all costs.
Britain will eventually receive $31 Billion worth of war supplies Roosevelt Calls for Action to \s Aid Britains fs ve {» “s'TO° CONGRESS \ rm Me attr yD toh FDR and cronies smile as they move America closer to war.
APRIL 6, 1941 GERMANY BLOCKS BRITISH & SOVIET SCHEMES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE BY INVADING GREECE & YUGOSLAVIA Though unrelated to Germany’s war, Mussolini’s foolish adventure in Greece has already created a big problem for Hitler.
British troops begin arriving in Greece to help the Greeks in their fight against the Italians.
Hitler offers to mediate peace between Italy and Greece, but the Greeks won't come to the table as more British troops keep arriving.
In response, British intelligence immediately triggers an orchestrated coup.
Stalin’s Yugoslavian Communists take to the streets in support of the new government.
If he does not act now, the “soft underbelly” of Europe will be flooded with British troops destined for southern Germany, as well as the Romanian oil fields upon which Germany depends.
The still small numbers of British troops are forced to evacuate, spoiling Churchill’s scheme to inflame southern Europe and invite the Soviets in to help.
Rudolf Hess is Germany’s Number 2 in command and a close friend of Hitler.
Recall that it was Hess who typed out the dictation for Hitler’s Mein Kampf.
In May of 1941, Hess flies a solo mission over Scotland and parachutes in, carrying an offer of peace.
He is hoping to link up with the Duke of Hamilton, who he had befriended at the 1936 Berlin Olympics, and convince his British acquaintance of Germany's sincere desire for peace.
On Churchill's orders, Hess is held in solitary confinement for the duration of the war.
After the war, Hess is ""tried"" at Nuremberg and then sentenced to life in East Berlin’s Spandau prison.
With the liberalization of the USSR in the 1980’s, there is talk of finally releasing him.
His family believes that the 93-year-old Hess was murdered so that the details of his peace mission would remain buried forever.
Hess's peace mission to Britain ended with Churchill jailing him for life.
MAY JULY, 1941 FDR ESCALATES HIS PROVOKATION OF GERMANY & JAPAN Long before the German-Polish conflict, FDR had waged a silent war against Germany.
With Germany now in control of the European situation, FDR is even more desperate to drag America into Britain's war.
To that end, the United States impounds German ships, sinks German subs, freezes German, Italian, and Japanese financial assets, assists the British Navy in spotting and sinking The Bismarck , and ships large amounts of arms to Britain.
Hitler bears the humiliating provocations quietly; knowing that United States entry into the war would be disastrous for Germany.
Realizing that Hitler will not take his bait, FDR further instigates the Japanese.
JUNE 22, 1941 ‘OPERATION BARBAROSSA’ / HITLER THWARTS STALIN’S PLAN TO CONQUER ALL OF EUROPE As Germany and Britain exhaust each other in the air, at sea, and now North Africa, Stalin quietly gathers his massive Red Army along Germany’s eastern frontier, near the Romanian oil fields that supply Germany.
He recalls how Stalin broke a nonaggression pact and pounced on Poland while the Poles were pre-occupied with Germany.
Soviet invasions of the Baltic States and eastern Romania, along with a recent Communist-backed coup in Yugoslavia all combine to offer still more proof that Stalin is up to something.
Now, with Germany and Britain distracted, Stalin threatens all of Europe.
Hitler had hoped to remove the Soviet threat in April, but invasion plans were delayed by Mussolini’s misadventures in Africa and Greece.
When “Operation Barbarossa” is launched, the Red Army is caught flat-footed and bunched up in offensive positions.
Millions of Soviet troops are taken prisoner, and the devastating loss of weaponry and equipment leaves the Red Army neutralized.
Up to 65% of all Soviet tanks, field guns, machine guns, and anti-tank guns are either destroyed or captured.
The Germans rout the Reds all the way back to the gates of Moscow, liberating many cheering Ukrainian, Baltic, and even Russian people along the way.
It is only the onset of the brutal Russian winter that forces the Germans to pause their stunning offensive.
The 2 month delay due to Mussolini’s folly in Greece may have saved Stalin’s regime from a total collapse in 1941.
Liberated from the Stalin & Kaganovich death cult, happy Ukrainians cheer the invading German soldiers.
When the German offensive almost reaches Moscow, Stalin is forced to flee eastward.
I have already told the nation of the build-up of Soviet military power in the East during a period when Germany had only a few divisions in the provinces bordering Soviet Russia.
Only a blind person could fail to see that a military build-up of worldhistorical dimensions was being carried out.
He unfreezes Soviet assets that had been frozen after Stalin’s attack on Finland in 1939, enabling the Soviets to immediately purchase 59 Fighter aircraft.
Without this ENORMOUS INFUSION of American aid, the Germans would probably have finished off Stalin after the spring thaw of 1942.
S Says, Pledging Russ All Out Help Pace 2 Newer Wee Neatral,” Saye Gen.
Recruited as immigrants to Russia in the 18th century, they had always been allowed to maintain their culture, language, and traditions After the German invasion in 1941, the Soviets consider the Volga Germans as potential collaborators.
On August 28, 1941, Stalin dissolves the VolgaGerman Republic and orders the immediate relocation of ethnic Germans.
About 400,000 Volga Germans are stripped of their land and houses; and transported eastward to Soviet Central Asia, and Siberia.
By 1942, nearly all the able-bodied German population will have been conscripted to the NKVD slave-labor columns.
Volga Germans were forced from their homes and herded onto cattle cars bound for slave camps THE GERMAN SOLDIER’s 10 COMMANDMENTS The German soldier is the best behaved and honorable soldier of Europe.
Every soldier receives a copy of ‘The German Soldier’s 10 Commandments and is expected to follow them to the letter or face serious punishment.
While fighting for victory the German soldier will observe the rules of chivalrous warfare.
Combatants will be in uniform or will wear specially introduced and clearly distinguishable badges.
No enemy who has surrendered will be killed, including partisans and spies.
While arms, maps, and records are to be taken away from them, their personal belongings will not be touched.
Dum-Dum bullets are prohibited; also no other bullets may be transformed into Dum-Dum.
Medical personnel and army chaplains may not be hindered in the execution of their medical or clerical activities.
Landmarks of historical value or buildings serving religious purposes, art, science, or charity are to be especially respected.
Neutral territory will never be entered nor passed over by planes, nor shot at; it will not be the object of warlike activities of any kind.
If a German soldier is made a prisoner of war he will tell his name and rank if asked for it.
Under no circumstances will he reveal to which unit he belongs, nor will he give any information about German military, political, and economic conditions.
LIFE IN THE GERMAN INTERNMENT CAMPS Contrary to the popular belief that life in the SS-run internment camps was a brutal existence of slave labor followed by extermination, the German went to great lengths to keep the Jewish inmates well-fed, well-housed and even entertained.
Officials from the International Red Cross visited the camps regularly and right up until the end of the war.
There were weddings, Bar Mitzvahs, and even maternity wards for pregnant women.
It was only during the final year of the war that conditions began to deteriorate as typhus epidemics spread and supplies diminished.
Because of the contagious nature of typhus, the corpses were cremated, not buried near groundwater.
The destruction of so much of Germany’s critical infrastructure contributed to the deaths.
Nonetheless, as the camps were liberated, many healthy and seemingly well-fed ‘Holocaust survivors”, as well as some not so healthy, were seen and photographed.
VOLUNTEERS FROM ACROSS EUROPE JOIN INTERNATIONAL FORCE UNDER GERMAN COMMAND Brave men from every nation in Europe volunteer to fight the Soviets.
The anti-Communist Waffen SS are motivated by a vision of a greater European family.
For the European SS, the Europe of jealousies, border disputes, and economic rivalries is petty.
By war's end, half of the SS commanders will have been killed in action.
By the end of the war, 40% of the Waffen SS will have been killed or gone missing.
Were it not for the tenacity and sacrifice of the heroic Waffen volunteers, all of Europe would have been lost to the Soviet hordes.
It is not surprising that to this day, the ""SS"" is still vilified in the Globalist press.
Waffen-SS.com Waffen SS banner includes emblems from every nation of Europe.
HITLER’S JEWISH SOLDIERS AND HIS FAVORITE JEWISH DOCTOR Hitler was not fanatically anti-Jewish as much as he was anti-Marxist, although there was large overlap between the two groups.
As hard as it may be to believe, it is absolutely true that about 60,000 half-Jewish, and 90,000 quarter-Jewish soldiers fought for Hitler’s Germany.
Among these were decorated soldiers, officers, and even Generals and Admirals.
Eduard Bloch, the noble Jewish doctor who had treated his cancer stricken mother.
Bloch's kindness, and inquired about him when he returned to liberated Austria in 1938.
When interviewed by the OSS towards the end of the war, Bloch spoke very well of the young Hitler that he had known.
Hitler never forgot Eduard Bloch, the Jewish physician who had treated his dying mother.
S Gets Jap Peace Bid; end to the war in Asia; but chose to Tokio Asks for Parley continue arming the Chinese.
ACCUSES FDR AND JEWS OF PLOTTING TO DRAG THE United States INTO THE WAR American patriots such as famed aviator Charles Lindbergh Jr. clearly see that FDR is plotting to involve America in the war.
Lindbergh’s speech in Iowa accurately describes what is happening behind the scenes.
FDR imposes devastating oil and trade embargoes on Japan, denies her ships access to the neutral Panama Canal, and orders United States battleships to undertake ""pop up"" cruises through Japanese territorial waters.
Finally, on November 26th of '41, FDR sends an impossible ultimatum to Japan, implying a military threat, and demanding that Japan withdraw all of its troops from China and Indochina as a pre-condition for lifting the oil embargo.
The tasty bait that these two traitors are dangling is the heart of America’s Pacific fleet, deliberately left vulnerable at the naval base of Pearl Harbor, in the United States territory of Hawaii.
The Japanese high command, in the hopes of gaining an early advantage, decides to strike as damaging a blow to the United States Navy as possible.
Because the United States and Britain have each cracked Japan’s naval communication codes, FDR and Churchill both have advance knowledge of the impending “surprise attack”; but no specific warning is sent to the Commanders at Pearl Harbor.
The attack kills 2402 United States sailors, and ignites press frenzy and a wave of patriotic fervor.
The ""isolationists"" are silenced for good and the America First Committee disbands.
Pes RLaner 1The Great Deceiver plays innocent while addressing the nation.
DECEMBER 8-11, 1941 WAR DECLARATIONS EXCHANGED The day after Pearl Harbor, Congress declares war on Japan.
Congress then follows with additional declarations upon Germany and Italy.
Again, from the diary of FDR’s War Secretary, Henry Stimson, we learn that Stimson’s immediate and “dominant feeling” was not one of sorrow or outrage over the lost lives at Pearl Harbor, but rather of relief.
We hereby declare war upon the United States of America and the British Empire.
To cultivate friendship among nations and to enjoy prosperity in common with all nations has always been the guiding principle of our Empire's foreign policy.
It has truly been unavoidable and far from our wishes that our Empire has been brought to cross swords with America and Britain.
More than four years have passed since China, failing to comprehend the true intentions of our Empire, and recklessly courting trouble, disturbed the peace of East Asia and compelled our Empire to take up arms.
Although there has been reestablished the National Government of China, with which Japan had effected neighborly intercourse and cooperation, the regime which has survived in Chungking, relying upon American and British protection, still continues its fratricidal opposition.
Eager for the realization of their ambition to dominate the Orient, both America and Britain, giving support to the Chungking regime, have aggravated the disturbances in East Asia.
Moreover these two powers, inducing other countries to follow suit, increased military preparations on all sides of our Empire to challenge us.
They have obstructed by every means our peaceful commerce and finally resorted to a direct severance of economic relations, menacing greatly the existence of our Empire.
Patiently have we waited and long have we endured, in the hope that our Government might retrieve the situation in peace.
But our adversaries, showing not the least spirit of conciliation, have unduly delayed a settlement; and in the meantime they have intensified the economic and political pressure to compel our Empire to submission.
This trend of affairs would, if left unchecked, not only nullify our Empire's efforts of many years for the sake of the stabilization of East Asia, but also endanger the very existence of our nation.
In public he hypocritically claimed to be interested in peace while at the same time he threatened every country that was ready to pursue a policy of peaceful understanding by blocking credits, economic reprisals, calling in loans, and so forth.
In this regard, the reports of the Polish ambassadors in Washington, London, Paris and Brussels provide a shocking insight.
I will overlook as meaningless the insulting attacks and rude statements by this so-called President against me personally.
That he calls me a gangster is particularly meaningless, since this term did not originate in Europe, where such characters are uncommon, but in America.
And aside from that, I simply cannot feel insulted by Mr Roosevelt because I regard him, like his predecessor Woodrow Wilson, as mentally unsound.
We know that this man, with his Jewish supporters, has operated against Japan in the same way.
This man first incites to war, and then he lies about its causes and makes baseless allegations.
He repugnantly wraps himself in a cloak of Christian hypocrisy, while at the same time slowly but very steadily leading humanity into war.
And finally, as an old Freemason, he calls upon God to witness that his actions are honorable.
His shameless misrepresentations of truth and violations of law are unparalleled in history.
After years of negotiating with this deceiver, the Japanese government finally had its fill of being treated in such a humiliating way.
All of us, the German people and, I believe, all other decent people around the world as well, regard this with deep appreciation.
It is the same eternal Jew that believes that his hour has come to impose the same fate on us that we have all seen and experienced with horror in Soviet Russia.
Millions of German soldiers have personally seen the land where this international Jewry has destroyed and annihilated people and property.
Even if we were not allied with Japan, we would still realize that the Jews and their Franklin Roosevelt intend to destroy one state after another.
The German Reich of today has nothing in common with the Germany of the past.
For our part, we will now do what this provocateur has been trying to achieve for years.
And not just because we are allied with Japan, but rather because Germany and Italy with their present leaderships have the insight and strength to realize that in this historic period the existence or non-existence of nations is being determined, perhaps for all time.
They were able to bring the democratic Germany of the past to starvation, and they seek to destroy the National Socialist Germany of today.
When Mr Churchill and Mr Roosevelt declare that they want to one day build a new social order, that's about the same as a bald-headed barber recommending a tonic guaranteed to make hair grow.
Rather than incite war, these gentlemen, who live in the most socially backward countries, should have concerned themselves with their own unemployed people.
They have enough misery and poverty in their own countries to keep themselves busy insuring a just distribution of food there.
As far as the German nation is concerned, it doesn't need charity, either from Mr Churchill or Mr Roosevelt -but it does demand its rights.
And it will do what it must to insure its right to life, even if a thousand Churchills and Roosevelts conspire together to prevent it.” December 11, 1941 DECEMBER, 1942 1945 SUPER SECRET MANHATTAN PROJECT INFESTED WITH COMMUNIST SPIES The Manhattan Project is an effort, led by the United States with participation from Britain, which will result in the first atomic bomb.
The effort had started out on a small scale later that year, and by war's end will eventually employ 130,000 people at 30 locations.
Physicist Gregory Breit, an important researcher, quits in 1942 because of concerns over lax security procedures.
The Jewish Communist Physicist J Robert Oppenheimer takes over Breit's research, and is then appointed to head the secret weapons lab at Los Alamos, New Mexico.
As Oppenheimer ""looks the other way"", Red spies pass America's secrets into Stalin's hands.
Mad Man, Communist, Soviet Agent 2Many years later, the declassified “Venona Intercepts” will confirm the full extent of the treason which took place at Los Alamos.
FEBRUARY, 1942 FDR ORDERS LOYAL AMERICANS OF JAPANESE DESCENT TO BE PLACED IN INTERNMENT CAMPS FDR’s Executive Order 9066 condemns 110,000 Americans of Japanese ancestry to serve the rest of the war years in prison camps.
GermanAmerican and Italian-American families are also interned in camps, though in lesser numbers.
The increased productivity and decreased unemployment associated with a wartime slave economy benefit only the industry bosses who own the factories and the bankers financing the new spending.
The goods that are churned out do not benefit the working public because they have to be shipped to the soldiers overseas; in many cases to be destroyed.
World War II was a time of great sacrifice for both the American men who were compelled to fight, bleed and die, as well as for “Rosie the Riveter” on the home front.
As consumers, the women who were herded into buzzing factories faced shortages of everything from metals to quality food and clothes.
The U.S., British, and Soviet armies sucked up the manufactured “goods” while Americans struggled.
Propaganda posters everywhere told Americans it was their patriotic duty to work like animals and to go without.
Nimitz, decisively defeats the Japanese, inflicting irreparable damage upon the Japanese fleet.
After Midway, Japan’s Pacific defense perimeter of islands steadily shrinks as Japan cannot replace its lost ships and aircraft as fast as the United States can.
Though Midway marks a turning point, the United States will sustain much more casualties as the Japanese tenaciously defend their Pacific perimeter for many months to come.
It will go down in history as the bloodiest battle ever, with combined deaths of nearly 2 million.
Stalin’s refusal to pull the Red Army out of the city leads to a long siege and great suffering for the hungry residents.
After the German offensive captures most of the city, the Lend Leaseequipped Red Army wears the Germans down with bloody house-to-house fighting.
Brainwashed and inflamed by the NKVD’s false atrocity propaganda, much of the city’s civilian population fiercely resists the Germans as well.
As intended, this “false flag” terror enflames the civilian population against the Germans.
The losses suffered by the Germans will make victory in Russia impossible.
The politically appointed and grossly unqualified General Dwight D Eisenhower is given command of the Allied force which sails from England.
But it is the military genius of General George Patton that ultimately bails out the incompetent and envious Eisenhower.
By May of 1943, the Germans will have evacuated Northern Africa as they prepare to defend the ""soft underbelly of Europe"" in southern Italy.
Patton vs Rommel / Allies land in North Africa / Italy now vulnerable to invasion.
FDR announces a policy of “unconditional surrender” for Germany, Italy, and Japan.
Unconditional surrender means the Allies expect the Axis nations to not only stop fighting, but to also hand over complete political, educational, military and media control to the invading Allied armies.
This brutal hard-line policy of complete subjugation inspires the Japanese and Germans to fight harder and longer.
Giraud, FDR, de Gaulle, and Churchill demand ""Unconditional Surrender"" JANUARY — MAY, 1943 THE TIDE TURNS AGAINST GERMANY The opening months of 1943 mark the turning point in the war.
General Friedrich Paulus requests that Hitler allow the 6 Army at Stalingrad to surrender.
Hitler, knowing what the stakes were for Germany and Europe, and knowing that Stalin would kill any prisoners, orders Paulus to hold firm.
In February, the cowardly general finally surrenders his army to the tender mercy of the Stalin-Kaganovich death cult.
About 35,000 of the men under Paulus’s command had already been evacuated from the front.
Paulus eventually sells out to the Soviets altogether, joining the ‘National Committee for Free Germany’ and urging German troops to defy orders and surrender.
After testifying at the post-war Nuremberg show-trials for the Soviets, he was released and spent the rest of his life as a mouthpiece for Communist East Germany.
Germany is now limited to playing defense as the Allies slowly tighten the Globalist noose around Hitler’s Reich.
Betrayed by their General, cold, tired and hungry Germans surrender at Stalingrad.
The Firebombing of Hamburg creates a tornado of fire so intense; it actually lifts people off of the streets and into the fire.
Those who are not burned to death suffocate in shelters as the fire above sucks up all the oxygen.
Hundreds of United States and UK aircraft feed the inferno with wave after wave of incendiary bombings.
As a sick joke, the demonic planners of the genocide of Hamburg actually code named the arson attack “Operation Gomorrah”, after the Hebrew Bible story of the cities which God destroyed by fire and brimstone.
One million traumatized German refugees flee the city in which 250,000 homes were destroyed.
The women, children, and elderly of Hamburg were suffocated or charbroiled alive by Churchill and Roosevelt.
In the prior year, when Japan occupied Burma, an important rice exporter, the British bought up massive amounts of rice and hoarded it.
Churchill then orders the diversion of food away from India and toward British troops around the world.
Wheat from Australia (which could have been delivered to starving Indians) is instead transported to British troops as well.
Even worse, British colonial authorities actually turn down offers of food from the United States Churchill hates Indians almost as much as he hates Germans; mainly because India wants its independence from Britain.
Within four weeks of the initial air and sea assault, Axis troops evacuate to the Italian mainland.
Italian Leader Benito Mussolini is removed from power by his own Grand Council.
The new government arrests him, makes peace with the Allies, and switched sides.
This leaves Germany with the sole task of halting Patton’s push up the Italian peninsula.
In August of 1943, the British Royal Air Force, departing from bases in southern Italy, begins heavy bombing of the Ploesti oil fields of German allied Romania.
The German-occupied parts of Italy are also heavily bombed by the Allies, resulting in the deaths of 60,000 Italian civilians.
A talented painter himself, Adolf Hitler has a great appreciation for art and culture.
He sees Churchill and FDR as uncultured barbarians with merciless disregard for innocent life, architecture, and works of art.
As the Germans had done during World War I, Hitler too orders the protection of artworks throughout the combat theatres of Europe.
The task of protecting the art is handed over to Air Force Marshal Hermann Goering.
As Allied terror bombing ravages Europe, thousands of paintings and sculptures from Italy, France, Belgium, Russia, Romania, and Poland are gathered and meticulously inventoried by the Germans.
After the war, the American Art Looting Investigation Unit of the Office of Strategic Services issues 13 reports on the German “looting” of artworks.
By the way, this is the same OSS (forerunner of the CIA) that also accused the Germans of using dead Jews to make “shrunken heads”, “lamp shades” and “bars of soap” allegations which are today universally acknowledged as false.
Handbook “Nazi looted art” is a war propaganda lie, as is the Hollywood film “Monuments Men” starring George Clooney and Matt Damon.
An Allied advance on the Balkans through Yugoslavia and Greece would be disastrous for Germany.
From Italy and the Balkans, the Allies can then launch a final push upon Germany itself from the south and southeast.
Inexplicably, Allied Commander Dwight Eisenhower. and Army Chief of Staff George Marshall (who had promoted Eisenhower over scores of senior officers) insist upon making preparations for an invasion of heavily fortified Northern France the following year.
This bizarre “blunder” prolongs the war, buys the Soviets much needed time to march westward, and eventually enables Stalin to steal Eastern Europe.
However, after the war, Stalin will break with the Globalists and move towards a form of Nationalistic Communism instead; an extension of the ideological conflict that had bitterly divided Stalin and Trotsky during the 1920’s.
The anti-Communist soldiers of the Russian Liberation Army wore German uniforms with a Russian patch.
The RLA fought valiantly, mainly in key rear guard support roles against Communist partisans.
After the war, the RLA will attempt to surrender to the western allies.
Not wanting to deny ‘Uncle Joe’ of his revenge, Eisenhower will turn down their offers and forcibly repatriate those who were already in United States custody.
Despite pleading with the Americans for political asylum, General Vlasov and his freedom fighters will then be handed over to the brutal Soviets.
Vlasov and 11 of his senior officers are hanged in Moscow in August, 1946.
MAY, 1944 4000 ITALIAN WOMEN ARE GANG RAPED BY FRENCH CONTROLLED NORTH AFRICANS AT MONTE CASSINO In May ’44, the Allies finally succeed in taking Monte Cassino.(in Central Italy) from German control, after bombing the town’s 6"" century abbey into ruins.
The Moroccans are allowed to run wild; slitting the throats of prisoners, looting homes, and raping every Italian woman they can get their hands on.
One dies from the abuse, and the other will spend the rest of her life in a mental hospital.
The Moroccans go unpunished by their “Free French” Commanders and will later rape and kill again when they occupy Germany. eal Italian actress Sophia Loren starred in ""Two Women"", about a mother and daughter savagely raped by France’s Moroccan conscripts.
JUNE 6, 1944 ‘D-DAY’ OVERLORD / ALLIED INVASION OF NORMANDY LAUNCHED ON 6-6-6 ESTABLISHES A FOOTHOLD IN EUROPE At the 6™ hour, of the 6"" day, of the 6"" month of 1944, Allied armies based in England launch ‘D-Day’ , and successfully cross the English Channel.
The cost of Operation Overlord is high as nearly 10,000 men are killed storming the fortified beaches of Normandy.
From this base in northern France, the Allies will be reinforced for the push towards Germany.
At the same time, the Soviet Red Army, armed to the teeth with state-ofthe-art American weaponry, advances upon Germany from the east.
If they would give me enough gas, I could go all the way to Berlin!"" -* ” Nenegy/| \S HAN — r f ; \ \ ’ h , 1Instead of exploiting the ""soft underbelly"" of Italy, Allies storm fortified French beaches.
SUMMER, 1944 THE MURDEROUS ‘LIBERATION’ & RAPE OF FRANCE Under what was intended to be only temporary, wartime German occupation , life in Northern France goes by peacefully for French civilians.
But with the Normandy invasion (June 6, 1944), the peace and security of France is shattered into a million pieces.
To support the cross-channel invasion, and to then push the Germans eastward, the Allies unleash a ferocious aerial bombardment campaign.
Cultural icons and works of art are destroyed, 65,000 French civilians are killed, 150,000 are injured, and at least 500,000 left homeless.
The Allied occupation and subsequent economic collapse bring new nightmares for the women of France.
Under Allied occupation, American troops rape 1000's of French women, and turn many 1000's more hungry women into sex-for-food prostitutes.
It will take years for these areas of France to recover from the tragedy.
Such is the glorious ""liberation"" that Churchill, FDR, and the French traitor de Gaulle have imposed upon France.
So Ot Ane pee ime biyaey eee . <— w aarve +r sahoe 1The Allied ‘liberators' left death, trauma and homelessness in their wake.
JULY, 1944 RED ARMY ROLLS BACK INTO POLAND / GERMANS RETREAT With their free arsenal supplemented by America’s finest tanks, TommyGuns, planes, trucks, jeeps, and even food and blankets, the Red Army advances on Germany from the east.
By July ’44, the murdering and raping Reds have rolled into Poland, threatening Germany’s eastern flank.
Frightened German civilians begin fleeing westward by land and also via the Baltic Sea.
The top British delegate is the legendary Fabian Socialist (possible secret Communist) and homosexual pedophile , John Maynard Keynes.
Keynes suggests the creation of a World Currency, to be issued by a Global Central Bank.
But the world is not ready for such a radical step towards The New World Order.
Instead of a global currency, each nation will link the value of its currency to the United States Dollar, which will serve as the international medium of exchange.
Both the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, are conceived at Bretton Woods.
Soviet agent White & Fabian Marxist pedophile Keynes crafted the world’s debt-based monetary system and devised the World Bank and IMF schemes.
JULY 20, 1944 OPERATION VALKYRIE & THE ASSASSINATION ATTEMPT AGAINST HITLER In addition to a few ambitious traitors, there are still some naive fools among the German military establishment who believe that the western Allies can yet be reasoned with and peace obtained in the western front.
Unbeknownst to them, Churchill and FDR have already pledged to Stalin that they will not seek a Separate peace with Germany.
Carrying a bomb in his briefcase, Stauffenberg attends a conference with Hitler.
After a few minutes, Stauffenberg receives a planned telephone call and leaves the room.
When the bomb detonates, it demolishes the conference room, killing three officers and the stenographer.
The conspiracy is unraveled and the conspirators are soon executed by firing squad.
Decomposing typhus corpses can also spread the disease into local groundwater.
During and after the World War I, as many as 5 million Poles and Russians had died of the deadly disease.
With the situation in Germany deteriorating fast, deadly typhus epidemics break out in Germany’s internment camps, especially in Poland.
The Allied bombardment of railroads and medicine factories contributes greatly to this medical crisis.
In spite of Germany’s well-documented efforts to stop the typhus epidemic, deaths in the concentration camps continue to mount throughout ’44 & ’A45.
After the war, Allied propaganda will falsely portray the typhus deaths as evidence of a deliberate extermination program aimed at the Jews.
Cruel punishment is meted out against those labeled as “Nazi collaborators”, whose only crime was in making peace with Germany, or to have fought against the Soviets on the eastern front as members of the German SS units.
The de Gaullist ‘liberals’ will murder as many as 40,000, and imprison 100,000 of their countrymen.
French women who dated German soldiers during the occupation are humiliated by having their heads shaved bald or stripped naked.
After the war, he will be sentenced to death for “treason”, but due to his age, 88, and hero status from WW I, de Gaulle has no choice but to reduce Petain's sentence to life in prison.
French women who had fallen in love with German soldiers were shaved bald and paraded by Red Frenchmen and other ‘patriotic” ignoramuses.
DEAD tes By Since ""39 Poy ot pepe athe pray remeber } call, and prattent ot the institute's enectutere beeen ert We have firmly established that, on numerous occasions dating back to 1900, the propaganda claim of “6 million Jews"" being in jeopardy of dying appeared in print.
As far back as 1933, Lestchinsky had been accused by both Latvia and Germany of spreading false atrocity propaganda.
The most ""prestigious"" newspaper in the world thus gave a HUGE boost to a big lie.
Aside from Lestchinsky being a known Communist liar, there is another problem with the story.
Though the number was based on German records, the Red Cross at the time neither questioned the figure nor ever complained about German cooperation with regard to Camp inspection.
As it turns out, the “6 million” number, which evidently has some symbolic significance, has been around for a long time.
As the raping and murdering Soviets push eastward, millions of terrified German refugees flee west by land and sea.
Soon after leaving port, the doomed ship is sighted by Soviet Submarine commander Alexander Marinesko.
Having stalked his human prey for several hours, the Soviet killer then fires three torpedoes into the ship’s port side.
In the panic that follows, many passengers are trampled to death as they flee to the decks.
The murderous firebombing of the beautiful city of Dresden is therefore as cruel as it is unnecessary.
In an apparent effort to mock Catholic Germans, the ZioGlobalists chose the day of ""Ash Wednesday"" to literally turn Dresden into ashes.
For two straight days, wave upon wave of Allied air sorties drop phosphorus and incendiary bombs upon a defenseless population.
Thousands of fires merge into one huge firestorm, sucking oxygen to feed itself as countless numbers of German elderly, women, and children suffocate or burn alive.
The fire is so massive that pilots report that their cockpits are actually illuminated by the great flame.
Survivors are later strafed during the daytime with machine gun fire from low flying American & British fighter planes.
The dead of Dresden were stacked in huge piles and cremated before mass disease could set in.
MARCH 10, 1945 FDR FIREBOMBS TOKYO / 100,000 CIVILIANS KILLED Though it will later be overshadowed by the subsequent atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the Firebombing of Tokyo is just as deadly in its initial death toll.
The genocidal terror bombing involves the same type of incendiary explosives dropped on Dresden one month earlier, and yields similar horrific results.
The charred bodies of 100,000 dead civilians litter the streets and 250,000 buildings and homes are destroyed.
Millions more are injured or left homeless. ' > ; amar 4 abet Ady Though later overshadowed by the atomic bombings of Japan, the Tokyo firebombing was just as deadly.
APRIL 12, 1945 FDR DIES OF A STROKE/ HARRY TRUMAN BECOMES PRESIDENT ee | The polio-stricken FDR will not live to see the end of the bloody war that he helped unleash upon the world.
FDR intends to take a few weeks rest before his anticipated appearance at the founding conference of the United Nations in San Francisco.
He slumps forward in his chair, unconscious, and is carried into his bedroom.
Like Wilson in 1919, FDR suffers a massive stroke and dies soon afterwards.
FDR's lasting legacy for America is the class warfare induced welfare state and the brutal foreign warfare state; both of which are bankrupting the United States and killing innocents abroad.
FDR's Jewish and Red inner circle will continue to run the show while the ill-tempered little man from Missouri delivers the speeches.
British General Bernard Montgomery argues that there is now nothing to stop the Allies from sweeping into Berlin, thus taking the German Capital before the advancing Soviet army can get there.
As FDR’s loyal lapdog had done time and time again, ""Ike"" would find a way to delay the Allied advance so as to buy time for Stalin to advance from the east.
On March 28, '45, Ike sends a message to Stalin, assuring him that the Allied advance will focus on western Germany.
On April 15, Ike issues a halt order forbidding Allied commanders from crossing the Elbe River.
Generals Montgomery and Patton are very upset over the sudden order to halt the advance, thus condemning Berlin, and all of Eastern Europe, to Soviet barbarism.
The Goya is a German transport ship carrying 7,000 wounded soldiers and terrified refugees westward.
Soviet Captain Vladimir Konovalov spots the Goya and orders it to be blasted by torpedoes.
The Goya sinks very quickly, plunging its passengers into the icy Baltic Sea.
APRIL 28, 1945 ITALIAN COMMUNIST PARTISANS KILL MUSSOLINI / HIS BODY IS PUBLICLY HUNG UPSIDE DOWN With total defeat looming in Europe, Mussolini attempts to escape to neutral Switzerland.
Mussolini's body is then taken to Milan, where it is hung upside down for public viewing and also to provide confirmation of his death.
There were many positive economic and social developments during his rule.
But in the end, ""il Duce"" and his imperialistic ego put Italy and Germany in very difficult situations.
His reckless adventures in Africa & Greece made Italy a huge burden for Germany to carry and defend.
Moreover, French & Arab disdain for Mussolini’s actions ruined Hitler’s chances to bring France and the Arabs into an anti-British alliance.
APRIL 30, 1945 HITLER ISSUES HIS FINAL TESTAMENT / COMMITS SUICIDE IN HIS BERLIN BUNKER With the situation in Berlin hopeless, Hitler marries his longtime mistress, Eva Braun.
The staff is under orders to burn the bodies and to escape Berlin before the Soviets can capture them.
One day before committing suicide, Hitler had dictated his final Political Testament, a suicide note, in essence, in which he denied any responsibility for starting the war.
In these three decades I have been actuated solely by love and loyalty to my people in all my thoughts, acts, and life.
They gave me the strength to make the most difficult decisions which have ever confronted mortal man.
I have spent my time, my working strength, and my health in these three decades.
It was wanted and provoked solely by international statesmen either of Jewish origin or working for Jewish interests.
I have made too many offers for the control and limitation of armaments, which posterity will not for all time be able to disregard for the responsibility for the outbreak of this war to be laid on me.
Nor have I ever wished that after the appalling First World War a second against England, or even against America, should break out.
Three days before the outbreak of the German-Polish war I again proposed to the British ambassador in Berlin a solution to the German-Polish problem —similar to that in the case of the Saar district, under international control This offer also cannot be denied.
It was only rejected because the leading circles in English politics wanted the war, partly on account of the business hoped for and partly under influence of propaganda organized by International Jewry.
After six years of war, which in spite of all setbacks will go down one day in history as the most glorious and valiant demonstration of a nation's life purpose, I cannot forsake the city which is the capital of this Reich.
As the forces are too small to make any further stand against the enemy attack at this place, and our resistance is gradually being weakened by men who are as deluded as they are lacking in initiative, I should like, by remaining in this town, to share my fate with those, the millions of others, who have also taken upon themselves to do so.
Moreover, I do not wish to fall into the hands of an enemy who requires a new spectacle organized by the Jews for the amusement if their hysterical masses.
I have decided therefore to remain in Berlin and there of my own free will to choose death at the moment when I believe the position of the Fuehrer and Chancellor itself can no longer be held.
I die with a happy heart, aware of the immeasurable deeds and achievements of our soldiers at the front, our women at home, the achievements of our farmers and workers and the work, unique in history, of our youth who bear my name”, Adolf & Eva loved each other, and died together.
Hitler ’s young secretary, Traudl Junge, typed out the dictation for Hitler’s Final Testament.
Junge lived until 2002, describing Hitler as a loving father figure until the end.
Pound is an admirer of National Socialism, or ""Fascism"" as it is called in Italy.
While living in Italy during the war, Pound had condemned the unjust war and the Jewish financiers behind it.
You would do better to inoculate your children with typhus and syphilis than to let in the Sassoons, Rothschilds, and Warburgs.
EZRA LOOMIS POUND MAY 1Condemned as a ""traitor"", Ezra Pound was once regarded as America's foremost literary genius.
SURRENDER IS UNCONDITIONAL; V-E WILL BE PROCLAIMED TODAY; bg fa ee ON Bin GAIN MTULATE Of ALL FRONTS Upon hearing that Germany has surrendered, jubilant crowds throughout Britain and the United States celebrate Victory in Europe Day.
Admiral Karl Donitz, named in Hitler’s final testament as the new President of Germany, signs the surrender agreement.
Germany’s real nightmares are about to unfold as a vengeful GlobalistCommunist Alliance-of-Evil imposes a _ collective punishment upon Germany that will dwarf Versailles.
The story tells of mass killing and “gassings” at the Auschwitz prison camp in Poland.
The timing of the report’s release —just hours after Germany’s surrender— makes it impossible for the falsely accused Germans to refute Stalin’s claim.
It is a little known fact of history that the Auschwitz “gas chamber” story originated with a Soviet report (authorized by the known liars and murderers Joe Stalin & Lazar Kaganovich) which is then spread by the ""prestigious"" NY Times.
Noted American and European scholars who have since dared to explore the many inconsistencies and contradictions of “The Holocaust” story have been subjected to harassment, career destruction and (in Europe & Canada) imprisonment.
It is for this reason that he must forever be portrayed in the public mind as the most evil and wretched monster who ever lived.
Forensic tests on the porous stones proved negative for any trace of chemicals.
The museum piece ""gas chamber"" is an admitted reconstruction shown to unquestioning suckers.
Foreign Minister Hanged at Nuremberg, 1946 Goebbels — Ribbentrop JUNE 26, 1945 THE FOUNDING CHARTER FOR THE UNITED NATIONS IS SIGNED IN SAN FRANCISCO At the founding San Francisco Conference that established the United Nations, the United States official serving as Secretary General is the Communist agent Alger Hiss.
The United Nations replaces the League of Nations as the foundation of The New World Order.
All 51 nations signing the original charter agree to be bound by its articles.
The all-out propaganda campaign surrounding the UN’s establishment is pervasive and intense.
Even the conservative legend, Senator Robert Taft (son of President William Howard Taft) votes in favor of United States entry.
By August ‘45, Japan is trying hard, via “neutral” Soviet channels, to negotiate surrender, just not unconditionally as Truman demands.
Just 3 days after the bombing of Hiroshima, and only hours before the 2™4 bombing at Nagasaki, the man whom Truman and the United States press affectionately referred to as ‘Uncle Joe” breaks the Soviet-Japanese Non Aggression Pact of 1941 and declares war upon an already beaten Japan.
Stalin’s entry into the Asian theater, agreed to at the Yalta Conference, will enable him to arm and materially assist Mao Tse Tung’s Communist takeover of China in 1949.
Soviet occupation of North Korea will also lead to the Korean divide which results in the North vs.
SO OVIET DECLARES WAR ON JAPAN; ATTACKS MANCHURIA, TOK YOSAYS; Giugeet® ATOM BOMB LOOSED ON NAGASAKI — WAU TRST Mem soe 2 UD a TR Tene Ye <r. ae ee ete Stalin stabbed Japan in the back and brought Communist power to Asia.
AUGUST 15, 1945 VJ DAY/ JAPAN SURRENDERS Facing what Truman calls “a Rain of Ruin”, Japan, like Germany before her, has to make a choice between unrestrained civilian genocide at American and now Soviet hands, or unconditional surrender and occupation.
For the Globalists, the atomic bombings will later serve a strategic purpose.
The threat of “nuclear war” will, in the coming years, do much to frighten, and then consolidate, the nations of the world into political, economic, and military alliances.
The iconic V-J Day kiss in Times Square AUGUST, 1945 ‘IKE’ PARTIES IN MOSCOW WITH ‘UNCLE JOE’ WHILE MILLIONS ARE BEING RAPED AND MURDERED BY THE SOVIETS ""The striking aspect of the visit was the lavish reception the Russians gave the commander of a foreign nation’s army.
Georgi Zhukov, General Eisenhower’s Soviet counterpart in Berlin, met us at Tempelhof Airport for the flight to Moscow in Ike’s C-54 four-engine aircraft.
Zhukov, as the official host, was the soul of hospitality and congeniality.
By this time the two commanders...had become friends, as close of friends as public life permits.
Significantly, my father was invited to undergo a four-hour ordeal atop Vladimir Lenin’s tomb with Zhukov and Stalin.
One full-length film, authorized by General Eisenhower, shows the homicidal “gas chambers” of Dachau, shrunken heads of inmates, and lamp shades that were made from human flesh at the request of a camp commander’s wife.
To add further credibility to such claims, the film includes images of the sworn affidavits of United States military officials.
As it turns out, and as even Jewish “scholars” of the “Holocaust” now openly admit, the shrunken heads were fakes, the lamp shades were made of goat leather, and there were never any homicidal “gassings” at the Dachau camp.
She committed suicide in 1967, just before a scheduled visit from her son.
Across Europe, landscapes are ravaged, entire cities ruined, and millions of people are homeless.
Institutions such as the police, the media, transport, local and national government are either gone or badly weakened.
Crime rates soar; economies collapse; and hungry women and girls turn to prostitution as the European population hovers on the brink of starvation.
Communists, liberals and Jews impose a cruel vengeance upon their helpless prey.
German civilians and their anti-Communist allies everywhere are rounded up, raped, sodomized, drowned in cesspools, tortured, genitally mutilated, burned alive, and executed.
Internment camps are reopened and filled with anti-Communists and Germans.
Massacres and civil wars follow in Greece, Yugoslavia, Poland, and parts of Italy and France.
In the greatest acts of ethnic cleansing the world has ever seen, tens of millions are expelled from their ancestral homelands as Allied occupiers look the other way.
The 2012 book ’Savage Continent’ describes the horror of the post-war months and years in gruesome detail.
As the Red Army rolls into Germany, Stalin’s Jewish chief propagandist, Ilya Ehrenberg, encourages the soldiers to rape and kill German women.
The orgy of violence and rape is one of the ghastliest episodes in human history.
Two million German females ranging in age from 8-80 will be gang-raped, sodomized and beaten badly, often in view of their children or family members.
Some are penetrated with broken bottles and bayonets in wild orgies of drunken violence.
Even the terrified women who flee to churches and hospitals are hunted down and gang raped.
Nuns, little girls, and elderly women are infected with venereal diseases.
There are cases of breasts being cut off and victims set on fire after being raped.
Rather than submit to the horror, thousands of German women commit suicide.
Eisenhower, Truman, and the Zionist Press are fully aware of the monstrous horror that the man they all refer to as ‘Uncle Joe’ is inflicting upon these poor women.
UNCLE JOE’s HANDIWORK Ignored by the sanctimonious hypocrites of ‘the world community” German women were snatched from the streets and gang raped.
We have destroyed what could have been a good race, and we are about to replace them with Mongolian savages.
It’s said that for the first week after they took Berlin, all women who ran were shot and those who did not were raped.
I could have taken it had I been allowed.” General George Patton 1945 — 46 ‘TKE’ MURDERS 1.
More than one year after the German surrender, General Eisenhower still holds millions of German Prisoners-of-War.
The men are inhumanely crowded into camps without latrines, exposed to the elements and underfed.
American guards who attempt to help the prisoners face disciplinary action.
German civilians try to bring food and blankets to the men but are shot at by guards.
Unlike Germany’s wartime internment camps which were open to international inspection, Eisenhower issues an order stating that Red Cross officials are not to be given access to the camps.
As disease, exposure, and hunger take their toll, the German losses mount daily.
By the end of their cruel incarceration, as many as 1. million German prisoners will have died a slow and torturous death.
Millions of exposed Germans were packed tightly in Ike's POST-WAR death camps.
Not to be outdone by Eisenhower, Stalin’s mistreatment of German POW’s is heartbreaking.
Germans were often summarily executed, paraded like animals and, up until the 1950’s and perhaps beyond, worked to death in Siberia.
German POWS’s were be taken to the Soviet Union and paraded through the streets.
Many died on the long march; many died in the slave camps; and a minority returned to Germany years later.
Estimates of POW’s killed or worked to death in captivity range from 400,000 to 1,000,000.
It is mostly transferred to Soviet occupied Poland and to the Soviet Union itself.
Seven million Germans are expelled from their homes and forced to migrate west.
Still more German territory is given to Soviet occupied Czechoslovakia, with 3 million more Germans expelled.
The refugees are often attacked and raped by the Red Army as well as Jewish and Communist gangs.
Two million will die during the forced migrations, and about 500,000 more are interned in Soviet labor camps.
Displaced Jews are given preference in seizing and occupying the stolen homes of German refugees.
As part of a psychological re-programming effort known as “DeNazification”, the German people are deliberately subjected to hunger, mental trauma, and homelessness.
Starving German women sell their bodies to American soldiers in exchange for a few cans of food.
Expelled from Prussia / Expelled from Sudetenland DECEMBER 21, 1945 ANTI-RED, ANTI-ZIONIST GENERAL GEORGE PATTON IS ASSASSINATED (‘Auto Accident’) General Eisenhower needed General Patton in order to win the war.
But the outspoken Patton often bucked Ike, complaining openly about his halt orders (which stopped Patton from liberating Eastern Europe before the Soviets could get there) and ignoring Ike’s orders to continue holding German prisoners after the war.
Patton urges his superiors to allow his army to evict the weakened Soviets from Europe.
In letters to his wife, he expresses his disgust over the cruel extermination of the German people, the Red Army rapes, and what he describes as Jewish Communist efforts to advance Soviet influence.
In one of those letters, Patton reveals that upon leaving the Army and resettling in America, he will openly fight against the treason.
Patton is hospitalized following a strange, low impact auto accident near Mannheim, Germany.
The American icon dies in the hospital two weeks later, apparently the victim of an assassination order, issued by Ike or higher.
At Yalta, FDR and Churchill had agreed that Russian “traitors” and SS men should be sent to Stalin in exchange for American & British POW’s “liberated” by the Soviets.
Up to 3 million terrified Russian POWs are forced at gunpoint onto trains and trucks that bring them to their Soviet executioners.
United States troops, upon returning from the drop-off points, later report seeing rows of bodies already hanging from the trees.
In separate operations, anti-Communist refugee families, who actually followed their German protectors as they retreated from Russia, are also shipped back to ""Uncle Joe"", and subjected to special tortures, including rape of the women.
As a final insult from our “ally”, Stalin holds on to 25,000 American POW’s and 30,000 British, sending them to his Siberian Gulags, and even summarily executing some.
For delivering the nations of Eastern Europe, and millions of terrified Russian refugees to their death, Ike earned a Soviet Medal.
Terrified Russian POWs (declared to be traitors) and Waffen SS men from many countries were shipped to the USSR to be murdered.
Nor is he interested in annexing the USSR to a western-controlled New World Order.
Behind that line lie all the capitals of the ancient states of Central and Eastern Europe.
OCTOBER, 1946 NUREMBERG MILITARY TRIBUNALS SENTENCE GERMAN LEADERS TO DEATH During the 1943 Tehran Conference, Joe Stalin had proposed executing 50,000 German staff officers after the war.
The murderous Allies were all in agreement that ""trials"" of Germany’s top leaders would take place after the war.
The primary American judge is Francis Biddle, of the Biddle Family that spawned the 19th century American Central Bank Chairman, Nicholas Biddle.
Several hundred prominent American and European political figures, writers, artists and military men, including a young John F Kennedy, condemn the trials.
Of the accused, 11 will hang, and 7 (including the peacemaking parachutist Rudolf Hess) will receive long, or life prison terms.
Herman Goering, Head of the Luftwaffe cheats his executioners by taking poison in his jail cell.
It is likely that a sympathetic American guard helped Goering by smuggling the poison into his cell.
Additionally, the trapdoor was too small, such that several of the men suffered bleeding head injuries when they hit the sides of the trapdoor while falling.
Adding final insult to injury, the bodies were cremated and scattered over a river, denying the families the right of burial.
German political and military leaders were subjected to a ridiculous show trial.
It was the Brits who had stolen Palestine for the Zionists’ sake after World War I, but now Britain is to be betrayed and chased out of Palestine.
The deadly bombing of the King David Hotel in Jerusalem targets the offices of the British Military, killing 91 people.
In 1948, after the three Allied powers of the War have recognized the new State of Israel, the massacre at Deir Yassin targets innocent Palestinian villagers, scaring them to flee from their villages.
The Irgun terror gang, headed by future Israeli Prime Minister & Nobel Peace Prize winner Menachem Begin, is responsible for both.
Due to sympathy gained from the fictitious “6 million” dead of World War II, Israel’s brutal dispossession and displacement of the Palestinians is tolerated.
Irgun terrorized the British protectors of Palestine as well as the local Arabs.
JUNE, 1947 GLOBALIST ‘MARSHALL PLAN’ IS PROPOSED The Marshall Plan is a massive United States Foreign Aid scheme for post-war Western Europe.
The Globalists use every propaganda trick in the book to cleverly sell the expensive scheme to the anti-Communist United States Senate, and to a gullible American public.
It is the “embryo” of the coming European Common Market as well as today’s socialist, single currency European Union.
From an early age, German school children are taught to hate the great accomplishments of previous generations and wallow in self-loathing.
Those Germans who are not full of self-loathing are too afraid to speak up, lest the occupation governments of Germany or Austria throw them in jail.
It’s like a woman who has been raped and battered to near death, blaming herself and apologetically groveling before the perpetrator.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel grovels before Israeli Minister Shimon Peres.
Beaten by terrorists and arrested 2Author David Irving : Arrested in Austria 3-Author Ernst Zundel : Deported to Germany and arrested 89 years old Innocent SS men in their 90°s are still being hunted, arrested and deported to Germany or Israel to face trial over imaginary crimes.
It was an entirely natural thing for him to stop his car and share his food with young cyclists along the road.
At midnight he would interrupt his work and prepare the food for his dog Blondi.
He could not bear to eat meat, because it meant the § death of a living creature.
He refused to have so much as a rabbit or a trout sacrificed to provide his food.
It will engage in covert activities at the request of the United States President.
Among the CIA’s agents are many fine patriots, but the CIA's Directors have always been Globalist front men.
CIA grows in power and eventually engages in assassinations, election rigging, planting disinformation through its many paid media contacts, overthrowing of disobedient foreign leaders by “spontaneous” peaceful revolutions or violent coups, and the staging of “false flag” terror events to frame enemies.
GET MORE INFORMATION Upon Globalist orders, the super-secret CIA assassinates political leaders, stages ‘false flag’ terror attacks, manipulates the news and destabilizes foreign governments.
From the very beginning, this cesspool of ""modern art"" is a Rockefeller directed organization.
In 1947, The Rockefeller Brothers Trust Fund begins pouring cash into the promotion of their House of Horrors.
The Globalists and the Communists use ""modern art"" to corrupt the beautiful western culture that they seek to destroy.
If “intellectuals” can be persuaded that junk is “art”, they can then be persuaded of any other false realty presented to them.
Zionist/Marxist dominated Hollywood remains to this day a pornographic, sex-obsessed polluter of public decency and purveyor of anti-White, antiChristian, and anti-Muslim, propaganda.
NOVEMBER, 1947 THE United Nations PARTITIONS PALESTINE INTO ARAB & JEWISH REGIONS The British Mandate of 1922 ends as a UN resolution establishes the basis of the modern state of Israel.
The resolution also contains plans for an economic union between the proposed states, and for the protection of religious and minority rights.
Zionists have no more intention of respecting Arab rights than they did in 1922.
Certainly it has been easier for the world to accept the Zionist lie that Jews were evicted from Muslim lands because of anti-Semitism, and that Israelis, never the Arabs, were the pursuers of peace.
The truth is far more discerning; bigger players in the world stage were pulling the strings.
We Jews did not leave our ancestral homes because of any natural enmity between Jews and Muslims.
Jewish author Naeim Giladi’s expose of Israeli false-flag terror against fellow Jews is shocking.
Some are shot; some have their throats slit open, while others die as hand grenades are thrown into their homes.
Several villagers are taken prisoner and killed after being paraded through the streets of West Jerusalem.
The strategic aim of the massacres is to terrorize the Palestinians into fleeing from their villages, which the European Jews with adopted Hebrew names will then takeover.
Massacres such as Deir Yassin frightened the Palestinians into fleeing from their villages.
MAY, 1948 ISRAEL DECLARES NATIONHOOD / TRUMAN & SOVIET UNION GRANT IMMEDIATE RECOGNITION Herzl's 1897 plot comes into full fruition when Israel is formally established.
Harry Truman's quick recognition of Israel pleases his Zionist donors, whose influence will help him to narrowly win the upcoming November 1948 election.
Ironically, a 2003 review of his diaries reveals Truman's dislike for the Jews who were often pressuring him.
Several Arab nations come to the defense of their Palestinian brothers.
The Deir Yassin attack of the prior month, along with murderous attacks on Tiberias, Haifa, and Jaffa, put pressure on Arab governments to save Palestine.
News of the killings arouses such public anger in the Arab world that the governments cannot ignore it.
The Arabs are unsuccessful in their brief war, and in future attempts to liberate Palestine.
The Zionist military and its free arsenal of American weapons will soon make Israel the dominant power of the region.
It was Jewish support and money that narrowly pulled him through in 1948.
JUNE, 1948 STALIN ATTEMPTS TO STARVE BERLIN / TRUMAN ORDERS ‘BERLIN AIRLIFT’ Although the city of Berlin is located entirely within the eastern, Soviet half of post-war Germany, the city itself is divided into a Soviet zone, and a Western zone.
Berliners are stranded and face starvation unless the United States and UK agree to get out.
Not wanting the Soviets to get too out-of-control, the Globalists take a stand against their Soviet partners.
The United States &Britain fly food and other supplies into Berlin, landing on international airstrips.
After 1 year of the ""Berlin Airlift"", Stalin calls off the hunger blockade.
Hungry Berliners cheer the same American Air Force that terror-bombed them just 3 years earlier.
An ardent New Dealer, Hiss took part in the 1945 Yalta Conference where Eastern Europe was betrayed to Stalin.
In ‘46, he is named President of the Marxist Carnegie Endowment for World Peace.
FDR's widow, Red lesbian Eleanor Roosevelt, also defends the traitor Hiss.
In spite of his important friends, Hiss’s guilt is clear and he will serve 44 months in jail.
The declassification of the VENONA intercepts in 1995 will confirm the high-level treason of Hiss \e Hiss was sacrificed, but many other Communists remain undiscovered.
APRIL 4, 1949 NATO — A GLOBALIST MILITARY ALLIANCE IS FOUNDED The military consolidation of the New World Order begins with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , a military alliance headquartered in Belgium.
Members, led by the US, UK, & France, agree to mutual defense in response to an attack by the Soviets.
An attack against one nation in Europe or North America is an attack against all.
NATO is an NWO consolidation trap and the Globalist-created “Soviet threat” is skillfully used to build this trap.
After the planned takedown of Communism in the ‘90’s, NATO expands into the former Soviet satellites of Eastern Europe.
MAY, 1949 ANTI-RED, ANTI-ZIONIST DEFENSE SECRETARY JAMES FORRESTAL IS ‘SUICIDED’ Defense Secretary James Forrestal “falls” to his death from the 16th floor of Bethesda Naval Hospital.
Before an investigation is even launched, newspapers state that Forrestal committed suicide.
The media vilified Forrestal for opposing the creation of Israel and Harry Truman’s pro-Red foreign policy.
Forrestal was a wealthy man who intended to buy a newspaper and, like Patton, work to expose the treason that brought the United States into World War II and the policies that helped the Soviets.
Anti-Communist and Anti-Zionist Forrestal turned against the policies of his boss, Harry Truman.
AUGUST, 1949 THE USSR SHOCKS THE WORLD BY DETONATING ITS 1% ATOMIC BOMB The world is stunned when the Soviets explode their first Atomic Bomb.
The physicists who directed the Soviet Project, benefited greatly from espionage efforts.
Through sources in Robert Oppenheimer’s Communist-infested Manhattan Project, most notably British-German Communist Klaus Fuchs and American Zionist Communist Theodore Hall, the USSR had obtained vital information on the Atomic bomb project.
Reports are shown to the head of the Soviet atomic project Igor Kurchatov and have a significant impact on his own team's research.
In 1945 Soviet intelligence obtained rough ""blueprints"" of the first United States atomic device.
The New World Order uses the psychological threat of nuclear war to scare the ""free world"" into closer military, political, and economic integration.
United States Learns of Recent Explosion, President Discloses Pentagon Shows Excitement, But Officials Mum Hay OAM fy ther ate POR Congresemes Beliece cn ALCOA Fights met Bethea * Thinking that they could work with him to build an integrated ‘New World Order’, the Globalists turned a blind eye to Stalin getting an atomic bomb.
OCTOBER, 1949 BETRAYED BY GEORGE MARSHALIT, NATIONALISTS LOSE CHINA TO THE REDS Due to the inexplicable 1945 Yalta gifting of Manchuria, (and its captured Japanese weapons), to Stalin, the Chinese Nationalists can no longer keep down Mao Tse Tung's Soviet-armed rebel Reds.
As Special Envoy to China, Secretary of State, Marshall had delivered the final blow to free China by slapping an arms embargo on Chiang Kai-Shek.
They set up a free and prosperous state; while George Marshall’s buddy Mao turns Red China into a mass murderous tyranny that will soon attack and kill American troops in Korea.
In just the past few years, Eastern Europe has fallen to the Reds, Mao has captured China, the Soviets have exploded an A-bomb, and spies such as Alger Hiss have been exposed.
JUNE, 1950 KOREAN WAR BEGINS AS THE COMMUNIST NORTH ATTACKS THE United States BACKED FREE SOUTH Five years after the United States had gifted North Korea to the Soviets at Yalta; the Communist North invades South Korea in June of 1950.
After just three months, the great World War II General and patriot, Douglass MacArthur, stages brilliant offensives and captures the North’s capital of Pyonyang.
With minimal American casualties, it appears that the war is over and has been won very quickly.
That is until President Truman and the Globalists around him begin to interfere.
Upon his firing of the heroic General MacArthur for “insubordination” Truman immediately became the most unpopular president in United States history.
The Globalists claim that it was MacArthur’s aggressive actions which brought China into the Korean War.
But in reality, it is Truman’s treasonous restraining of both MacArthur & Chiang that green-lights Red China.
Mao enters the war against the mighty United States because he knows that the game is being rigged by the Red agents around Truman.
With the patriotic and brilliant strategist removed from the field of battle, Communists at home and abroad rejoice.
JUNE, 1951 IN HISTORIC SENATE SPEECH, McCARTHY OPENLY ACCUSES GEORGE MARSHALL OF TREASON The Globalist media is outraged when Senator McCarthy dares to denounce one of their manufactured heroes as a traitor.
During a long speech on the Senate floor, McCarthy masterfully exposes George Marshall’s pattern of “mistakes” surrounding the Pearl Harbor ""surprise"", the mismanagement of World War II, the loss of Eastern Europe to Stalin, and the loss of China to Mao's Reds.
ELECTION YEAR, 1952 FORCES BEHIND EISENHOWER CHEAT SENATOR TAFT OUT OF THE REPUBLICAN NOMINATION FOR PRESIDENT With the country dismayed at the socialist domestic policy and disastrous foreign policy of the Democrats, 1952 is certain to be a big Republican Election year.
Democrats are so weak, that the much maligned Harry Truman will not even seek re-election.
Like his father William H Taft, the younger Taft is a conservative patriot.
And, also like his dad in 1912, he too will be cheated out of an election.
The Republicans, like the Democrats, are now fully in the grip of the Globalists.
During his presidency, Eisenhower, rumored to be of Swedish-Jewish lineage, will be inducted as an honorary member into Tau Epsilon Phi , a Jewish fraternity; and also help to set up the first RockefellerRothschild Bilderberg meeting in The Netherlands.
As they did to his father in 1912, the Globalists trotted out a phony 'war hero' to derail Taft’s candidacy.
MARCH, 1953 STALIN [S DEAD / APPARENTLY POISONED BY FEARFUL SUBORDINATES Stalin's paranoia often led him to ""purge"" any subordinates who grew too powerful in their own right.
Fearing for their own lives, the mad dog Secret Police Chief Laventry Beria and others likely poisoned the murderous old bastard.
Nikita Khrushchev a murderous assistant to Lazar Kaganovich during his Ukrainian genocide will become the new Soviet Premier by year's end.
Khrushchev will later condemn Stalin for his brutality towards his fellow Communists.
By 1951, ABC owns and operates numerous TV stations, but is on the brink of bankruptcy.
Zionist Globalist Leonard Goldenson steps in with a 25 million dollar cash infusion and becomes Chairman of the new company.
Eisner is later succeeded by the current CEO, the Zio-Globalist Robert Iger.
ABC joins CBS, NBC, Reuters, The NY Times, and The Washington Post as media giants under Zionist ownership.
Programs such as the 1970’s mini-series ‘Roots’ incite Blacks and inflict guilt amongst weak-minded Whites.
JUNE, 1953 COMMUNIST ROSENBERGS FRY IN THE ELECTRIC CHAIR Jewish Communists Julius & Ethel Rosenberg are executed for passing Abomb secrets to the Soviets.
Ethel's brother, David Greenglass, had given the secrets to the Rosenbergs while working on the Manhattan Project.
Though the ""small fry"" Rosenbergs are sacrificed; the ""big fish"" Globalist traitors go untouched.
Times Pe ROSENBERGS DIE Pair Executed for Atom Spying OK OX \\en.an 4 The Rosenbergs had to be sacrificed.
All of the existing guests at the exclusive resorts are required to leave before the ‘Bilderbergers’ arrive in town.
The Bildebergers are all people of great influence in the fields of politics, banking, intelligence, business, military and media.
The Group takes its name from the Bilderberg Hotel in Holland, where the first meeting was held.
Members of the Rothschild and Rockefeller families have attended every year since its inception.
The Group has a history of inviting littlke known politicians, and then catapulting them to fame and office within a short time.
For example, Bill Clinton attended a 1991 Bilderberg meeting in Germany while he was a barely known Governor of Arkansas.
When the Egyptians find the culprits, it is revealed that they are actually Jewish agents working for Israel.
The ""Lavon Affair"" ultimately creates such a controversy that it brings down the Israeli government and forces new elections.
This long since forgotten scandal marks the first known Israeli ""false flag"" operation aimed at the United States for the purpose of framing Arabs.
In recent years; aging members of the Lavon Conspiracy were honored by the Israeli government.
DECEMBER, 1954 GLOBALIST MEDIA SMEAR CAMPAIGN LEADS TO THE SENATE CENSURE OF JOE McCARTHY McCarthy’s high profile hearings have attracted a huge national following.
Such popularity poses a threat to the Communists and to their Globalist enablers.
When McCarthy begins inching “up the ladder” towards the bigger players; the media big guns are brought out to stop him.
In March of 1954, CBS legend Edward R Murrow, a personal friend of CBS CEO Bill Paley, dedicates an entire show to attacking McCarthy.
The accumulation of TV and newspaper venom aimed at McCarthy takes a toll on his image.
Colleagues begin to ignore him as President Eisenhower plots against him.
This marks the end of his crusade against the Globalist / Communist axis.
Following his censure, Eisenhower happily quips, in private, ""McCarthyism is now McCarthy-wasism.
Presidents DECEMBER, 1954 THE ‘REECE COMMITTEE’ CONCLUDES THAT TAX EXEMPT FOUNDATIONS FINANCE GLOBALISM The Reece Committee is chaired by Rep.
It produces its final investigative findings regarding the influence of tax-exempt foundations, such as the Rockefeller Foundation, in the field of education.
The report finds that “philanthropic” foundations are using their awesome grant giving power to influence college curriculums and finance leftist groups.
The goal is to alter public attitudes and belief systems by injecting Globalist propaganda into the educational system.
The Globalist media, and John D Rockefeller III himself, attack the Committee, “No shred of evidence is presented in the report to show that the Rockefeller Foundation or any of the organizations to which it has made grants has advocated world government.” , said Rockefeller.
Little did the people know that over the coming decades; these seemingly harmless treaties would, by design, grow into the powerful European Union which today dominates its captive member-nations today.
The Common Market is the first economic structure to be based on supranationalism a major step towards Rothschild's New World Order.
The Globalists skillfully utilize the Soviet threat, which they themselves created, as a psychological means to frighten the people of the formerly nationalist Europe into close economic, political, and military consolidation.
MAY 2, 1957 McCARTHY DIES OF SUDDEN ILLNESS AT 48 / APPARENTLY POISONED AT BETHESDA NAVAL HOSPITAL After his 1954 censure, McCarthy's influence has faded.
But the feisty young Senator remains outspoken, and continues to rail against Communism and its high level protectors.
McCarthy had become ill in late April of '57, and was taken to Bethesda Naval Hospital, just like his ""suicided"" mentor, James Forrestal, had been in 1949.
He begins to recover, but strangely falls ill again on the Communist Holy Day of May 1.
He dies at the young age of 48, on May 2, the victim of an apparent poisoning.
The great Senator's name continues to be dragged through the mud to this day.
The constant use of the term 'McCarthyism"" serves as a constant reminder to United States politicians of the fate which awaits anyone who challenges the New World Order.
QUOTE TO REMEMBER ""The individual is handicapped by coming face-to-face with a conspiracy so monstrous he cannot believe it exists.
The American mind simply has not come to a realization of the evil which has been introduced into our midst.
It rejects even the assumption that human creatures could espouse a philosophy which must ultimately destroy all that is good and decent."" J Edgar Hoover, FBI Director 1924-1972 AUTUMN, 1958 iii EISENHOWER BETRAYS THE ~4 ANTI-COMMUNIST FREEDOM FIGHTERS OF HUNGARY , The Hungarian Revolution of 1956 is a revolt against the Communist regime of Hungary.
Civilians and patriotic soldiers combine to defeat the Jewish dominated Secret Police and Soviet troops.
The Soviets consider withdrawing all troops as the rebels wait anxiously for the “anti-Communist” West to send weapons.
Instead, Ike pressures Spain and West Germany into canceling an arms shipment to the Hungarian rebels.
There is to be no weapons, nor even any symbolic words, recognizing the struggle for a free Hungary.
Upon realizing that Stalin's favorite American General from World War II is green lighting a re-conquest of Hungary, just as he had during World War II, the Soviets re-occupy Hungary with massive force.
Hungarian freedom-fighters decapitate a statue of Ike's 'Uncle Joe' and take a bloody revenge on their Communist masters.
Peasants are confined to starving villages as the Reds torture and kill those accused of not meeting their grain quota.
In addition to the starvation victims, at least 5 million Chinese are beaten or tortured to death and 2-3 million more commit suicide.
The blood of 50+ million is on the hands of the '45 Yalta traitors FDR, Hiss & Hopkins, as well as Truman, Marshall, and all the others who engineered the postwar fall of China.
The huge tax and spending cuts of the late 1940's have finally ended the long Depression, leading to economic growth for professionals as well as ""blue collar"" manufacturing workers.
It is the era of the American ""Baby Boom"" as war veterans marry and have children.
Fathers go to work and earn enough money so that the mother can stay home and tend to children and home.
On the cultural front, ""the 50's"" still represent an era of decency and innocence.
Movies, TV shows, and songs are, for the most part, clean and healthy entertainment.
Churches are thriving, streets are safe, communities are tight, children are respectful, the divorce rate is very low, and homosexuality is largely unspoken of.
But those who grew up in the ‘50's’ and most of the 60’s, know that it was a far happier and healthier time than the current era of economic and moral rot.
But beneath the surface of the happy 50's, the sex-obsessed Globo-Zionist moguls of Hollywood plot to unleash a destabilizing storm of moral and cultural filth which will forever weaken families, communities, and churches.
TV shows like ""Leave It to Beaver”, “Bonanza” and “Father Knows Best” reflected the goodness and loyalty of American family life.
Welch believes that Globalists are using Communism, Central Banking, wars, moral corruption, and debt to bring about The New World Order.
Its enthusiastic members use books, pamphlets, and speaking tours to warn the public about the Globalists.
JBS membership grows rapidly, attracting brutal media attacks from both the Communists and their Globalist enablers.
NOW WILL YOU JOIN THE JOHN BIRCH SOCIETY REGISTER COMMUNISTS NOT FIREARMS The Globalists were worried about Welch's plan to educate the public.
JANUARY, 1959 EISENHOWER’S PARTING GIFT TO WORLD COMMUNISM / CUBA GIVEN TO FIDEL CASTRO The “blundering” Eisenhower did much to advance the Globalist/Communist Axis.
His final “blunder” is to allow Cuba’s pro-American government of Fulgencio Batista to fall to the Marxist Fidel Castro.
While the NY Times & Washington Post smear Batista and glorify Castro as another ‘agrarian reformer’; Ike ignores repeated warnings from Ambassador Earl T Smith that Fidel Castro is a Soviet-backed Communist.
Just like Chiang in China , Batista is betrayed when the United States refuses to ship armored cars purchased by Cuba.
Yet another ""reformer"" turned out to be a Marxist 2Ambasador Smith’s book, ‘The Fourth Floor’, gives a firsthand account of how the Eisenhower State Department betrayed Cuba.
SEPTEMBER, 1959 EISENHOWER WELCOMES SOVIET MASS MURDERER KRUSHCHEV TO THE UNITED STATES If the enslaved people of Eastern Europe, North Korea, China, or Cuba had any lingering delusion that the United States would stand up, at least symbolically, for the cause of freedom, those hopes were dashed forever when Eisenhower gave a warm White House welcome to Soviet tyrant Nikita Khrushchev.
As a Commissar, Khrushchev worked closely with the monsters Stalin & Kaganovich.
Despite his criticism of Stalin , Khrushchev had murdered faithfully for Stalin while rising up through the Soviet ranks.
Stalin invited Eisenhower to our Victory Parade and expressed his recognition by presenting him with our highest medal, the Order of Victory.
Shirer’s Rise and Fall is heavy on the empty verbiage and page-count , but extremely light on essential facts.
Weaving truths with half truths and outright lies, while sprinkling in a few seemingly objective, even pro-German nuggets of truth; Shirer skillfully paints a deceptive facade; one which any reader of Planet Rothschild or The Bad War should now be able to easily crack open.
The Jewish publishing giant Simon & Schuster publishes the book, and the Jewish press hypes it to the stars.
Presidents and is currently agitating for confrontation with Russia and China.
It is an attempt by the Kennedy administration to overthrow the Communist government of Fidel Castro.
Dulles later serves on the Warren Commission, which will cover up the truth of JFK’s assassination.
Were the anti-Communist Cubans set up to fail by CIA Chief Allen Dulles.
Their main route of escape is through the divided city of Berlin (East Berlin was in the Soviet Zone.
The Soviet masters of East Germany finally respond to this embarrassing mass exodus by erecting the Berlin Wall.
Over the next 28 years, the Berlin Wall becomes a hated symbol of Communist oppression.
FEBRUARY 1962 WILLIAM F BUCKLEY DENOUNCES THE JOHN BIRCH SOCIETY By 1962, Robert Welch’s John Birch Society has become a force that the Globalists and Communists can no longer ignore.
For selling his soul to the Globalists, Buckley is later rewarded with his own TV show in 1966, PBS’s Firing Line.
The proposal calls for CIA operatives to commit terrorist acts in United States cities to be blamed on Cuba, in order to create public support for a war.
The proposals include the shooting of innocent Americans on the streets, hijackings and bombings, followed by the introduction of phony evidence to implicate Cuba.
The shocking details of this false-flag plot were not declassified until 1997.
Lyman Lemnitzer wanted American planes to be shot down and American citizens killed in the streets.
OCTOBER 1962 United States AND THE SOVIETS COME CLOSE TO WAR DURING THE ‘CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS’ After the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion a year earlier, the Soviets, perceiving American weakness, position nuclear missiles in Cuba.
When evidence of the missiles and military advisors based in Cuba is brought to JFK, a quarantine of the Island is ordered.
JFK knows he must present a strong image, but he is also concerned about how the Soviets might react in Europe if the United States invades Cuba.
Publicly, the Soviets will appear to back down by removing their missiles.
But unknown to the world, the United States also agrees to remove missiles from Turkey as part of this Cold War deal. ———— Us.
Friedan would go on to found the radical National Organization for Women.
Friedan’s movement is a Globalist destabilization campaign aimed at traditional family life.
With her book being super-hyped by the media, millions of gullible women swallow Friedan’s Marxist poison.
The ""male chauvinist pig"" becomes the hated target of the feminist rebellion.
Broken families and broken people are easier for the Globalists to control.
MAY — JULY 1963 JFK PRESSURES 2 ISRAELI PRIME MINISTERS / ALSO TAKES ON MARXIST TRADE UNIONS, THE PENTAGON, THE CIA, AND THE FED JFK is concerned that Israel is developing nuclear weapons.
He fears that this could cause Arab nations in the region to follow suit.
On May, 18, 1963, JFK sends a letter to Israeli Prime Minister David Ben Gurion, requesting that Israel open up its Dimona nuclear facility to inspection so as to confirm that it is only for peaceful energy development, and not bomb making.
JFK and his brother, Attorney General Robert, also take on the powerful AFL-CIO Trade Union boss Jimmy Hoffa.
And finally, JFK issues debt-free currency directly from the United States Treasury in 1963.
In just over 2 years in office, the charismatic young President has challenged the CIA, the Pentagon , two Israeli Prime Ministers (Ben Gurion & Eshkol), the AFL-CIO and apparently, even The Federal Reserve.
The media reports that Kennedy was shot from behind by a rifleman hiding in a warehouse.
This contradicts witnesses who saw, and heard gunfire coming from in front of the motorcade.
The “Zapruder Film” released years laterclearly shows Kennedy being shot from the front, once in the chest and once again in the face.
Although JFK was part of the Establishment, he was an anti-Communist with a patriotic independent streak.
During his brief time in office, he had confronted many powerful people within the hierarchy of the GlobalistZionist crime network.
JFK, riding with his wife and Texas Governor Connelly, is shot in the face.
The public is told that it was a “lone gunman” and ""Communist"" named Lee Harvey Oswald who fired the deadly shots from a warehouse located far behind from where JFK' was riding.
Two days later, Oswald is silenced when a Zionist mobster named Jack Ruby shoots Oswald as he is being transferred from Dallas Police Headquarters to County jail.
Oswald’s claim of innocence, and his killing by Ruby, are captured in full view of TV cameras and are available at YouTube.com.
AUGUST 4, 1964 THE TONKIN GULF HOAX TRIGGERS United States COMBAT INVOLVEMENT IN VIET-NAM The Tonkin Gulf Incident is a fabricated event involving the United States and Red North Vietnam.
The new President, Lyndon Baines Johnson claims that the North’s torpedo boats fired upon United States ships.
In 2005, an NSA report was declassified, concluding that there may not even have been any Vietnamese Naval vessels present during the incident.
B-57s Crash in Vietnam Defense Secretary McNamara lies his ass off about the fictitious attack which will drag America into the Gulf War.
NOVEMBER 1964 GLOBALIST MEDIA DESTROYS THE 1964 PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN OF SENATOR BARRY GOLDWATER After a nasty internal Republican contest with NY Governor Nelson Aldrich Rockefeller , Senator Barry Goldwater wins the Republican nomination for President.
Goldwater is a true constitutional conservative and an outspoken anti-Globalist.
LBJ’s campaign runs a TV ad showing a little girl picking daisies as an ominous voice counts down to an atomic bomb detonation.
The intensity of the anti-Goldwater hype, coupled with the phony Tonkin incident of three months earlier, rallies the country behind LBJ, who defeats Goldwater in an historic landslide.
LBJ’s “Great Society"" will leave a legacy of reckless spending and borrowing that will burden the America's private economy for decades.
The Voting Rights Act gives illiterates the ""right"" to vote for their Democrat caretakers.
The Immigration Act will flood America with third world immigrants likely to vote for socialist Democrats.
Medicare & Medicaid trap the elderly and poor into dependency on the state for health care.
The Food Stamp Program, Head Start, & Federal aid to schools are also introduced in the suicidal spending spree year of 1965.
LBJ's expensive, vote-buying welfare state destabilizes the traditional family by subsidizing unwed pregnancies and making welfare a way of life.
As America approaches bankruptcy and collapse today, we have LBJ & FDR to thank for putting us on the socialist road to ruin.
LBJ’s signing of the Immigration Act is intended to eventually make European Whites a minority and then extinct altogether.
IS USED TO RADICALIZE AMERICAN YOUTH AND DEMORALIZE THE WAR EFFORT After deceiving the United States into escalating the Vietnam War, the Globalists now manage the war in such a way as to prevent any chance of victory.
When the restrictive rules of military engagement are finally declassified in 1985, it is confirmed that the Vietnam War, like the Korean War before it, was not meant to be won.
The Globalists use these wars against Communism as a means to weaken America and ""contain communism"" without ever defeating it.
Some ""peaceniks"" aren't so peaceful, instigating riots on college campuses and clashes with police.
MANIPULATING THE YOUNG AND IDEALISTIC Globalists always target young, idealistic students.
Many of this generation believe they are ""changing the world"" with their embrace of left-wing / ""liberal"" politics.
Quigley's observations are not new, but they are very significant because the claims are coming from someone who is actually a willing academic member of the New World Order crime gang.
Quigley spends the rest of life claiming that he was quoted out of context.
Upset over the failure of his “Great Leap Forward,” Mao blames the failure on his own people.
Radicalized students are formed into “Red Guards” who are then loosed upon intellectuals, Buddhists, “counterrevolutionaries, internal political rivals, and other residual “capitalist” elements.
Red Guards drag teachers out of classrooms and publicly torture them to death.
Ancient buildings, artifacts, antiques, books, and paintings are destroyed by Red Guards as Mao consolidates power and elevates himself to god-like status.
Only Mao’s death in 1976 will finally end the insanity of his Revolution and eventually lead to the emergence of a pro-market and peaceful China.
Mao's brainwashed ""Red Guards"" publicly tortured ""counter revolutionaries"" in the streets.
He had been sentenced to death but his sentence is overturned when he is granted an appeal.
Ruby is now talking about a conspiracy and plans on giving new information at his upcoming trial, set for February 1967.
In December of 1966, he suddenly becomes ill, and dies a few weeks later in January of 1967, just one month before his new trial was set to begin.
Prior to his death, Ruby tells Dallas Deputy Sheriff Al Maddox that he was tricked into being injected for a cold, but he was actually injected with cancer cells.
The Jewish Mafia-connected night club owner and assassin of JFK's alleged assassin was assassinated in prison.
But for the Zionists, the 1947 border was just a foot-in-the-door, just as the 1920 British Mandate had been.
The ultimate plan for a Greater Israel requires much more territory than what was stolen in ‘47-48.
It is this 1967 occupation, not the 1947 partition that is the main source of the current Palestinian grievance.
The horrific living conditions in occupied Palestine are kept hidden from the American people.
PALESTINIAN ned OF LAND 1946 TO 2005 Israel picks a fight and steals more territory.
The Zionists actually want all of Palestine and parts of Syria and Lebanon too.
LIBERTY During the Six Day War between Israel and several Arab states, Israeli jets and torpedo boats deliberately attack the USS Liberty.
The sustained daytime attack, taking place as the United States flag flies visibly, kills 34 Americans, wounds 170, and badly damages the communications ship.
The Israelis finally call off the attack when they realize that help may be on the way.
Israel claims the attack was a case of mistaken identity, but the American survivors clearly contradict that lie.
Israel’s intent is to sink the Liberty, machine-gun any survivors, blame Egypt, and thus draw the United States into a war on its side.
The Zionist Globalist United States media buries the Liberty tragedy in its back pages.
Israeli fighter jets deliberately attacked the USS Liberty in broad daylight.
JANUARY, 1967 CBS ANCHOR WALTER CRONKITE BETRAYS AMERICA WITH FALSE REPORT ON ‘TET OFFENSIVE’ North Vietnam launches multiple surprise attacks known as the Tet Offensive.
The offensive is a disastrous failure for the Communists as their Red Viet Cong guerillas in the South are crushed.
To say that we are mired in a stalemate seems the only realistic conclusion.
Cronkite's false report on Tet was a deliberate act of treason against America.
APRIL 4, 1968 MARXIST MARTIN LUTHER KING IS ASSASSINATED / DEADLY RIOTS ERUPT IN United States CITIES During the 1960's, Marxists agitate relentlessly in the black community.
This leads to government ""solutions"" such as expensive welfare programs, voting rights for illiterates, and greater Federal control over private industry.
The most notorious of the ""non-violent"" agitators is the prostitute-addict and proven plagiarist , ""Reverend"" Martin Luther King.
After the Globalists had finished using the Marxist MLK to achieve their domestic objectives, they decided to kill him and then capitalize upon his death even more.
King's mysterious assassination sets off anti-white riots in inner cities throughout America.
The Divide & Conquer scheme to promote racial unrest always works to the advantage of the New World Order.
JUNE 5, 1968 ROBERT F KENNEDY’S PRESIDENTIAL BID IS ENDED BY ASSASSINATION The assassination of Robert F Kennedy occurs after he wins the California primary for the nomination for President.
RFK will never be able to use the power of the Presidency to go after his brother's killers.
Conveniently, this is very bad for Palestine's image, but it does generate sympathy for Israel.
In 2006, the BBC's Newsnight program presented research revealing that several CIA officers were present on the night of the assassination.
Three men who appear in films and photos were positively identified by colleagues as former senior CIA officers.
In 2007, analysis of an audio tape recording of the shooting indicates, that 13 shots were fired, even though Sirhan's gun held only 8 rounds.
OCTOBER, 1969 COMMUNIST TERRORISTS STAGE ‘DAYS OF RAGE’ IN CHICAGO The ""Days of Rage” are violent actions organized by the Communist terrorist “Weathermen"" in 1969.
On October 5"", a statue honoring the murdered policemen of the 1886 Haymarket Square Communist attack is dynamited.
At 10:25 pm, Weatherman Jeff Jones gives the signal, and the violence begins.
The Reds charge toward the affluent Gold Coast neighborhood, smashing windows as they go.
In 2009, Ayers & Jones will visit Obama’s White House and secure cash grants for their educational schemes.
THE 1Weathermen Communist terrorists wanted to instigate rioting in Chicago.
MARCH, 1970 HORRIFIC COMMUNIST TERROR ATTACK DOES NOT GO OFF AS PLANNED Four dead Communist “Weathermen” lie in the rubble of a Manhattan basement.
They had been building a bomb, which accidentally detonated prematurely.
Dynamite pipe bombs, using nails as shrapnel, are later recovered in this bomb factory.
Had the bomb not detonated prematurely, the planned attack on an officers’ dance in Ft.
Dix, NJ would have been the deadliest act of terror in United States history at that time.
The group, led by Bill Ayers, was intending to murder scores of Army officers and their dates.
After the blast, Ayers (whose girlfriend died in the blast) goes into hiding until 1980.
Ayers will later ghost write a book for an Illinois State Senator Barack Obama.
Most Americans remain blissfully unaware of the mass murder which Ayers attempted in 1970; and of his close relations with President Obama. wey .muga hots .com Bill Ayers future friend and ghost-writer for Obama became a fugitive after the failed mass murder attempt.
It is narrated by Walter Cronkite, who in later years openly admits his support for World Government.
Raise Global taxes, including ""carbon taxes""/ Erode national sovereignty / Empower the UN /*Control private industry and individuals / *Promote ""One World-ism"" / Prevent energy independence / Artificially depress living standards / Prevent poor nations from developing, keep them dependent on the UN for aid.
Alinksy believes that America is too strong to be taken down by violent revolution.
Instead of non-effective violence, Alinsky advises young radicals to become active in their local communities and to infiltrate the political system.
Community Organizers are highly skilled at political warfare, agitating in black neighborhoods, and organizing vote fraud efforts.
His 1971 classic, Rules for Radicals, is dedicated to Satan, the first revolutionary as Alinsky calls him.
RFR will be a bible of sorts for inner city agitators, vote fraud organizers, and liberal activists.
It lays out clever strategies for infiltrating the system with the intent of subverting it from within.
Another future student of Alinsky tactics is President Barack Obama, who will actually work as a “community organizer” in Chicago in the 1990’s.
Alinksy taught the Marxist radicals of the 60s how to infiltrate America's institutions from within.
DECEMBER, 1970 THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY IS ESTABLISHED Media-driven environmental hysteria culminates with the establishment of a new government cabinet department.
As the year pass, unnecessary, excessive, and dictatorial environmental regulations will render many American businesses unable to compete with foreign counterparts.
Along with heavy taxation and frivolous litigation, EPA regulations, often based upon ""junk science"", have either forced American business to close their operations, or forced them to relocate overseas.
Citing the hoax of “Global Warming”, the EPA today is driving up electricity rates, eroding national sovereignty, and killing jobs by waging war on the coal industry.
Under pressure, the supposedly “conservative” Nixon greatly expanded the size and destructive power of the Federal government.
AUGUST, 1971 NIXON SEVERS ALL LINKS BETWEEN GOLD AND THE United States DOLLAR President Richard Nixon shocks economic conservatives when he takes the United States completely off the Gold Standard.
Prior to this move, the government/Fed complex could not borrow or create new currency “out of thin air” unless it had a certain portion of that amount of gold in storage at Fort Knox.
With the Gold Standard now completely gone, the United States can spend recklessly, and then borrow unlimited counterfeit money from the Zionist owned Federal Reserve.
When foreign trading partners such as Arab nations see that the dollar is now worth 35 cents, they triple the price of oil to compensate.
When gas prices triple from 50 cents a gallon to $1.50, ""the OPEC nations"" are blamed for the inflationary recession.
FEBRUARY, 1972 NIXON VISITS MAO IN CHINA / CALLS FOR A ‘NEW WORLD ORDER’ Mao is not only one of the greatest mass killer in world history, but his gang had also murdered United States POWs during the Korean War.
This means nothing to CFR Globalist and “anti-Communist” Richard Nixon.
Mao has served Globalist goals by consolidating Chiang Kai Shek’s China under centralized state control.
The oceans of blood he shed in doing so does not concern the Globalists.
The time has come to “open up” China for a gradual future transition into The New World Order.
To that end, Nixon follows up on a secret trip that Secretary of State Henry Kissinger. had made to China the year before.
In a speech before Mao, Nixon expresses his wish to ""build a New World Order"" which intends to include Mao's China.
Ironically, within 30 years, a post-Communist and more market-oriented China will begin to demonstrate independent nationalist tendencies an intolerable offense to the Globalists.
Wallace is a nationalist who wants to either win the Viet Nam war quickly, or pull out totally.
He is anti-Communist, opposed to foreign aid, and opposed to Globalism.
In January of 1972, Wallace again declares himself a candidate for the Democrat nomination, entering the field against liberals George McGovern and Hubert Humphrey.
Then, while campaigning in Maryland on May 15"", he is shot 5 times by ""lone nut gunman"" Arthur Bremer.
Governor Wallace is left paralyzed and his campaign effectively ends, even though he still wins two more state primaries.
Like RFK in 1968, Wallace was gunned down just before he could win the Democrat nomination.
At the Paris Peace Accords of 1973, the United States agrees to end the Viet-Nam war.
The negotiators for the talks are Rockefeller agent Henry Kissinger for the United States and Le Duc Tho.for Communist North Vietnam.
To the delight of the United States Media, Kissinger “gives away the store” to the North.
Not only is the North assured that its troops may continue to occupy the South, but the post-war political arrangement is configured in such a way as to guarantee a Communist take-over of South Viet Nam after the war.
Eager to wrap up the war and win his Nobel Peace Prize, Zionist Kissinger knowingly abandons American Prisoners of War still being held by the Communists.
Kissinger and Le Duc will receive Nobel Peace Prizes for engineering the Red takeover of South Viet Nam.
WADE’ DECISION FORCES ALL 50 United States STATES TO PERMIT KILLING OF UNBORN BABIES The Globalist/Communist complex has never had any regard for human life, whether born or unborn.
Its latest pro-death / anti-morality success is the Roe vs Wade Supreme Court decision, which ignores states’ rights, and makes legalized abortion the law of the land.
Wade cheapens modern culture, ushering in an era in which uninformed American women have abortions like candy Ironically, the plaintiff in the case, a Texas woman named Norma McCorvey would in later years come to regret her decision to abort and becomes a fierce pro-life activist.
Although the debate over abortion rages until the present day, the Globalist media NEVER shows the public any images of what an actual abortion really is.
Most pro-abortion people, upon first seeing actual images or video of what an abortion really is, soon begin to rethink their position on the matter.
That is why the graphic images of the abortion procedure are concealed from public view.
JULY, 1973 DAVID ROCKEFELLER & ZBIGNIEW BREZEZSKI ESTABLISH THE GLOBALIST ‘TRI-LATE RAL COMMISSION’ The Trilateral Commission is set up to foster cooperation between the US, Europe, and Japan.
CFR Chairman David Rockefeller had proposed its creation at the 1972 Bilderberg meeting.
What the Trilateralists intend is the creation of a worldwide economic power superior to the political governments of the nation-states involved.
Georgia Congressman and Birch Society leader Larry McDonald calls for an investigation.
SEPTEMBER, 1973 GENERAL AUGUSTO PINOCHET STAGES AN ANTI-MARXIST COUP IN CHILE The Globo Communist ""left"" is in an uproar over an anti-Marxist coup in Chile.
General Augusto Pinochet has had enough of Marxist Salvador Allende's ""democrat’ socialist government.
Upon assuming power, Pinochet cracks down on the Marxist scum that devastated Chile's economy.
He downsizes government, slashes taxes, and privatizes state industries.
Under pressure from ""the world community"", the beloved General steps down in 1990.
As a result of his reforms, Chile is still the most prosperous economy in South America.
While visiting Great Britain to have back surgery in 1998, the 85 year old Pinochet is arrested for ""human rights violations"" committed against Spanish Communists.
Ironically, Cuba’s Communist boss, Fidel Castro, whose firing squads have executed thousands, and whose prisons are notorious for torture of political prisoners, is being honored in Spain at the very same time the warrant is issued for Pinochet.
Pinochet is eventually released, but will be hounded and harassed by Chile's ""intellectuals"" until his death in 2006.
The sudden departure of a humiliated USA left its destabilized South Vietnamese friends defenseless at the hands of the Communists of the North.
Millions of terrified pro-Americans crowd into leaky boats in order to flee the Communists who, as they always do, began murdering, torturing, and arresting their enemies.
Suddenly destabilized, the neighboring nation of Cambodia also falls to Communism.
The Globalist Henry Kissinger and the Marxist-loving “peace activists” who had so hindered the United States war effort shed no tears.
America had been deceived & betrayed into an unnecessary war, and then deceived & betrayed into losing it.
As was the case in both World Wars and the Korean War, American boys and innocent civilians paid for the Globalist joke with their lives.
Driven in the sea by Kissinger's Communist friends, 200,000+ Vietnamese ""boat people"" died.
Ambitious Republican Governor Nelson Rockefeller dreams of being President.
Conservatives like Barry Goldwater will never allow this Globalist to ever win the nomination.
But after a series of bizarre events, eerily similar to the rapid rise of Teddy Roosevelt, ‘Rocky’ literally comes within inches of achieving his.dream.
President Nixon resigns over the media-hyped ""Watergate Scandal"" Vice President Ford becomes President.
With the blessing of the Democrat Congress, Ford selects Rockefeller as Vice President.
Rockefeller& Kissinger cause internal factionalism within Ford administration.
Radical Lynette Fromme aims her pistol at President Ford's head, but is apprehended by a Secret Service agent before she can fire.
Radical Sarah Jane Moore fires her gun at Ford, missing his head by just 6 inches.
Ford runs for election in 1976, but drops Rockefeller from the ticket after Goldwater and Ronald Reagan threaten to withdraw support.
From 1971-79, the most highly rated show is the sitcom ""All in the Family"", produced by ZionistMarxists Norman Lear and Bud Yorkin.
Set in the Queens, NY living room of the Bunker family, every episode contains political arguments between Archie and some younger liberal character Archie's arguments are always made in an angry, buffoonish tone and bigoted towards blacks, Hispanics, and Jews.
Week after week, the massive national audience can't help but laugh at stupid, angry Archie.
In the subconscious of the public mind, conservative ideals become associated with stupidity and hate, whereas liberal opinions are associated with education and tolerance.
In the final year of AITF's decade long run, Archie ""matures"" into a more liberal minded, and likeable older man, taking in a Jewish business partner and even adopting a Jewish daughter.
The viewing audience of AITF cannot detect the psychological manipulation, but AITF's unflattering portrayal of Archie, along with his eventual redemption, will gradually turn millions of reactive viewers away from conservative thought, and towards a more Marxist view of the world.
Nasty “conservative” Archie is always yelling and saying stupid things.
Out of nowhere, the unknown Governor of Georgia is media-hyped through the Democrat Primaries.
As it turns out, Jimmy Carter is an original member of the Trilateral Commission.
After Carter's victory, Brzezinski is named as National Security Advisor.
Angola's Communist regime is strengthened and protected from the anti-Communist rebel forces of Jonas Savimbi.
Brzezinski was the main handler of Jimmy Carter MARCH MAY, 1978 ITALIAN PRIME MINISTER ALDO MORO IS KIDNAPPED AND MURDERED Henry Kissinger is very angry with the Italian Prime Minister, Aldo Moro.
On his own initiative and in defiance of Globalists, Moro is in the process of working out a deal with the Communists of Italy.
Under the terms of “II Compremesso Storico” , Moro’s Christian Democrats will form a coalition government which will include Communists.
Undoubtedly this would lead to a more neutral foreign policy with regards to the Soviet Union.
Whether it is a Czar like Nicholas; or a Communist General Secretary like Brezhnev; or a democratic free-marketeer like Putin; the goal is always the same to subjugate the Eurasian land mass under Globalist control.
Any national leader who gets too close to Russia will therefore have to be punished in one way or another.
On March 16, 1978, a unit said to be of the militant Communist group known as the Red Brigades blocks the two-car convoy transporting Moro and kidnaps him, murdering his five bodyguards.
The resulting anti-Communist backlash scuttles “The Historic Compromise” and brings Italy back into the Globalist anti-Soviet Union sphere.
The murder of Aldo Moro was very bad for the Communists, but good news for the Globalists — all of which points to the CJA taking out Moro and framing the pro-Soviet Communists of Italy for the deed.
Moro's widow will later recount her husband’s meeting with Henry Kissinger and an unidentified American intelligence official.
Moro was so shaken by the comment that he became ill and threatened to quit politics.
Kidnapped by CIA “Red Brigades” — held hostage for nearly two months — murdered in cold blood OCTOBER, 1979 THE United States DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION IS BORN President Jimmy Carter establishes the Department of Education.
The answer reveals itself in the years to come, as the UN-connected United States Department of Education grows large and powerful, influencing school curriculums on every local level.
As a result, American children today learn next to nothing about America’s founding doctrines or its true history.
Instead of learning to think critically, young students are force-fed Globalist & socialist propaganda, fairy tales about Global Warming, hatred for American ideals, pornographic “sex education”, and the joys of homosexuality.
Globalist DOE deliberately dumbs-down American kids, turning them into non-thinking adults.
The founders of Neo-Conservatism are self-professed ""exMarxists"" who claim to realize their error and now wish to embrace American conservatism.
The first major intellectual to ‘come out’ as a neocon is Irving Kristol “The Godfather” of the neo-cons.
Gullible traditional conservatives welcome the media-hyped, neo-con infiltrators with open arms into their circles.
It isn't long before these ""exMarxist"" Zionists hijack true conservatism.
The neo-cons are Globalists that differ from other ""liberal"" Globalists in one key area.
Whereas Bilderberger / TC Globalists have no special love or loyalty for Israel, the neo-con Globalists are hard core, Israel-First Zionists.
This internal, and often bitter, divide within the broader New World Order crime family is an extension of Churchill's ""Zionism vs Bolshevism"" thesis of which he wrote about 60 years earlier.
Irving Kristol's son, William Kristol, will found the controversial Project for the New American Century which will call for a ""New Pearl Harbor"" in later years.
Communism is a tool for overthrowing nationalistic and free market nations.
But the long range plan is to one day merge the Communistic nations into a New World Order that is a mix of corporatism and communism.
The Soviets in Moscow have their own plans of world domination, or at least, world influence.
Zbigniew Brzezinski develops a plan to draw the USSR into a costly and destabilizing war in Afghanistan.
In the same way that the RussoJapanese War weakened Czarist Russia in 1905, Brzezinski's Afghan trap will weaken the Soviet state.
Question: The former director of the CIA, Robert Gates, stated in his memoirs , that American intelligence services began to aid the Mujahedeen in Afghanistan 6 months before the Soviet intervention.
In this period you were the national security adviser to President Carter.
According to the official version of history, CIA aid to the Mujahedeen began during 1980, that is to say, after the Soviet army invaded Afghanistan, 24 Dec 1979.
Indeed, it was July 3, 1979 that President Carter signed the first directive for secret aid to the opponents of the pro-Soviet regime in Kabul.
The day that the Soviets officially crossed the border, I wrote to President Carter.
It is sprung so that one group of criminals can gain advantage over another group of criminals , and entrap them into the coming world government. “i'd Dott Again” | Tans T Aronanistal 7 4 ~ * WITH ZeiGmiew BRZEZINSKI ~ Brzezinski and the CIA armed Afghan fighters against the Soviets.
NOVEMBER, 1980 CONSERVATIVES REJOICE AS RONALD REAGAN IS ELECTED PRESIDENT Former California Governor Ronald Reagan defeats former CIA boss George HW Bush in a bitter Republican primary.
Reagan was a Goldwater supporter and an anti-Red informant during his days as a Hollywood actor.
During his campaign, he advocates taking a hard line against the Soviets, and preaches the virtues of limited government, a gold standard, less spending, and low taxes.
But political realities soon cause Reagan to be maneuvered into surrounding himself with TC/CFR manipulators, including his choice for Vice President George HW Bush.
With inflation, taxes, and unemployment all skyrocketing, the charismatic Reagan defeats Carter easily.
Reagan was a decent man who lost control of his Presidency to the Globalists and Zionists who had been placed all around him.
A policeman, a body guard, and Reagan’s Treasury Secretary are badly injured.
Reagan himself is hit by a ricocheting bullet that punctures his lung and comes within inches of killing him, and inches from making Globalist CIA man George HW Bush the new President.
It was confirmed by the Associated Press that Scott Hinckley had been scheduled to dine at the home of Marvin Bush, one of George Bush’s sons, the night after the event took place.
What did come out of the assassination attempt was a much more “moderate” Ronald Reagan.
Reagan’s Presidency, though a great improvement over Jimmy Carter’s, will do nothing to reverse America’s march towards Globalism and socialism.
Reagan's Treasury Secretary, a bodyguard, and a DC cop were also seriously wounded by John Hinckley.
Lawrence Patton McDonald , cousin of General George Patton, is on board.
Bright, handsome, articulate, McDonald's ""star quality"" has destined him for higher office.
Of concern to the Globalists is the fact that he is also President of the John Birch Society.
If not for the delays, a decapitation of Congress's three leading anti-Communists would have occurred.
One of those theories is that the United States shadow government baited and duped the Soviets into taking out the plane — thus embarrassing the Soviets and taking out McDonald at the same time.
The most dangerous enemy of the Globalists and Communists was eliminated.
In the present day, AIPAC is without a doubt the most feared pressure-group in America.
It’s affluent, and very vocal, 100,000 members pump millions of dollars into both political parties.
American politicians, who fail to follow AIPAC's policy line on Israel-Arab issues, will soon find themselves running against a well-funded, media-hyped challenger.
AIPAC openly boasts about the politicians that have been unseated as a result of their activism.
Governors, sitting Presidents and Presidential contenders are usually in attendance as well.
President Obama pays his respects to Israel at the annual AIPAC convention.
The GloboZionist Axis of Evil seeks to destroy and enslave both nations into the Global system.
To this end, the United States supports Saddam Hussein of Iraq in a long protracted war against Iran.
Estimates of the final death toll vary extremely, but it is safe to say that 100’s of 1000’s -soldiers as well as civilians — are killed on both sides.
American support for Iraq during the war includes billion of dollars' worth of economic aid the sale of technology, weaponry, military intelligence, special operations training, and indirect involvement in warfare against Iran.
This support is not a secret and is frequently discussed in open session of the Senate and House of Representatives.
Soon after the war, the dirty double-dealers of the Council on Foreign Relations will then turn on Saddam Hussein, whom they had used as a tool and will then discard like a used-up lemon.
In 1980 the Mayor of Detroit, Coleman Young, made Saddam an honorary citizen.
APRIL 17, 1984 LIBYA FALSELY ACCUSED OF KILLING | BRITISH POLICE WOMAN | The international Zionist campaign to isolate Libya and its leader, Colonel Muammar Qaddafi, intensifies during an April 1984 anti-Libya demonstration in London.
As a crowd forms outside the Libyan embassy, shots suddenly ring out towards the crowd.
Eleven people are wounded, and a 25 year old British police woman named Yvonne Fletcher is killed.
Media images of her heartbreaking death are broadcast non-stop in the western press.
Following the shooting, the embassy was surrounded by armed police for 11 days, in one of the longest police sieges in London's history.
Despite no evidence of Libyan wrongdoing, the UK then ends diplomatic relations with Libya.
The televised murder of Yvonne Fletcher damages Libya in particular and all Arabs/Muslims in general, while benefiting its Zionist enemies.
There will be more anti-Libya intelligence operations to follow in the coming years.
APRIL 5, 1986 LIBYA FALSELY ACCUSED OF BOMBING GERMAN DISCO / REAGAN BOMBS LIBYA / KILLS QADDAFI’S DAUGHTER The 1986 Berlin Disco Bombing is a terrorist attack on the La Belle discotheque in West Berlin, a club commonly frequented by United States troops stationed in United States occupied West Berlin.
Libya is falsely blamed for the bombing after messages are conveniently intercepted from Libya to the Libyan embassy in East Germany, congratulating the terrorists on a job well done.
A gullible President Reagan swallows Israel's bait, and retaliates by ordering airstrikes against the Libyan capital of Tripoli and the city of Benghazi.
At least 15 civilians are killed in the airstrikes, including Libyan leader Colonel Qaddafi's 1-year old daughter.
More than 2,000 others are injured in the murderous bombing raid, engineered by Israel, and carried out by its American puppets and dupes.
Zionists used false flag attacks to target Libyan leader Muammar Qaddafi.
APRIL, 1986 REAGAN &GLOBALIST GORBACHEV END THE COLD WAR / ‘GORBY’ CALLS FOR ‘NEW WORLD ORDER’ The new Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, and Ronald Reagan team up to end the Cold War Gorbachev wants to also reform the failed Soviet system.
Although the end of communism and Soviet tyranny are desirable, ‘Gorbachev’s liberalization programs of ""Perestroika"" and “Glasnost” have little to do with love of liberty or free-market economics.
Unlike previous Russian leaders who were Soviets First, Gorbachev is a Globalist.
Gorbachev is mega-hyped by the media and wins the Nobel Peace Prize in 1990.
Old line Stalinist supremacists in Russia still haven't figured out who the real bosses of the Global Game really are.
They oppose Gorby, but it is too late for them to prop up their rotten system.
The Reagan-Gorby talks were hyped by the Globalist media as the ""Thawing of the Cold War"" 1988 THE RUSH LIMBAUGH DECEPTION IS BORN / NEO-CON TALK RADIO HOST GOES NATIONWIDE The Globalists are known for setting up “controlled opposition” to themselves.
This allows anti-socialist, anti-Globalist, anti-Zionist resistance movements to be misdirected and watered down.
False “conservative” leaders like William F Buckley were skillfully used for this exact purpose.
The foremost ‘disinfo’ agent of the current day is neo-con radio talk show legend, Rush Limbaugh.
Limbaugh’s program does indeed expose the lies and the corruption of the Democrats in an enlightening and entertaining manner.
The false “left-right” illusion is what keeps the American public enslaved to a “two party system” in which both parties are New World Order controlled.
Limbaugh has been a guest-of-honor in Israel, and has mercilessly ridiculed ""conspiracy theorists"" who ""buy into"" World Government conspiracy theories.
Anonymous phone calls from “Muslims groups"" claim credit for the terrorist bombing.
A Libyan named Abdelbaset al-Megrahi is tried and sentenced in Scotland.
Relatives of some of the Scottish victims will later state that they believe that al-Megrahi was wrongly accused.
He will receive a hero's welcome upon returning to Libya after having spent 20 years in prison.
Cleat and Corel stents di ina crash Israel framed an innocent Libyan national for the murder of American & British passengers.
JUNE, 1989 MASSACRE IN TIANANMEN SQUARE / GLOBALIST ENGINEERED ‘DEMOCRACY MOVEMENT’ [IS CRUSHED As the Globalists continue to pull the rug out from under the very same Communists that they had created in Eastern Europe, a similar operation unfolds in China.
Massive protests involving the usual suspects capture the world's sympathy.
Many of these students had studied in the USA where the CIA surely made good use of their discontent.
The “spontaneous” protests grow larger by the day as thousands of workers, with legitimate grievances; join the students in the protests.
Student leaders of the ""democracy movement"" are hunted down and arrested.
Globalist George Soros's ‘human rights’ organization is forced to pack up and leave.
China will continue moving towards a more market-based economy, but it is not yet ripe for a Globalist ‘Velvet’ takeover by the Soros / Brzezinski / CIA gang.
NOVEMBER, 1989 THE BERLIN WALL IS TORN DOWN / GLOBALISTS MAKE BIG MOVES IN EASTERN EUROPE Weakened by a disastrous war in Afghanistan , the USSR can no longer hold the Communist world together.
When Communism collapses in Eastern Europe, the common view is that it is due to its own inefficiencies.
But the role of Globalist Billionaire George Soros and the CIA in the ""Velvet.Revolutions"" is a critical factor.
His Open Society Institute pumps cash into opposition movements and media.
Ostensibly aiming to promote “human rights”, Soros and the CIA are actually weakening existing political structures in order to eventually consolidate the ex-Communist states into the New World Order.
Now it is time to ‘pull the plug’ on the Communists and swallow them up into the New World Order.
AUGUST, 1990 PRESIDENT GEORGE HW BUSH STARTS A WAR WITH IRAQ / OPENLY CALLS FORA ‘NEW WORLD ORDER’ Unlike Arab states Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia, the Globalists do not control Saddam’s Hussein’s oil rich Iraq.
Like Libya's Qaddafi, Hussein is a nationalist, and also a defender of the oppressed Palestinians.
This makes Iraq a target of both the Zionist and Bilderberger factions of the New World Order Crime Syndicate, who bait Hussein into invading Kuwait so as to have a pretext for war.
President George HW Bush raises eyebrows when he uses a certain phrase in citing his reasons for attacking Iraq.
The Gulf War is brief and limited as United States armed forces quickly expel Iraq from Kuwait.
But the ensuing UN economic sanctions will lead to the slow death of as many as 1 million Iraqis over the next 10 years.
Saddam Hussein was tricked by the Globalists into invading Kuwait, and then blamed for a war he did not want.
JUNE, 1991 BORIS YELTSIN ELECTED PRESIDENT OF THE NEW RUSSIAN FEDERATION / GLOBALISTS RAPE RUSSIA Elected President in 1991, Boris Yeltsin is a totally inept and drunken autocrat.
After dissolving the Soviet Union, he hands control of Russia over to internal criminal Zionist Oligarchs and external NWO Globalists.
The naive , Yeltsin turns to Harvard economists and Globalist institutions such as the IMF, World Bank, and United States Treasury for help in transitioning Russia from communism to a market-based economy.
The recommended “shock therapy” causes an economic downturn as severe as that of the United States or Germany during the Great Depression.
Zionist ‘Russian’ businessmen buy up entire State industries for pennies-in-thedollar.
The plan is to weaken post-communist Russia so much so that it can be swallowed up by the New World Order.
The families of the missing men are hopeful that the hearings will lead to the return of their loved ones still being held in Vietnamese camps.
A minor arm scratch was treated with a band-aid, and a buttocks bruise was self-inflicted.
To the contrary, he was given preferred treatment by the Vietnamese in exchange for giving information to his captors.
These two PHONIES stonewall the investigation and humiliate the POW families.
Traitors Kerry & McCain have closed the lid on the POW-MIA betrayal forever.
The device is intended to knock the North Tower into the South Tower, destroying both and killing thousands.
The mighty tower withstands the basement blast, but 6 people die and hundreds are sickened from smoke inhalation.
The bombing occurs at a time when Zionists within the government are trying to maneuver President Bill Clinton into a land war with Irag.
The Towers withstood the massive blast, but will be targeted again in 2001.
NOVEMBER 1993 THE GLOBALIST ‘EUROPEAN UNION’ IS ESTABLISHED The European Union is a political and economic union of the formerly sovereign nations of Europe.
Through patient gradualism, the EU now emerges as a regional New World Order, whose power will surpass that of its individual member nations.
By 2011, the EU will have 27 members (including former Communist states from Eastern Europe), a common currency , a European Bank, and a socialist bureaucracy answerable to no one.
To transform Europe into a “multi-cultural” society, EU officials will now flood the continent with North African and Middle Asian immigrants.
From the post-World War II Marshall Plan to the current socialist super state Rothschild’s dream advances forward.
Clinton's feminist wife, Hillary Rodham, had served as the Chairman of the Marxist Globalist New World Foundation during the 1980's.
The long term plan is to expand membership southward into Central & Latin America.
With strong Republican support, Democrat Clinton signs Globalist inspired NAFTA into law.
MAY, 1994 COMMUNIST NELSON MANDELA INSTALLED IN SOUTH AFRICA South Africa’s system of political separation between its founding White Afrikaner population and the African blacks, serves as a convenient pretext for the Globalists to subvert the anti-Communist, nationalist, and mineral rich nation.
In its first mixed-race election, Communist and former terrorist Nelson Mandela is elected in a landslide by the majority Black population.
Afrikaners are permanently dispossessed of the nation that their own forefathers built as socialism and cultural degeneracy is enshrined.
Ironically, anti-Communist Blacks who oppose Mandela are often tortured and killed by Mandela’s cult-like followers.
But the Globalists do not care at all about the black people of South Africa.
Thanks to its Marxist politics, the once prosperous nation is today marked by high unemployment, an AIDS epidemic, high crime, and vicious anti-white atrocities.
APRIL 19, 1995 ‘FALSE FLAG’ BOMBING IN OKLAHOMA Two years into the unpopular Clinton presidency, there is a national backlash against his radical socialist-Globalist policies.
The terror attack was falsely linked to American patriots and anti-Clinton critics.
Clear evidence of pre-planted explosives in the building is covered up by the Media.
After shedding crocodile tears for the cameras, Clinton’s popularity ratings rebound as the “discredited” Patriot movement all but fizzles out.
Oklahoma was a false flag bombing designed to frame up American patriot groups.
Although unknown to the public, and unknown even to Presidents FDR and Truman, this information concerned critical events conceming the early Cold War.
The intercepts, not made public until 1995, will not only confirm the treason of the Rosenbergs, Harry Dexter White, J Robert Oppenheimer, and Alger Hiss, but also implicate high-ranking officials in the United States Treasury, State Department, the OSS , The Manhattan Project, and the White House itself.
Sometime in 1945, a Communist United States army analyst named Bill Weisband neutralized the VENONA Project by revealing its existence to his Soviet handlers.
Statistically, for even a single airplane to suddenly fall out of the sky is a very unusual event.
At this time, Switzerland was being squeezed very hard by Zionists over allegations of holding gold stolen from ""Holocaust"" victims.
Protestors in Egypt reject the ""suicide"" claim and accuse Israel of taking down Flight 990.
Numerous witnesses saw the plane catch fire in midair before it crashed into a residential neighborhood.
His 1998 book, The Grand Chessboard, lays out a grand plan for the United States to control Central Asia, and set up bases ringing China and Russia.
Realizing how difficult it is to get Americans to support foreign adventures, “Zbig” hints of a coming “massive external threat”, and invokes the “shock effect” of Pearl Harbor.
Zbig's books are written for snobbish ""intellectuals"" and elite policymakers, not for the general public.
The United States embassies in Kenya & Tanzania are bombed simultaneously.
A new ""villain"" is introduced to the American people, and falsely blamed for the attacks.
The public is told that a Saudi Arabian billionaire named Osama Bin Laden and his ""Al Qaeda"" terrorist network are responsible for the attacks.
In response, President Clinton orders missile strikes on Sudan and Osama's hideout in Afghanistan.
The strike on Sudan destroys a vital pharmaceutical factory, causing hardship for the poor people of Sudan.
The ""truly massive external threat"" that Zbigniew Brzezinski had recently foretold has been created.
This will eventually trigger the occupation of Central Asia and the increased military budget that the Globalists want so badly.
Brzezinski's Central Asian ""bogeyman"" is introduced to the American public.
NOVEMBER, 1998 MORE HIGH-RANKING GLOBO-ZIONISTS FORETELL OF A MAJOR “CATATROPHIC TERRORISM’ EVENT In the wake of the embassy bombings in Africa (falsely blamed on Osama Bin Laden) Globalist Ashton B Carter , Zionist John Deutch , and Zionist Philip D Zelikow co-author an article in the Council on Foreign Relation's ‘Foreign Affairs’ magazine.
In it, they lay out what changes would need to be made within the United States government in the wake of ""catastrophic terrorism,"" which is also the title of the article.
Bright, young, and very handsome, it is speculated that the 38-year-old socialite may soon follow in the footsteps of his famous father and soon run for NY Senate.
The sinister forces who killed his father and his uncle must take out John-John before he can start his political career.
Any chance of JFK's son rising to high office ends when his private plane crashes; killing him, his wife, and sister-in-law.
Suspiciously, the media is very quick to proclaim “pilot error”, falsely claiming that JFK Jr. was an incompetent pilot and that visibility was poor.
By now fully corrupted and intimidated the Kennedy clan, led by the drunken degenerate Senator Ted Kennedy, is forced to remain silent.
Recall that it was Cronkite who betrayed America's troops, with a false report about the Tet Offensive.
Cronkite’s disloyalty to America is now confirmed when the World Federalist Association awards the “Global Governance Award” to the aging news legend.
When I had my own strong opinions, as I often did, I tried not to communicate them to my audience.
Every half-educated school child in America knows to equate Einstein with genius.
For this, Albert Einstein is named ""Person of the Century"" by TIME magazine.
The true geniuses of late 19th and 20th century science and invention are, for the most part, fading or forgotten.
These include the phonograph , motion picture camera, and the first practical light bulb.
Edison was known as ""The Wizard of Menlo Park"" Remember Thomas Edison the next time to turn on a light, listen to a CD or watch a DVD, or watch a movie.
He was a major contributor to the birth of commercial electricity and is best known for his revolutionary developments in the field of electromagnetism.
Tesla, in private letters, dismissed Einstein as a “long-haired crank” and his space-warping Relativity Theory as the result of “unclear thinking”further suggesting that its proponents were not sane.
Gottlieb Daimler & Carl Benz German engineers whose separate work led to the development of an internal combustion engine feasible for use in the first automobile.
Henry Ford would later pioneer mass production of these ""cars"", making them much more affordable.
Wright Brothers American inventors and builders of the world's first successful airplane. the Wright brothers were the first to invent aircraft controls that made fixed-wing powered flight possible.
It is because of him that you can escape the oppressive heat, in your car or at home.
His work contributed greatly to the development and availability of modern computers and electronics.
Wernher von Braun German rocket scientist, aerospace engineer, and space architect.
Lister introduced carbolic acid to clean surgical instruments and wounds, making surgery safe for all of us.
The ringleader of this cabal is William Kristol, son of the Marxist founder of Neo-conservatism, Irving Kristol.
PNAC’s report calls for America to dominate the Middle East and overthrow the government of Iraq.
Donald Rumsfeld, Dick Cheney, Robert Kagan, and Paul Wolfowitz are also PNAC members.
Each will assume high office when George W Bush, becomes president in 2001.
The super-hyped film resurrects the idiotic myth of Pearl Harbor for a whole new generation of American suckers.
When we recall Zbig Brzezinksi's written mention of the ""shock effect of Pearl Harbor""; and Ashton Carter’s warming of a coming “Pearl Harbor”; and PNAC’s written hint for ""a new Pearl Harbor"", the sudden release of the summer blockbuster, combined with a certain ""surprise"" event that is soon to follow, appears very, very convenient indeed.
As demonstrated by the ""Hollywood 10"" case, Hollywood has long been an instrument of the New World Order.
The creation, and the hyped-up 2001 Summer release, of ""Pearl Harbor"" is no accident.
Before the dust of the attacks has even settled, ""9/11"" is blamed on Osama Bin Laden and his “Al Qaeda” terrorist network.
Albert D Pastore . establish beyond any doubt that the ""official story"" of 9/11 is a monstrous lie.
It is clear that the collaborating factions behind the attacks are the Israelis, the Zionist “Neo-Cons,” and the Bilderberg/TC Globalists.
The attacks are used as justification for preplanned invasions of Afghanistan & Iraq, as well as for destabilization plots aimed at other nations in the region. 9/11 marks the start of the New World Order’s dual “end game” for global domination via the encirclement of Russia & China, and Israel’s drive to dominate the Middle East.
SEPTEMBER 11, 2001 FIVE ISRAELI MOSSAD AGENTS ARRESTED IN CONNECTION WITH 9/11 ATTACKS On the day of the attacks, police in nearby New Jersey receive telephone calls complaining of suspicious looking ""movers"" seen celebrating and filming the destruction of the Twin Towers.
One van is stopped as it approaches the Lincoln Tunnel linking New Jersey to Manhattan, and another is stopped as it approaches the George Washington Bridge.
Bomb-sniffing dogs detect the scent of explosives in the tunnel-bound van, and the bridge-bound van is packed with explosives.
They are held for 40 days in a local prison and finally released in December after high level forces in the government overrule the local agents on the case.
A Jewish magazine later confirms that the men were agents of Israeli's spy agency, the Mossad.
It is a little known fact about 9/11 that the first, and only, arrests made that day were of Israelis, not Arabs.
The details are Summarized and sourced in the well-researched Internet essay, ""The Dancing Israelis"", which has circulated worldwide since 2003.
Albert D Pastore documented how 5 Israeli agents were linked to 9/11, and later released due to Israeli pressure.
OCTOBER, 2001 THE United States AND BRITAIN INVADE AFGHANISTAN AS OSAMA CONTINUES TO CLAIM INNOCENCE The Brzezinski-Bilderberg plan for Central Asia is set in motion with the invasion of Afghanistan.
President Bush and the Establishment media tell the public that the invasion’s purpose is to capture Osama Bin Laden — the falsely accused “mastermind” behind 9/11.
There exists a government within a government within the United States.
AUTUMN, 2001 FEDERAL RESERVE BEGINS INFLATING A MASSIVE HOUSING BUBBLE Hyped by the Globalist Media as “The Maestro,” Zionist Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan ignites an artificial 6-year ""boom"" by pumping up the money supply with artificially low interest rates & easy lending standards.
Home buyers with bad credit, unverified income, and little or no down payment, can now purchase homes.
The loans make money for the Wall Street firms that buy and resell the notes, until the inevitable correction of the artificial values comes.
When the intro ""teaser rates"" expire, debtors will no longer be able to afford their monthly payments.
By '08, a wave of foreclosures will cause home prices to crash, and bankers to lose money.
Home buyers will lose their down payments, but the NWO bankers will later have their ""investments"" bailed out by taxpayers.
The ""7/7"" attacks in London kill 56 people when three subways trains and one bus are simultaneously blown up.
London Bali Madrid — All were clearly false-flag frame up jobs carried out by Western / Israeli intelligence NOVEMBER 2002 GEORGE BUSH ESTABLISHES THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY Again using the fictitious pretext of “protecting America from Al Qaeda” George Bush and co-conspirators establish the Department of Homeland Security.
The DHS is given massive power to spy upon and harass the American public.
By 2015, DHS’s annual budget will reach $40 Billion with 250,000 employees.
The DHS grants billions of dollars to local communities for the purpose of installing cameras to monitor the movements of the people.
In 2010, one of the DHS sub-agencies, the TSA, creates a firestorm of controversy when it introduces naked scanner machines and full body pat downs at the nation’s airports.
New World Order imagery in the logo for the ’Information Awareness Office’ of Homeland Security / Abuse at the airports 2000's ‘BOMBER-OF-THE-MONTH’ CHARADE KEEPS THE AMERICAN PUBLIC IN FEAR AND UNDER CONTROL Throughout the 2000's, the gullible American public is fed a steady diet of fear-based propaganda.
In addition to the actual ""false flag"" terror attacks, the Globalists create a number of ""foiled"" false flag attacks as well.
After this incident, Americans are forced to remove their shoes at the airport check-in.
A steady diet of some of the goofiest fear propaganda imaginable keeps the American & European people under psychological control.
S INVADES IRAQ The Zionist Neo-Con faction of the Establishment finally gets what it wanted out of the 9/11 hoax.
After months of scaring the public with fabricated tales of Iraq’s “Weapons of Mass Destruction,” the United States and Britain kick off a new war against Iraq.
The nationalist Saddam Hussein will soon be removed from power and executed.
With this enemy of Israel eliminated, Israel intensifies its brutal oppression of the Palestinians.
More than 7000 United States troops and contractors; and at least 500,000 innocent Iraqi civilians will eventually lose their lives during the war and the planned internal chaos that follows.
Iraqi boy's parents were killed and his arms were blown off by American bombing.
NOVEMBER 2003 GLOBALISTS STAGE THE PHONY ‘ROSE REVOLUTION’ IN GEORGIA The Republic of Georgia is a former Soviet state.
Georgia's elected government has good relations with neighboring Russia, which is led by President Vladimir Putin.
In the parliamentary election, Georgian President Edward Shevardnadze's political allies are successful.
The incredibly well organized protests are funded by Globalist George Soros and have all the indicators of CIA orchestration.
Finally, the government is forced to step down when Globalist puppet Mikhail Saakashvili and his mob crash the Parliament carrying roses.
The pro-Russian government is overthrown by the Rose Revolution, and an NWO puppet state, led by the psychotic Saakashvili, is installed on Russia's southern border.
The ""Rose Revolution"" sets up a hostile Globalist base on Russia's border, and also close to Iran.
George Bush later visited Georgia, where he was warmly greeted by the new Globalist puppet president.
NOVEMBER, 2004 THE CURIOUSLY RAPID RISE OF A WORTHLESS RADICAL NAMED BARACK OBAMA Born the bi-racial child of Marxists, Barack Obama was groomed for big things, possibly as far back as his High School days.
A Communist, bisexual ""mentor"" named Frank Marshall Davis appears to have been young Barry's connection to the New World Order pipeline.
Obama's alleged Ivy League transcripts and bar exam results remain unavailable to this day.
Coming from a broken & dysfunctional family of modest means, the question of who paid for these extremely expensive schools is also a mystery.
During the 1990's, instead of practicing law, Obama works as an Alinskyite ""community organizer"" in Chicago.
Obama launches his election effort in the living room of his friend and ghost writer, William Ayers, head the cop-killing Communist Weathermen who terrorized Chicago in 1968.
In 2004, the popular incumbent Republican United States Senator, Peter Fitzgerald, inexplicably announces that he will not seek reelection.
Fitzgerald's Democrat predecessor, Carol Mosely Braun, then also strangely passes up the chance to win her old seat back.
In the Democrat primary, Obama defeats the much better known, and much better funded, Blair Hull after embarrassing details of Hull's former marriage surface.
In the General Election, Obama's Republican opponent, Jack Ryan, withdraws from the race, again after Zionist George Zell’s Chicago Tribune persuades a Court to release Ryan's embarrassing divorce papers.
One by one, every big-name politician in Obama's path (Palmer, Fitzgerald, Mosely-Braun, Hull, Ryan) has been removed by an unseen force.
NOVEMBER 2004 — JANUARY 2005 GLOBALISTS STAGE THE PHONY ‘ORANGE REVOLUTION’ IN THE UKRAINE Exactly one year after Georgia's phony ""Rose Revolution"", George Soros and the NWO gang replay the same spectacle in Ukraine, another former Soviet Republic friendly to Vladimir Putin's Russia.
When Globalist candidate Viktor Yushenko loses a close Presidential election to Viktor Yanukovych, ""spontaneous protests"" once again erupt.
As was the case with Georgia, the world is treated to a Hollywood charade filled with music and orange banners.
Under intense pressure from the outside, coupled with controlled pressure from within, a 24 election is held in December of 2005.
The Orange Revolution results in another hostile puppet state being set up on Russia’s border.
In 2010, the Ukrainians will dump their Globalist President and re-establish friendly ties with their brother nation of Russia. eb ” Another phony ""color revolution"" on Russia's border.
My eyes bugged out, but then I realized that she was Jewish and she knew I was, too, and between us we could acknowledge there's a lot of truth in that statement.
For the Jews were the vanguard of a social movement that over the course of the 20th century transformed the American university system and the nature of the American elite.” —November 6, 2005 / “The Chosen” 2006 RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN OPENLY CHALLENGES THE AUTHORITY OF THE NEW WORLD ORDER Vladimir Putin had succeeded Boris Yeltsin in 2000 and regained control of Russia from the criminal ""Oligarchs"" who had raped the country's finances.
Putin is a patriot who respects Russia’s culture and heritage, including the Orthodox religion and the Romanov past.
Putin will not tolerate the curious American obsession with placing missiles in Globalist puppet Poland.
This begins a series of high-level meetings among the developing giants.
A full-scale diplomatic meeting would be held in Yekaterinburg, Russia, in May 2008.
BRIC will emerge as an independent international organization that facilitates commercial, political and cultural cooperation between its members.
The critical difference between the BRICS (and also the SCO — Shangai Cooperation Organization), versus Globalist bodies such as the EU and NAFTA, is that the SCO & BRICS clubs deal with each other as equals; with no centralized power source to absorb their individual sovereignty.
BRICS & SCO are like a group of neighbors collaborating to hold a neighborhood yard sale, or block party; whereas the New World Order bodies on the other hand, are like an overbearing Condo Association.
Putin forges close ties with China 2: Putin establishes the BRIC trade powerhouse 3: Russia & China’s Eurasian SCO is growing fast.
Now, Russian President Putin presents America with a sculpture to commemorate the fallen towers.
Hanging from the crack is a massive ""teardrop"" designed to actually drip water.
The base of the monument is surrounded by a marble wall with the names of all 3000 victims engraved in it.
The media gives the memorial, dedicated by Putin himself, a total silent treatment.
One Bayonne Councilman is happy to host the monument, but he is baffled by Jersey City's rejection of it.
But the Globalists, in anticipation of the eventual conflict with the allied independent powers of Russia and China, need to portray Putin as evil.
That is why the 9/11 memorial gift from Russia remains unknown to Americans.
The Globalists know that their Global Warming fairy tale has been discredited by honest scientists, but they use the horrifying hoax as a tactic to impose taxes on carbon dioxide, depress living standards, and erode national sovereignty.
Each year, Gore’s unscientific Globalist garbage is shown to millions of impressionable young people.
Gore himself is a member of the CFR; and his daughter Karenna married into the Marxist-Zionist Schiff family.
Gore is making a multi-million dollar fortune by promoting the hoax, wins a Hollywood Oscar, wins a Pulitzer Prize for his book on the subject, and, of course, wins a Nobel Peace Prize.
In 2010, Gore is personally and publicly disgraced after allegations surface that Gore attempted to sexually assault a masseuse.
His wife of many years divorces the perverted propagandist soon afterwards.
REVOLUTION IN RUSSIA FALLS FLAT ON ITS FACE / PUTIN CRUSHES GLOBO STOOGE GARRY KASPAROV When the Globalists unleash a ""Color Revolution"" aimed at Russia, Vladimir Putin is ready for it.
The man chosen by the Rothschild / Soros / Brzezinski / CIA destabilization gang is the legendary Chess Champion, Garry Kasparov Kasparov and 3000 of his ’Other Russia’ thugs stage an anti-Putin rally in St Petersburg.
The arrogant Kasparov is now widely viewed as a traitor by most Russians.
His popularity is so low, that he decides to abandon his run for President of Russia in 2008.
Though Kasparov-Weinstein continues to take cheap shots at Putin while visiting Israel and the US, don't expect the influence of the popular Mr Putin to decline anytime soon.
Kasparov works as a street agitator for the Rothshilds (Image #1 -Kasparov with Jacob Rothschild.
JULY 23, 2008 200,000 BRAINWASHED GERMANS CHEER CANDIDATE OBAMA AS HE CALLS FOR ‘GLOBAL COOPERATION’ More than 60 years of post-war, Globalist inflicted self-hatred has damaged both the minds and spirits of the once proud German people.
German guilttripping over “Nazism”, and Globalist media hype combine to create the most ridiculous spectacle of ""Obama-Mania"" of 2008.
In Berlin, 200,000 German imbeciles give candidate Barack Obama a delirious reception.
Obama's Globalist owners must surely be amused at the stupidity of the German people; whose recent ancestors they had so mercilessly butchered, tortured, slandered, and conquered.
The homosexual Marxist ""community organizer"" who never held a real job is worshipped by brainwashed Germans.
Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin and United States President George Bush are seated close to each other as they watch the Opening ceremonies of the 2008 Olympics in Beijing, China.
When Putin is informed that NWO puppet Georgia has just invaded South Ossetia a tiny independent state whose inhabitants are Russian citizens he wags his finger at Bush and storms out of the stadium.
Russian leaders Putin and Medvedev order Russian troops to mobilize, but by the time they arrive to liberate Ossetia, 2,000 civilians have been murdered by the US/Israeli equipped Georgian army.
The Russians quickly and impressively rout the Georgian invaders, chasing them back deep into Georgian territory.
In a manner similar to the lies surrounding the German-Polish conflict of 1939, the Globalist media then reports that Russia has ""invaded"" Georgia.
No mention is made of the fact that it was Georgia that drew first blood against Russian civilians.
Georgia puppet state attacks Russia and gets smacked down hard OCTOBER, 2008 REPUBLICANS AND DEMOCRATS UNITE TO BAILOUT THE BANKERS WITH TAXPAYER MONEY The Wall Street banks and investment houses profited greatly from Greenspan’s housing bubble.
Now that the party is over, they demand $750 billion of losses to be covered by the United States taxpayer.
While well-connected criminals such as Goldman Sachs agent and Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson twisted the arms of Congress, the Establishment Media terrorizes the American public with horror stories of what will happen if the bankers are not bailed out and new emergency powers are not given to the Federal Reserve.
The public never bought into the bailout, but that didn’t stop the politicians from robbing them.
After an initial failure in Congress, the bailout bill passed on a second try.
It was the largest robbery in United States history. labtooe 1a ‘etet ect Morne Billionaire Globalists George Soros and Warren Buffett benefitted from the ""bailout"" they demanded.
Haider had also openly supported Muammar Qaddafi of Libya and Saddam Hussein of Iraq.
Haider is being closely watched by Israel’s Mossad, Due to Haider's perceived contacts to “Holocaust deniers”, the Israeli Foreign Ministry on September 29, 2008 declares that it is heavily concerned about the 2008 Austrian elections.
We see it as a disturbing development and are following the matter very closely"" Within two weeks of that statement, Haider dies of injuries from a car crash in the state of Carinthia.
He had been on his way to celebrate his mother's 90th birthday Haider meets Hussein — Haider meets Qaddafi — Haider meets Mossad OCTOBER, 2008 THE OMINOUS PROPHECY OF WEBSTER GRIFFIN TARPLEY Astute observers of geo-politics are not so easily fooled by Obama-Mania.
Webster Griffin Tarpley quickly spots George Soros’s ‘Obama Deception’ and tries to warn anyone who will listen.
Webster Tarpley stated with absolute certainty that the “peace” Candidate Obama, if elected, would maneuver the U S. into war with Russia & China.
NOVEMBER 4, 2008 THE OBAMA DECEPTION IS PERPETRATED UPON AMERICA Barack Obama the previously unknown Chicago street agitator and vote fraud organizercompletes his rapid, media-fueled ascent to the Presidency.
A Marxist activist with close ties to former Weather Underground terrorists William Ayers and Jeff Jones; Obama is the ultimate puppet of choice of Globalist Billionaire George Soros and the International Banking gang.
The Jewish-Hungarian Soros and his paid mob of liberal activists pour millions of dollars and countless man-hours into getting Obama elected.
Trillion, passing another bailout for General Motors, advancing socialized health care, allowing Goldman Sachs to loot the Treasury, giving new powers to the Fed, and expanding America’s military role in Asia.
Critics of Obama’s reckless spending are denounced as “racists” by the Media, as very credible allegations of his homosexuality and ineligibility due to foreign birth are ignored.
Obama is an artificial creation of the most intense media hype campaign in history.
By installing a black man as President, the Globalists can advance their agenda more radically than ever before.
Fear of being called ""racist"", combined with media-inflicted ""white guilt"" shield the Marxist President from the condemnation he deserves.
G, talk, or even destroy | can make him sing, entire economies without moving my 1Barack Obama is a wholly owned puppet of George Soros — who is himself connected to the Rothschild Octopus.
DECEMBER, 2008 OPERATION ‘CAST LEAD’ / ISRAEL KILLS 1400 DEFENSELESS PALESTINIAN CIVILIAN Rockets of unknown origin are landing in uninhabited areas of Israel.
The Israelis accuse Palestinian guerillas of firing the cheap and harmless rockets.
Using the rockets as a pretext, Israel launches a 3 week terror bombing campaign against the Palestinian refugees trapped in the Gaza strip.
By the end of Cast Lead, 1400 Arabs lay dead, mostly women and children.
In spite of clear evidence that Israel bombed densely populated neighborhoods with skin-melting white phosphorous bombs, the United States blindly declares its support for Israel's terror campaign.
Israeli school children write messages on bombs destined for Palestinians.
Soros is concerned that the new China is acting too much in her own national interests.
The Globalist plan to encircle China and Russia is the true reason behind United States military adventures in Asia, as well as CIA sponsored “color revolutions” throughout Europe, Asia, and North Africa.
It remains to be seen if this dynamic and nationalist new China will go fully Globalist, or ally itself with Russia against the coming Globalist confrontation.
Moreover, it appears that Poland may be in the process of “mending fences” with Russia.
In 2010, Putin & Medvedev invite the most powerful people in Poland to attend a memorial service honoring Polish victims of Stalin's Katyn Forest massacre of 1940.
These include Polish president Lech Kaczynski, the Chief of the Polish Military Staff and other senior Polish military officers, the president of the Central Bank of Poland, and dozens of other members of the Polish government and Parliament.
A low impact crash over Russian soil near Katyn Forest cloaked by some very unusual anomalies, decapitates the Polish government.
The fact that Poland has since become much more anti-Russian and obedient to the EU adds further intrigue to this bizarre event.
As expected, commodity prices for grains, meats, oil, and metals rise steadily from 2010 and beyond.
But very few understand the true nature of the Fed’s role American decline.
The Origins, History, and Future of the Federal Reserve"", and is held on November Sth & 6th in the very same building where the original 1910 meeting occurred.
Inflationary Zio-Globo bubble-makers Alan Greenspan and Benjamin Bernanke are both in attendance and participate as speakers.
Between the pure Globalist George Soros-Bilderberger faction, and the radical Zionist faction of the New World Order, there is a deep divide over how to overthrow Iran.
The Bilderberger Globalists believe that a military invasion of Iran is costly and risky.
The Zionists on the other hand, have no patience for long term maneuvers.
The Zionists respond by using some of their controlled ""conservative"" talk radio mouthpieces to do ""limited hangouts"" of George Soros and even the Bilderberg conferences.
The Bilderberger / Trilateralists strike back by exposing scandals related to FOX News chief and international media mogul, and arch neo-con Rupert Murdoch.
Obama is clearly in the Soros / Zbig Bilderberg camp, but he also knows that he must respect the Israeli / Neo-Con power base.
Like two competing Mafia Families, the internal squabbles between the ""left"" Bilderbergs and the ""right"" Israel Firsters can get very ugly at times.
But, at the end of the day, both lunatic factions of this New World Order crime gang work against the interests of the people; and will eventually come to an agreement over the Iran situation.
The unrest begins after a CIA operation known as “WikiLeaks” conveniently “leaks” out information damaging to certain Arab states.
CIA media in those states then spread the embarrassing stories which help to spark to demonstrations; thus providing protective cover for the agents leading the “people’s” revolutions.
Starting in Tunisia, and then ""spreading"" to Egypt, Libya, Bahrain, and Syria, these ClA-engineered coups aim to _ install NWO _ puppet ""democracies"" all along the outskirts of the great Eurasian land mass.
From Eastern Europe to North Africa to the Middle East to Iran to South Central Asia and South East Asia, Brzezinski's Globalist noose is being skillfully constructed around the defiant Chinese and Russia giants.
In an ironic twist, the ex-communist powers are now peaceful and moving towards a market-based economy, while the United States & EU are becoming socialistic as they terrorize the disobedient nations of the world.
TIME sells the idiotic myth that Arab college kids on the Internet started the 2011 revolutions.
The deceitful Marxist President announces to a gullible nation that Osama Bin Laden has just been killed in a United States raid on his compound in Pakistan.
The phantom terrorist (who is innocent of the 9/11 attacks and was actually killed in 2001) is said to have been shot dead, and then dumped in the ocean.
Without a shred of evidence, no photos, no videos, and no body — the brain dead American public swallows this latest media hoax.
China strongly condemns the violation of Pakistan's sovereignty, and issues a warning against future attacks on Pakistan.
By 2011, millions of Mexican ""anchor babies"" has already reached voting age as ""Amnesty"" programs threaten to turn millions more into instant Democrat voters.
Traditionally conservative states such as California and Nevada have already become Marxist leaning.
Within 25 years, even libertyloving Texas will have a majority ""Hispanic"" voting bloc that will have been skillfully radicalized by Globalist controlled Spanish TV into hating ""gringos"" and voting for leftist Democrats only.
During the 1980's, the eccentric ""Colonel Gaddafi"" was framed by the Israelis for acts of terror that he had nothing to do with.
In response to pressure from ""neocons"" inside of his administration, President Reagan ordered the bombing of Gaddafi's compound, killing his young daughter.
Libya is a debt-free country that issues currency from a National Bank, not a Rothschild Central Bank.
Qaddafi was seeking to take leadership of the emerging African Union and free it of Globalist-Zionist domination.
In a 2009 speech before the UN, Gaddafi accused the Zionists of having murdered John F Kennedy.
After months of merciless NATO bombing, Gaddafi's convoy is bombed by French jets.
NATO/CIA paid mercenaries then capture and torture the popular leader, beating him and sodomizing him with a knife before finally shooting him in the head.
Due to the ensuing chaos, China is forced to evacuate all of its foreign-based workers from Libya.
In an effort to court the Jewish vote for his re-election campaign, President Obama imposes tough new economic sanctions on Iran.
As they did during the 2002 run up to Iraq War, the NWO gang is falsely accusing Iran of building nuclear bombs.
US ships in the Persian Gulf now face a serious threat of a ""false flag"" attack staged by Israeli submarines and to be blamed on Iran.
Undaunted by US/Israel threats and propaganda, Iran vows to massively retaliate if attacked, but insists that they will not attack first.
Obama's assault on tradition and faith is completely in line with the centuries-old drive by Marxists and Globalists to attack traditional family structure and to undermine the moral codes of civilized societies.
Little do most people know that Newsweek's controversial cover was really a literal statement of Obama's homosexuality.
JUNE, 2012 IN RESPONSE TO United States BULLYING, RUSSIA & CHINA INCREASE THEIR MILITARY COOPERATION Not long after the United States announces its intentions to increase its naval presence in the Pacific, Russia's new President Vladimir Putin counters by announcing an increase in military ties, and war game operations, with the Chinese navy.
The rhetoric between the NWO Globalists and the Russia-China-Iran-Syria Axis continues to heat up, as the chess pieces for the Grand War are positioned.
No longer the communist tyrannies they once were; independent Russia and China unite against the Globalist NATO war machine.
JULY, 2012 HILLARY CLINTON THREATENS RUSSIA AND CHINA OVER THEIR SUPPORT OF SYRIA The New World Order wants to conquer Syria but Russia, China and Iran are blocking the effort — going so far as to deploy naval assets to the region.
As was the case with the plot to take down Hitler, Russia and China now have provocative NWO puppet neighbors provoking conflict on their doorsteps.
Alert Internet ‘conspiracy theorists’ soon expose the “Sandy Hook Massacre” as a staged, fictitious event that involved ‘crisis actors’ and total CIA orchestration.
To date, not a single photo the crime scene or of any covered bodies has ever been released.
Immediately, the just recently re-elected Obama, the media and Hollywood launch into a massive push to ban semi-automatic rifles.
MARCH, 2013 PRESIDENT CHAVEZ OF VENEZUELA DIES OF CANCER / SUPPORTERS ACCUSE United States / ISRAEL OF ASSASSINATION The outspoken Hugo Chavez is a socialist, but is also fiercely independent.
His close allies include Iran, Syria, Russia, and, prior to the murder of Qaddafi by United States backed ‘rebels’, Libya.
After claiming for years that Israel and the United States were plotting to assassinate him, Chavez is stricken with a strange form of cancer.
Many of his supporters believe that Chavez was infected with cancer cells by sophisticated methods of a foreign intelligence service.
The odd onset of his sickness, and the absolute hatred that the Globalists and Zionists had for Chavez, lend weight to this ‘conspiracy theory’ 1 Chavez honoring Qaddafi with The Sword of Simon Bolivar.
Pe |) PHESOaTIMES f — A New World Pope POPE FORA NEW WORLD The sudden overthrow of Benedict and the installation of Frankie the Fake proves that the Globalists have agents of destruction working high up in the Catholic Church.
MAY, 2013 SEEKING TO KICK OFF A REGIONAL WAR, ISREAL DROPS MASSIVE BOMB ON SYRIA With Obama dragging his feet in kicking off the Zionist’s long awaited war in the Middle East, Israel attempts to force the matter by dropping a massive bomb just outside of Damascus, Syria.
With its hands already full fighting a CIA backed internal civil war; Syria refuses to take Israel’s bait.
Putin’s Russia announces that it will not cancel deliveries of advanced Surface to Air missiles to Syria.
Out of nowhere come the professionally-made banners, massive EU flags, English-language placards, etc.
The CIA-NGO protesters demand that Yanukovich reverse his course and return Ukraine towards the path of EU membership.
As these “revolutions” go, the mobs begin to stir more and more each passing day.
Feeding the frenzy are Globalist politicians who arrive in Kiev to foment chaos.
Foremost among the interlopers is Putin’s hatful adversary, Senator John McCain, who takes to the outdoor microphone and fires up the roaring mob.
The whole time, riot police continue to treat the violent attackers with kid gloves.
Finally, the Russia-friendly President flees Kiev with his life, as mobs trespass into his private home.
A violent coup, orchestrated by the “democratic” West, has toppled a democratically-elected friend of Russia.
The Russian majority of eastern Ukraine is incensed over the coup and many are rightfully frightened.
Nuland’s hand-picked puppet, Arseniy “Yats” Yatsenyuk, is installed as Ukraine’s new President.
MARCH, 2014 CRIMEA VOLUNTARILY RETURNS TO RUSSIAN SOVEREIGNTY No sooner had the ousted President Yanukovich arrived to safe haven in Moscow than another “spontaneous” protest erupts on the majority-Russian, Ukrainian Peninsula of Crimea — a region that had always been Russian and ended up as part of ex-Soviet Republic Ukraine only by a fluke of recent history.
This phony flash mob consists of a group of ethnic Tatars, a Turkic minority of Russian-speaking Crimea.
These NGO Tatars rally in favor of the new illegitimate gang installed in Kiev.
Russian Crimeans and NGO Tatars face off; exchanging chants and insults with each other.
Before the situation can escalate, local Crimean Self Defense units deploy and established order.
It is then that the ‘Mother of all Lies’ races around the Globe at lightning speed.
The “H-Word” is rolled out again, used most notably by Hillary Clinton.
All the Germans that were ... the ethnic Germans, the Germans by ancestry who were in places like Czechoslovakia and Romania and other places, Hitler kept saying they're not being treated right.
Meanwhile in Western Ukraine, out came the NGO rent-a-mobs and other assorted ‘pro-Western’ ignoramuses with their professionally made English-language banners and Putin-Hitler posters.
Now, given NATO’s aggressive antagonizing of Russia, the violent NGOMossad coup in Kiev, and the fact that Crimea has always been majorityRussian, no objective rational person would have blamed Putin for sending his troops into Crimea and securing the important warm water naval base at Sevastopol.
You see, Crimea is a peninsula attached to Ukraine only by a very thin strip of land.
Crimea’s easternmost point is more than 3 miles across the water from Russia.
What happened was that after the bloody coup in Kiev, and the NGO “softpower” rent-a-mob demo in Crimea, Crimea’s own version of United States State “National Guard” units took to the streets to protect their own brothers and sisters.
The happy people of Crimea soon voted to return to Mother Russia with a 97% majority.
The “annexation” is followed by more threats from the United States and the pygmies of Europe.
But China, India, Argentina and Brazil calmly expressed an understanding of Russia’s position.
Unwilling to endure such Globalist-inspired provocation, Donetsk and Louhansk declare their independence and have been fighting Kiev ever since.
As they had done with Saddam Hussein and Adolf Hitler in years past, The New World Order gang falsely blames Putin for the very “aggression” that it started.
Under the ridiculous pretext of “protecting Europe” harsh economic sanctions are imposed upon Russia as NATO builds up its forces along the Russian borders.
A series of fake beheadings are staged in order to keep the world frightened.
The emphasis shifts from fighting Syrian troops to massacring Syrian civilians instead.
The fake 'beheading' videos cut to black just as the throats of the strangely calm 'victims' are about to be cut by the really bad actors in black.
The terrorists attack and kidnap Chinese workers while destabilizing the pro-China / pro-Russia government of Nigeria.
The Race for Raw Materials a Mutual respect and common benefit is the foundation of the strong ChinaNigeria relationship.
PROXY WARS DESTABILIZE COUNTRIES AND TRIGGER MASSIVE REFUGEE IMMIGRATION TO EUROPE As a direct result of destabilizing proxy wars initiated by deep cover front groups such as ISIS , Boku Harem , Al Shaabab and others; refugees, organized by mainly Israeli human traffickers, are fleeing to chaotic Libya , and boarding boats bound for Europe.
Spooked out of their native lands, free housing, money and health care awaits them in dying Europe.
The New World Pope and the Globalist media are all in favor of the invasion that they themselves engineered.
MAY, 2015 CHINA AND RUSSIA CONDUCT FIRST EVER NAVAL DRILLS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN SEA By staging large joint naval drills in the Mediterranean; the sovereign powers of Russia and China make it clear that they will not submit to The New World Order.
That same month, General Secretary Xi Jinping attends Moscow’s ‘Victory Day’ celebration and looks on as Chinese military units actually march in Russia’s parade.
Front-Man Soros speaks for his Rothschild bosses (Nat and Papa Jacob above) when he “warns” that World War III is a real possibility.
JUNE, 2015 THE HOMOSEXUAL AND TRANSGENDER TRIUMPH OVER AMERICA After years of conditioning, the Globalists have broken down the mental and moral resistance of the American and European public to such a point that a majority are now willing to “tolerate” female impersonation / bodily mutilation and “same sex marriage” as part of our society.
The hyped up “transformation” of former Olympic champion Bruce Jenner into a “woman, and the lighting of The White House in rainbow colors marks the final surrender of normality to the organized forces working for The New World Order.
There are higher reasons behind this moral madness which people cannot understand.
JULY, 2015 THE OBAMA DEBT MONSTER The United States National Debt as of July 1, 2015 stands at $18 Trillion Dollars and is growing at a rate of at least $1 Trillion dollars annually.
Much of this unpayable debt is floated by the printing of additional money by the Federal Reserve in the form of bond purchases.
This printing of money ‘out-of-thin-air’ is debasing the value of existing currency and causing food prices to steadily rise.
All we can do is prepare ourselves to cope -financially, personally and emotionally.
Our ""saviors"" then propose a New World Order to solve the world's problems.
National borders disappear as ""racist"" Europe and America are flooded with third world immigration.
People are micro-chipped, monitored, controlled, and reeducated in the new Global System.
The remaining ""Blue-Blood"" Whites, Orientals, and Jewish Global Elites will live like gods and marry among themselves.
The mixed masses of the Globe will be fed, housed in small apartments, ""taken care of"", given ""free"" access to public transportation, and constantly entertained.
But the ""American Dream"" of prosperity and upward mobility will be a thing of the past.
Towards the end of his life the Lindemann made a remark on more than one occasion with such an air of seriousness that he seemed to regard it as his testament of wisdom, and I accordingly feel it incumbent upon me to record it here, although not in perfect sympathy with it.
Tt will not be Hitler and the Second World War; it will not be the release of nuclear energy; it will not be the menace of Communism.
A biography of F.A Lindemann (Lord Cherwell), Chief Scientific Advisor to Winston Churchill.
As the collective memory of past days fades away, the docile mixed-race people of the One World may actually find happiness in their benevolent slavery.
They will learn to love their elite masters for the peace and ""security"" they have been given.
The people, by design, are too ‘dumbed-down’, too decadent, too depressed and too lazy to reclaim their liberty.
Unless there is some miraculous reawakening of humanity at the 11th hour, the sheeple will have what they deserve.
All we can do now is take care of ourselves, and our loved ones, and prepare to make it through the coming crisis.
Not only will one find that the research, events and quotes presented in this book are accurate, but the searches will also open up new avenues of exploration.
