Russia’s Use of Military Power in Ukraine ROGER N MCDERMOTT Senior International Fellow, Foreign Military Studies Office United Kingdom Open Source, Foreign Perspective, Underconsidered/Understudied Topics The Foreign Military Studies Office at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, is an open source research organization of the United States Anny.
It was founded in 1986 as an innovative program that brought together military specialists and civilian academics to focus on military and security topics derived from unclassified, foreign media.
Today FMSO maintains this research tradition of special insight and highly collaborative work by conducting unclassified research on foreign perspectives of defense and security issues that are understudied or unconsidered.
He specializes in Russian and Central Asian defense and security and is a member of the editorial board, for Central Asia and the Caucasus, and, The Caucasus and Globalization, and a member of the scientific board, Journal of Power Institutions in PostSoviet Societies.
Transfonning Russia’s Hard Power,” in Annuaire Francais de Relations Internationales, Paris, 2012, and “Network Centric Warfare As the Undeclared Aim of Russian Defense Refonn: Russian Perspectives and Challenges,” in Roger McDermott, Bertil Nygren and Carolina Vendil-Pallin , The Russian Armed Forces in Transition: Economic, Geopolitical and Institutional Uncertainties, , 2011.
FMSO has provided some editing, format, and graphics to this paper to conform to organizational standards.
Academic conventions, source referencing, and citation style are those of the author.
The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the United States government.
In fact, the ‘hybrid warfare’ concept is entirely alien to Russian military science and is only discussed by Russian military theorists and specialists in reference to assessing developments in foreign military approaches to warfare.
For example, in March 2014 in an article in Zarubezhnoye Voyennoye Obozreniye, Colonel N Nikolaev, Candidate of Military Sciences, assessed the ‘hybrid’ concept specifically in a United States context.
Nikolaev conceived of this as only concerning the United States Joint Staff, while outlining ‘hybrid’ war as one that blurs classical warfare with the use of rebel forces, guerrillas, Special Forces, and transforms the infonnation space and cyberspace in a new environment of confrontation.
On February 19, 2015 an expert conference was hosted in the Moscow offices of Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye, to discuss ‘controlled chaos,’ or the ‘hybrid’ aspects of modem warfare.
These specialists concluded there was no agreed definition of the term; even using the Russian word traktovki , meaning there is simply no agreed or accepted definition.
In reality, the relatively lowscale commitment of Russian military and security forces in Ukraine provides further evidence of ongoing conventional weakness; despite several years of military transformation and modernization Russia still has only limited deployment and sustainment capabilities to commence and support operations on the country’s periphery.
A key determinant of Russian military actions in Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk flowed from Moscow’s assessment of these operational environments.
Kyiv All the destabilizing influences in Donetsk and Luhansk were the result of Moscow’s indirect involvement through the mechanism of ‘polite people,’ as first witnessed in Crimea.
Those pushing for autonomy or independence from Kyiv, or those supporting them were labelled as ‘terrorist’ and the Antiterrorist Operation was seen as the natural response.
Moscow The Russian/Novorossiya narrative portrayed the Euromaidan protests as the precursor to bringing an illegitimate and anti-Russian government to power in Kyiv.
Both sides escalated the conflict, from Kyiv’s effort to prosecute the ATO to Moscow’s covert aid to separatists.
Consequently, the conflict assumed its own internal logic of evolution, with its dialectic of conflict involving action and response.
In the context of Moscow’s views on ‘color revolution’ and the risks of Western powers pursuing similar goals in Russia, analysts had long connected such efforts as part of a wider effort to undennine the Russian state.
Into this set of competing narratives the US, NATO and EU response was to attempt to isolate Russia diplomatically and inflict graduated damage on its economy, with these governments perceiving the crisis as essentially European, threatening the existing international order, while Moscow regarded the crisis in its Eurasian context.
Russia’s Strategic and Operational Advantages on the Eve of Conflict In any conflict between opposing parties there certain advantages enjoyed by a stronger side prior to onset of operations.
Traditionally, Russia and Ukraine have appeared shoulder to shoulder since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, saving for the fluctuating bilateral disputes about trade and energy or the so-called ‘color revolution’ in 2004 that brought about an unex6 Russia’s Use of Military Power in Ukraine pected outcome for Moscow.
When, in February 2014 Russian military hard power was used to dislodge part of Ukrainian territory from the state, Crimea, and the crisis that ensued resulted in destabilization and conflict in eastern Ukraine, many onlookers were tempted to simply compare the relative numerical and hardware strengths of the opposing militaries.
Such an approach, simplistic at best, hides the more nuanced and detailed aspects that fed into Moscow’s planning for and later involvement in such events.
In the analysis that follows throughout this paper, a number Russia’s strategic and operational advantages over Ukraine need to be kept in mind, and some of these were intentional concerning developments in Russia’s military force structure and military modernization, though other factors fall into the category of coincidence or serendipity.
Some of these factors facilitated the ease with which Russia took Crimea, or the way in which its involvement would later differ in southeastern Ukraine.
These consisted mainly of contract personnel unlike the conventional forces still heavily relying on poorly trained 12-month conscripts.
The embryonic RRF structure consisted of 70,000 to 80,000 personnel; • Russia’s information tools and capability to dominate or seize the initiative in the information space to influence events in Ukraine.
Nevertheless, the confluence of the above factors and especially both the presence of the Black Sea Fleet HQ and the military’s developing RRF allowed rapid deployment by stealth capitalizing on Russian personnel having a ‘friendly’ status locally narrowed the time to react on the part of Kyiv.
Yet, the later deployments including artillery and Motor Rifle Brigades suggest that the ultimate default position envisaged regular combined-arms warfare.
The Operation to Restore Crimea to Russia Although much of the narrative of events in Russia’s operation to restore Crimea, resulting in its formal annexation on March 18, 2014, is relatively easily established, there remain some contradictions and inherent problems in relation to the ‘start date’ for the operation.
In early March 2015, President Putin stated in a Russian documentary trailer that he ordered the operation to ‘restore’ Crimea to Russia following an all-night emergency meeting in the Kremlin that began on February 22, 2014.
The medal to decorate participants in the Russian operation ‘Liberation of Crimea,’ is dated ‘February 20’ to ‘March 18’ 2014; in other words, commencing two days before Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych fled Kyiv.
Nonetheless, based upon open source reporting of these events, and knowledge of historical Russian military operations, the author has concluded that these issues reflect various levels of contingency planning.
The contingency planning to retake Crimea most likely began in the 1990s over the status of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet base in Sevastopol, refining these at regular intervals since this is a strategic asset for Russia.
Such contingencies, however, are not to be confused with evidence of willful intent.
As the Ukraine crisis unfolded in late 2013, with Moscow arguably surprised by the development of the EU offering an Association Agreement to Kyiv, this is likely to have intensified the planning and formulation of intervention scenarios to protect Russia’s interests; in other words the contingencies were being narrowed and refined into possible options.
Yanukovych’s decision to eschew the EU association agreement in favor of a counter-offer from Moscow sparked popular protests in Kyiv in November 2013, which continued over winter.
These protests, known as ‘EuroMaidan’ were seen by Moscow as a mortal threat to the Yanukovych regime, and following suppression by the security force and continued protests in February 2014, the president fled and his government collapsed resulting in interim government emerging along pro-Western and deeply anti-Russian lines.
The anti-Russian elements crystalized on February 23, 2014, the same day as the Winter Olympic Games ended in Sochi, with the interim Ukrainian government repealing Russian as an official state language.
This arguably alienated the predominately ethnic Russian Crimea, and was seized upon by Moscow to justify its claims to protect ethnic Russian interests in Ukraine.
Russian intelligence penetration, as already noted, of Ukraine’s intelligence agencies, implies possible foreknowledge of the collapse of the Yanukovych government.
Ukrainian General Staff sources suggested later that they had detected ‘unusual’ Russian activity in Crimea in January 2014, but that Kyiv had ignored such warnings.
Nonetheless, such post-factum claims are difficult to test and even if there was some type of ‘unusual’ activity’ in Crimea as early as January 2014 it does not imply foreknowledge of the collapse of the Yanukovych regime.
In this context Putin most likely ordered planning to be intensified on February 20, while only giving final authorization on February 22/3, 2014.
The fact that Russia’s largest foreign military base was located in Crimea permitted such military activity to occur under the guise of ‘reinforcement,’ and suggests that such an operation would prove impossible to replicate on the territory of a NATO member state.
On February 25, 2014, during an extended period of public silence on the crisis by President Putin the Russian foreign ministry stated that it recognized the concerns of the Crimean parliament.
Two day later, the Crimean Parliament announced it would hold a referendum to boost its autonomy from Kyiv, scheduling this for May 25, 2014.
This included seizing the parliament in Simferopol with VDV, and Special Forces teams as well as Spetsnaz participating; Marine infantry were also deployed in the peninsula on the same day.
The Russian media soon labeled these gunmen as ‘polite people,’ a phrase which Putin has reportedly liked and so the myth of hybrid warfare operation to take Crimea became a popular label to explain these events.
On February 28, 2014, the masked gunmen increased their control over Crimea with the airport and the state television station placed under pro-Russian control, and this extended to surrounding and blockading military bases.
These ‘mysterious’ forces restricted their activities to surrounding or blockading Ukrainian military bases, except for command and control points and air defense units which were seized to ensure the safety of Russian forces inserted by air.
Simultaneously, Moscow ordered ‘snap inspection’ exercises involving large numbers of its conventional military forces in Western and Southern Military Districts.
By the following day, March 1, reportedly 60 percent of Ukrainian Air Defense units in Crimea had been captured, a Spetsnaz brigade arrived in Simferopol and additional Spetsnaz units were inserted by air through Sevastopol.
Putin sought parliamentary approval in Moscow for the right to use troops in Ukraine to protect ethnic Russians.
The ‘polite people’ by this stage, had effectively dislodged Ukraine from Crimea.
On March 3, 2014, the Crimean Parliament changed the date of the referendum initially scheduled for May 25, 2014 to March 30, 2014, and on March 6, 2014 moved the date again to March 16, 2014.
By March 9-12 the Ukrainian naval air base at Novofedorovka fell and the 12 th Motor Rifle Brigade entered Crimea via Kerch.
After the referendum was held on March 16, 2014, with an overwhelmingly proRussian majority , Moscow recognized Crimean independence and began preparing to absorb it into the Russian Federation.
What puzzled analysts and governments alike was the fact that it occurred with very little bloodshed —Kyiv made no effort to reassert its control of Crimea.
These facts combined with an unusual force mix, rapid deployment accompanied by an infonnation campaign resulted in media focus on ‘polite people,’ or Tittle green men,’ and thus the myth of Russian hybrid warfare was reinforced.
The case for a Russian ‘hybrid’ operation cannot be tested since Kyiv never authorized combat operations against Russian forces, which would have revealed what in fact lay behind these deployments.
At strategic level, there was nothing new in the operations, the areas of novelty lie at the tactical and operational levels.
Indeed, the operation was actually a case of a stronger power exploiting weaknesses of a weaker power during a period of political-military uncertainty caused by the revolution in Kyiv and the need for the interim government there to consolidate its position and establish legitimacy.
In this sense it was the local operational environment, including all the innate advantages enjoyed by the Russian military such as basing rights, that drove and shaped the subsequent operation; using the Black Sea Fleet HQ and other platforms to spread forces out across Crimea as well as to reinforce and add to the deployment, transfer materials, supplies and support the ensuing operation it all hinged on surprise.
The Ukrainian military presence in Crimea was 22,000 mainly consisting of Naval personnel, with small number air defense and Interior Ministry personnel.
By comparison under the basing terms for the Black Sea Fleet in Crimea, Russia was limited to no more than 25,000 personnel, though the actual number was lower prior to the crisis.
The new interim government in Kyiv lacking experience, legitimacy and any opportunity to consolidate its control over Ukraine, found Crimea momentarily isolated and were at a loss to understand what was unfolding.
Timing was therefore critical, and from Putin’s point of view the timing of the operation could not have been better; finding Kyiv in at best a transition phase, he chose to act decisively.
It is precisely in this context that Russian General Staff planned and executed a rapid deployment of forces into Crimea based mainly on elite and Special Forces mix to take key communications nodes and blockade local Ukrainian military bases, exploiting Kyiv’s disarray and its military and security weaknesses.
Intelligence gathered in Kyiv and the use of Russian intelligence in Crimea not only afforded Moscow a clearer insight into the capacity of the Ukrainian state to respond, but was also an important element locally in preparing the potential battlefield, with FSB, SVR and GRU involved in stirring up local protests, hiding among the population and conducting reconnaissance and subversive operations.
All of these measures were accompanied by an active information campaign, including levels of disinformation to deny Russian military involvement or to mask intentions.
The use of the referendum device, as part of the information campaign was one illustration of how these initiatives played locally, regionally and internationally.
The force mix is discussed below, but zeroing in for a moment on the information campaign brings the reader closer to understanding how and why the Ukrainian military never responded to Russian actions.
Moscow’s Information Operations Moscow’s infonnation operations were aimed at boosting domestic support for and local acquiescence to its actions over Crimea, while raising doubts internationally about any contradictory narrative.
Yet the campaign locally was clearly aimed at facilitating and complementing the military intervention.
These measures were matched with the force mix and rapid deployment in order to maximize command and control advantages over the enemy and ultimately reduce his decision making speed options.
That is the date shown in leaked video footage of an operation by one of the units of the Russian Special Operations Forces.
The fact that something unusual was going on was quickly picked up by the Russian social networks and regional media outlets.
It was reported, for example, that the entire 45th Independent Spetsnaz Regiment of the Airborne Assault Troops had left its base outside Moscow.
Two squads of the 16th Independent Spetsnaz Brigade left their base in Tambov.
The 3rd Independent Spetsnaz Brigade in Tolyatti was put on combat alert.
Similar orders were received by some units of the VDV service, including the 7th Airborne Assault Division in Novorossiysk, which is not far from Crimea.
One Moscow-based source believes that select elements of five of Russia’s seven GRU Spetsnaz brigades, (2 nd , 3 rd , 10 th , 16 th , 22 nd Spetsnaz Brigades) and one GRU Spetsnaz regiment were also involved in the campaign.
The confused and rapidly emerging picture on the peninsula, therefore, was that the additional deployments centered on elite and Special Forces personnel.
Given these assessments of Ukrainian military weaknesses and the strengths already noted in terms of Russia’s forces disposition pre-operation, arguably Kyiv lost Crimea rather than Russia ‘winning’ it; Moscow’s authorization of the operation exploited a unique set of circumstances.
The mismatch in the capabilities that either side could bring to the conflict therefore played an important role.
The Russian forces looked highly professional and operated in a very disciplined manner, but assessing their performance must be balanced against the significantly weaker condition of the Ukrainian military on the eve of conflict.
These reflected the realities of two former Soviet armies with the imbalance stemming from the fact the Russian military had experienced reform and a degree of modernization.
In terms of execution, past occurrences of Russian force projection have taken the “sledgehammer” approach, but on this occasion Russia used a scalpel.
The Russian troops were well disciplined over the course of the operation.
There were undoubtedly many tense situations over those few weeks that could have resulted in a limited shooting war.
Although, the Ukrainians wanted to avoid bloodshed as much as the Russians, this certainly was not the same military that entered Chechnya in 2000 and fought Georgia in 2008.
Southeastern Ukraine In stark contrast to the Russian military operation in Crimea, Moscow’s involvement in destabilizing southeastern Ukraine in 2014-15 was different in its approach.
After annexing Crimea, the peninsula could no longer be used as a means of Russian leverage over Kyiv, leaving destabilizing southeastern Ukraine with the aim of establishing a protectorate.
These aims, of course, were subject to change and by the fall of 2014 it was no longer clear that Moscow wanted to achieve a larger protectorate under the banner of Novorossiya and instead scaled back its ambitions.
The performance of rebel forces in the conflict shows the Russians were there, but not in large numbers—this was driven by quality and not numbers.
While much of the commentary on Russian military activities in Ukraine has focused on combat operations, in fact, their primary mission appears to have been to conduct a train and equip program to provide capabilities to the local separatists.
Moscow’s adoption of a low-scale ‘deniable’ conflict, which avoided a larger-scale war mirrored Kyiv’s avoidance throughout the crisis of declaring martial law and de facto war on Russia; President Petro Poroshenko could not declare war on a nuclear power.
However, the Kyiv leadership underestimated the extent to which local separatist strength existed and quickly took hold in spring 2014 in southeastern Ukraine.
As the conflict gathered pace, though direct and indirect Russian Federation support existed, it was relatively small-scale.
In other words, the bulk of the ‘forces’ facing the Ukrainian Armed Forces in 2014-15 were home grown.
However, the following analysis concentrates on the Russian military components and Moscow’s use of military power in theater.
Slatma <£> *c r aiova ^Bucharest Motorized Rifle or Tank Brigade Mechanized Brigade Artillery Brigade Theater Ballistic Missile Brigade Air Defense Airborne Brigade Brigade Major Naval installation What made Russia’s use of military coercion in Crimea appear to some observers as ‘hybrid,’ was the lack of a combat response from Kyiv and actually much more likely reflecting Russian foreknowledge of Ukrainian capabilities and readiness levels rooted in Russia’s penetration of Ukrainian intelligence; which was not repeated in Donbas.
Major rebel successes in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts were achieved using occasional Russian combined-arms operations sup20 Russia’s Use of Military Power in Ukraine porting local rebels, based upon extensive battlefield preparation by military and civilian intelligence agencies coupled with training these local forces in such approaches.
Throughout the crisis in southeastern Ukraine, Moscow kept Western governments and Kyiv guessing as to the nature of its tactics and overall strategic aims by exploiting a range of measures to both instigate, supply, train and equip local separatists, as well as by inserting some of its own forces.
Establishing how Moscow conducted its evolving operation to destabilize southeastern Ukraine, involves analysis of the tactical tools used to achieve these ends.
In the second phase in January 2015, the ill-fated Ukrainian government effort to take Donetsk airport was followed by significant rebel advances to the fall of Debaltseve in February 2015 —shortly after the conclusion of the Minsk Two agreement.
Both ceasefires proved to be shaky, with scepticism among Russian experts that Minsk Two could be implemented in full.
In support of Moscow’s implied strategic threat of using larger-scale military power in southeastern Ukraine, there were also intermittent joint military exercises, which appeared to rehearse a ‘peacekeeping’ intervention in a neighboring country.
This might have been used by Moscow on legal grounds in tenns of protecting Russian-speaking civilians in Ukraine.
For example, Nerushimoye Bratstvo-2014 in October and Vzaimodeystviye-2014 in August tested combat and peacekeeping skills of CSTO units.
The CSTO exercise in Kazakhstan used a scenario based on rehearsing intervention in a neighboring country, with close similarity to events in Ukraine.
VDV commander, Colonel-General Vladimir Shamanov, said the VDV should expect to deploy beyond Russia’s borders.
Since the focus of the Ukraine crisis shifted from Crimea to southeastern Ukraine in spring 2014, much Western media attention concentrated on what many commentators interpreted to be a new Russian ‘hybrid warfare’ approach to conflict.
However, the concept lacks definition, remains alien to Russian military theory and doctrine and fails to serve as an explanatory model for Russia’s mix of hard and soft power in Ukraine.
In fact, during two of the most critical points —namely the battle of Ilovaysk in August 2014 and rebel advances in January-February 2015— it was old-style Russian-led combined-arms force that propelled these rebel advances.
Russian military training provided to rebel forces supports the assertion that Moscow never adopted or 22 Russia’s Use of Military Power in Ukraine used ‘hybrid warfare’ approaches; military exercises conducted by rebel forces in southeastern Ukraine were for manoeuvre warfare.
And the knowledge passed by Russia military trainers to their rebel trainees was shaped by an understanding that the BTG is a superior manoeuvre force in the field compared with Ukrainian deployments of battalions.
That is to say that even if some fonn of embryonic ‘hybrid warfare’ approach was under development in the Russian military and security structures, it was quite simply old-style regular combined-arms operations that secured key advances during the campaign.
Poroshenko over-relying on possible foreign aid, repeatedly failed to appreciate the buoyant mood in the Russian Armed Forces and Putin’s will to use military coercion.
The dangers of conflict escalation frequently reappeared, but with Moscow holding all the cards.
Moreover, Moscow consistently used the threat of conflict escalation in the period by staging ‘snap inspections’ of its conventional Anned Forces throughout the Russian Federation as well as sustaining force build-ups in proximity to the Ukrainian border.
It also stepped up tactical and strategic level military exercises in ways that might be interpreted by other actors as preparations for a much larger-scale military intervention in Ukraine.
This was frequently combined with exercises of nuclear forces and strategic bomber flights close to NATO airspace, as a signal to other actors to stay out of the conflict.
While NATO and Kyiv estimates of the numbers of Russian troops participating in the conflict varied, it seems that the surges and variance in regular troop numbers during critical periods were relatively modest.
Persistent claims concerning Russia’s sudden discovery and use of ‘hybrid warfare’ tactics in southeastern Ukraine stemmed from Moscow utilizing a broad range of soft and hard power approaches, with an overall impact that NATO considered to be below the threshold of Article Five, were it to be replicated against an Alliance member.
In this sense, as Moscow questioned the legitimacy of the government in Kyiv, yet recognizing it on numerous occasions at the same time, variously labelled as ‘fascist’ or ‘Nazi,’ it pursued a broad mixture of diplomatic, economic, political, informational and military mechanisms.
Moscow was also involved at an early stage in fomenting rebellion in Ukraine’s east and contrary to its own strict laws on mercenary activity, promoted and facilitated the recruitment of ‘volunteers’ to boost separatist numbers.
Moscow supported the rebels with materiel, deploying some Russian Ground Forces, and maintained higher-readiness forces close to the Ukrainian border, while maximizing fears in Kyiv of a full-scale Russian military invasion; notably triggered during the first Russian aid convoy to Donbas in August 2014, and inserting moderate numbers of Russian troops.
The humanitarian aid convoys also represented psychological operations to achieve limited political and strategic ends with minimal forces.
However, the threat to deploy Russian ‘peacekeepers’ remained on the table, and in real terms was far more effective in destabilizing Ukraine than any alleged use of ‘hybrid’ techniques.
In the aftennath of rebel successes in August 2014, with numerous reports that Moscow had increased the number of its regular troops involved in supporting the separatist Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic campaigns, speculation in Western capitals as to Russia’s ‘war aims’ bordered on guesswork.
Into the mix of tactical devices in use at the time, Moscow added the motif of sending ‘humanitarian aid convoys,’ in what many saw as a fresh breach of Ukraine’s sovereignty.
Despite official denials, there was strong evidence of direct Russian military participation in the conflict zone, as well as materiel support from weapons systems and hardware that could only have come from the Russian military inventory, logistical assistance including fuel and the provision of repair and maintenance for assets in the theater of operations.
Yet, the organizational structure and individual makeup of the rebel forces, direct involvement of Russian military personnel and the tactics used in southeastern Ukraine generated considerable uncertainty about the precise objectives of such advances.
Speculation about the possible targets for the rebels centered upon Mariupol in order to create this land link, and eliminating Ukrainian forces locally to open a second re-supply route directly from the Russian Federation.
Shadows on the wall: Russian military involvement in Donbas While the Kremlin placed ‘plausible deniability’ at the heart of its use of military power in Ukraine, as the conflict unfolded it became impossible to conceal the extent of Russian military involvement in rebel operations.
On February 18, 2015, Novaya Gazeta ‘identified’ a senior Russian general in Debaltseve, which resulted in Russian media trying to quickly explain or dismiss his presence there.
Lieutenant-General Aleksandr Lentsov, former deputy commander of the Airborne Forces and since July 2013 serving as deputy commander of the Russian Ground Forces, had slipped from public view in late 2014.
Russian media reported, on February 19, that a man ‘resembling’ Lentsov had ‘appeared’ in Debaltseve.
General Lentsov appeared in video footage taken in the town on February 18.
To us, he looks like Lentsov,” Novaya Gazeta editor-in-chief, Dmitry Muratov, told Ekho Moskvy.
No-one appeared to question why Moscow would nominate such a high ranking officer and deputy commander of the Ground Forces for such a role, or why his exit from Ukraine was so delayed.
Official OSCE statements 26 Russia’s Use of Military Power in Ukraine indicate that General Lentsov was replaced in the JCCC in mid-December by Major-General Aleksandr Vyaznikov, deputy commander of the VDV forces for peacekeeping operations and CSTO Collective Rapid Reaction Force.
General Lenstov’s continued presence in the conflict zone in January-February 2015 may well indicate a dual hatted role (heading the Russian representation within the JCCC and advising or directing rebel operations) and this could have shifted to the latter as operations intensified to take Debaltseve.
Indeed, on January 21, 2015 the SMM was informed that the Russian military representatives were withdrawing north to Soledar, which also coincided with an intensification of the rebel offensive on Debaltseve.
Moreover, the wellconducted encirclement of Debaltseve also implies the presence of an operational HQ for planning and logistics.
Weapons and equipment Following the rebel seizure of Donetsk airport after months of fighting and an upsurge in clashes in January 2015, NATO again strongly condemned Moscow’s active role in the conflict.
Indeed, it was the presence of sophisticated Russian military systems within the conflict zone that offered the clearest evidence of direct Russian support including the use of its military personnel during rebel operations.
Since Moscow’s intervention in Ukraine in February 2014, its military operations made extensive use of ‘plausible deniability.
Illustratively, an article in late January 2015 in Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye by its editor Oleg Odnokolenko presented views on the conflict predicated on such denial.
Nonetheless, Western intelligence agencies, NATO, and even local eyewitnesses, as well as foreign analysts, noted the presence of Russian-manufactured and defense ministry-owned weapons and equipment appearing on Ukrainian territory.
Of course, in any conflict situation there are competing claims, counter-claims, rumors and propaganda that generates an atmosphere of confused information/disinformation.
Some Russian specialists have talked to media outlets in detail in an effort to respond to what Moscow views as hyperbolic claims made by Kyiv concerning the level of Russian involvement in the conflict.
In March 2015, an anonymous analyst in the Russian General Staff, denoted as ‘a specialist in battle management analysis,’ commented at length to Novaya Gazeta on statements by Ukraine’s defense ministry.
Among his observations, the General Staff analyst tried to rebut reports of direct contact between Ukrainian journalists and serving member of Russia’s Armed Forces deployed in southeastern Ukraine.
In 34 years of service I know of not one instance where the commander of the smallest subunit, coming up in communications with the enemy at his initiative, gave his affiliation on the air, if only even the company number.
In the following analysis, however, some key examples are considered to offer glimpses into the flow of Russian weaponry and hardware across the border.
In April 2014, as separatists launched early operations in Donbas, the weapons and equipment appear to have been Soviet relics, with sightings of old T-64 tanks, for instance.
As the conflict advanced so too did the level of input from Russia’s military inventory.
The 2B26 Grads mounted on KAMAZ-5350, in the Russian military inventory, were observed in Donetsk in late January 2015.
Also, in late January 2015, footage emerged in the rebel-held town of Shakhtarsk showing two Pantsir-Sl truck-mounted anti-aircraft and surface-to-air missile systems—a modification specifically incorporated into the Russian Armed Forces in 2012.
On September 3, 2014 locals witnessed a convoy of 25 combat vehicles in Luhansk oblast.
That convoy included a BTR-80, two main T-72B3 battle tanks, as well as three ‘Strela-10’ SPGs, mounted on MT-LB tracked vehicles.
Later in September 2014, Russian T-72B3 tanks were destroyed near Starobeshevo, while on December 2, 2014, an armored convoy of 20 units passed through Luhansk including six tanks identified as T-72B3s.
There is also reliable reporting on the presence of sophisticated Russian military EW systems in southeastern Ukraine.
This system was displayed to representatives from the OSCE in Donetsk in January 2015.
Its manufacturer, the Tula-based Strela Production Association, says that the Aistenok detects mortar firing positions at up to 5 km and provides trajectory-based artillery fire adjustment up to 15 km.
Numerous different lightly annored vehicles of Russian resonance were identified in Donbas.
Approximately ten of these vehicles appeared in Vesti TV footage of ‘regular field training’ on December 30, 2014 in Luhansk.
Moreover, on January 10, 2015, the four-wheel-drive GAZ-3937 Vodnik was seen in local combat operations.
Again, this platform has been exported from Russia, but none of the contracts included Ukraine.
On February 10, 2015 a convoy of Russian vehicles, including three BPM-97s, was also identified in Luhansk.
Equally, Tigr-Ms (modem light armored vehicles) have been witnessed in a convoy passing through Ukrainian territory on their way to Luhansk.
In addition to the higher profile Russian military systems deployed in Ukraine, to which NATO repeatedly alluded, including command and control systems, air defense systems with advanced 30 Russia’s Use of Military Power in Ukraine SAMs, UAVs, MRLS, and EW systems, some of the smaller arms in use also implicate Moscow in the conflict.
In December 2014, Ukrainian separatists were reportedly using the KSVK/ASVK Kord sniper rifle, part of the 12. mm 6S8 Kord sniper system.
The Kord entered use in the Russian military in mid-2013, designed for action against lightly armored and non-armored vehicles at up to 1,000 m and enemy personnel at up to 1,500 77 Ukrainian troops seized examples of these weapons at Donetsk airport on January 14, 2015.
Footage of Donetsk separatists in January 2015 reveals the silent and flameless 9-inm AS Val assault rifle, used by Russian Special Forces and the Russian Interior Ministry Troops.
These weapons systems and items of military equipment not only come from the Russian military inventory but are also modem and advanced— which places intensive demands on those using such technology, without sufficient training.
These examples of Russian military weapons systems and hardware identified in southeastern Ukraine demonstrate direct support for the rebels, and establish the need for Russian military service personnel to use these assets, train separatists in their use and also to maintain, repair and even supply fuel and spare parts to sustain usage.
What began as a disparate collection of rebels and mercenaries, with training and assistance from Moscow, became a much more cohesive military structure.
By February 2015, DPR/FPR forces more closely mirrored the brigade-based structure of the Russian Armed Forces, with its main combat elements based upon the use of BTGs in combat operations.
Often the type of military equipment supplied to the separatists, therefore, demanded experienced and well-trained Russian contract personnel in order to use and maximize sending such systems into the conflict zone.
One instance, in terms of speciality is the use of snipers; since 2011, Moscow was introducing specialist sniper companies into the table of organization and equipment.
Paradoxically, the presence of Russian weapons systems in southeastern Ukraine is also acknowledged in the February 12, 2015 Minsk Two agreement.
Many of these Russian systems are sophisticated and way beyond the capacity of inadequately experienced separatists; a significant proportion of this hardware demands specialist military training and cannot be operated properly by amateurs.
It implies the presence of Russian kontraktniki from various branches of Russia’s Armed Forces, acting in at least training, guidance and mentoring roles to maximize the use of such systems and equipment.
In January 2015, President Poroshenko claimed there were around 9,000 Russian troops in eastern Ukraine; while NATO estimates were somewhat lower—no more than a brigade-strength in total.
By early March 2015, NATO estimated up to 12,000 Russian troops were involved, though German intelligence told Der Spiegel that the numbers were much lower.
And, in the absence of local reporting in the vicinity of Russian military bases about the movement of large numbers of personnel it is likely that kontraktniki military specialists were covertly deployed from numerous units in the VDV and Ground Forces and combat support units such as artillery brigades —but in relatively modest numbers.
Artillery fire from Russian territory into the conflict zone was sporadically detected, while actual artillery support during combined-arms operations likely involved direct deployment of units in theater.
For example, in the aftermath of the shooting down of MH17 on July 17, 2014, widely attributed to the use of the SA-11 ‘Buk’ SAM system, it is likely that Moscow tightened its grip over which systems were deployed and how they were utilized.
Moreover, the need for ‘plausible deniability’ restricted the available military options.
Thus, Moscow could not deploy the Russian Air Force to keep the Ukrainian Air Force from entering the conflict and gaining control of airspace.
Consequently, the rebels and Russian regular troops required constant access to and training in the use of portable and more sophisticated air defense systems.
In addition to fuelling the conflict Moscow also effectively field-tested new or modernized weapons systems or equipment in Ukraine.
As the British military analyst Keir Giles noted, the Russian military used the Ukraine conflict to test new systems, possibly even to assess how these may perfonn against NATO forces.
There are no publicly available reliable figures for the total number of Russian military casualties in Ukraine.
In the early stages of the conflict in southeastern Ukraine in the spring of 2014, ‘plausible deniability’ continued as the sine qua non of the operations.
In late May 2014, reports emerged of the discrete funerals of Russian military personnel killed in the conflict zone.
Since these early reports of military casualties among Russian military personnel, the official narrative underwent several modifications to account for their presence in Ukraine, but consistently maintained that Moscow had not ordered their official deployment.
These explanations varied from soldiers going to the conflict during their ‘vacation,’ or to VDV servicemen becoming ‘lost’ in the combat zone.
By the fall of 2014, Russian social media including Vkontakte (Russian equivalent of Facebook) and other social networks were actively reporting on the unofficial fatalities of Russian military personnel in southeastern Ukraine.
Some Russian TV channels reported on these secret burials, such as on the funeral of a VDV soldier in late August 2014, though still using the official narrative that he was only there on ‘leave,’ from his unit.
Similar projects were launched, such as Lostlvan, to publicise the plight of Russian military families struggling to gain recognition for their familial losses in combat.
Since the Kremlin pursued the line in public of ‘deniability,’ most Russian media including television 34 Russia’s Use of Military Power in Ukraine channels maintained a near eerie silence on this aspect of the Ukraine conflict.
However, through social media there was at least some effort to piece together an account of the numbers and identifies of Russian military personnel missing or killed in action.
Admittedly this offers only a partial insight into these issues, and cannot be relied upon to reveal anything near a complete picture.
Airborne • BTG/CTG of the 56th Air Assault Brigade, Volgograd; • BTG 76th Division, Pskov; • BTG 98th Division, Ivanovo; • BTG 45th Separate Spetsnaz Regiment, Kubinka ; • BTG 247th Regiment of 7th Division, Novorossiysk; • 106th Division, Tula.
Company Tactical Groups and Saboteur-Reconnaissance Teams of the Main Intelligence Directorate • 10th Spetsnaz Brigade, Molkino, Krasnodar Kray; • 22nd Spetsnaz Brigade, Aksay, Rostov Oblast; • 100th Experimental Reconnaissance Brigade, Mozdok, North Ossetia; • 346th Spetsnaz Brigade, Prokhladnyy, Kabardino-Balkaria; • 25th Spetsnaz Regiment, Stavropol; • 2nd Spetsnaz Brigade, Pskov; • 16th Spetsnaz Brigade, Tambov; • 3rd Spetsnaz Brigade, Ulyanovsk.
The table and its contents by no means offer an exhaustive account of the Russian military personnel and Russian units involved in the Donbas conflict.
However, it illustrates the unit types and levels of Russian military deployment in the theater of operations.
A number of observations can be made concerning the broader picture of Russia’s use of military power in southeastern Ukraine.
Russian servicemen were being deployed from BTGs in the Ground Forces, including Motorized Rifle Brigades, Ta nk Brigades, and with combat support from Artillery Brigades.
The elite Airborne Forces were heavily involved with personnel deployed from several key VDV fonnations.
Russian GRU Spetsnaz also featured, and FSB ‘Alpha’ and ‘Vympel’ units.
Russian military personnel appear to have supported the use of advanced military weapons systems and hardware, demanding the deployment of kontraktn ik i from among VDV, the Ground Forces and other supporting units.
It is highly likely that entire artillery battalions were deployed in theater to support rebel operations.
VDV personnel seem to feature more among the fatalities than other branches and arms of service, perhaps reflecting their use in theater as lightly armed combat infantry.
Among the Spetsnaz and other Special Forces casualties there are also references to small numbers of FSB personnel; these and GRU Spetsnaz were most likely aiding and abetting the separatists by carrying out or training locals in sabotage, reconnaissance and intelligence gathering.
Such data illustrates how different were the Russian military operations in southeastern Ukraine in contrast to the earlier relatively smooth experience of the operation in Crimea.
It is the author’s conclusion, therefore, that the operational environment in each case not only differed, but served to shape the nature and options in Moscow’s use of military force.
That is to say that neither of these operations were driven by innovative concepts such ‘hybrid warfare,’ or other novelties, but simply shaped by the unique local circumstances involved.
Crimea and Southeastern Ukraine Historically, Russia does not engage in military operations without extensive preparation of the battlefield.
Although there seems likely to have been contingency plans in Moscow since the 1990s linked to the Black Sea Fleet HQ in Crimea, probably updated following the Orange Revolution in Kyiv in 2004, these needed to be further refined in light of recent Russian military developments.
Contingency plans, however, do not equate to a ‘pre-determined’ intention to act aggressively.
As the crisis in Ukraine developed it is entirely plausible that diplomatic, legal and media campaigns were used in this context; forming part of a wider campaign to support military/security operations in Ukraine in order to achieve strategic objectives.
That, most likely, harnessed Russian ‘reflexive control’ theory 96 as part of a deeper information campaign (Information Warfare, IW/Infonnation Operations, 10) to support the overall use of Russia’s military power in Ukraine.
This complex operational environment, distinct in Crimea and Donetsk/Luhansk resulted in Moscow carefully conducting operations in both theaters.
Moscow’s options and actions were therefore shaped by the unique circumstances of the differing operational environments in Crimea and Donbas, and the same methods could not be applied to each theater.
However, Moscow’s efforts to prepare military operations in each case involved 10 focused on reflexive control, designed to influence the enemy and gamer domestic support.
In military terms, Putin’s decision to authorize the use of Anned Force in Crimea and later ‘implausible deniability’ operations in southeastern Ukraine was steeped in caution and choosing options that were relatively low key and allowed control over escalation.
Russian operations in these two distinctive theaters differed greatly, guided by the uniqueness of the operational environments.
Thus, in both cases the Russian military was used more as a scalpel than sledgehammer in order to reduce the inherent risks of conflict escalation.
Putin specifically ordered the use of GRU Spetsnaz, elite VDV units and marine infantry to Crimea under the guise of reinforcing Russian military infrastructure for this very reason.
Notwithstanding such caution and deliberate calculation in response to the crisis, Russia’s use of military power in Ukraine broke all inter40 Russia’s Use of Military Power in Ukraine national standards and conventions, flouted the sovereignty of its neighbour, challenged European security and effectively marked the end of the post-Cold War international security system.
It occurred during a general worsening in US-Russia relations, and given Putin’s memory and the Russian security elite’s reaction to the events of 1999 with the US/NATO bombing of Belgrade during the Kosovo crisis, it also appears that Putin chose to protect the security of the Russian state by replaying the Kosovo crisis in reverse.
The consequences of which will take generations to fully understand or heal the current divides.
Much of the commentary by experts on the sudden use of ‘hybrid’ warfare by the Russian Armed Forces is traced to an article by the Chief of the General Staff in February 2014.
However, this risks taking the article out of context, implies possible ‘pre-planning’ mistranslates predvidenii as ‘prediction’ or ‘anticipation,’ and underestimates the inherent limit on foresight in military affairs or refer to the specific circumstances which led the Kremlin to choose to act in February 2014 against the revolutionary government in Kyiv.
Jacob W Kipp for highlighting the importance of these articles as well as in helping to understand how alien the ‘hybrid’ concept is to the Russian Armed Forces.
Putin appeared to enjoy the use of the term ‘polite people’ in reference to the first sightings in Crimea of Russian military forces without insignia moving to secure Ukrainian bases.
Sergei Markov , “Russia must stop United States expansion in Ukraine,” Moscow Times, March 20, 2014.
Sergei Karaganov, “Flow to Avoid a Second Afghanistan,” Vedomosti, July 28, 2014.
Order of the President of the Russian Federation of 17.03.2014 N° 63-p “On the signing of the Treaty between the Russian Federation and the Republic of Crimea on the adoption of the Russian Federation Republic of Crimea and the formation of the Russian Federation new subjects,” www. pravo.gov.ru, accessed March 7, 2015.
Niklas Granholm, Johannes Malminen, Gudrun Persson , A Rude Awakening: Ramifications of Russian Aggression Towards Ukraine, FOI: Stockholm, June 2014.
Such approaches have long been identified by specialists on the Soviet and Russian militaries.
Author interviews with SMEs, Rome, September2014, Washington November 2014.
The Military Operation for Crimea,” Colby Howard and Ruslan Pukhov, eds.
The Russian Army realized that it needed to increase its ability to respond and gain the initiative through agility, mobility, and independent action over a much larger area.
This led to reforming motorized rifle battalions and companies into mobile detachment combat groups by adding artillery, tanks, and engineers.
Helicopter gunship support complemented the formation by adding long-range, accurate fires to neutralize opposing forces.
Reportedly, among the ethnic diversity of the many volunteers that arrived in Donbas were small numbers of Kazan Tatars.
Although the reasons and motives among these individuals differed as to why they travelled to engage in the rebellion one common theme was a sense of identifying with rhetoric and appeal around the nationalist cause of Novorossiya.
In December 2014, rebels posted video footage of their field tank training in southeastern Ukraine, which also clearly revealed the participation of modem Russian MRAPs.
One Russian report indicated ways in which ‘volunteers’ were recruited in Russia and sent to Ukraine, for $1,000 to $4,000 per month depending on rank.
Given estimates that as many as 5,000 such volunteers were fighting in Donbas it is unclear as to the ultimate source of such money.
Antiterrorist units of the Strategic Rocket Forces are all equipped with this asset.
One example of Russian kontraktniki wounded in combat and treated in hospital emerged in early March 2015.
A Russian kontraktniki, from the 5th Ta nk Brigade in Central Military District was treated in a hospital in Donetsk for severe facial and arm bums.
During an interview he spoke of extensive training prior to his deployment and later sustaining severe injury on February 8, 2015.
In order to secure official permission to go on leave, Russian military personnel need to apply, disclose details as to the destination of their leave of absence and gain the approval of their commanders.
Elena Vasilieva created a Facebook page using the phrase Gruz 200, sharing details on Russian soldiers killed or missing in Ukraine.
Most fatalities listed in Russian social media appear to be service personnel from VDV, the Ground Forces with lesser numbers from GRU Spetsnaz.
FIttps://www.facebook.com/groups/gruz200/ members, accessed February 22, 2015.
This goal is often accomplished by the use of disinformation, camouflage, or some other stratagem.
This principle can be used against either human-mental or computer-based decision-making processors.
The theory is similar to the idea of perception management, except that it attempts to control more than manage a subject.
During Putin’s speech to Russian lawmakers on March 18, 2014 he compared Crimea’s ‘secession’ from Ukraine to Kosovo’s secession from Serbia.
