The conflict in Ukraine was created intentionally and follows ""unprofessional actions"" by the West, Russian President Vladimir Putin said.
The West has been accusing Russia of meddling in Ukraine's internal affairs and supporting independence fighters in the regions of Donetsk and Lugansk, where Kiev launched a special military operation in April, 2014.
The United States and the European Union have also criticized Moscow over the reunification of Crimea with Russia in March, 2014.
Russia has repeatedly stressed that it is not involved in the situation in Ukraine, also pointing to the fact that 96 percent of Crimean residents voted for rejoining Russia at a referendum following a declaration of independence from Ukraine.
Russia has had to deal with a range of sanctions imposed against it by the West over the Ukrainian crisis.
In response to the restrictive measures Russia has introduced a one-year food ban against countries that have introduced anti-Russia sanctions.
The Ukrainian crisis started in 2014 when pro-EU forces, including radical nationalists, backed by Western powers, ousted Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych after he did not sign an association agreement with the European Union.
Following the appointment of new pro-Western and increasingly nationalist leadership in Kiev, it was proposed that the country join NATO in recent months, and drop its non-aligned status.
Russian President also said that concerns over a possible repetition of the Crimean scenario in the ongoing conflict in southeastern Ukraine are ungrounded because Crimea's residents voted to rejoin Russia while people in the Donetsk and Lugansk regions opted for independence.
Putin emphasized that, in contrast to Crimea residents, people in Ukraine's Donetsk and Lugansk regions have demanded sovereignty from Ukraine as they refused to recognize the new Kiev government, which came to power as a result of a coup in February.
Donetsk and Lugansk residents held independence referendums in May, 2014.
As a result, the self-proclaimed people's republics of Donetsk and Lugansk were established.
DPR and LPR fighters have been countering attacks from Kiev forces, which launched a special military operation against residents of southeast Ukraine in April, 2014.
These issues, issues of this kind can only be resolved by peaceful means,"" Putin stressed.
Putin noted that Russia is doing everything possible to influence independence supporters in Ukraine's southeast in seeking a peaceful resolution of the Ukrainian conflict, and is calling on its EU and United States partners to make the same effort in relation to Kiev.
Our European and United States partners should exert influence on the current Kiev administration.
Putin also stressed that the European Union could and should provide more substantial funds to crisis-hit Ukraine.
Finally, since we are talking about what can or must be done, and by whom, I believe that the European Union could surely provide greater financial assistance to Ukraine,"" the Russian president stressed.
The deep political crisis in Ukraine has had a devastating impact on the country's economy and finances, pushing the former Soviet republic to the brink of a default.
