Read our anonymous expert’s summary, then the referenced articles very carefully.
It reminds me of the massacre in Christ’s Church, where Russian neo-Nazis symbols were worn.
Unfortunately, no, this appears incidental to the new ‘improved’ Russia of Putin.
SECDEF and Chairman of the JCS testify to SASC, more on SACEUR testimony.
USAF sorties a Buff from RAF Fairford over the Baltic, Russians get very excited.
Fascinating commentaries by Gannushkina and Sukhanov, given Burckina’s comments on the Russian government understating its demographic collapse – it appears that ethnic Russians in former Soviet republics who are descendants from mixed marriages with non-Russians are now no longer allowed to migrate to Russia, only “pure Russians” are now permitted to enter Russia to live there as Russian nationals.
Muscovy MoD would like a million children enrolled in the Yunarmia by 2020.
EU very unhappy with Muscovian proxy Orban, and Kazakhstan genocide documentary now available on Youtube.
The 5th anniversary of the invasion of Crimea has produced a great many public statements.
United States increases the number of Island class CG cutters for Ukraine to four hulls.
Crimea water crisis is far worse than earlier suggested and well detailed in Makarenko’s analysis.
While the United States labels the 2014 fake referendum as a sham, disaffected Crimean residents put up leaflets calling for the votes to be withdrawn.
In Russia, support for Krymnash collapses from 67 percent to 39 percent – a majority of Russians now think it was a bad idea.
Thursday, March 14, 2019 Time: 09:30 AM Location: Room SD-G50, Dirksen Senate Office Building Agenda To receive testimony on the Department of Defense budget posture in review of the Defense Authorization Request for Fiscal Year 2020 and the Future Years Defense Program.
The Pentagon believes that the modernization of the armed forces of China and Russia allows them to act quickly to put the United States in front of a fait accompli.
Russian military strategists are seriously studying the possibility of using nuclear weapons in limited military conflicts, a senior American general warned.
In a statement, he refuted the suggestion that Russia is developing such weapons solely in order to cause alarm to the Pentagon, which plans to modernize United States nuclear forces, taking into account the new threats.
Representatives of the Pentagon believe that Russia, which cannot compete with the United States military in a long conflict with the use of conventional weapons, is thinking about using nuclear weapons for quick victories over weaker neighbors before American forces can intervene.
Both countries are seeking to lead the United States to a difficult dilemma.
Russia supports this strategy with “active stocks consisting of approximately 2,000” weapon systems capable of delivering “non-strategic,” that is, relatively small nuclear weapons, Skaparotti noted.
A United States B-52H Stratofortress large-payload multirole strategic bomber aircraft practiced a mock attack on a Russian naval base in the Baltic Sea region.
A strategic bomber of the United States Air Force approached to within about 99 miles of the border with the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad on Friday, according to flight data from air traffic network Plane Radar.
The B-52 is one of the oldest airframes that the Air Force still operates.
The Stratofortress bombers have been in every conflict since the Vietnam War.
As to date, B-52s have been modified for low-level flight, conventional bombing, extended-range flights and transport of improved defensive and offensive equipment — including ballistic and cruise missiles that can be launched hundreds of miles from their targets.
B-52H Stratofortress is capable of carrying and launching nuclear weapons.
According to the current information, the bomber can fly at high subsonic speeds at altitudes of up to 50,000 feet and can be armed with nuclear-tipped cruise missiles or a conventional payload of up to 70,000 pounds.
The B-52H bombers currently in service were built between 1961 and 1963, and are expected to fly until 2040.
The Air Force will replace them with the new B-21 Raider bomber, currently under development.
The Russian Defense Ministry confirmed Saturday that a United States B-52H Stratofortress multirole strategic bomber aircraft flew over the Baltic Sea approached to within about 93 miles of Russia’s border.
According to official reports, a B-52 plane was last spotted over the Baltic Sea in 2017.
Early, air traffic network Plane Radar has reported that a United States B-52H Stratofortress large-payload multirole strategic bomber aircraft practiced a mock attack on a Russian naval base in the Baltic Sea region.
Government officials and executives from the United States and Europe square off in tense debates over the Nord Stream 2 pipeline at a major energy conference.
Some of the tensest moments at a major energy conference in Houston were over a Russian-German natural gas pipeline.
The debates this week show that Germans and their counterparts in the United States and Poland cannot even agree on why the line is being built.
Berlin sees Nord Stream 2 as a purely economic project, while its opponents see it as a tool of Russian influence over Europe.
Romania is looking to acquire additional F-16 fighter jets to replace its ageing MiG-21 Lancer fighter aircraft, National Defense Minister Gabriel Les said.
According toScramble Magazine, the National Defence Minister Gabriel Les announced that the Fortele Aeriene ale Romaniei started the procedure for acquiring more F-16 Fighting Falcon fighter aircraft to replace the last MiG-21 Lancer aircraft.
It is reported that the air force expressed a need for 36 F-16 Fighting Falcons.
To date, Romania bought a total of secondhand 12 F-16 Block 15 Mid-Life Upgrade fighter jets from Portugal and officially took delivery the first six in late September.
Minister Gabriel El also reported that starting on 14 March 2019, the Romanian Air Force commenced flying Air Policing missions under Romanian command with the Baza 86 Aeriana F-16s.
In the near future, Romania will also conduct these kinds of missions under NATO command after the squadron will complete the NATO certification process.
So far, we conducted this service with MIG aircraft, if we are to talk about the Romanian Air Forces,” said Gabriel Les.
According to the current information, the Block 15 change feature larger horizontal stabilizers, the addition of two hardpoints to the chin inlet, an improved AN/APG-662 radar, and increased capacity for the underwing hardpoints.
Paul Goble Staunton, March 15 – Russian immigration policy both reflects and intensifies the increasing role of ethnicity in Russian life, with officials ever more often using ethnicity as a test to decide who is allowed into the country and who is not, under what terms and for how long, Svetlana Gannushkina says.
In large measure, this reflects the impact of the large number of Ukrainians who fled to Russia in 2014-2015.
Many Russians were happy to welcome them at first only to turn on them when the Ukrainians proved less “angelic” and less grateful than Russians assumed they should be if they were to remain in Russia.
And the Russian government, which initially trumpeted its willingness to take in these people, generally ceased to be interested in them as soon as their propaganda value was exhausted and in those many cases when the Ukrainians refused to take Russian citizenship.
As a result, many have been forced into impossible situations within Russia or forced to leave.
Not only does this mean that Russia is increasingly closed to refugees – except for those who agree to cooperate with the FSB, Gannushkina says – but it is also leading to a situation in which ethnicity is being elevated to the point that Moscow wants not just ethnic Russians but “’pure Russians,’’” a much narrower category.
She gives as an example of this the case of Larisa Iosiashvili, her colleague at Civic Action.
Her father, a Georgian, left the family early on and she know no Georgian, speaking only Russian and considering herself a Russian despite her name.
But when she sought to get Russian citizenship “as a bearer of the language,” officials weren’t even willing to give her a test.
Maybe she didn’t discuss a saying the way they wanted, but that is because she is an ordinary person, not an alien.
If Russian officials can exclude someone in this way, the rights activist says, they can exclude anyone and do so apparently in the name of ethnic “purity” whatever they think that means.
Paul Goble Staunton, March 16 – As negative as Rosstat’s figures are for Russia’s demographic problems in recent months , the real figures are likely five to ten percent worse than the Russian statistical agency is reporting, according to a blogger who compares Rosstat numbers with other statistics.
The blogger, who posts under the screen name Burckina, compared Rosstat numbers for seven predominantly ethnic Russian regions with the figures of the registration offices in these same oblasts.
In every case, the decline in total population in January of this year was from 89,500 to 103,800 greater according to the registration offices than according to Rosstat.
If the former figures are correct, then that means both the overall decline of the population of the Russian Federation and the decline in the number of ethnic Russians is far steeper than Moscow is admitting.
That in turn means that the population of the country is going to get smaller faster than Russian officials acknowledge and, more seriously, that the share of ethnic Russians in that population is going to get smaller even faster, something that in many regions will change the ethnic balance against Moscow.
That Rosstat routinely falsifies numbers is commonly recognized and that it has been especially inclined to do so after the withering criticism it received last year for being too negative and after a new director was appointed.
But the comparison with ZAGS figures nonetheless should be treated with caution.
ZAGS data in Russia are also prone to inaccuracies and especially to late reporting.
To give but one example, if an oblast registration office did not include births in one month but listed them in the next, it might overstate a decline in population in the earlier month.
That problem may be especially likely during January with the long winter holiday.
But at the same time, this comparison of figures is important as a reminder that Russian statistics and especially Rosstat statistics should be used with caution and that the demographic decline of Russia is something very real and very likely far worse than anyone in or near the Kremlin wants to face.
Paul Goble Staunton, March 15 – Only a few years ago, many analysts and commentators were pronouncing nations and nationalism as survivals of the past which would give way to civic identities under the growing impact of immigration and globalization.
But now it is obvious that the prediction of their demise was premature, Dimitry Savvin says.
At the same time, their arrival provokes a new ethnic assertiveness among the host population.
His first argument is that “any nation is a political community, but in the future, only those in the basis of which there is a strong ethnic or ethno-confessional core will have a chance to survive.
The state on whose territory representatives of a nation are located will become one resource among many for those people and in some cases not the most important.
That unity, promoted and maintained by the rapid flow of information and people, will in many cases overwhelm the capacity of the state to control it.
The situations of the Armenians and Kurds are especially instructive in that regard.
And fifth, the new nationalism will be based on securing representation not just in states but in broader institutions, giving it leverage over all the places where its representatives happen to find themselves.
Those nations that are best represented in these institutions will be in the best position to survive and even flourish.
Paul Goble Staunton, March 16 – Historians see as their task determining whether something happened or not and then explaining it.
They care only about whether their image of the past is good or bad, something entirely different.
Other speakers elaborated on this theme and showed the ways in which it has pernicious influence on a wide variety of issues.
Sokolov for his part notes that the Russian economy has always been extensive rather than intensive, seizing new resources rather than developing those it already has.
As a result, the authorities aren’t concerned about developing schools and laws but in destroying them if they get in the way of its unlimited access to resources.
It will be led far in any direction but there are limits, including in the population’s assessment of Stalin, he suggests.
One place where people get more realistic pictures of the past is in the study of local history.
But over the last decade or so, the current Russian government has done what it can to destroy such history, not only because it encourages a diverse view of the Russian past but because it promotes a more honest one, Petrov continues.
Instead, Russians have the sense that they are accidentally in any one place and may soon be shifted to another, an attitude that undermines an honest approach to the past but that is exactly what the current powers that be in Russia want, Petrov concludes.
The European Commission has slammed Google for what it says is a lack of action in fighting disinformation ahead of elections to the European Parliament in May.
In October 2018, Twitter published a database of over 9 million tweets that from Russian Internet Research Agency, believed to be a state-backed troll factory.
Ukrainian think tank VoxUkraine identified more than 750,000 tweets related to Ukraine by the keywords and analyzed how the Russian troll factory has been working against Ukraine; and who, how, and what was tweeted.
In the separatist regions of eastern Ukraine, young people prepare to defend themselves—and their nation.
The European Union is determined to pursue the policy of non-recognition of the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia and will continue imposing restrictive measures.
The illegal restrictions to passage via the Kerch Strait have negative economic consequences for Ukraine’s ports in the Sea of Azov and the whole region.
The Russian Foreign Ministry has announced Moscow will respond to fresh sanction action by the European Union.
President Petro Poroshenko congratulated the North Atlantic Alliance on its 70th anniversary and promised to raise the issue of the Action Plan regarding Ukraine’s membership at the NATO summit in December 2019.
This is mentioned in the letter of the head of state to NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg, which was published by the press service of Ukraine’s mission to NATO, reports Ukrinform.
The President assured that on the eve of the 70th anniversary of NATO he is proud that the partnership with Ukraine has become an important page in the history of the alliance.
According to him, Ukraine highly appreciates the solidarity of the Alliance with Ukraine and the continued support of the country in the face of Russia’s aggression.
I would also like to assure you that Ukraine remains a reliable partner of NATO in building our common and secure future, “the president added.
Russia will respond to new European Union sanctions, its foreign ministry said on Saturday, without saying what action it would take.
The Russian side said it would not leave this unfriendly action by the European Union unanswered.
Measures target Russian officials over Moscow’s actions against Ukraine, including 2018 naval clash in the Kerch Strait.
The U.S., Canada and European Union on Friday imposed financial sanctions on more than a dozen officials and entities accused of supporting Russia’s occupation of southeastern Ukraine.
The United States Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control on Friday, March 15, designated six Russian individuals and eight entities in response to Russia’s continued and ongoing aggression in Ukraine, including in the Kerch Strait.
The United States action targets individuals and entities playing a role in Russia’s unjustified attacks on Ukrainian naval vessels in the Kerch Strait, the purported annexation of Crimea, and backing of illegitimate Nov 11 elections in eastern Ukraine’s Donbas, according to the United States Treasury.
The United States Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control designated six Russian individuals and eight entities in response to Russia’s continued and ongoing aggression in Ukraine. — Ukrinform.
The United States, Canada and the European Union simultaneously announced the imposition of the Azov package of sanctions against Russia as a powerful transatlantic strike against its plans to occupy the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait. — Ukrinform.
Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin has commented on the decisions of the European Union, the United States and Canada to impose sanctions in response to Russia’s continued aggressive acts against Ukraine.
The solidarity and unity of Ukraine’s friends and partners are the key to the effectiveness of sanctions against the Russian Federation, Klimkin said.
The United States and the United Kingdom will never recognize the occupation of Crimea and call on the world to thwart the legalization of the annexation of the peninsula by Russia. — Ukrinform.
Five years ago today, on March 16, 2014, Russia stage-managed a sham referendum in Crimea and two days later illegally annexed the peninsula, Minister of Foreign Affairs Sven Mikser wrote in a statement published on Saturday morning.
Crimea has become a bridgehead for the Russian armed forces striving to control the whole Black Sea region and thus to cement Russian influence in the wider area.
The United States Embassy in Ukraine has said the United States does not and will not recognize the Kremlin’s control of Crimea.
Five years ago, Russia organized an illegitimate referendum on the annexation of Crimea.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey has released the official statement on the occasion of the 5th anniversary of the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation, reiterating the support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. — Ukrinform.
Russia must release detained Ukrainian servicemen and return the vessels of the Ukrainian naval forces seized near the Kerch Strait in November last year. — Ukrinform.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic says that the ongoing militarization of Russian-occupied Crimea represents a blatant breach of international law.
Since the occupation of Crimea by the Russian Federation, the fundamental human and civil rights of the Crimean Tatars, as well as those of other ethnic and religious communities, have been violated.
Ukraine proposes to include the issue of Crimea de-occupation in the Minsk negotiation process, Deputy Foreign Minister of Ukraine Serhiy Kyslytsia said, speaking at the Arria-formula meeting on the Russian occupation of Crimea on Friday, March 15.
Ukraine insists on Russia’s full implementation of the Minsk agreements and proposes to include the issue of Crimea in the Minsk process. — Ukrinform.
With the restrictions on the movement of vessels, the canal bottom is growing shallow and silting up,” Minister for Temporarily Occupied Territories and IDP Vadym Chernysh said during his visit to Mariupol.
However, he said that, despite the blockade of the Kerch Strait by the Russian Federation, the Mariupol port continues operating and remains one of the strategically important enterprises of the city.
One of them is the use of domestic financial resources that could remain in the ports.
The EU additional funds are an equally important financial resource,” the minister said.
During a hearing in the United States House of Representatives ,The Commander-in-Chief of the United NATO forces in Europe Curtis Scaparrotti stated that the United States intends to send two more Island-class boats to Ukraine.
We have a good relationship with them, and now there is an increase in funding that we request from Congress for the transfer of marine funds to Kiev, primarily two ships, island class patrol boats to start replenishing their Navy.
Earlier the commander of the Naval Forces of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, Ihor Voronchenko said that two Island class patrols boats which were transferred to Ukraine from the United States of America in September would arrive at the port of Odessa in July.
In the summer of 2017, Ukrainian officials announced that the United States would send Island-class boats to Ukraine.
It appears that the dissatisfaction of many Crimeans with life under Russian occupation is becoming more vocal.
On the fifth anniversary of the “referendum,” which Russia held on 16 March 2014 to legitimize its occupation of the Ukrainian peninsula, the Crimean city of Yalta was plastered with leaflets criticizing life in Russia and calling to “withdraw” signatures in the sham referendum of 2014.
As twitter user wasily_crimea noted, the user who originally posted the photos is now unavailable, being supposedly blocked.
However, photos of the leaflets had by that time spread like wildfire in the internet.
