The prosecutor in the Yanukovych treason case, Ruslan Kravchenko, said that he could neither confirm nor deny the participation of Chepiga-Boshirov in the ""evacuation"" of the ex-president.
He and his special forces unit arrived at the residence of Yanukovych in Mezhyhirya.
They transported him from there to Crimea and further to Russia,"" former Russian journalist of the Center for Investigation Management Sergey Kanev, who took part in a probe by The Insider and Bellingcat into the suspects in the Skripals case told Ukraine's Hromadske news outlet.
The investigator said that Alexey Dyumin, a former security guard of Russian President Vladimir Putin, also received the ""Hero of Russia"" award for the ""evacuation"" of Yanukovych from Ukraine.
I also know that the people who later formed the backbone of Private Military Company Wagner also got awards for Yanukovych's evacuation,"" Kanev said.
The journalist promised that he would publish a detailed investigation into the facts of Chepiga-Boshirov's participation in a special operation concerning the flight of Yanukovych from Ukraine.
Yanukovych's lawyer, Alexander Goroshinsky, who recently joined the case, told Hromadske that he knew nothing about Russian special operations forces' involvement in the ""evacuation"" of Yanukovych.
He also said he did know anyone with such names as Chepiga and Boshirov.
I haven't read all the materials, but in those which I have, I haven't read anything "" the lawyer said.
The prosecutor in the Yanukovych treason case, Ruslan Kravchenko, said that he could neither confirm nor deny the participation of Chepiga-Boshirov in the ""evacuation"" of the ex-president, because the investigators were not aware who of the Russians had participated in that operation.
Investigative journalists also found out that Chepiga was a highly decorated GRU officer with the ""Hero of Russia"" title for participation in the Chechen war and a certain ""peacekeeping mission"" in 2014, which is probably the Russian invasion of Donbas, eastern Ukraine.
