This includes several rounds of sanctions against Russia, as well as military assistance to Ukraine, and temporary protection for Ukrainians and third country nationals fleeing the conflict.
The EU has also discussed plans to end the dependence of some Member States on Russian energy.
The EU-Ukraine association agreement The EU and Ukraine have an association agreement, in force since 2016.
The agreement provides a framework for the convergence of Ukraine with the EU in the political, economic and legal spheres.
In 2013, then Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych, said he would not be signing the association agreement.
President Yanukovych’s decision led to a wave of mass protests and a violent response from the Government.
He was removed from office by the Ukrainian Parliament in February 2014 and fled to Russia.
EU response to the Russian annexation of Crimea Shortly after President Yanukovych was forced out of office, Russia moved to occupy Crimea.
This was followed by protests by pro-Russian separatists in the Donbas region in Eastern Ukraine, with parts of this region coming under their control in April 2014.
The EU condemned Russian actions, describing the action in Crimea as illegal and called on Russia to withdraw.
Russia’s involvement in the then G8 was ended, and the EU said it was suspending further talks on a new co-operation agreement.
The EU imposed sanctions against officials involved in the actions in Ukraine.
These included a ban on the import and export of arms and related material and a ban on the export of dual use goods for military users.
There were also restrictions on exports of energy-related 5 Commons Library Research Briefing, 22 March 2022 The EU response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine equipment and technology.
These sanctions have remained in force since 2014 EU Response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine Russia began its invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022.
EU Sanctions against Russia Sanctions have been coordinated with the USA, UK and other allies.
New sanctions had already been imposed on Russia on 22 February, after President Putin had signed the order recognising the self-declared independent republics in the Donbas region.
Further sanctions were announced on 25 February, and these were expanded again on 28 February, 2 March and 15 March.
The list of individuals and entities subject to an asset freeze and travel ban has been progressively expanded to include President Putin, Government Ministers, all members of the Russian Parliament and various businesspeople.
Following an agreement among G7 countries, the EU also announced on 15 March that there would be action to deny Russian products and services “most favoured nation treatment” in EU markets.
Belarus’ accession to the World Trade Organization would also be blocked.
This includes restrictions on the use of SWIFT services for three Belarus banks and other financial sanctions.
Members of the Belarus’ military are on the list of individuals subject to sanctions.
Ending EU reliance on Russian energy On 8 March, the European Commission announced an outline for a plan to make Europe independent from Russian fossil fuels before 2030.
The Commission also outlined measures to respond to rising energy prices in Europe and to replenish gas stocks for the next winter.
The Commission said this could reduce EU demand for Russian gas by two thirds before the end of the year.
Russia also accounts for around 25% of oil imports and 45% of coal imports.
Other States, such as Germany, are reluctant to go this far given high levels of dependency on these imports.
The German government has however announced that it will not allow the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia to Germany to begin operation.
Proposals would be developed further by the European Commission and Member States.
This would be the first time the EU had provided lethal equipment to a third country. €450 million was allocated under the European Peace Facility for this. €50 million was allocated for non-lethal supplies.
On 21 March, EU foreign ministers agreed an additional €500 million would be allocated under the European Peace Facility.
Temporary Protection to people fleeing Ukraine On 4 March, the EU adopted legislation providing for temporary protection for persons fleeing Ukraine.
This applies to Ukrainian nationals, and their family members, if they resided in Ukraine on or before 24 February 2022.
It will also apply to third country nationals or stateless persons benefiting from international protection in Ukraine, and their family members.
The scheme could end earlier if the Council of the EU decides it is safe to return to Ukraine.
People fleeing Ukraine will have rights of residence, access to the labour market and housing, medical assistance, and access to education for children in the Member State they go to.
The EU will coordinate assistance and provide funding for the host Member States.
Humanitarian and economic support The European Commission announced an emergency support package of €500 million for those affected by the conflict in Ukraine on 1 March 2022.
Supplies delivered through the EU Civil Protection Mechanism by EU Member States are estimated to be worth an additional €100 million.
Humanitarian aid has gone to Ukraine and to the neighbouring countries receiving people fleeing from Ukraine.
On 1 February 2022, the European Commission announced a €1. billion emergency Macro-Financial Assistance loan programme to Ukraine.
Half of this was expected to be delivered by March. €5 billion of MFA loans had already been provided in the period 2014-2021.
Some funds had been withheld as they had been contingent on reforms being undertaken in Ukraine.
Several EU Member States from the former Soviet bloc have called for the EU to begin the process of Ukraine’s accession to the EU swiftly.
However, other Member States have adopted a cautious tone and have pointed to the lengthy process for accession.
The EU-Ukraine association agreement The EU and Ukraine have an association agreement, which provisionally came into force on 1 January 2016.
Following ratification by all Member States of the EU it came fully into force on 1 September 2017.
Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area Among the aims of the association agreement were to establish a framework for enhanced political dialogue, and convergence of Ukraine with the EU in the political, economic and legal spheres.
Ukraine would gradually align its legislation with the EU in a number of areas, including competition, technical barriers to trade , sanitary and phytosanitary measures, 2 customs and trade facilitation, and protection of intellectual property rights.
Ukraine would establish state aid rules similar to those of the EU, and align with EU public procurement legislation.
It was hoped that the agreement would help with the reform and modernisation of the Ukrainian economy.
Progress by Ukraine in aligning legislation with the EU would enable greater access to the EU internal market.
Political dialogue and broader cooperation The agreement also included a commitment to enhanced cooperation in the field of justice, freedom and security with the aim of reinforcing the rule of law and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Ukraine 2 Sanitary and phytosanitary requirements relate to trade in live animals, animal products, food, plants and products.
Ukraine 4 Friedrich Ebert Stiftung Implementation of the EU-Ukraine association agreement: labour law, gender equality and occupational safety and health, October 2019 10 Commons Library Research Briefing, 22 March 2022 The EU response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine placed particular emphasis on the strengthening of the judiciary, and combating corruption in Ukraine.
In addition, the agreement promoted gradual convergence on foreign affairs and security matters with the aim of Ukraine's ever-deeper involvement in the European security area.
There was also a commitment to regular political dialogue, including through EU-Ukraine summits and the governance structures established by the agreement.
Reaction to agreement in Ukraine and Russia The EU-Ukraine agreement was negotiated between 2007 and 2011.
Ukraine had loosened ties with Russia in the period following the so-called Orange revolution in 2004.
Ukraine agreement Earlier in 2013, Russia warned it would tighten customs procedures against as “suicidal” for Ukraine and a Russian official described the EU-Ukraine agreement as “suicidal” for Ukraine.
Ukraine President Yanukovych’s decision led to a new wave of mass protests and a violent response from the Government.
President Yanukovych was removed from office by the Ukrainian Parliament in February 2014, and fled to Russia.
An interim government then signed the political part of the association agreement with the EU, in March 2014.
The economic part of the agreement, the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area , was then signed by the new President, Petro Poroshenko, following his election in June 2014.
A referendum was held in Crimea on 16 March, backing union with Russia.
Neither the referendum nor the Russian annexation were recognised internationally.
These developments were followed in March by protests by pro-Russian separatists in the Donbas region in Eastern Ukraine, with parts of this region coming under their control in April.
The conflict in Eastern Ukraine has continued since 2014, although there have been several ceasefires.
In response to these developments, the EU adopted a series of statements condemning Russian actions, and also agreed on a set of sanctions against Russia.
On 3 March 2014, the President of the European Commission and President of the European Council joined with G7 leaders in suspending participation in preparations for the G8 summit due to be held in Russia later in 2014.
The EU’s political leaders , including UK Prime The EU described Minister David Cameron, held an extraordinary meeting on 6 March 2014.
The the Russian action EU leaders adopted a joint statement condemning Russia's “unprovoked in Crimea as an violation of Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity” and calling on it to “unprovoked immediately withdraw its forces.
They also described the decision to hold on a referendum on Crimea joining the Russian Federation as illegal. violation of Ukrainian The EU leaders also confirmed that bilateral talks with the Russian Federation sovereignty” on visa matters and on a new EU-Russia co-operation agreement were to be suspended.
In parallel to the meeting, EU leaders and Ukraine’s acting prime minister, Arseniy Yatsenyuk, signed the political provisions of the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement.
EU introduces sanctions against Russia The EU leaders’ statement of 6 March 2014 warned of sanctions if Russia did not take steps towards a negotiated solution to the crisis.
On 17 March 2014, EU foreign ministers agreed a package of restrictive measures against 21 officials associated with their role in threatening the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
The list of persons and entities subject to sanctions and the legal basis was doing so was progressively expanded throughout 2014.
On 29 July 2014, the EU adopted additional sanctions against the Russian The EU adopted Federation.
This followed the European Council meeting of 16 July, where EU leaders agreed to adopt further targeted sanctions against Russia.
EU foreign ministers then asked for the adoption of measures to be accelerated following the downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight MH17 over Donetsk in Eastern Ukraine.
Further trade and investment restrictions were also placed on Crimea and Sevastopol on 30 July 2014.
In January 2022, the sanctions originally imposed in 2014 were extended for a further six months until the end of July 2022.
EU economic support for Ukraine Macro-financial assistance In April 2014, the Council of the EU approved proposals aimed at providing economic and financial support to Ukraine.
These included a decision providing up to €1bn in macro-financial assistance to Ukraine to support its economic stabilisation and its structural reform agenda.
It also adopted a regulation granting unilateral trade preferences to Ukraine, providing for the temporary reduction or elimination of customs duties ahead of the implementation of the EU-Ukraine association agreement.
The previous MFA commitments were paid out in 2014 and early 2015 and were for €610 billion worth of loans.
Macro-financial assistance operations are part of the EU's wider engagement with neighbouring countries and are intended as an exceptional EU crisis response instrument.
They are available to EU neighbourhood countries experiencing severe balance-of-payments problems.
EU prolongs economic sanctions by six months, 21 December 2015 25 See for example Council of the EU, Russia: EU prolongs economic sanctions by six months, 28 June 2017 and Russia: EU prolongs economic sanctions by six months 19 December 2019 26 Council of EU, Ukraine: EU sanctions eight more people over territorial integrity, 11 October 2021 27 Council of EU, Russia: EU renews economic sanctions over the situation in Ukraine for further six months, 13 January 2022.
For example, the third €600 million tranche of the 2018 2015 was not paid out as Ukraine had not fulfilled four out of 17 policy commitments which were conditions for this instalment.
Nevertheless, by 2020, the MFA funds provided by the EU to Ukraine were the largest it had provided to any single partner country.
In proposing new assistance on 1 February 2022, the European Commission said the EU had so far supported Ukraine through five consecutive MFA operations totalling €5 billion of loans in the period 2014-2021.
New funds proposed, 2022 The proposal in February 2022 was for a new emergency macro-financial assistance programme for Ukraine of up to €1. billion.
This followed a request from Ukraine and direct discussions between Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelenskyy.
It said a first tranche of €600 million would be paid to Ukraine immediately once the proposal was adopted by the Council of the EU and European Parliament.
The second tranche would be paid once there had been a positive assessment of progress made by the Ukrainian authorities with the implementation of a limited number of agreed short-term policy measures.
Other economic support Alongside the €1. billion MFA programme formally proposed on 1 February 2022, the European Commission said in January 2022 that it was also allocating an additional €120 million to Ukraine in bilateral assistance grant funding.
It said this support would strengthen Ukraine’s state-building and resilience efforts.
The Commission said that in addition to this, its Economic and Investment Plan for Ukraine aimed to leverage up to €6. billion in investments in upcoming years.
EU bilateral assistance for Ukraine is brought together under the framework of the eastern regional dimension of the European Neighbourhood Policy.
A United States intelligence assessment in December 2021 suggested that Russia could be planning an invasion of Ukraine in early 2022.
It also reiterated its full support for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Any further military aggression against Ukraine will have massive consequences and severe cost in response, including restrictive measures coordinated with partners.
EU response to Russian recognition of DPR and LPR On 21 February 2022 President Putin signed Executive Orders recognising the self-declared independence of the Donetsk People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s Republic , the areas of the Donbas that are under the control of Russian-backed separatist forces.
EU Foreign Ministers met later in the day to agree on an initial package of sanctions in response to Russia’s actions.
In his comments following the meeting of foreign ministers on 22 February, Josep Borrell indicated his appreciation to Germany for making the EU’s united message stronger by stopping the pipeline.
The pipeline had previously been opposed by the USA and some EU Member States.
Calls for Germany to stop the pipeline had increased as a Russian invasion of Ukraine appeared more likely.
Germany halts Nord Stream 2 approval, 22 February 2022 42 EU External Action Service, Press remarks by High Representative Josep Borrell, 22 February 2022 43 See House of Commons Library briefing paper 9462, Geopolitical implications of Nord Stream 2 18 Commons Library Research Briefing, 22 March 2022 The EU response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine weeks prior to the invasion.
Response of EU leaders European Council, 24 February 2022 An urgent special meeting of the European Council was already due to take place on 24 February 2022.
The members of the European Council (the heads of state or government of the 27 Member States) issued a joint statement ahead of their meeting on 24 February.
The European Council condemned “in the strongest possible terms Russia's unprecedented military aggression against Ukraine” and demanded Russia’s unconditional withdrawal.
The involvement of Belarus in the aggression against Ukraine was also condemned.
The would be massive EU would be providing further political, financial and humanitarian and severe assistance to Ukraine. consequences for The European Council meeting held later in the day was also addressed, Russia for its action remotely, by the President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelenskyy.
The conclusions of the meeting reiterated the messages set out in the earlier statement.
It said that Russia would “be held accountable for its actions”, and that further sanctions against Russia were being prepared.
There would also be additional sanctions against Russian individuals, with new listing criteria.
The EU would also continue strong coordination with partners and allies, within the UN, Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, NATO and the G7.
He shaken to its core said the meeting was also an opportunity to affirm the unity of the EU Member States, and unity with partners and allies across the world “to defend and come under a international law and this rules-based order”. devastating attack Michel also referred to discussions about developing the EU’s strategic autonomy.
This was hosted by France, which holds the rotating Council Presidency for the first half of 2022.
This repeated earlier The EU and its condemnation of Russia’s actions and support for Ukraine.
At the same time, the leaders said they were political, financial, determined to increase pressure on Russia and Belarus even further. material and humanitarian The declaration made reference to Ukraine’s application to join the EU on 28 support” February 2022, noting that Ukraine had exercised the right to choose its own destiny.
Initial proposals were set out in relation to these dimensions, which the EU and individual Member States would take forward.
Bolstering defence capabilities While acknowledging the “specific character” of the security and defence EU Member States policy of certain Member States, the EU leaders agreed on the need to invest will substantially more and better in defence capabilities and innovative technologies.
EU leaders asked the European Commission, in coordination with the European Defence Agency, to bring forward an analysis of defence investment gaps by mid-May and to propose any further initiatives necessary to strengthen the European defence industrial and technological base.
Reducing energy dependency According to the declaration, the current situation required a thorough EU leaders agreed reassessment of how the EU ensured the security of its energy supplies.
In this to phase out respect EU leaders agreed to phase out dependency on Russian gas, oil and dependency on coal imports as soon as possible.
Amongst coal imports as other things, the development of renewables would be speeded up, and soon as possible further work on improving energy efficiency and the management of energy consumption would be undertaken.
The Commission was invited to propose plan to end energy dependency on Russia by the end of May 2022 to deliver on these objectives.
It was also invited to put forward its plan to ensure security of supply and affordable energy prices during the next winter season by the end of March.
The declaration identified measures to foster investment that would strengthen the EU’s economic base.
This also involved promoting skills and job creation, meeting green and digital objectives, and creating more integrated, attractive and competitive European financial markets.
International Coordination Sanctions and other measures taken by the EU in response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine have been co-ordinated with the UK, USA, Canada and other allies.
The international response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine has also been co-ordinated through the G7 format.
Some statements have been coordinated alongside European Council meetings.
Although the EU as a whole is not part of the G7, three EU Member States are G7 members and the Presidents of the European Commission and of the European Council take part in G7 leaders’ summits.
G7 Foreign Ministers meeting, 19 February 2022 The EU High Representative on Foreign and Security Policy, Josep Borrell joined a meeting of G7 Foreign Ministers on 19 February 2022 which expressed grave concern about Russia’s threatening military build-up around Ukraine, and called on Russia to deescalate tensions and engage diplomatically.
This also warned of “massive consequences” including financial and economic sanctions on a wide array of sectoral and individual targets “that would 50 Informal meeting of the Heads of State or Government, Versailles Declaration, 10 and 11 March 2022 22 Commons Library Research Briefing, 22 March 2022 The EU response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine impose severe and unprecedented costs on the Russian economy” which would be coordinated by the EU and G7 members.
It the European described the action as “a serious violation of international law” and “a grave continent, President breach of the United Nations Charter” and of previous commitments given by Russia.
By re-introducing war history”. to the European continent, President Putin had “put himself on the wrong side of history”, it said.
The statement affirmed the G7’s unity with partners, including NATO, the EU The G7 are bringing and their Member States as well as Ukraine, in preserving the integrity of the forward severe and international-rules base order.
The G7 would also closely monitor global oil coordinated and gas market conditions, and support “consistent and constructive economic and engagement and coordination among major energy producers and consumers” in maintaining the stability of global energy supplies and address financial sanctions potential disruptions.
SWIFT is a system that facilitates secure messaging between banks and other financial institutions, enabling 23 Commons Library Research Briefing, 22 March 2022 The EU response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine • Restrictive measures to prevent the Russian Central Bank from deploying its international reserves in ways that undermine the impact of sanctions.
Additional Russian officials and elites close to the Russian government, their families, and “their enablers” would also be subject to these sanctions.
Work with other governments would also be undertaken “to detect and disrupt the movement of ill-gotten gains”, and to prevent these individuals from hiding their assets across the world.
On 4 March, the Foreign Affairs Council of the EU held an extraordinary meeting.
United States Secretary of State Antony Blinken, UK Foreign Secretary Liz Truss, Canada’s Minister for Foreign Affairs Mélanie Joly and NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg, joined the meeting in Brussels alongside the EU foreign ministers and the EU High Representative Josep Borrell.
The foreign ministers called for a humanitarian corridor from Ukraine and discussed further support for the neighbouring EU Member States hosting the majority of those fleeing the war.
The meeting also involved an informal exchange with Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba, who joined via video conference and provided an overview of the latest developments on the ground, and the needs of Ukraine. them to perform transactions such as payments and settling trades between themselves.
For further information see House of Lords Library, Ukraine sanctions and the Swift system, 1 March 2022, and section 3. of Commons Library Briefing 9481, Sanctions against Russia.
The statement referred to existing internationally coordinated measures that had “severely compromised Russia’s economy and financial system, as evidenced by the massive market reactions” and targeted the architects of the war, namely President Putin and his accomplices, as well as the Lukashenko regime in Belarus.
Russia will be denied WTO most• Action to deny Most-Favoured-Nation status 56 to products of Russian favoured nation companies.
This will revoke important benefits of Russia’s membership of the World Trade Organization . status • Work to prevent Russia from obtaining financing from the leading multilateral financial institutions, including the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
The task force previously announced on 26 February will work to target the assets of Russian elites close to President Putin and the architects of his war.
More specifically, this will include work to ensure sanctioned individuals cannot leverage digital assets as a means of evading or offsetting the impact of international sanctions.
The statement said that EU citizens should not see their savings and investments fund the companies that underpin Russia’s economy.
The G7 would also continue working together to develop and implement measures that will further limit Russia’s ability to raise money internationally.
The G7 leaders said they stood ready to impose further restrictions on exports and imports of key goods and technologies on Russia.
They noted that international companies are already withdrawing from the Russian market, and said they would ensure that the elites, proxies and oligarchs that support “President Putin’s war” are deprived of their access to luxury goods and assets.
In addition to the announced plans, the statement referred to further international efforts to reduce reliance on Russian energy.
The G7 leaders said they would work together to preserve stability of energy markets as well as food security globally, given that the invasion threatened Ukraine’s capacity to grow crops this year.
Sanctions are designed to impose • Cripple Kremlin’s ability to finance Russia’s military action clear economic and • Impose clear economic and political costs on Russia’s political elite responsible for invasion political costs • Diminish Russia’s economic base.
The EU also amended the criteria for designation to include individuals and companies supporting and benefitting from the Russian Government, providing a substantial source of revenue to it, and family members of listed individuals.
Furthermore, the EU would also target those individuals, who facilitated the Russian military aggression from Belarus.
Financial sanctions Existing sanctions, restricting Russian access to EU financial markets, were also expanded.
A full asset freeze was imposed on three leading Russian banks and the list of state-owned companies subject to sanctions was extended into the defence sector.
Russian individuals would also be restricted from depositing money in EU banks over a certain value.
Technology for certain sectors The EU also introduced an export ban on specific goods and technologies related to the oil refining sector, and the aviation and space industry, including a ban on the sale of all aircrafts and equipment to Russian airlines.
Further restrictions were imposed on dual-use goods and technologies related to the defence and security sector, including semi-conductors and cutting-edge technologies such as drones and associated software, and encryption software.
The EU said that this decision would not affect ordinary Russian citizens.
Third sanctions package The EU sanctions against Russia were subsequently expanded on 28 February and again in early March.
On 28 February, the Council of the EU adopted additional measures related to aviation and finance.
Aviation EU member states would deny permission to land in, take off from or fly over Russian aircraft their territories to any aircraft operated by Russian air carriers, any Russian cannot land in or fly registered aircraft, and other aircraft owned, chartered, or otherwise over the EU controlled by a Russian legal or natural person.
This included Russian banks are banning seven Russian banks from using the SWIFT system.
This would come banned from using into force ten days later and would also apply to any legal person, entity or the SWIFT system body established in Russia who have proprietary rights more than 50% directly or indirectly owned by these banks.
Russian Media Also on 2 March, the Council of the EU adopted sanctions on Russian stateowned media outlets Russia Today and Sputnik.
The Council approved the suspension of broadcasting activities in the EU of Russia Today and both Sputnik and Russia Today.
Sputnik are banned in the EU until the aggression against Ukraine is brought to an end and until the Russian Federation and its associated outlets cease conducting disinformation and information manipulation actions against the EU and its member states.
The Council press release commented that Sputnik and Russia Today are under “the permanent direct or indirect control of the authorities of the Russian Federation” and instrumental in supporting the military aggression against Ukraine and destabilisation of its neighbouring countries.
It said that Russia had “engaged in a systematic, international campaign of disinformation, information manipulation and distortion of facts in order to enhance its strategy of destabilisation of its neighbouring countries” and of the EU and its member states.
It said this had targeted European political parties and civil society and the functioning of democratic institutions in the EU and its member states.
EU bans certain Russian banks from SWIFT system and introduces further restrictions, 63 Council of EU, EU imposes sanctions on state-owned outlets RT/Russia Today and Sputnik's broadcasting in the EU, 2 March 2022 28 Commons Library Research Briefing, 22 March 2022 The EU response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine Maritime navigation goods and radio communications technology On 9 March, the Council of the EU introduced further restrictive measures with regard to the export of maritime navigation goods and radio communication technology to Russia.
Sanctions against individuals extended On 10 March, a Council decision extended the duration of these sanctions until 15 September 2022.
Among those added to the list were Roman Abramovich and German Khan as well as other prominent businesspeople involved in key economic sectors, such as iron and steel, energy, banking, media, military and dual use products and services.
Several prominent businessmen and oligarchs were already on the list from previous rounds of sanctions.
Fourth sanctions package Following on from the G7 statement on 11 March, the Council of the EU gave the go ahead to the European Commission to support actions at the WTO to deny Russian products and services most favoured nation treatment in EU markets.
This was announced on 15 March, alongside a new sanctions package against Russia adopted by the Council.
EU agrees fourth package of restrictive measures, 15 March 2022 29 Commons Library Research Briefing, 22 March 2022 The EU response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine contribute to Russia’s technological enhancement of its defence and security sector; • prohibiting new investments in the Russian energy sector, as well as a to introduce a comprehensive export restriction on equipment, technology and services for the energy industry, • further trade restrictions concerning iron and steel, as well as luxury goods.
There were also further additions to the list of individuals and entities subject to restrictive measures.
Companies in the aviation, military and dual use, shipbuilding and machine building sectors were added to the list of entities.
Some states, notably Germany, were reluctant to go this far given their own high usage of Russian energy imports.
Poland had called for a total ban on trade with Russia, while some Member States supported a ban on Russian ships docking in EU ports and others wanted to focus on closing loopholes in existing sanctions.
Sanctions against Belarus On 24 February, 20 members of Belarusian military personnel were added to the list of individuals sanctioned for undermining or threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
On 9 March 2022, the Council of the EU said it had added 22 high ranked members of Belarusian military personnel to this list, and was adopting additional sanctions against Belarus.
EU High Representative Josep Borrell said Belarus’ involvement in the aggression against Ukraine would “come at a high price” and the EU was targeting those in Belarus who were collaborating in the Russian action.
Belarus is supporting the Russian military aggression against Ukraine inter alia by allowing Russia to fire ballistic missiles from the Belarusian territory, enabling transportation of Russian military personnel and heavy weapons, tanks, and military transporters, allowing Russian military aircraft to fly over Belarusian airspace into Ukraine, providing refuelling points, and storing Russian weapons and military equipment in Belarus.
The Council announced further measures targeting the Belarusian financial sector on 9 March.
This includes a €450 million support package for the provision of by a third country lethal assistance for defensive purpose and a €50 million support package for the provision of non-lethal supplies.
The EU High Representative, Josep Borrell said this followed a request by Foreign Affairs Minister of Ukraine.
Previously, in December 2021, the EU had announced a package of measures to help strengthen the capacity of the Ukrainian armed forces.
This package is worth €31 million over three years and will finance military medical units, including field hospitals, engineering, mobility and logistics units and support on cyber.
In January 2022, Josep Borrel said that EU foreign ministers were discussing the establishment of an EU military training assistance mission to Ukraine, which will focus on military education reform.
It replaces the previous Athena Mechanism through which the common costs of EU military operations were financed.
Council adopts assistance measures for Georgia, the Republic of Moldova, Ukraine and the Republic of Mali, 2 December 2021 79 EU External Action Service, Foreign Affairs Council: Press remarks by High Representative Josep Borrell, 24 January 2022 32 Commons Library Research Briefing, 22 March 2022 The EU response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine At a meeting of the Foreign Affairs Council on 21 March, ministers agreed that an additional €500 million would be allocated under the European Peace Facility.
Military assistance from Member States Several individual EU Member States have provided arms and military equipment to Ukraine, or said that they intend to.
These include Belgium, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia and Sweden.
The announcement by Germany to send lethal weapons to Ukraine on 26 February 2022 was viewed as a historic shift from its post-WWII policy of not sending weapons to conflict zones.
In addition to the anti-tank weapons and anti-aircraft defence systems Germany would be sending to Ukraine, the German government also said it was giving permission to other EU countries to send German-made arms to Ukraine.
The 2001 directive had not been previously used but had been adopted on the basis of the EU’s experience relating to persons displaced by the conflict in the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s.
The protection will apply to Ukrainian nationals, and their family members, if they resided in Ukraine before or on 24 February 2022.
Family members are defined in the decision as including spouses or partners, children under 18 and other close relatives that lived with them as part of the family unit.
The EU temporary protection or equivalent protection under the national law of the Member States should also be applied to third country nationals residing in Ukraine before or on 24 February with a permanent residence permit and who cannot safely return to their country.
Member states may also apply this decision to other persons, including any third country nationals residing legally in Ukraine and who are unable to safely return to their country of origin, as well as Ukrainians who fled not long before 24 February or who found themselves in EU territory just before that date, for example for holiday or work purposes.
The decision will provide temporary protection for a period of one year.
This will be extended automatically by six monthly periods for a maximum of one year, unless terminated by another Council decision.
The Commission can then propose to the Council to extend the temporary protection for an additional year.
It may also at any point propose to end the temporary protection if the situation in Ukraine is such as to permit safe and durable return.
As part of this decision, the Commission will coordinate cooperation and exchange of information among Member States, in particular in relation to monitoring reception capacities and identifying any need for additional support.
EU agencies, including Frontex , the EU asylum agency and Europol can provide further operational support if requested by the Member States.
In this time they will need to decide where they wish to claim temporary protection.
They cannot subsequently transfer that status to a different EU Member State, although another Member State may then decide to offer them temporary protection.
Ireland does not apply EU visa policy (because of its Common Travel Area with the UK) but has decided to waive short-term visa requirements for Ukrainian nationals unilaterally.
However, the Decision says that these nationals should be admitted on humanitarian grounds, without the need to produce a valid visa or travel documents or to prove they have sufficient means of subsistence, so that they are ensured safe passage to their home country.
The 2001 Council directive sets out the various obligations of Member States where people are granted temporary protection.
Beneficiaries of temporary protection will be provided with a residence permit in the Member State where they are granted temporary protection.
There are various grounds for excluding specific individuals from temporary protection, for example if there are reasonable grounds for considering that they present a security risk to the host community.
Council unanimously introduces temporary protection for persons fleeing the war, 4 March 2022 85 22 of the 27 EU Member States are part of the Schengen area.
Non-Schengen EU countries, apart from Ireland, have also applied the same list of countries nationals requiring or visa or having a visa waiver for short stays.
This will allow cohesion policy funding to be released swiftly to help EU countries and regions providing emergency protection to people fleeing Ukraine.
Member States will also be able to use €10 billion under the Recovery Assistance for Cohesion and the Territories of Europe package, one of the EU’s post-pandemic EU public investment programmes.
The European Parliament would also need to approve the proposal, but was expected to use an urgent procedure to do so.
Also on 16 March, the Council agreed on a proposal to release a further €420 million of unspent home affairs funds to support Member States providing temporary protection for those fleeing Ukraine.
Support for education EU education ministers, together with the European Commissioner for Innovation, Research, Culture, Education and Youth, Mariya Gabriel, held a video conference on 16 March 2022 to discuss ways of supporting the education of for those who had fled Ukraine.
Around half of the three million Ukrainians who had fled the country since the invasion began are estimated to be children.
Support for healthcare EU health ministers also had a video conference call on 16 March to discuss the EU response to the health consequences of the conflict in Ukraine.
Council approves swift release of cohesion resources for Ukrainian refugees, 16 March 2022 87 Council of EU, Ukraine: Council adopts negotiating mandate to unlock additional support under the home affairs funds, 16 March 2022 88 Council of EU, Informal video conference of education ministers, 16 March 2022 36 Commons Library Research Briefing, 22 March 2022 The EU response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine wounded.
Ministers discussed coordination of action and mutual support to ensure health systems could cope with these challenges.
A medical evacuation mechanism for those fleeing the war in Ukraine has been established under the EU Civil Protection Mechanism.
On 13 March, the first operation under this mechanism transferred chronically ill paediatric patients from Poland to Italy.
Following the request on 15 February, Member States provided various essential supplies, including disposal masks, medical supplies and equipment, and tents.
Support was expanded following the Russian invasion, with all 27 EU Member States, together with Norway and Turkey, offering assistance.
This included provision of medical supplies and shelter items, specialised equipment, vehicles and fuel.
Moldova also activated the EU Civil Protection Mechanism to support Ukrainians arriving there at the end of February.
By 18 March, 16 EU countries had offered various assistance to Moldova, including shelter and hygiene kits.
Poland and Slovakia also requested assistance via the EU Civil Protection Mechanism, to deal with the Ukrainian refugee influx.
On 28 February 2022, the European Commission announced an additional €90 The European million for humanitarian aid programmes to help civilians affected by the war Commission in Ukraine.
This included €85 million for Ukraine and €5 million for Moldova. announced €500 Further humanitarian funding of €3 million was allocated to Moldova on 10 million in March to support the Ukrainians forced to flee there. humanitarian aid This funding is part of the European Commission’s emergency support package of €500 million for those affected by the conflict in Ukraine announced on 1 March 2022.
In addition, a substantial contribution from the rescEU medical stockpile, worth over €10 million, was sent to Ukraine.
On 11 March, the Commission said it had on that day paid €300 million in emergency Macro-Financial Assistance to Ukraine.
The Commission said it was preparing an additional MFA programme to further support Ukraine in the longer term.
The European Council statement of 24 February 2022 asked the European Commission to bring forward contingency measures on energy.
EU energy ministers met on 28 February, and discussed energy supply and stocks.
They agreed that the EU was not immediately at risk in terms of supplies of gas or fuel, even in the event of a disruption in the supply of Russian gas.
However, contingency measures were discussed, along with actions aimed at increasing energy imports from regions other than Russia.
The ministers also discussed proposals for providing further assistance to the Ukrainian Government, in particular in consolidating the operation of its electricity network, ensuring that Ukraine’s network is synchronised with that of the EU and providing assistance and energy resources.
RePowerEU plan On 8 March, the European Commission announced an outline for a plan, A plan to make REPowerEU, to make Europe independent from Russian fossil fuels before Europe independent 2030, beginning with gas.
The Commission also outlined measures to from Russian fossil respond to rising energy prices in Europe and to replenish gas stocks for the fuels by 2030 next winter.
The plan would seek to diversify gas supplies, speed up the rollout of renewable gases and replace gas in heating and power generation.
The Commission said that this could reduce EU demand for Russian gas by two thirds before the end of the year.
The Commission said it would also present, by April, a legislative proposal requiring underground gas storage across the EU to be filled up to at least 90% of its capacity by 1 October each year.
The Commission would also look into all possible options for emergency measures to limit the contagion effect of gas prices in electricity prices, such as temporary price limits.
The Commission said that following the invasion of Ukraine, the case for a rapid clean energy transition had never been stronger and clearer.
The EU imports 90% of its gas consumption, with Russia providing around 45% of those imports, in varying levels across Member States.
The Commission said it was also working with neighbours and partners which share the EU's fossil fuel dependencies and exposure to price hikes, including in the Western Balkans.
Support would also be provided for Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia, to ensure reliable and sustainable energy.
Among other things, the statement referred to the impact on international energy markets of recent developments, and the need to control prices.
Oil and gas producing countries were called upon to act in a responsible manner and examine their ability to increase deliveries to international markets.
According to the statement, the G7 would be committed to working together to mitigate the impact on energy supply and security.
This also involved working together to ensure diversification of energy sources and supply routes.
Joint European action for more affordable, secure and sustainable energy, 8 March 2022 98 OilPrice.com, “Russia threatens to cut off flow of Nord Stream 1 pipeline”, 7 March 2022 39 Commons Library Research Briefing, 22 March 2022 The EU response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine and gas 99 altogether was noted.
The EU’s RePowerEU plan was highlighted in this context.0 99 President Biden signed an executive order banning the import of Russian gas and oil on 8 March 2022.
Two other former Soviet states, Georgia and Moldova, submitted applications to join the EU later in the same week.
This was addressed remotely by President Zelenskyy of Ukraine, and the Speaker of Ukraine’s Parliament, Ruslan Stefanchuk.
Now we’re fighting for our survival, and this is our highest motivation, but we’re also fighting to be equal members of Europe.
Today, I believe that we are all showing the world exactly what we’re made of.
Without you, Ukraine will be alone.3 Ruslan Stefanchuk also called upon the EU and its Member States to support candidate status for Ukraine, and said this was now supported by the whole of Ukraine.
The best support for the people of Ukraine in their darkest hours would be the immediate recognition of our membership of the European Union.
Membership of the European Union – even before these events that started on 24 February – was supported by the majority of Ukrainians.
It said the submit an opinion Council of the EU had responded swiftly by inviting the Commission to submit on Ukraine’s its opinion on Ukraine’s application in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Treaties.
In the meantime, the EU would deepen its partnership with application Ukraine and support it in pursuing its European path.
It also referred to “significant progress” in the implementation of the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement and internal reforms in Ukraine.
Slovenia and Poland’s Prime Ministers also separately signed a joint letter to the President of the European Council expressing support for Ukraine’s EU membership by 2030.
Croatia, Hungary and Romania have also added their support for moves to launch an accession process for Ukraine.0 Following the announcement that Ukraine was submitting is membership application on 28 February, the German Foreign Minister Annalena Baerbock adopted a more cautious tone.
The Dutch Prime Minister, Mark Rutte said there could be no “fast-track procedure” and that countries in the Western part of Europe were agreed on this.
There are reported concerns in some Member States about corruption in Ukraine, instability of its institutions and the state of its economy.
More broadly, Member States are concerned about what they view as a drift towards undemocratic practices in some Member States and do not want further enlargement without reformed EU decision-making.
One treaty article of particular relevance to Ukraine is Article 42. of the Treaty on European Union.
This has been interpreted as a “mutual defence” clause similar to Article 5 of the NATO treaty.
However, unlike the NATO treaty it does not include an explicit reference to the use of force to assist the party being attacked.
Some Member States are not members of NATO, and some retain a policy of neutrality.4 3.3 EU accession process The process by which the EU agrees to applicant states joining the EU is set out briefly in Article 49 of the Treaty on European Union.
An assessment of suitability to join is made by the European Commission, which also conducts accession negotiations.
Candidate countries are expected to have stable institutions that guarantee democracy, the rule of law and human right, as well as a functioning market economy.
Applicant Member States also need, over time, to implement all of the EU’s standards and rules.
Accession negotiations for process is lengthy most of the countries that have joined the EU since 2004 took six to eight years.
For recent Member States such as Poland, Romania, Bulgaria and Croatia, ten to twelve years elapsed between submitting applications to the EU and actually becoming Member States.
These are all countries that have applied to join the EU, and with whom the EU has approved the beginning of accession negotiations.
Accession negotiations with Montenegro and Serbia have also made little headway.
Some commentators have warned that the reluctance of certain EU leaders to move forward with EU accession for the Western Balkan countries is fuelling instability in the region, and making some countries more prone to Russian influence.
