The FRANKLIN PATRIOT DO NOT BE JUDGMENTAL But please feel free most important leaflet home to read in peace.
For example, freedom of expression may be limited by laws against hate propaganda, namely degrading speech causing psychological injury or physical distress, or child pornography or propaganda advocating genocide.
Everyone has freedom of conscience and religion, being guaranteed freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression, including freedom of the press and other media of communication, and ensuring that every “natural person” and all “strawman entities” have equal standing and human dignity and are free to create and express their ideas.
World War III is Inevitable Based on an article by Dave Hodges, The Common Sense Show The Common Sense Show features a wide variety of important topics that range from the loss of constitutional liberties, to the subsequent implementation of a police state under world governance, to exploring the limits of human potential.
The primary purpose of The Common Sense Show is to provide patriots with the tools necessary to reclaim both our individual and national sovereignty.
It is worth remembering that most wars in the world over the past decade (this also applies to those that are only being prepared) are maintained primarily for natural resources , and that these conflicts are very profitable for those who invest in them.
Some families like the Rothschilds or the Bushes amassed vast fortunes on the blood and death of civilians and soldiers who believed they were protecting their homeland, but only helped others to get rich.
Since before 2016, Vladimir Putin, President of Russia has been under pressure from the occidental ZOG junta, which wants to overthrow and replace him with Western-minded puppet oligarchs via sanctions and intentionally orchestrated oil price crashes.
Despite efforts by the Rothschild-controlled Central Bank of Russia and the use of dozens of billions of foreign exchange reserves the value of the ruble against the dollar declined.
The CBR can only print money corresponding to its cash in foreign currency, which being the dollar, which is not sufficient for Russia’s purposes.
The CBR even has to buy the worthless United States treasury bonds for the dollars paid for Russian oil—whereby the dollars are returned to the Federal Reserve Bank.
The Boeing Company is an American multinational corporation that designs, manufactures, and sells airplanes, rotorcraft, rockets, satellites, telecommunications equipment, and missiles worldwide.
The company, being the prime integrator for the International Space Station, provides a variety of support capabilities, leasing and product support services that benefits the future space economy, deep-space exploration and life on Earth.
Degree from Virginia Tech and a medical missionary, is the only person to have revealed the “dustification” scandal, filing her evidence of breakthrough energy technology with the courts in pursuit of truth and justice.
She was a beautiful soul whom was castigated and died a suspicious death.
He had worked his way up the Komsomol apparatus, during the Soviet years, and started several businesses during the glasnost period of “openness and transparency” popularized by Mikhail Gorbachev—eighth and last leader of the Soviet Union—and perestroika restructuring of the Soviet political and economic system in the late-1980s.
Yukos was acquired from the Russian government by Russian oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovsky’s Bank Menatep SPbh— established in 1988 as one of the first private banks in Russia and later renamed Group Menatep Limited , which still exists as a holding company.
Between 2004 and 2007, most of Yukos’ assets were seized and transferred for a fraction of their value to state-owned oil companies.
Washington’s aggressions via NATO cannot and will not diminish its pressure, especially if the war-monger Hillary Clinton is installed into office.
Meanwhile, pressure on Russia forces it to technologically evolve into a national liberation movement.
This means that CBR has never really been in control of neither the ruble nor an independent Russian monetary policy.
CBR can only defend against these entities by limiting its foreign exchange reserves, which are finite.
Putin was then cautiously reluctant to interfere with Rothschild’s CBR grip on Russia.
The recovery in Russia after the Ruble crisis of 2014/15 was exasperated by CBR’s CEO Elvira Nabiullina, the country’s Minister of Economic Development and Trade, since September 2007—before becoming Vladimir Putin’s aide in 2012—her holding interest rates too high for too long.
The Russian bond market took way to long to normalize because of this lack of liquidity.
But, in 2017 and early-2018, every time Bank of Russia cut rates, the Ruble would strengthen— that’s how high demand was for them.
Nabiullina once again undermined “it” by trying to control price inflation as opposed to letting the market regulate itself.
The role of a central bank, at best, should simply exist as a lender of last resort when the banking system is illiquid and needs a temporary backstop to clear interbank markets during times of stress.
With Putin actively pursuing a de-dollarization policy, the central bank through interest rate arbitrage discouraged dedollarization of the Russian economy.
Despite Nabiullina’s mistakes, Russia was in a very good position to accept inflows of foreign safe-haven capital in 2019 on political unrest in Europe.
IMF-style austerity is not a benefit to emerging markets like Russia—it is a destructive dogma that overestimates the central bank’s ability to improve the economy through manipulating interest rates.
Ever emboldened by its totally illegal regime change policies in Iraq, Egypt, Libya, Syria, Ukraine, etc., Washington and its allies were foolishly pursuing the same in Russia.
Within the ruling political and business elite a split appeared, where some, by their basic survival instinct, chose to support Putin’s path of national sovereignty, while the others were expected to either join them or be After the dissolution of the Soviet Union in the mid1990s, he accumulated considerable wealth by obtaining control of a number of Siberian oil fields unified under the name Yukos, one of the major companies to emerge from the privatization scheme of state assets during the 1990s.
In October 2003, Khodorkovsky was arrested by Russian authorities and charged with fraud, leading to a collapse of the company’s share price and the evaporation of much of Khodorkovsky's wealth.
In May 2005, he was found guilty and sentenced to nine years in prison.
In December 2010, while he was still serving his sentence, Khodorkovsky and his business partner Platon Lebedev, former CEO of Group Menatep—imprisoned from July 2003 to January 2014—had indirect controlling interest in Yukos Oil Company... both were further charged with and both were found guilty of embezzlement and money laundering; Khodorkovsky's prison sentence was extended to 2014.
He was considered to be a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International.
Upon being pardoned by Putin and released from prison at the end of 2013, Khodorkovsky immediately left Russia and was granted residency in Switzerland.
At the end of 2013, his personal estate was believed to be worth, as a rough estimate, $100-—250 million.
In 2015, he moved to London In 2014, the Russian Supreme Court reduced Lebedev’s sentence and ordered his release from prison.
Legislation was prepared for ‘mandatory de-off-shoring’ of Russian corporations, 3/4 of which had a complex foreign ownership structure— non-compliance meant asset seizure.
Other essential and inevitable measures included nationalization of the Central Bank, breaking the tributary link with foreign central banks, and lowering interest rates to facilitate industrialization and job-creation.
The liberation movement published a kind of “5™ column assessment card,” a formula by which anyone's actions and position can be assessed objectively.
While the technology of Orange Revolution * against Russia was stuttering, Yevgeny Fyodorov,a senior member of Putin’s party and chairman of the Russian parliament’s economic policy committee, warned of the consequences of visible NATO troops in Ukraine.
Zbigniew Brzezinski, primary organizer of The Trilateral Commission Then, in 2015, Fyodorov accused the central bank of sabotage.
The bank, failing to prevent the ruble from plunging—despite spending tens of billions of foreign currency reserves trying to salvage it—was investigated by state prosecutors Pavlov Vyacheslav and Stechbart Alexander.
Western sanctions had froze investments and raised funding costs—sparking a flight of capital and, as revenues fell, the currency weakened, driving inflation up and forcing the CBR to raise interest rates, exacerbating the crisis.
As stated earlier, under the Constitution, CBR (for all practical purposes) works for a foreign state,e., Federal Reserve, City of London, and other Rothschild entities.
Giovanni Salvetti, the head of Rothschild in Russia and Commonwealth of Independent States , ; manages the bank’s operations from Kazakhstan to Ukraine.
In 2014, Baron David de Rothschild and the Rothschild Financial Services Group were indicted by the French government after he was accused of fraud in a bogus loan scheme that allegedly embezzled large sums of money from British pensioners.
While news of a single Rothschild being indicted is noteworthy, it is particularly important that the French government launched an investigation into the entire Swiss branch of the Rothschild’s banking empire.
The Rothschild banking dynasty is a family line that has been accused of pulling the political strings of many different governments through their control of various economic systems throughout the world.
After opening a trust company in Reno, Nev., Rothschild & Co. began ushering the massive fortunes of the world’s most wealthy individuals into the Rothschild-run United States trusts, which are exempt from the international reporting requirements.
Vladimir Putin, President of Russia Russia’s economy is set to surpass Germany’s in 2020 following Putin’s ban of Rothschild banks in the country.
As early as next year, Russia is likely to become the world’s fifth-largest economy, despite years of Western sanctions, multinational bank Standard Chartered predicted in its long-term growth forecasts.
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.
Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Armenia, Russia, and Uzbekistan were the founding member states.
Since Putin ordered the arrest of the Rothschild backed oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovsky, whom had made Jacob Rothschild, Henry Kissinger and Arthur Hartman directors of the Open Russia foundation, whose stated purpose was to build and strengthen civil society in Russia.
Putin has banned the evil Rothschild money changers and their banking cartel family from entering Russian territory.
The Central Bank of Russia has been systematically destroying the country’s private banks and consolidating immense financial power in the hands of the Kremlin Russian Federation.
The bank was established in 1948, based on the consolidation of the Huabei Bank, the Beihai Bank and the Xibei Farmer Bank.
Between 1950 and 1978 the PBC was the only bank in the People’s Republic of China and was responsible for both central banking and commercial banking operations.
All other banks within mainland China, such as the Bank of China, were either organized as divisions of the PBC or were nondeposit taking agencies.
The two banks aim at implementing economic policies’ of the government and conducting non-profit businesses in particular sectors.
China Development Bank used to be one of such banks before its shift to a corporation in 2008.
The bank is the second-largest bond issuer in China after the Ministry of Finance.
In the last decade, CDB has issued 1. trillion yuan in loans to more than 4000 projects involving infrastructure, communications, transportation, and basic industries.
CBD does not take private savings, so it does not have local branches like many other major banks.
The top management of the PBC are composed of the governor and a certain number of deputy governors.
The candidate for the governor of the PBC is > Deng Xiaoping was the paramount leader of the People’s Republic of China from 1978 until 1989.
Chen Yun, known for his conservatism, especially in his last years, contributed much to the strategy adopted by Deng and was more directly involved in the details of its planning and construction.
He was increasingly disenchanted with the direction modern China’s economic reforms were taking.
In 1982 he was among those grumbling about “spiritual pollution” as the sense of freedom spread from economics, threatening China’s social, cultural, and political status quo.
Chen Yuan eldest son of Chen Yun was Chairman of the China Development Bank from March 1998 to April 2013.
Chen Yuan then served as Vice Chairman of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference from 2013 to 2018. nominated by the Premier of the People’s Republic of China approved by the National People’s Congress.
The current governor is Yi Gang—former Director of the State Administration of Foreign Exchange—an administrative agency under the State Council tasked with drafting rules and regulations governing foreign exchange market activities, and managing the state foreign-exchange reserves.
In 2016, Yi helped represent China at the semi-annual meetings of the IMF and the World Bank in Washington, D.C., including the Bank of England governor Mark Carney.
Nowhere in the dubious history of the lying Zionist-occupied governments are questions of truth honestly answered.
Contrary to popular belief, conduct of nation on the international stage is almost never driven by moral considerations—trather such be driven by a shadowy cocktail of money and geopolitics.
For some time now, Russia, China, Iran, and Syria have been in the crosshairs—and once you begin to understand why events unfolding in the world right now... life will begin to make much more sense.
In fact, its’ current design and its relationship to geopolitics is unlike any other in history.
Many currencies have held “reserve status” offand-on over the centuries.
Hence it is known as the “petro-dollar”: (The preeminent global currency paid to oil-exporting countries in exchange for oil.
Prior to 1971, the United States dollar was bound to the gold standard—at least officially.
According to the IMF, by 1966, foreign central banks held fourteen billion in United States dollars.
The result was rampant inflation... and a general fight from the dollar.
In 1971, in what later came to be called ""Nixon shock,"" President Nixon removed the dollar from the gold standard completely and directed the Secretary of the Treasury to take the action necessary to defend the dollar against the speculators | | temporarily suspending the convertibility of the dollar into gold, or other reserve assets, except an amount and conditions determined to be in the interest of the monetary stability and in the best interest of the United States.
Modern Money Mechanics Approximately 70% of the money in circulation has been created by ordinary banks which are allowed to loan out more money than they actually have in their account books—the rest is valueless paper created by the Federal Reserve which loans out imaginary money that they don’t have... mostly to the government.
And, as long as this insanity is tolerated... and there is no evidence that anybody is requesting that the Fed does things other than how-and/or-as what it does... then, frankly, it doesn’t matter.
And, in order to stay “in the black,” the economy’s debt must grow perpetually.
In 1973, under the shadow of the “artificial debt crisis,” the Nixon administration began secret negotiations with the government of Saudi Arabia to establish what later came to be referred to as the “Petro Dollar Recycling System”—and the “petro dollar” was made the notional unit of currency earned by a country from the export of petroleum.
Under the arrangement, Saudis would only sell their oil for United States dollars—the majority of their excess profits being invested into United States capital markets.
The IMF would then use this money to facilitate loans to oil importers who were having difficulties in covering increases in oil prices.
The interest and payments on these loans would, of course, be denominated in United States dollars.
This agreement was formalized in the U.S.-Saudi Arabian Joint Commission on Economic Cooperation (put together by Nixon’s Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, in 1974.
The ever-increasing demand for oil would prevent flight from the dollar... while distributing the inflationary consequences across the entire planet.
The dollar went from being a gold-backed currency to an oil-backed currency.
As long as the world needs oil and as long as oil is only sold in United States dollars, there will be a demand for United States dollars—and that demand will give the dollar value.
For the United States this is a great deal—dollars go out either as worthless paper or as equally worthless bytes in a computer system—and real tangible products and services are made equally worthless.
However, for the rest of the world, its a very sneaky form of exportation.
Having global trade predominantly in dollars also provides Washington with a powerful financial weapon for sanctions... as most large-scale dollar transactions are thusly forced to pass through American banks.
This “petro-dollar system” stood unchallenged until September 2000 when Saddam Hussein announced his decision to switch Iraq’s oil sales off of the dollar and on to euros.
This was a direct attack on the United States petrodollar...and, easily, the most important geopolitical event of the year.
This document called for massive increases in United States military spending and a much more aggressive foreign policy in order to expand United States dominance world-wide.
Propagating public emotional reaction to 9-11, the Bush administration was able to invade Afghanistan and Iraq, and pass the Patriot Act... all without any significant resistance.
They knew exactly what was going to happen... but, in 2003, they did it anyway.
Once Iraqi oil fields were under the American neo-cons’ control, oil sales were immediately switch back to the dollar.
Soon after invading Iraq, the Bush administration attempted to extend their wars to ITran—the Iranian government was supposedly working to build weapons of mass destruction.
After the Iraq fiasco, Washington’s credibility was severely damaged... as a result, they were unable to muster international or domestic support for an intervention.
Their efforts were further sabotaged by elements within the CIA—however, the demonization campaign against Iran continued—even into the Obama administration.
Well... it might have something to do with the fact that Iran has been in the process of organizing an independent oil market since 2004—and, it wasn’t going to be tied to the dollar.
Unable to manufacture the war that they wanted, the American capitalists used the United Nations to impose sanctions against Iran.
Whilest this did inflict damage on Iranian economy, these measures failed to destabilize the country—due, in large part, to Russia’s assistance in bypassing United States bank restrictions.
In February 2009, after Muammar el-Qaddafi was named chairman of the African Union, he immediately proposed the formation of a unified state with a single currency.
On page 94, it explicitly states that the key to success in the African monetary union would be the “eventual linking of a single African currency to the most monetary of all commodities”... gold.
In 2011, the CIA moved into Libya and began backing militant groups in their campaign the topple Qaddafi.
And, the United States and NATO pushed through and stressed a no-fly zone resolution to tip the balance of power.
The presence of al-Qaeda extremists amongst rebel fighters was swept under the rug.
Libya, like Iran and Iraq, had committed the unforgivable crime of challenging the United States petro-dollar.
Between December 1992 and October 2007, Ecuador suspended its membership; Gabon terminated its membership ; Indonesia suspended its membership in January 2009, but this was reactivated on 1 January 2016.
This means that, currently, the organization has a total of 13 Member Countries.
The OPEC Statute distinguishes between the Founder Members and Full Members and those countries whose applications for membership have been accepted.
The Statute further provides for Associate Members which are those countries that do not qualify for full membership, but are nevertheless admitted under such special conditions as may be prescribed.
His father, Hafez al-Assad, President of Syria (1971 — 2000), established an authoritarian totalitarian regime under the control of the “nationalist, populist, socialist, and It was already clear at this point that a large percentage of these fighters had ties to terrorist organizations.
However, the United States national security apparatus considered this as a necessary evil.
In 2013, these same al-Qaeda-linked Syrian rebels launched two sarin gas attacks in an attempt to frame Assad and muster international support for military intervention.
Fortunately, they were exposed by United Nations and Russian investigators—whence the push for air-strikes completely fell apart.
The Syrian War is a Proxy War The campaign for regime change in Syria, as in Libya, has been presented in terms of human rights.
In 2009, Qatar put forward the proposal to run a natural gas pipeline through Syria and Turkey to Europe.
Assad, however, rejected this—and, in 2011, he forced a pact with Iraq and Iran to build the pipeline eastward—cutting Qatar and Saudi Arabia out of the loop completely.
Not surprisingly, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Turkey have been the most aggressive regional players in the push to topple the Syrian government.
In February 2014, this global chess game heated up a new venue—Ukraine.
The real target, however, was Russia... the world’s second-largest oil exporter.
And not only have they been a thorn in Washington’s side diplomatically... but they also caused an energy bourse in 2008 with sales nominated in rubles, not gold.
Ore-so, Russia had been in the process of organizing a Eurasian Economic Union, planning to adopt a common currency unit which was slated to have its own independent energy market.
The E.U. insisted that this was an either-or proposition—but Ukraine couldn’t join both.
In response, the United States national security apparatus did what it does best—Yanukovych was removed from office in the 2014 Ukrainian revolution and currently lives in exile in Russia.
Though this all seemed to be going well at first, the United States quickly lost control of the situation.
Crimea held a referendum and people voted overwhelmingly to secede from Ukraine and reunify with Russia.
The transition was orderly and peaceful—no one was killed—but the West immediately framed the entire event as an act of Russian aggression.
Such a move would place United States forces right on Russia’s border—resulting in Russia loss of their naval base in Crimea.
This is why Russia immediately accepted the results of the disputed 2014 Crimea referendum ° and quickly consolidated the territory.
Meanwhile, in Eastern Ukraine, two regions declared independence from Kiev and held referendums of their own—the results overwhelmingly favored self-rule.
In practice, this is a massive and indiscriminate shelling campaign killing thousands of civilians.
Apparently, killing civilians didn’t qualify as aggression to the West.
In fact, the IMF explicitly warned the provisional government that their seventeen billion dollar loan package could be in danger if they were not able to put down the uprising in Eastern Ukraine.
Having a puppet in place, however, hadn’t turned out to be enough to get Washington the upper hand in this crisis.
They impose sanctions and they demonize [ | this wasn’t a very good strategy for dealing with Russia—in fact, their plans backfired.
Sanctions merely pushed Russia and China into closer cooperation—accelerating Russia’s dedollarization agenda.
The United States and NATO put a wedge between themselves in Russia... not between Russia and the rest of the world.
This new anti-dollar axis goes deeper than economics—these countries understand what’s at stake.
This is why in the wake of the Ukrainian crisis China proposed a new Eurasian security pact including Russia and Iran.
Consider the implications of the Obama administration beginning bombing in Syria... which also had a mutual defense agreement with Iran.
The masses may not have figured out yet... but history will remember it that way.
It’s only a matter of time for the big players to confront each other directly... and that is a recipe for disaster.
The people running the world right now are insane... and the public is sleepwalking into a tragedy.
Even the most powerful weapons of war are neutralized if we reach the minds of those with their fingers on the doomsday button.
A bank-driven economic system is sucking the life’sblood out of ordinary people through the process of usury and taxation.
As China, Russia and the United States are drawn into a confrontation, the world’s economy will be obliterated along with billions of lives.
In the aftermath of the coming global holocaust, the supreme financial rulers of the planet will be waiting to create order—New World Order—reaping chaos.
Make no mistake about it... the BIS controls the central banks and world finance.
What is interesting is that I have completed the article and I barely mentioned how Putin laid the groundwork for Moscow to end Syrian conflict with the territorial caliphate of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria ... and he accomplished this feat in less than 10 days when the United States has been trying to accomplish the same for years.
Putin, in a move foreign to politics, has openly explained the dangers to the media, asking them to share the information with the people... something United States politicians would never do, since they have a policy of keeping the American people in the dark.
Putin has found him in the unlikely role of underdog fighting for common people all over the world... good folk who want to be free from neocolonialism, imperialism and the evil influence of the Jesuit Papacy, the Aristocrazia Nera, cultural Marxism, the banker-mafiosa of Frankfurtr am Main and the likes of Coudenhove-Kalergi.
People’s willingness to hold money can change suddenly for “psychological and spontaneous reasons”... causing a spike in the velocity of money.
It can occur at lightning speed, over a surprisingly short period of time... and invariably catches economists by surprise.
They wait too long to drain the excess money... and get burnt. e Near civil war between town and country will be a pervasive feature of the break-down of social order.
Large mobs of half-starved and vindictive townsmen will descend on villages and farms to seize food from farmers and ranchers accused of hoarding.
Common booty will become the currency of pauperized civil service elites trading the symbols of their old status for a sack of potatoes and a side of bacon.
Foreigners with money and power will live in opulence whilest the “national citizens” will suffer from more than want or need.
And, great numbers of citizens which have failed to realize the quick becoming Apocalypse... as hath been “revealed” to the prophets and soothsayers already long dead and forgath.
Imagine how much more y* trusting fools who heedeth not the warners shall suffer whence even our children’s children will have to struggle to reclaim our stolen heritage—the gift of our ancestors.
The Kalergian refugee “replacement peoples” are the central bank’s new debt slaves.
ZOG doesn’t give a good god damn about any of us... they’d rather we goy were mindless automatons... clones and androids... soulless meaty machines which they could turn on-and-off at their behest.
Hell, why not do away with fleshapoids for ever and robotize “human” labour.
The New World Order want to plunge us all into World War III and the failure of the central banks to corral and control Vladimir Putin, President of Russia and Xi Jinping, President of the People’s Republic of China has made Armageddon a likely scenario.
Stop borrowing from these banks and begin looking for loop-holes to avoid paying taxes and start resisting their UN Agenda 21 vaccination-depopulation plan—we are not cattle to be RFID-chipped by the gadom commies... these Nosferatuan parasites.
