Robert Serry is told to leave Crimea, as the United States sends an extra six fighter jets to a Nato air policing mission in the Baltics.
PARIS/KIEV, March 5 The United States and Russia will hold talks on easing East-West tension over Ukraine on Wednesday as the West steps up efforts to persuade Moscow to pull its forces back to base in Crimea and avert the risk of a war.
United States Secretary of State John Kerry and Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov will meet face-to-face for the first time since the crisis escalated, after a conference in Paris attended by all five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council.
NATO and Russia will hold parallel talks in Brussels amid concerns that a standoff between Russian and Ukrainian soldiers in Crimea could still spark violence, or that Moscow could also intervene in Russian-speaking eastern Ukraine.
French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius said European Union leaders meeting in Brussels on Thursday could decide on sanctions against Russia if there is no ""de-escalation"" by then.
President Vladimir Putin on Tuesday defended Russia's actions in Crimea, a strategic Black Sea peninsula that is part of Ukraine but used to be Russian territory, and said he would use force only as a last resort.
This eased market fears of a war over the former Soviet republic after sharp falls on Monday.
The rouble was steady on Wednesday and Ukraine's hryvnia rose slightly against the United States dollar.
Russian forces remain in control of the region, however, and Putin gave no sign of pulling servicemen, based in Crimea as part of the Black Sea Fleet, back to base.
Investors in Russian stocks were still worried about Ukraine, with the MICEX index down 1 percent on Wednesday in contrast to other stock markets.
Russian forces remain in control of the region and Putin gave no sign of pulling servicemen, based in Crimea as part of the Black Sea Fleet, back to base.
A senior administration official said Obama spoke to German Chancellor Angela Merkel on Tuesday and discussed a potential resolution to the crisis.
The Russian-speaking German leader has good relations with the German-speaking Putin, and Berlin is Russia's biggest economic partner.
The official said Obama, in his phone call with Putin last Saturday, had discussed what officials called an ""off-ramp"" to the crisis in which Russia would pull its forces in Crimea back to their bases and allow international monitors to ensure that the rights of ethnic Russians are protected.
The United States president will stay away from a G8 summit scheduled for Sochi, Russia, in June unless there is a Russian reversal in the Ukraine crisis, the official added.
At his first news conference since the crisis began, Putin said on Tuesday that Russia reserved the right to use all options to protect compatriots who were living in ""terror"" in Ukraine but that force was not needed for now.
French President Francois Hollande became the latest Western leader to raise the possibility of sanctions if Putin does not step back and accept mediation.
He set out a tougher public line than Merkel, who has avoided talk of sanctions so far.
Hollande told an annual dinner of France's Jewish community leaders late on Tuesday.
Putin earlier said Western sanctions under consideration against Russia would be counter-productive.
A senior United States official said Washington was ready to impose them in days rather than weeks.
Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper said after speaking to Obama at the weekend that the Group of Seven leading industrialised nations were considering meeting in the near future, a move that would pointedly exclude Russia.
Kerry, on his first visit to Kiev since the overthrow of Russian-backed President Viktor Yanukovich, accused Moscow of seeking a pretext to invade more of the country.
He was expected to meet Lavrov, Hollande and British Foreign Secretary William Hague on the sidelines of a Paris conference on Lebanon, before holding private talks with the Russian minister later in the day in the French capital.
Ukraine's acting foreign minister, Andriy Deshchitsia, is also in Paris for talks with French officials and Kerry.
The Feb. ousting of Yanukovich after months of street protests in Kiev and Russia's seizure of control in Crimea have prompted the most serious confrontation between Moscow and the West since the end of the Cold War.
Lavrov told European Union foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton that an EU-brokered agreement signed by political leaders in Kiev on Feb. should be the basis for stabilising the situation in Ukraine, his ministry said on Wednesday.
He said the agreement foresaw constitutional reform which would take into account the wishes of all regions in Ukraine.
But in a sign of the fragility of the situation, a Russian soldier on Tuesday fired three volleys of shots over the heads of unarmed Ukrainian servicemen who marched bearing the Ukrainian flag towards their aircraft at a military airfield surrounded by Russian troops at Belbek, near Sevastopol.
After a standoff in which the two commanders shouted at each other and Russian soldiers levelled rifles and rocket-propelled grenade launchers at the Ukrainians, the incident was defused and the Ukrainians eventually dispersed.
Yelena Kiseleva and Yelena Kovaleva article headlined ""Ukraine to be competed for in mother and daughter game"" says Ukrainian businesses owe $10 billion to the subsidiaries of Russian banks in the country.
Text of an open appeal of Russian publishers to the Russian president who ask him not to abolish subsidies to the Russian Post that cover its losses from lower fees for newspapers delivered.
Vitaly Gaidayev article headlined ""Currency exchange rates return to bases"" says the Russian stock market and the currency exchange rate have recuperated from a plunge on March 3 after Putin dispelled fears of the Russian intervention in Ukraine.
Kirill Belyaninov article headlined ""Europe does not join U.S."" says the United States has failed to persuade its European partners to freeze economic cooperation with Russia.
Vyacheslav Kozlov article called ""OMON has no complaints"" provides an update on the trial of Sergei Udaltsov and Leonid Razvozzhayev.
Margarita Lyutova article headlined ""How they can punish Russia"" discusses possible sanctions that the USA and the EU may take against Russia if it attempts to escalate the conflict in Ukraine.
Vladimir Gurvich essay called ""Stagnation as result of stabilization"" says that the Russian authorities have finalized their ideological and political concept that is aimed at contained Western influence and promotion of pan-Eurasian values.
International media rights advocates say independent journalists are getting attacked and harassed while trying to cover events in the autonomous republic of Crimea, which has been occupied by pro-Russian forces.
The recently appointed head of the southern Ukrainian republic of Crimea says his government refuses to negotiate with newly installed central authorities in the capital, Kiev.
Crimea, a peninsula of some 2 million people, has with ample support from Russia resisted the authority of the leadership that came to power last month after the ouster of President Viktor Yanukovych, which followed months of mainly peaceful protests in Kiev.
Russian President Vladimir Putin this week described the current Ukrainian government as illegitimate, in effect bolstering the Crimean government's position.
Aksyonov has requested that Moscow provide security assistance in the largely ethnic Russian-populated Crimean Peninsula amid oft-aired concerns the region could come under attack.
Thousands of unidentified troops under apparent command from Russia have taken control over Ukrainian military bases across the Crimea over the past week.
Russia's parliament has given its approval to military intervention in Ukraine, ostensibly for peace-keeping purposes.
Crimea plans to hold a vote this month on the future status of the peninsula, with greater autonomy and even secession named as possible options on the ballot.
Aksyonov was appointed prime minister last month by a vote in the Crimean parliament, which was being guarded at the time by unidentified masked gunmen who had occupied the building the previous night.
Speaking to Baltcom, Aksyonov declined to be drawn on whether he supported on secession for Crimean, insisting that it was a decision for the people on the peninsula to make.
The majority of the region's population is pro-Russian, although it is unclear to what extent they favor a breakaway from Ukraine.
Despite Moscow's refusal to accept the legitimacy of the government in Kiev, interim Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said Tuesday that Russian government officials have nonetheless engaged in what he described as ""tepid"" consultations.
MOSCOW, February 26 Since Ukraine exploded last week in a blaze of lethal violence and collapsed leadership, some ominous predictions have been circulating about Russia’s plans for its neighbor’s future.
But military intervention seems too high-stakes a game for Moscow to play.
And cooperating with the new leaders in Kiev is hardly more acceptable.
For now, in pursuing its national interests, Russia is far likelier to choose fence-sitting as its modus operandi, with a view to step in more actively when its chances for success improve.
For days, Russia was, at best, incoherent and, at worst, stuck in denial about the new political reality in Ukraine and the downfall of Moscow’s loyal ally, the de facto deposed president, Viktor Yanukovych.
President Vladimir Putin, who held a Security Council meeting about Ukraine on Tuesday, has said nothing publicly about Russia’s new position on the situation there since the opposition clearly gained the upper hand.
Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev and the Foreign Ministry have been busy casting doubt on the legitimacy of the new authorities.
And Kremlin propagandists have been lashing out at Yanukovych for betraying Moscow.
This floundering cannot last long given Moscow’s vested interest in integrating Ukraine into a Russia-led trading bloc – a key priority for Putin in his third presidential term.
Cooperating, in this case, means sincere and effective action to help the new Ukrainian government keep its footing, and this is a highly improbable option for Moscow.
European Union officials have called on Russia to participate in joint financial assistance to Ukraine and invited Moscow to discuss the country’s future.
But this development would fly in the face of numerous firm convictions held by the Kremlin in dealing with its neighbors.
The Kremlin views the revolt in Ukraine as part of a zero-sum game with the West in the former Soviet republics, which Moscow regards as its zone of privileged interests.
For Putin, cooperating would mean acknowledging defeat in the largest, most prized of these now sovereign countries.
Also, it would send the wrong message – in the Kremlin’s view – to political players in other ex-Soviet republics, such as Belarus, emboldening Western-leaning opposition groups and disheartening pro-Moscow incumbent leaders.
There is a big risk – aggravated by the country’s dire economic situation – that the new Ukrainian government will not be stable and effective.
The second option, “spoiling,” would require the active disruption and sabotage of Ukraine’s new government, and this would come at a price Moscow is not willing to bear.
The United States and European leaders have already warned Moscow against possible military intervention in Ukraine, but it is highly unlikely that Putin would keep this option on the table even without the warnings.
Radical, violent Ukrainian nationalists would be very likely to wage a campaign of terror and sabotage both in the occupied territories and in mainland Russia.
Also, were it to fail, military action would only strengthen anti-Moscow sentiments among Ukrainian elites who would then seek stronger alliances with the West, including military ones.
Propping up separatists in Crimea and in Ukraine’s eastern provinces is also a road to violent conflict that Moscow cannot afford.
If these provinces eventually demand that Russia intervene and protect them, Russia will either have to face the consequences described above or lose face.
On Tuesday, the Foreign Ministry effectively ruled out military intervention, saying Russia will not interfere in affairs in Ukraine.
Russia has already declared that it would freeze the remaining $12 billion of $15 billion in pledged aid to Ukraine until a working government is in place in Kiev.
It may also boost economic pressure by imposing bans on Ukraine imports as it has in the past, including just last summer.
Russia is Ukraine’s largest trade partner, responsible for nearly 30 percent of its foreign trade in 2012; the EU is a close second.
However, at this time, import bans would not be the way to pressure Ukraine’s new leadership into concessions that it could not deliver in any case, such as integration into Russia’s trading bloc.
Fence-sitting, under the circumstances, amounts to outsourcing the tough job of stabilizing Ukraine – and thus responsibility for a possible failure – to the European Union.
The EU, now mired in the problems of its own member states, might eventually offer Russia certain concessions in exchange for agreeing to share the burden of salvaging Ukraine, with its miserable economy.
Such concessions could include lifting restrictions on Russian energy trade in the EU and the visa-free travel long sought by Moscow.
If, after a time, things go well for Ukraine, Moscow would be able to deal with a functioning, established government capable of reciprocity.
If the new government fails, Ukraine will see a wave of popular resentment for the idea of integration with the EU, especially in the eastern regions and the Crimea.
This, in turn, would mobilize and empower proponents of closer ties with Moscow, who could then open its arms wide to embrace anyone disenchanted with the Europeans.
Nabi Abdullaev is the head of RIA Novosti’s Foreign-Language News Service.
The United States and Russia are to hold talks on easing east-west tensions over Ukraine as the west steps up efforts to persuade Moscow to pull its forces back to base in Crimea and avert the risk of a war.
The United States secretary of state, John Kerry, and the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, will meet face-to-face for the first time since the crisis escalated, after a conference in Paris attended by all five permanent members of the UN security council.
The French foreign minister, Laurent Fabius, said European Union leaders meeting in Brussels on Thursday could decide on sanctions against Russia if there is no ""de-escalation"" by then.
In Donetsk -– the home of deposed president Viktor Yanukovych and a flashpoint of tensions between pro-Russian and nationalist Ukrainians in eastern Ukraine – Ukrainian police seized the city's government headquarters from pro-Russian demonstrators who had occupied it.
On Wednesday morning, the Ukrainian flag was raised above the building, replacing the Russian flag that had flown there since Saturday, when protests had erupted following the announcement by the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, that he had the right to invade.
Protesters led by a man who declared himself ""people's governor"" had been barricaded in the regional administration building demanding relations with Kiev be severed and control of the security forces placed in their hands.
A police statement said the evacuation began after reports the building had been booby-trapped with explosives.
Putin on Tuesday defended Russia's actions in Crimea, a strategic Black Sea peninsula that is part of Ukraine but used to be Russian territory, and said he would use force only as a last resort.
His comments eased market fears of a war over the former Soviet republic.
But Russian forces remain in control of the region and Putin gave no sign of pulling servicemen – based in Crimea as part of the Black Sea fleet – back to base.
In Washington, Barack Obama acknowledged that Russia had legitimate interests in Ukraine but said that did not give Putin the right to intervene militarily.
A senior United States administration official said Obama spoke to the German chancellor Angela Merkel on Tuesday and discussed a potential resolution to the crisis.
His comments, coupled with the end of Russian war games near Ukraine's borders, lifted Russian bonds and stock markets around the world after a panic selloff on Monday.
The French president, Françcois Hollande, became the latest western leader to raise the possibility of sanctions if Putin did not step back and accept mediation.
The Canadian prime minister, Stephen Harper, said after speaking to Obama at the weekend that the G7 group of leading industrialised nations were considering meeting in the near future, a move that would pointedly exclude Russia.
Kerry, on his first visit to Kiev since the overthrow of Russian-backed president Viktor Yanukovych, accused Moscow of seeking a pretext to invade more of the country.
Yanukovych was expected to meet Lavrov, Hollande and the British foreign secretary, William Hague, on the sidelines of a Paris conference on Lebanon, before holding private talks with the Russian minister later in the day in the French capital.
Ukraine's acting foreign minister, Andriy Deshchitsia, was also in Paris for talks with French officials and Kerry.
The Ukrainian border guard service said Russian navy ships had blocked both ends of the Kerch Strait between Crimea and Russia, but Ukraine's infrastructure ministry said the 2.7-mile wide waterway was still open for civilian shipping.
