A History of Significant Accomplishments \ AAAWARVANOVO AAA Faces of the program : David Marples; students in Cambridge, UK; Eudokia Stasiuk In June 1990, CIUS officially established the Stasiuk Program for the Study of Contemporary Ukraine, with its initial work funded by a generous endowment from the Stasiuk family.
Vasyl, Eudokia, Anna, and Iakiv Stasiuk was supplemented by a 2:1 matching grant from the Government of Alberta and now funds a number of CIUS projects.
The Stasiuk Program was founded to take advantage of the enormous quantity of material available on this subject.
Its purpose was and remains to provide an accurate analysis of events in Ukraine for those engaged in Ukrainian studies, government and non-government organizations, the general public, and the media.
Since 1994, the program has been associated primarily with the name of Dr.
The Stasiuk blog site “Current Politics in Contemporary Ukraine” was established in 2007.
Over two decades, the Stasiuk Program has achieved great accomplishments, with the past year being the breakout one in conducting and disseminating research on contemporary Ukraine.
Indeed, the 2013-14 academic year has been the busiest in the history of the Stasiuk Program, which responded to events in Ukraine and acted as a resource base for local, national, and international media.
New challenges have been added to those already facing the institute, which I discussed at the beginning of my directorship.
The reorganization of CIUS, which began in 2011 after its formal integration into the Faculty of Arts, is accompanied by generational change and reform of institute activity at all levels.
The radical change of Ukraine’ political situation, which raises the existential question of whether independent Ukrainian statehood is “to be or not to be,’ brings new intellectual challenges to the fore.
In these remarks, I shall briefly characterize CIUS activity in the academic year 2013-14 and outline prospects for the development of the institute.
The integration of CIUS into the Faculty of Arts has encountered a number of problems.
A special commission created in May 2013 by Dean Lesley Cormack of the Faculty of Arts to assess the state of affairs at the institute has not yet completed its work.
We await the approval of a new organizational structure for the institute and a change of job descriptions for its support staff.
Zenon Kohut, director of the Kowalsky Program for the Study of Eastern Ukraine, and Dr.
David Marples, director of the Stasiuk Program for the Study of Contemporary Ukraine.
Marples has been appointed chair of the Department of History and Classics.
I would like to express my deep gratitude to both our esteemed colleagues for their dedicated service and my hope that their constructive association with the institute will continue.
Oleksandr Pankieiev has drafted plans for a Ukrainian studies portal, and I expect to see the results of his activity in the near future.
A process of staff renewal and professional development is under way at CIUS, and I can assure our readers that it will continue.
This geographic disadvantage can be overcome only by means of a well-developed academic information and communications network.
Lectures and presentations organized by the institute are now available for viewing on the Internet.
The next step will be the creation of an electronic archive of Ukrainian academic studies.
We plan to approve a number of special issues of the journal, also to be issued in printed form, and to solicit contributions from young Ukrainian authors.
The institute's system of communication with the world at large and Ukraine in particular is steadily broadening its reach.
CIUS has established a new annual award for research and publications in Ukrainian studies.
Natalia Yakovenko worked diligently to select candidates for the award, and the institute recently announced this year’s winners.
The Shoemakers Guild of Lviv from the Fifteenth to the Eighteenth Century, and Dr.
The growing intellectual potential of Ukrainian studies will become fully apparent only when Ukrainianlanguage publications are available to English-language readers.
While the institute has such well-qualified specialists as Myroslav Yurkevich and Roman Senkus, a special program for the translation into English of outstanding academic works by contemporary Ukrainian authors must be undertaken.
I call on interested members of the Ukrainian community to promote the development of such a program.
This will be a major contribution to the modernization of Ukraine's academic milieu.
The acute political crisis that initially engulfed Ukraine and then took on international proportions is perhaps the most serious challenge to European security since the Second World War.
After Georgia and Moldova, Ukraine became the next victim of Russia’s policy of aggression, which is meant to revise existing political borders and destabilize the international situation.
The annexation of the Crimea, the instigation and support of an armed separatist movement in southern and eastern Ukraine, and naked aggression against a sovereign neighbouring state all came as a shock to the international community, making it necessary for leading states to review many principles and mechanisms of their foreign policy.
During the past academic year, events in Ukraine have set the tone for CIUS and its activities.
Practically all members of the institute—Taras Kuzio, David Marples, Frank Sysyn, Bohdan Harasymiw, Zenon Kohut, Bohdan Klid, Jars Balan, Roman Shiyan, Marko Stech, Andrij Makuch, Uliana Pasicznyk, Roman Senkus, and Mykola Soroka—have taken an active part in conceptualizing and explaining the dramatic developments that long commanded world attention.
Taras Kuzio showed amazing energy in giving literally hundreds of interviews in several languages to the mass media of Canada, the United States, Ukraine, and many other countries.
CIUS organized several roundtables, seminars, presentations, and conferences on these subjects.
The institute provided financial and intellectual support to the Euromaidan web project and the international Maidan publishing project.
Roman Shiyan and Oleksandr Pankieiev supported this activity with outstanding organizational and information resources.
In assessing recent developments on the territory of Ukraine and Russia, I consider them in historical perspective.
On the one hand, they mark the final disintegration of Soviet national and cultural space—a process that began in the late 1980s and has only now taken on irreversible tendencies.
On the other hand, we are witnessing a new process of national consolidation among Ukrainians and Russians, respectively.
This means that previous transnational identities—both Soviet and East Slavic Orthodox—are continuing to erode and give way to more contemporary Ukrainian and Russian national identities.
In eastern Ukraine today, we see a process of national differentiation somewhat similar to the one that took place on the western, Polish-Ukrainian border in the mid-twentieth century.
A true rather than an illusory border with Russia is now taking shape in the east.
It requires substantiation not only in engineering terms but also in symbolic ones.
Unfortunately, Russian nationbuilding is accompanied by the activization of archaic premodern symbols and social practices.
Sooner or later, Russian Orthodox-cum-imperial identity will find itself confronting the challenges of modernity.
The prospective “reset” of Ukrainian national doctrine can make it more flexible and open to change.
Accordingly, territorial political symbols and social values are likely to play an increasing role in Ukrainian national development.
This in turn will make it necessary to reorganize Ukrainian administrative and territorial space as a whole, perhaps entailing a shift from regional administrative centres to a national one.
Developments in Ukraine have taken both Kremlin-based Russian nationalists and Brussels bureaucrats by surprise.
Once again, Ukrainian, Russian, national, European, and postcommunist studies find it necessary to revise their methodological resources.
At the moment, these fields of study are feeling the effects of the shortsighted decision of certain national governments to eliminate research on Eastern Europe as a whole and Russia, Ukraine, and post-Soviet space in particular.
That policy produced a manifest decline in the professional standard of those disciplines in Western universities.
The place and role of CIUS in yet another reconceptualization of social studies and the humanities in general has yet to be determined.
It is already apparent, however, that Ukraine's progressive transformation into a genuine subject of international law, given the rapid globalization of informational space and the continuing internationalization of Ukrainian studies, will confront the institute with increasing competition.
CIUS has no monopoly on knowledge about Ukraine and its interpretation in the Western world.
Consequently, it needs a clearer definition of its research priorities and professional identity.
I favor the model of a think tank that would allow Ukrainian studies to develop in a broad intellectual and interdisciplinary context.
The first steps toward a thematic reorientation of the institute’s research programs have already been taken.
Research on contemporary Ukraine has been designated as a priority of the institutes scholarly activity.
We have begun work on creating a milieu of the requisite expertise and providing the financing, technical resources, and premises required to sustain it.
The recently established long-term Stasiuk Fellowship Program will make it possible to host international experts on modern and contemporary affairs on an annual basis.
Frank Sysyn and the support of the Ukrainian Studies Fund at the Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute, Dr.
Taras Kuzio has begun work at CIUS on a study of the political elite in the eastern regions of Ukraine.
We are working toward the establishment of a Centre for Political and Regional Studies as part of CIUS and providing it with financial support.
Bohdan Harasymiw, CIUS has organized several international conferences on problems of the trafficking of women, European integration, and the political boundaries of Ukraine.
Together with our partners in Ukraine, the institute is planning new long-term research programs to study the Ukrainian-Russian border zone and the phenomenon of Ukrainian regional diversity.
The project directors have confirmed their intention to complete them by 2017.
Other traditional projects undertaken by the institute, particularly the Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine (Roman Senkus), must be reconceptualized in order to meet the requirements of today’s information society.
CIUS will be marking its fortieth anniversary in 2016—a wonderful opportunity to assess its role in the development of academic Ukrainian studies in the West and chart a course for further activity.
I call on all those involved in founding the institute and all those who support its current activities and take an interest in its future to help us establish an electronic archive of Ukrainian studies at CIUS, prepare anniversary materials, contribute to a series of oral history interviews, and work on publications devoted to the subject.
CIUS Monitors and Studies the Situation in Ukraine The Centre for Political and Regional Studies at CIUS has been especially busy this past year in view of political developments in Ukraine.
This was to draw attention to the European Union summit in Vilnius scheduled for November, at which a historic association agreement was to have been signed with Ukraine.
Experts from Ukraine and Canada were brought in to explain its significance.
Lori Thorlakson, professor of political science at the U of A and director of the EU Centre of Excellence on campus, served as discussant.
The idea for the conference was suggested by chancellor emeritus and CIUS founder Peter Savaryn and Professor David Marples, who delivered the keynote address.
Amanda Paul, policy analyst and programme executive at the European Policy Centre, Brussels, Belgium; Taras Kuzio; and Bohdan Nahaylo, independent scholar, veteran Ukraine watcher, and former senior official with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Their presentation was well attended by students, professors, and the general public, as well as the media.
Paul, Kuzio, and Nahaylo repeated their performance that same evening before an attentive and lively audience at St.
John’s Institute, co-sponsored by the Ukrainian-Canadian Congress— Alberta Provincial Council.
Opportunities and Obstacles”; a word from Bohdan maceda, the leading North American specialist on energy politics in the former Soviet Union.
Her most recent book, The Politics of Energy Dependency , exposes how trading in natural gas has made certain individuals connected to government very wealthy, while leaving Ukraine itself more vulnerable than ever.
Robert Murray, adjunct professor of political science at the U of A and vice-president, research, at the Frontier Centre for Public Policy.
During the first quarter of 2014, these events were supplemented by numerous media appearances by the CPRS acting coordinator, Professor Bohdan Harasymiw, and by in-house round tables organized at short noCIUS Newsletter 2014.
On the Brink of War, featuring CIUS director Volodymyr Kravchenko along with Jars Balan, David Marples, Bohdan Harasymiw, and Heather Coleman.
Its participants were David Marples of CIUS and, by Skype from Toronto, Taras Kuzio.
The conference, bringing together experts from Ukraine, Finland, Austria, and Canada, developed an understanding of the nature of forces challenging the integrity of state borders and identified feasible policy alternatives for governments of postcommunist nations such as Ukraine in responding to such challenges.
While the above activities have been very successful in stimulating interest in Ukraine's political difficulties, the long-term aim of the CPRS is to become a world-class hub for research about present-day Ukraine in all the social-science disciplines.
This requires the establishment of a multi-milliondollar endowment that will properly fund a whole range of appropriate programs—a full-time coordinator, scholarly exchanges and fellowships, research projects, conferences, and publications—concerned with developing vital knowledge about Ukraine as a vital twenty-first-century nation-state.
New Quests, Pursuits and Opportunities ULEC has had a vibrant year promoting Ukrainian language education, developing learning resources, conducting research regarding enrollment sustainability and continuing to expand its professional, academic and community partnerships.
ULEC promotes Ukrainian language education by supporting teachers, disseminating research findings, and enabling students of Ukrainian to take international exams.
To address vital issues of Ukrainian language and culture education in the twenty-first century, the second national conference of Ukrainian Teachers of Canada was held in Edmonton on 2-4 May 2014 in conjunction with the 40th anniversary of Ukrainian bilingual education in Alberta.
Organized by the National Ukrainian Education Council of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, the conference received support from ULEC and other organizations.
At the conference, ULEC was recognized as a leading centre of Ukrainian education.
Alla Nedashkivska, acting director of ULEC, addressed the challenging question of the future of Ukrainian education at the post-secondary level.
Changing for Engagement” (Edmonton, October 7-8, 2014) Along with her graduate students Ms.
Ukrainian at the Post-Secondary Level” In her keynote speech, ULEC’s senior advisor Dr.
Hands-on support from ULEC team members Halyna Klid and Mykola Soroka was welcomed by attendees.
This year , twenty Alberta students took the exam, and almost all scored well over 60%, meaning that they were eligible to study at universities in Ukraine.
The students come from three school districts in which the Ukrainian Bilingual Program is offered— Edmonton Catholic Schools, Edmonton Public Schools, and Elk Island Catholic Schools.
Olena Hartsula, the Ukrainian language advisor at Alberta Education, facilitated the oral component of the exam and assisted with other educational projects throughout the year.
In addition to finalizing the oral literature components for Nova 5 and 6, which will soon be available online free of charge, the centre has also embarked on the digitization of the popular Tut i Tam series, beginning with the textbooks that are now out of print.
This project takes advantage of new technology and its broader outreach potential.
Benefiting from the latest teaching methods and new technology, ULEC’s third learning resources development project is directed at the post-secondary level.
Alla Nedashkivska, also an associate professor in the Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies , U of A, with the support of her two research assistants, Olena Sivachenko and Oksana Perets, is researching and developing online modules for a blended-learning method of delivery of the Beginners’ Ukrainian course.
Beginning in Fall 2015, U of A students will be able to have two hours of independent online study in addition to three in-class hours of instruction per week.
Nedashkivska also worked on redesigning the online Business Ukrainian textbook for compatibility with all electronic platforms.
Bringing together four universities from Edmonton and Ukraine in a rapid-response real-time research project, she and co-director Dr.
Funded by CIUS, the Kule Institute for Advanced Studies, the Alberta Foundation for Ukrainian Education Society , and the Ukrainian Resource and Development Centre at MacEwan, this innovative project partnered with four universities in Canada and Ukraine and extended participation to universities in Canada, the United States, Brazil, Europe, and Ukraine.
Oleh Inytskyj launched a special interdisciplinary course in which students use the newly created online materials.
Sustaining student enrollment has become a major concern for Ukrainian language programs from pre-school to university.
To address the issue, ULEC has initiated research, public discussions, and surveys with parents, children, teachers, and alumni on expectations, strengths, and visions for the UBP and Ukrainian Saturday schools.
A needs analysis of the Ukrainian Studies Program at the U of A further facilitates the redesign of curricula.
Community partners are helping to fund research assistants for these studies.
A paper elaborating on these ideas is currently under peer review for a Canadian scholarly journal.
National Ukrainian Education Council and Alberta Provincial Council-Education Committee, the Faculty of Education and the Faculty of Arts, U of A, and parent groups.
ULEC has been successful in obtaining donor support for immediate projects, thanks to the Alberta Foundation for Ukrainian Education Society, the Alberta Ukrainian Commemorative Society, the Alberta Society for the Advancement of Ukrainian Studies, the Ukrainian Canadian Foundation of Taras Shevchenko, and some individual donations.
Additional support for ULEC will be crucial to bringing Ukrainian education to a new level in the twenty-first century.
Many of the interviews focus on the interwar period and World War II, when these women lived through remarkable historical events.
The volume includes a preface by Yaroslav Hrytsak and an introduction by Iroida Wynnyckyj.
It is accompanied by a CD recording of portions of the published interviews.
The volume initiates the series “Memoirs, Diaries, and Interviews” of the Library of the journal Ukraina New Publications Moderna.
Thanks to Ushkalov’s erudition and his extensive and intimate knowledge of Shevchenko’s works and biography, his “Shevchenko encyclopedia” sheds light on many unknown and insufficiently studied aspects of Shevchenkos life and works and is presented in a lively and very readable form.
LoS pepscumiegene ef Bohdan Medwidsky 36ipwMnnanowany ~ Beorgana MeppigcpKoro: Proverbs in Motion Proverbs in Motion: A Festschrift in Honour of Bohdan Medwidsky is a collection of academic essays and greetings in honour of Bohdan Medwidsky, academic, program builder, community activist, fundraiser, and philanthropist.
His academic research has focused on Ukrainian proverbs, the historiography of Ukrainian folklore studies, and Ukrainian-Canadian oral traditions.
Contributors to the volume include North American and European colleagues, as well as former students.
The volume includes biographical information, a bibliography of works by Bohdan Medwidsky, and three previously unpublished studies by the honouree.
The academic articles, some written in English and others in Ukrainian, encompass several disciplines, including folklore, history, and literary studies.
The author recounts the courage and dedication of human-rights activists in the former USSR and efforts by their supporters in the West to lobby Western governments to pressure the political establishments of the USSR and other Eastern-bloc countries to implement the human-rights provisions of the Helsinki Final Act.
The author also provides insight into the evolution of the Helsinki Process and the development of Western commitment to human rights, all of which contributed to the revolutionary changes of the late 1980s and early 1990s in Eastern Europe.
This Ukrainian translation of Ukraine between East and West presents twelve essays by the distinguished Byzantinist Thor Sevéenko that explore the development of Ukrainian cultural identity under the disparate influences of the Byzantine Empire and Western Europe, mediated through Poland.
As the author points out, Byzantium was the source from which Kyivan Rus’ received Christianity and a highly developed literary and artistic culture that stimulated Kyiv’s own achievements in those fields.
Similarly important were the effects of the Counter-Reformation and of Polish lay and clerical institutions on early modern Ukraine's political and cultural life.
Overall, the collection offers a wealth of detail and the author's richly informed analytical perspective.
The essays will be a rewarding read not only for students of Byzantine and East European history but also for anyone interested in cultural formation and development.
Oleh Pavlyshyn’s meticulously researched volume draws upon numerous documents from the archives of Lviv, Kyiv, Warsaw, Munich, and Ottawa, shedding light on previously unknown or little-known aspects of Petrushevych's life and professional and political activities.
In particular, this book contains the first detailed description of the activities of Petrushevychss External Representation Centre in Berlin in the years 1923-32.
Yevhen Petrushevychss biography is presented in the broad context of the Ukrainian struggle for independence and the political situation in East Central Europe in the early twentieth century.
The publication of this richly illustrated booklet has been sponsored by CIUS and the Ucrainica Research Institute, Toronto.
It surveys the history of medieval and early modern Baturyn, which was the capital of the Ukrainian Cossack state from 1669 to 1708 and the residence of hetmans, high-ranking officials, church hierarchs, Cossack officers, and the cultural elite.
The prosperity of the town under Hetman Ivan Mazepa and its destruction in 1708 by Russian troops during his antiMoscow rebellion are described in detail.
The authors examine the CanadianUkrainian excavation project conducted in 2012-13 at the site of Mazepa’s ruined villa in Baturyn.
Archaeological data provides insights into the lifestyle, education, intellectual pursuits, and cultural interests of the Cossack officers and officials at the hetman’s court.
Within the first few months of the institute's existence, in the autumn of 1976, the first issue of the Journal of Ukrainian Graduate Studies was published.
The Journal quickly attracted contributions from established scholars as well as from students, and in 1980 it was renamed the Journal of Ukrainian Studies to reflect this reality.
Among the graduate-student Roman Senkus contributors who went on to pursue university careers in Ukrainian studies were such scholars as Olga Andriewsky, Marko Bojcun, Yury Boshyk, John-Paul Himka, Oleh Ilnytzkyj, John Jaworsky, Bohdan Kordan, Alexander Motyl, Bohdan Nahaylo, Marko Pavlyshyn, Jaroslav Petryshyn, Thomas M Prymak, Myroslav Shkandrij, Maxim Tarnawsky, and Stephen Velychenko.
In its first decade, JUS had from eight hundred to a thousand subscribers.
Until 1982 JUS was edited by ProfesJOURNAL OF UKRAINIAN GRADUATE STUDIES Inaugural issue of the Journal sor Luckyj and managing editor Roman Senkus at the CIUS Toronto Office.
Thereafter Mr Senkus—the longestserving CIUS staff member—continued editing JUS until the end of 1985, when his duties as senior manuscript editor of the Encyclopedia of Ukraine became too onerous to continue editing JUS as well.
Kohut was appointed acting director of the CIUS and work on the Encyclopedia of Ukraine project was wound down, Roman Senkus was reappointed the JUS editor in chief at the CIUS Toronto Office.
In his second term as editor , Mr Senkus solicited articles and book reviews from scholars in Ukraine and expanded the book-review section in each issue.
Mr Senkus was appointed director of the CIUS Publications Program in 2001, and in 2003 he hired his erstwhile encyclopedia colleague Dr.
Zakydalsky ably served as the editor in chief until his premature death in November 2007.
From 2008 to 2014 Mr Senkus served as the editor in chief for a third term, with the assistance of Dr.
Altogether thirty-seven volumes of JUS were published from 1976 to 2014.
Professor Oleh IInytzkyj was appointed the editor in chief of the new journal.
Its first issue appeared in the summer of 2014 and can be viewed for free at ewjus.com/ojs/index.php/ewjus.
In 2014, volume 10 of the History, the last in the subseries on The History of the Ukrainian Cossacks, was published by CIUS Press.
Its three chapters constitute only the first part of the volume as Hrushevsky planned it.
When he wrote them in 1929-30, the Soviet authorities in Moscow had begun their sweeping attack on Ukraine's political and cultural autonomy.
After the historian’s death in 1934, his daughter, Kateryna, edited the incomplete volume 10 and managed to have it published in 1936.
The late hetman's son and designated successor, Iurii, was not yet of age and did not command the loyalty of the Cossack rank and file.
Vyhovsky emerged as a ‘caretaker’ identified with the Cossack officer establishment.
He was soon faced with a revolt of Zaporozhian Cossacks led by a rival for command of the Host, Iakiv Barabash, and the colonel of Poltava, Martyn Pushkar.
Although Vyhovsky routed their forces in battle, his relations with Muscovy grew increasingly difficult, as he suspected the tsarist government of exploiting rank-andfile dissatisfaction in order to depose him.
In his introduction to the volume, Andrew Pernal discusses its sources and structure.
The complete twelve-volume set of the History is available at a subscription price of $1,100.
Volumes 7 to 10 (in six books), presenting the History of the Ukrainian Cossacks, are available at a subscription price of $600.
Professors Martin Schulze Wessel and Frank E Sysyn are the guest editors of the nine conference papers.
Kerstin Jobst examines transnational (Polish, Belarusian, and Ukrainian) and transdenominational (Roman Catholic and Uniate/ Greek Catholic) aspects of the cult of St.
Josaphat Kuntsevych and illustrates how the cult of the saint was utilized by contending religious and national groups in a development that was far from linear.
Burkhard Woller uses the historiography of the 1595-96 Church Union of Brest to examine how it and the church it engendered were variously evaluated by Polish and Ukrainian historians.
Martin Schulze Wessel aie Fone is Sysyn , the guest editors of the vo Tie accepted roles of the Orthodox and Greek Catholic clergy in the creation of Modern Standard Ukrainian and provides a more nuanced vision of the view that the language was largely a creation of laypersons in Russian-ruled Ukraine and clergy in Habsburg Galicia.
Tobias Grill in his study crosses and recrosses the border of the Habsburg and Romanov empires to show how the rabbinate was reshaped to fit into the contemporary world.
Frank E Sysyn examines how Father Mykhailo Zubrytsky conceived his political and cultural agenda for his Greek Catholic parishioners as part of a reform movement that also changed religious practices.
Liliana Hentosh studies the Vatican's policy on the Polish-Ukrainian War of 1918-19 in the light of Catholic views on nation and self-determination.
Oleh Pavlyshyn takes up the questions of rapid political and social change in the first decades of the twentieth century in his discussion of the calendar question in the Ukrainian Catholic Church, which not only had to deal with the replacement of Habsburg rule with Poland’s but also with the rapid expansion of a Ukrainian diaspora.
Martha Bohachevsky-Chomiak examines tensions between the hierarchy of the Ukrainian Catholic Church and the Ukrainian secular intelligentsia in the first third of the twentieth century.
Leonid Heretz seeks to set out a model of modernization and the secular world’s penetration of Ukrainian village society on the basis of interviews with former inhabitants of a few Boiko villages who were young in the interwar period.
The remaining sixtythree pages of the volume contain reviews of twenty-seven books in Ukrainian studies.
Marples took part in three events organized by CIUS concerning events in Ukraine.
Taras Kuzio, in a round table on “Russia's Annexation of Crimea and the Future of Ukraine” at the Telus Centre on the university campus.
Among the media interviews on Ukraine were more than a dozen for CTV News.
On 26 February he was on Alberta Prime Time, Global Television in Edmonton.
Marples was interviewed on the CBC Radio Radioactive program and gave three CBC Radio Syndicate interviews (a total of 20 altogether) to radio stations across Canada.
He gave separate interviews to CBC Calgary and CBC Saskatchewan and took part in a discussion with Katrina vanden Heuvel, editor of The Nation, on a program titled “Finding Ways out of the Ukraine Crisis” on “Uprising” Radio in Los Angeles on 5 March.
In March, during meetings in Warsaw, Poland, he also appeared on Polskie TV for an interview that included the acting Ukrainian foreign minister, Andrii Deshchytsia, as well as on TOK Radio.
The program solicited articles by a number of prominent contributors, while Dr.
One was to the Legal Forum (a gathering of senior Edmonton lawyers) at the Royal Mayfair Club on 21 March.
He also talked to Grade 11 and 12 students at Victoria School in Edmonton on 9 May.
Empire, Violence, and Ideology in Eurasia from the First to the Second World War.
Every year CIUS holds numerous public events that, for a variety of reasons, cannot be attended by all those interested in our activities.
Considering the popularity of social media outlets and their untapped potential for CIUS projects, the institute has appointed an assistant for information research and communications, Oleksandr Pankieiev, to help organize seminars, conduct interviews, and post materials on the web.
This initiative will improve the visibility of CIUS in cyberspace and promote current academic knowledge in Ukrainian studies.
It is no coincidence that the YouTube channel was activated during the recent crisis in Ukraine.
The first video posted on the channel featured an address by the institute's director, Volodymyr Kravchenko, presenting his evaluation of the origins of Ukraine's political crisis.
Within the first twentyfour hours of its posting, the address was viewed by close to a thousand individuals.
This significant number indicates the importance of conducting prompt analysis of current events in Ukraine and sharing it with those engaged in Ukrainian studies and with a general audience.
Members of CIUS staff, led by Oleksandr Pankieiev, are also creating brief video blogs on recent developments, responding to the interest shown by English-speaking members of the Ukrainian-Canadian community.
No less important is a series of interviews with leading Ukrainian experts taken by Mr Pankieiev via Skype and posted on the YouTube channel.
Volodymyr Kulyk, an expert in media discourse, language policies, identity, and nationalism, and Vadym Khmarsky, who offered an invaluable assessment of the recent tragic events in Odesa.
The institute's YouTube channel will soon become even more multifunctional.
There are already plans to feature presentations by CIUS scholars in interactive webinars during which questions from the audience can be asked and discussions held in realtime format.
Moreover, the institute is finalizing plans to produce and air short films and programs covering its research activities and paying tribute to members of the Ukrainian-Canadian community who are contributing to the development of Ukrainian studies in Canada.
A Conference on the Eightieth Anniversary The Holodomor Research and Education Consortium , launched in January 2013, has quickly established itself as a leader in Holodomor studies.
In its first year of activity, HREC organized two major conferences reflecting its main tasks—research and education.
Nineteen early-career scholars received stipends to attend, encouraging interaction between established scholars and a new generation.
The Holodomor Education Conference, the first conference in North America devoted to the teaching of the Holodomor, brought together fifty educators, community activists, and students from Canada and the United States in May 2013.
HREC activities focused on education include consultations with school boards and ministries to ensure inclusion of the Holodomor in curricula and other educational venues.
HREC representatives made numerous presentations in schools this Povo, # x aA past year, the eightieth anniversary year of the Holodomor.
HREC held a Holodomor Workshop for early-career scholars on 6-7 June 2014, with representation from Ukraine, Russia, Kazakhstan, Italy, the United States, Canada, and England.
Professors Andrea Graziosi and Liudmyla Hrynevych provided guidance on theoretical approaches and methodology.
By supporting the development of a new generation of scholars, HREC ensures that the Holodomor will receive the scholarly attention it deserves into the future.
HREC supported the Kule Ukrainian Canadian Studies Centre in its investigation of Canadian Englishlanguage newspapers, especially those published in Winnipeg (home of the Canadian grain exchange), culling material on the treatment of topics related to the Holodomor.
Discussion at the workshop led by Andrea Graziosi HREC awarded eleven project support grants through a competition to support new research and preservation of materials.
HREC is also supporting the preservation of interviews undertaken in making the film Harvest of Despair.
Considering the tight financial situation and the level of expertise, contacts, and experience required, Professor Kohut then submitted his recommendation that Professor Volodymyr Kravchenko take over the directorship of the Kowalsky Program.
Despite numerous challenges, the KEUI staff led by Volodymyr Kulikov conducted planned research on the project “National and Regional Identities of Sloboda Ukraine in Historical Perspective, published a double issue of the journal East-West under the title Neo-AntiColonialism vs.
The Relevance of Post-Colonial Discourse in Post-Soviet Space, completed the editing of Johann-Christian Engel’s History of Ukraine and the Ukrainian Cossacks in Ukrainian translation and submitted it for publication, and held the annual ceremony for students receiving this years Kowalsky awards in Ukrainian Studies.
He has been a visiting scholar at the German Historical Institute in Moscow, the New European College in Bucharest, and the Institute for Eastern and Southern European Studies in Regensburg.
He is a member of the international Association for History and Computing and the Association for Economic History.
He heads the project on “Industrialization and the Urban Landscape of the Industrial South in the Russian Empire,” which is being conducted under the auspices of the Centre for the Urban History of East Central Europe in Lviv.
His scholarly interests involve the history of business, the history of knowledge transfer, labour history, and digital history.
Elected was Volodymyr Milchev, whose education and academic career have been inseparably associated with this department for the last twenty-five years.
He earned his doctorate in history there, becoming professor and chair of Primary Sources, Historiography, and Specialized Historical Disciplines.
He belongs to the “school” of the late Professor Anatolii Boiko , known for studies of various topics related to the history and culture of the Ukrainian steppe region.
Today, both beginners and established scholars are studying the region’s social history, employing new primary sources, conducting annual archaeographic and ethnographic expeditions, and otherwise researching Steppe Ukraine's rich past under the competent and helpful guidance of Professor Milchev.
The Kowalsky Program and CIUS extend their greetings to the new dean of history and wish him a successful and productive tenure, as well as new and exciting collaborative projects with our institute.
CIUS Newsletter 2014 WZ, Dimensions of Global Confrontations in the Twentieth Century The Zaporizhia branch of the Kowalsky Eastern Ukrainian Institute co-organized and held an international scholarly conference dedicated to the centennial of the First World War in Zaporizhia on 6-7 February 2014.
These undertakings have considerably increased the scholarly importance of the conference and the publication alike.
Also under consideration in papers presented at the symposium were the fates of more than 80,000 residents of Canada forced to register and report to authorities because they were deemed to be suspicious, and several thousand Ukrainians who managed to enlist in the Canadian Expeditionary Force despite prohibitions preventing former residents of Austria-Hungary from serving in the Armed Forces.
Plans are now underway to publish select papers from the conference, the goal of which was to shed new light on the various challenges that confronted the “foreign element” in Canada during the war.
In the meantime, research continued on the reporting in the Canadian press about the First Five-Year Plan in Soviet Ukraine, focusing in particular on the years of the Great Famine-Holodomor.
Investigations have already revealed that Canadian periodicals carried extensive if sometimes contradictory news coverage about Stalin's campaign of deliberate starvation and his brutal oppression of Ukrainians.
Preparations are also now beginning on initiatives to commemorate the 125th anniversary of Ukrainian settlement in Canada in 2016-17.
Serge Cipko, UDSI coordinator, brings together news stories relating to Ukrainians outside Ukraine and is sent to recipients on six continents.
The UDSI was established in late 2006 with a donation of $100,000 from Drs.
In 2007, Peter and Doris Kule made a further donation to CIUS that led to the elevation of its Ukrainian Canadian Program to the Kule Ukrainian Canadian Studies Centre.
Several news items in Ukrainians Abroad have concerned the topic of return migration.
Now and then, articles have been translated from Ukrainian and other languages into English.
Another feature has been announcements of conferences, books, articles, and other activities that relate in some way to the Ukrainian diaspora.
The Making of a Community $29.95 $59.95 Argentina, the eighth largest country in the world, has relied heavily on Hanlanlke|ecdco) ako) ofeyoy-1qiie ofe) olUit-1alolaniial 1914 circa thirty percent of the Argentine population was classified as foreign-born.
The Making of a Community Serge Cipko Available from CIUS Press: www.ciuspress.com CIUS Newsletter 2014 19 Excavating Hetman Mazepa’s Capital of Baturyn In 2013, the CanadianUkrainian archaeological expedition resumed its excavations of the site of Hetman Ivan Mazepas principal residence in the Baturyn suburb of Honcharivka.
Mazepa commissioned an ambitious three-story masonry palace there that was destroyed during the razing of the town by Russian troops in 1708.
Research revealed that its main elevation was adorned with brick semicolumns crowned by limestone Corinthian capitals carved by local craftsmen.
Initially, these order elements were painted in a red ochre colour and stood out distinctly against the whitewashed walls.
The combination of red and white was probably borrowed from the ornamentation of some Mannerist and Baroque palaces, villas, or castles in Central Europe.
Before 1708, the red order elements and entire facades of the Honcharivka palace were completely whitewashed, probably in keeping with the contemporary decorative practice of the Hetmanate.
The floor of Mazepa’s palace was paved with ornate ceramic tiles of varied shapes covered with green and blue Artifacts found on the site of Mazepa's capital last year glazing.
The application of carved-stone and numerous glazed polychrome ceramic details at Mazepa'’s main residence in Baturyn attests to the rich and distinctive nature of its embellishment.
Archaeological research has shown that the predominant Western baroque-style outer adornment of the Honcharivka palace was supplemented with local and Kyivan decorative methods.
The ornamental glazed ceramic tiles were perhaps manufactured by expert Kyivan tile-makers invited by Mazepa to Baturyn.
Also, the expedition partially excavated the remnants of a sizeable service structure.
It was presumably inhabited either by Cossack officers and adjutants or scribes/clerks working at Mazepa's court.
Discovered artifacts testify to the high level of craftsmanship in Baturyn, to the penetration of European literature and art into the town, and to its extensive trade connections with the West, Russia, and the Ottoman Empire.
In 2013, a Turkish coin of Sultan Suleiman II dating from 1688 was found there.
Some articles of Cossack officers’ accoutrement have been reconstructed using computer techniques.
In the Baturyn fortress, the broken head of a terracotta female figurine, possibly a doll, was unearthed.
Conceivably, it was fashioned by a local artist in a naive realistic folk manner.
This find represents a truly unique piece of art of vernacular toys of early modern Ukraine.
At the cemetery of the ruined Holy Trinity Cathedral in the fortress, arThe broken head of a terracotta female figurine, possibly a doll chaeologists exhumed eight graves dating from the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
The remains of a man with a broken skull can be identified as those of a victim of the 1708 Russian attack on Baturyn.
Thanks to the work of our expedition, Baturyn has become the only one of several capitals of the Hetmanate where annual systematic field explorations have been carried out for thirteen years.
These are vital to the study of the hitherto little-known culture and lifestyle of the Cossack elite.
The Baturyn project is sponsored by CIUS, the Shevchenko Scientific Society of America, the Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies , and the Ucrainica Research Institute in Toronto.
Volodymyr Mezentsev and Professor Martin Dimnik have taken part in the archaeological research and the publication of its materials.
The 2013 expedition involved 70 students and scholars from universities and museums in Chernihiv, Kyiv, Hlukhiv, and Sumy.
One of the chief purposes of the visit was to promote academic ties between Ukrainian universities and their Canadian counterparts.
On their first day in Edmonton, the three Ukrainian visitors held a morning meeting with CIUS director Professor Volodymyr Kravchenko and staff, where they were informed of the institute’s work, especially its activities in Ukraine.
Later that morning, they held discussions with the dean of the Faculty of Arts, Professor Lesley Cormack, on prospects of joint programs, joint degrees, a summer school in Ukraine, and student exchanges.
Ukrainian guests discussed challenges and opportunities in this important field.
CIUS remains instrumental in facilitating contacts between Ukrainian universities and their Canadian counterparts, which go beyond disciplines usually associated with Ukrainian studies.
Hirka discussed the importance and prospects of medical physics in Ukraine, as well as arrangements for training specialists in this important field in Canada who would then return and work in their homeland.
PH News from the Program on Religion and Culture This was an active year for public lectures organized by the Program on Religion and Culture.
The Significance of the Ukrainian Commemoration of the 1025th Anniversary of the Christianization of Rus” The director of the program, Heather Coleman, spoke on the subject “Making a National Saint in the Southwest Borderland: St.
Father Hovorun spoke on recent developments in Ukraine, which he described as a social awakening and the birth of civil society.
He focused on the role of the Ukrainian churches in the protests, showing how the Maidan had a strong religious dimension.
He also suggested ways of building a new Cyril Hovorun Ukraine with the active presence of churches on the construction site.
The first of these well-attended presentations was held on campus, the second at St.
In summer 2013, project members travelled to northern Saskatchewan to document Ukrainian church architecture, art, and spiritual culture.
Co-investigators John-Paul Himka, Natalie Kononenko, and Frances Swyripa presented their findings at the Canadian Association of Slavists’ annual conference in St.
Organized by the Ukrainian Self-Reliance Association of Canada, it was held at St.
The symposium brought together prominent historians, theologians, religious studies scholars, clergy, and activists from all Orthodox ecclesiastical formations in Ukraine, the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada, the Ukrainian Catholic Church, the Ecumenical Patriarchate, and the Orthodox Church in America to discuss the Kyivan Orthodox tradition within the context of world Orthodoxy and the current religious situation in Ukraine.
At once a scholarly and a religious event, the seminar was welcomed by participants as the beginning of further research collaborations and co-operation between churches.
Religion, Politics and Society in Contemporary Ukraine’ This book, to be co-edited by Heather Coleman, Paul Gavrilyuk, and Cyril Hovorun, will explore the religious dimension of the Ukrainian revolution that we have witnessed this year, and will contain interviews with Maidan participants and analyses by historians, religion scholars, political scientists, theologians, and anthropologists.
This year’s annual Shevchenko Lecture, organized by CIUS and cosponsored with the Ukrainian Professional and Business Club , featured a presentation by Professor Tamara Hundorova, an internationally renowned scholar in the fields of literary studies, modern literary theoretical concepts, modern Ukrainian literature, cultural studies, and literary criticism.
Few people seem to know that Taras Shevchenko wrote prose as well as poetry.
Although there were reasons for his prose texts to remain largely obscure to literary scholars, and even more so to the general public, this aspect of Shevchenkos rich legacy offers a unique perspective on a deep and highly personal relationship between the poet and his beloved fatherland, Ukraine.
Indeed, the author seemed to change proverbial literary masks as effortlessly as he changed peasant clothing for the attire of a person of higher social standing.
Nonetheless, it would be an overstatement to maintain that the sole purpose of Shevchenkos writing his prose in Russian was to address readers in the Russian imperial capital, St.
Shevchenko’ mask of an author speaking and writing in Russian and addressing the so-called “middle class” of his time proved quite different from his “Ukrainian mask,’ displayed in a letter from exile to his compatriots active in the Ukrainian national movement.
Shevchenkoss Russian-language prose is replete with play, irony, and deliberate mystification.
A textual analysis of Shevchenkos prose demonstrates the richness of his arsenal of literary disguises.
In allowing his character to speak, Shevchenko played with his imagination, splitting his personality—a narrator and listener on the one hand, an author and literary character on the other.
Shevchenko’s choice of Darmohrai as a disguise served an important therapeutic function, helping him overcome the social, geographic, and cultural isolation of exile.
Separated physically from his friends and his native land, Shevchenko-Darmohrai wandered the expanses of his beloved Ukraine in imagination, remembering places he had visited and people he had met.
Simultaneously, Shevchenko created Ukraine as an imagined entity, using descriptions based on ideas of ethnic and social transformations that were important to him—projections of his “ideal” perceptions.
Those transformations involved human characters, languages, clothing, and landscapes.
In one of his stories, “A Delightful Stroll Not Without a Moral, Shevchenko offers a vivid composite portrait of his female “compatriot,” a member of his audience whom he likely addressed in his thoughts.
This image must have served as Shevchenko’s ideal embodiment of his mother, of Ukraine, and of a future wife.
In another story, Darmohrai engages in masquerade, exchanging clothes befitting a lord for those of a servant in order to join the common people's festivities.
This symbolic change of identity allows Shevchenko to join his characters, with whom he shares language, social status, culture, and ethnicity.
To Shevchenko, the use of masks and disguises proved his ability to masquerade, play, and take on alternative identities.
Darmohrai thus reveals to us a Shevchenko very different from the iconic image of him that we have all learned to know and cherish.
The round table was held at the Hrushevsky Memorial Museum at 9 Pankiv Street, where the historian and his family resided from the 1920s to the 1940s.
The museum’ director, Svitlana Pankova, spoke on behalf of the coorganizers.
Yaroslav Fedoruk, noted the milestones of Professor Kohut’s academic biography, emphasizing the productive cooperation between CIUS and the Institute of Ukrainian Archaeography during his directorship.
Speaking on behalf of the IUA, its assistant director, Oleksandr Mavrin, recalled the timely support of Professor Kohut and CIUS in the fall of 2013, when the IUA and the Ahatanhel Krymsky Institute of Oriental Studies both faced closure by the Ukrainian authorities then in office.
The intervention of Ukrainian and international academia prevented the planned closure.
He recalled the difficulties facing Western students of early modern Ukraine from the 1960s to the 1980s, when the field was dominated by Russian-inspired English-language historiography.
Zenon Kohut, along with his Harvard colleagues and their leader at a Round Ti fi and teacher, Professor Omeljan Pritsak, had to counter the prevailing trend in order to convince North American academics that Ukrainian history was a subject in its own right.
Their efforts gave rise to a new trend in Englishlanguage historiography.
Professor Kohut’s academic achievements in the study of eighteenthand nineteenth-century Ukrainian history were featured in an address by Dr.
Imperial Absorption of the Hetmanate, 1760s-1830s (Cambridge, Mass., 1988; Ukrainian translation: Kyiv, 1996) and subsequent publications represented a breakthrough in studying the decline of the autonomous Ukrainian Cossack polity, its origins and consequences.
Thor Hyrych discussed Ukrainian “autonomists” in the Russian Empire during the first third of the Si a photo at the celebration nineteenth century, noting the importance of conceptualism in Professor Kohut’s works, and likening his approach to that of Dr.
Viktor Brekhunenko concentrated on key developments in historiography of the late 1980s, when the image of Ukraine was still being formed by specialists in Russian studies and proponents of the so-called “Polish vision” of history.
Professor Kohut'’s monograph, published in 1988, was highly important in changing this situation.
Brekhunenko also referred to the notable support for studies in the history of southern and eastern Ukraine offered by CIUS under Professor Kohut’ directorship, which saw the creation of the Kowalsky Eastern Ukrainian Institute in Kharkiv.
Taras Chukhlib focused on Professor Kohut'’s contribution to the study of Ukraine in world history, while Dr.
Viacheslav Stanislavsky stressed the importance of his historical writings for the consolidation of the Ukrainian nation.
Yaroslav Hrytsak, who edited the writings of Ivan Lysiak-Rudnytsky, described Zenon Kohut as one of 24.
CIUS Newsletter 2014 Lysiak-Rudnytsky’s best students and one of the most prominent historians of Ukraine of the late 18th and early 19th centuries.
Other congratulatory addresses to Zenon Kohut were delivered by his colleagues Drs.
Ferhad Turanli, Tetiana Yaroshenko and Dmytro Vyrsky, and Oksana Yurkova.
Zenon Kohut then spoke of his academic career and his overriding interest in the problem of identity.
In his own words, biography played no small role in the development of such an interest.
Zenon Kohut was brought up with a strong sense of Ukrainian identity, but declaring it while growing up resulted in a host of problems.
This led him to study the birth and development of the Ukrainian nation, which began with research on modern Ukrainian political thought.
The genesis of that intellectual tradition is difficult to grasp without a detailed study of the liquidation of the Cossack Hetmanate and its integration into the Russian Empire, which became the focus of his monograph.
This important question was largely resolved in Professor Kohut’s two collections of articles.
According to him, the early modern Ukrainian political elite adapted the legacy of Kyivan Rus’ in order to formulate the concept of Cossack Ukraine as the “fatherland” of the Ukrainian people.
Another important factor was the continuing struggle of the Cossacks for their rights and freedoms.
Alexandra Chernenko Lysiak-Rudnytsky, an accomplished poet, writer and literary scholar, passed away on 24 June 2014 at the age of 90 in Edmonton.
Alexandra attended medical school between 1942-44 in Lviv, then in Danzig , Poland, and Graz, Austria.
Ivan Lysiak-Rudnytsky, a professor of history at the U of A A specialist in Ukrainian literature, Dr.
She was a member of the Shevchenko Scientific Society in Canada, the Ukrainian Academy of Arts and Sciences, the Ukrainian Writers’ Association “Slovo; PEN International , the Association of Writers of Ukraine, the Canadian Association of Slavists, the Alberta Council for Ukrainian Arts, and St.
Volodymyr, Local History, and the First Celebration of the Christianization of Rus’ in Kyiv in 1888” 3 October.
David Marples (Department of History and Classics; Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies, U of A) 4 October.
Jelena Pogosjan (Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies, U of A) 30 January.
Oksana Kis (Department of Modern Ethnology, Institute of Ethnology, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine) 5 March.
Volodymyr Kravchenko , Jars Balan (administrative coordinator, Kule Ukrainian Canadian Studies Centre, CIUS, U of A), David Marples (director, Stasiuk Program for the Study of Contemporary Ukraine, CIUS, U of A), Bohdan Harasymiw (coordinator, Centre for Political and Regional Studies, CIUS, U of A), and Heather Coleman 25 March.
Tamara Hundorova (Department of Literary Theory, Shevchenko Institute of Literature, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine) 3 April.
David R Marples (director, Stasiuk Program for the Study of Contemporary Ukraine, CIUS, U of A), and Taras Kuzio (research associate, Centre for Political and Regional Studies, CIUS, U of A) 10 April.
A History of the Nationalities Problem in the USSR (with Victor Swoboda, 1990), The Ukrainian Resurgence , and hundreds of articles and analyses.
Nahaylo sees this “battle for Ukraine’ as a defining moment not only for Ukraine's struggle for sovereignty and freedom, but also for NATO, the EU, and the entire structure of international relations.
Herstories: An Anthology of New Ukrainian Women Prose Writers, issued by Glagoslav Publishers.
Besides this anthology, Naydan presented a volume of his own translations, The Essential Poetry of Taras Shevchenko, published by Piramida in Lviv, Ukraine.
He discussed a large number of works, including novels by Maria Matios and Irena Rozdobudko, in which he identified particular patterns of using folk motifs.
The lecture was followed by a very lively discussion, with members of the audience posing many questions to the lecturer.
Naydan is only the second recipient of this prize, awarded for lifetime achievement in translating Ukrainian literature.
Serving the SOFRTINISY In February 2014 CIUS, together with the Canadian Foundation for Ukrainian Studies and Peter Savaryn, a well-known Ukrainian-Canadian activist, announced the launch of the Peter and Olya Savaryn Award.
The award is intended to support a range of scholarly and educational projects at CIUS, such as providing grants to scholars, organizing public events, and supporting publications and translations in Ukrainian studies.
CIUS will determine the allocation of the award, while CFUS will continue to manage the fund.
Peter and Olya Savaryn are well known in Canada for their generosity, initiatives, and dedicated community work.
Peter Savaryn was born in the village of Zubrets near Buchach in Ternopil oblast.
He began his studies in Ukraine and completed them after the war in Germany.
He was active in such community organizations as the Ivan Franko School of Ukrainian Studies, Plast, the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, the Ukrainian Professional and Business Club, the Multicultural Committee of the UP&BC, the Alberta Ukrainian Commemorative Society, St.
Mr Savaryn served for five years as president of the World Congress of Free Ukrainians and is currently chair of the Shevchenko Scientific Society, Edmonton branch.
He was one of the founders of CFUS, serving as its president and then as a board member Olya and Peter Savaryn until 1997.
Mr Savaryn has also excelled in Canadian political, educational, and cultural life.
He was instrumental in numerous election campaigns at the municipal, provincial, and federal levels.
In 1958, Mr Savaryn was among those who inspired the provincial government to introduce Ukrainian language instruction in Alberta high schools and at the U of A Mr Savaryn established Gateway Publishers to prepare learning materials in the Ukrainian language.
In 1971 he was also one of those who inspired Prime Minister Trudeau to proclaim Canada an officially multicultural nation.
This proclamation led to the establishment of bilingual schools, the Ukrainian Cultural Heritage Village at Elk Island Park, and CIUS at the U of A It also motivated the erection of the world’s first memorial in honor of the victims of the Holodomor in Edmonton, as well as the establishment of St.
Olya Savaryn (née Kobzar Prystajecky) was born in 1930 in the village of Zhyznomyr near Buchach, Ternopil oblast.
She began her studies in Ukraine, continued in Germany, and completed them in Alberta.
A graduate of Alberta College, she worked as a legal secretary in her husband's office.
George's and Eternal Fire badges in silver) and the Ukrainian Catholic Women’s League of Canada, and conducting a musical radio program for the League for twenty years.
Savaryn accompanied N ew or of Ukrainian ae where the need i is greatest.
She was the | daughter of Ukrainian immigrants | who came to Canada because of political and religious persecution in their homeland.
She began her teaching career in Saskatoon and soon became _ known to her students as “Ann Landers” because of her generous, openhearted character.
Moving to Ontario, CIUS Newsletter 2014 and assisted her husband in his numerous projects and business trips.
The Peter and Olya Savaryn Award is another accomplishment of this unique couple.
It will serve the Ukrainian community in Canada and elsewhere and always remind us of the generosity, caring, and visionary mindset of its founders.
Mary and Michael Yacyshyn Mary worked in various teaching and administrative positions, including that of first female school principal.
He and his family had _ the opportunity to meet the much-re-_vered _ Metropolitan Andrei Sheptytsky, encounter that had lasting spiritual significance for Michael.
Michael immigrated to Canada in 1948 and worked for the nation-wide Loblaw grocery chain in Toronto.
Both Mary and Michael Yacyshyn were active in the Ukrainian Catholic Church in Mississauga and in the Ukrainian community of Toronto.
Michael was a member of the Brotherhood of Former Soldiers of the First Division of the Ukrainian National Army.
They believed that their lives had been blessed with the spirit of generosity and hope.
With foresight, they made a lasting contribution to their community and future generations.
Donors Focus on Ukrainian Canadian Studies In October 2013, CIUS established the Dr.
The endowment will support the activities of the Ukrainian Canadian Program at CIUS, including publication of print and digital materials, organization of and participation in conferences, and research activities dealing with the history of Ukrainians in Canada.
Nestor and Myrosia Maslo said that they were very honoured to establish the fund.
From a young age, they became actively involved in the Ukrainian community.
Nestor was a member of the Shumka Dancers of Edmonton, and Myrosia of the city’s Dnipro Ensemble.
Both participated in CYMK (Canadian Ukrainian Youth Association), including the Edmonton CYMK choir.
Myrosia earned a Bachelor of Science degree in 1979 and a Bachelor of Education in 1981.
For a number of years, she taught in the Ukrainian Bilingual Program, after which she foNestor and Myrosia Maslo cused on raising a family and engaging in community work.
Rudolf Fischer Endowment Fund was established in April 2014 with a bequest of $377,168 from Dr.
The fund is to be used for the funding of fellowships and scholarly projects in Ukrainian studies.
Fischer-Slysh was honoured at the launch of this volume in Toronto in March 2011.
Born in Kolomyia in western Ukraine, she escaped the Soviet occupation.
After obtaining her medical degree in Munich , she emigrated to the of Canada, St.
She was a volunteer with the Ukrainian Bilingual Association and served as president of the Edmonton Medical Women’s Club.
Nestor received a Bachelor of Medical Science degree in 1975 and became an MD in 1977.
He subsequently earned his FRCPC for Radiology in 1983 and obtained certification by the American Board of Radiology in 1984.
As a partner with Insight Medical Imaging, Nestor has enjoyed practicing radiology in hospital and clinical settings in Edmonton and rural Alberta.
He holds many professional memberships and is section head of General Imaging at the Misericordia Community Hospital.
He also holds an appointment as a clinical lecturer in the Department of Radiology for the U of A As proud Canadians, Nestor and Myrosia appreciate and encourage the study of the Ukrainian Canadian experience.
Rudolf Fischer and Maria Fischer-Slysh United States , where she practiced as a pediatrician in Kankakee, Illinois.
Hrushevsky Institute of Ukrainian Archaeography and Source Studies, Kyiv.
Remeza Family Endowment Fund i Natalia Havdyda ff Vladyslav Hrynevych, Kuras Institute of Political and Ethnic Studies, Kyiv.
Hrushevsky Institute of Ukrainian Archaeography and Source Studies, Lviv Branch.
Stephania Bukachevska-Pastushenko Archival Endowment Fund Volodymyr Kulyk, Institute of Political and Ethnic Studies, Kyiv.
Stasiuk Family Endowment Fund Volodymyr Masliichuk, independent scholar, Vilshany, Kharkiv oblast.
Research I “Sustainability of Ukrainian language education from pre-school to post-secondary’; Research II “Vision.
Stasiuk Family Endowment Fund Dmytro Vashchuk, Institute of Ukrainian History, Kyiv.
The “Certificate of Appreciation first recipients are Parasia Iwanec and Jaroslaw Halchuk of St.
Ld otis oncom a for students and research grants for scholars in Ukrainian studies.
Mr Halchuk ""Ukrainian heritage established the Mykhailo, Volodymyr and Olia Halchuk Memorial Endowment ‘ Fund in July 2007 in memory of his sons, Mykhailo and Volodymyr, and his wife.
John Chappel Bohdan Kazymyra Barbara Fedeyko Rozalia Makohon William & Justine Fedeyko Paraskevia Woron Clarence Kadyk CIUS Newsletter 2014 CIUS Endowment Funds The Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies is very grateful to all donors for their support.
Your generosity and trust will be greatly appreciated and acknowledged.
Donations from both Canada and the United States are eligible for tax deductions.
CIUS encourages you to donate to our general CIUS Endowment Fund, which is used to support all our activities and programs wherever the need is greatest.
History, Ukrainian Canadian studies, Literature, Language, Education, Social Sciences, Economics, Diaspora studies, Religious studies, Womens studies, Law, Library Sciences, and CIUS Press.
You can donate online at www.giving.ualberta.ca, send us a cheque , establish an endowment, enroll in a deduction program, leave a bequest in your will, transfer part of your stock portfolio, and donate property or your life insurance.
Listed in order of establishment, amounts include all donations received by 31 July 2014.
In April 1996, a $10,000 bequest from the estate of Steven Kobrynsky of Canora, Saskatchewan, established the Steven Kobrynsky Memorial Scholarship, awarded every two years to an undergraduate who excels in the study of the Ukrainian language.
The Government of Alberta matched the initial donation of $100,000 two-to-one.
In 1998-2000, the Kowalskys increased the capital of their endowment by $1,650,000 and redirected it to use for the newly established Kowalsky Program for the Study of Eastern Ukraine.
The initial donation of $33,500 was later augmented by club members and matched two-to-one by the Government of Alberta.
Vlas Darcovich in July 1989 in memory of his wife, Helen , née Michalenko, to support Ph.D. students writing dissertations on a Ukrainian or Ukrainian-Canadian topic in pedagogy, history, law, the humanities and social sciences, women’s studies, or library science.
Oleh Zujewskyj of Edmonton in December 1989 to support the publication of literary works by Ukrainian writers living outside Ukraine.
Albert, Alberta), and many organizations and individuals from across Canada, the fund provides fellowships for Ukrainian scholars and professionals to conduct research and study in Canada.
Until 2007, the endowment also received matching funds from Xerox Canada.
Bohdan Klid , Myroslav Klid , and Maria Zadarko to fund fellowships and research grants in Ukrainian studies.
Andrew’s College to offer fellowships, supports independent research, and facilitates research and publication by scholars in the field of religious studies.
It supports projects at the Ukrainian Language Education Centre that promote teacher professional development and the improvement of language courses.
Anna Stelmaschuk and $10,000 from the late Nancy Shemeluck-Radomsky , Mary Orchuk, and $1,000 from Jean Naciuk.
The fund supports extension education in Ukraine and distance-learning workers from Canada to help educate prospective extension workers in Ukraine.
Celestin Suchowersky , the fund offers fellowships at the M.A. or Ph.D. level to residents of Bukovyna to study at the Universities of Alberta, Saskatchewan, Toronto, or other Canadian universities in the disciplines of sociology, psychology, economics, or Ukrainian studies.
Myroslawa Iwanciw of Elmwood Park, Illinois, in April 2006 in support of CIUS activities, with priority to Ukrainian students and scholars conducting research in Ukrainian studies.
Peter and Doris Kule with a donation of $100,000, matched by the Government of Alberta and supported by individuals and organizations, the fund supports the work of the Ukrainian Diaspora Studies Initiative at the Kule Ukrainian Canadian Studies Centre.
Peter and Doris Kule in August 2007 to support the Ukrainian Canadian Program, now known as the Kule Ukrainian Canadian Studies Centre at CIUS, and facilitate the expansion of the Institute's multifaceted commitment to documenting and sharing the wealth of the Ukrainian Canadian experience.
MOWTOBI KOLUITY ONNAYeHI TIIbKI B KaHagii. 1e name and address of someone who would like to be added to mailing list.
Gifts to CIUS are fully tax-deductible in both Canada and the United States. [lo»wKepmeéu He OOKNaGOaIomebca NOOaMKamu.
Postal/Zip Code Tel E-mail Please enter your change of address above or provide the name and address of someone who would like to be added to our mailing list.
Akulo y Bac 3MiHunaca ampeca, aO0 3Ha€ETe KOrOCb, xTO 6arkaB 6 OTPUMyBaTu BioneTenb KIYCy, 6yb nacka, nOBIHOMTe Hac.
Please fill out your name and address in the space above or enclose your mailing label and return it to CIUS in the stamped, self-addressed envelope.
A Memoir by Christina Isajiw This memoir by Christina Isajiw, the former director of the Human Rights Commission of the World Congress of Free Ukrainians , is one of the first insider accounts of efforts during the 1970s and 1980s on the part of Western NGOs and their workers to bring aid and support to Ukrainian dissidents and activists.
Nestor and Myrosia Maslo , the fund supports the activities of the Ukrainian Canadian Program at CIUS, including publication of print and digital materials, organization of and participation in conferences, and research activities dealing with the history of Ukrainians in Canada.
Maria Fischer-Slysh , the fund is to be used for fellowships and scholarly projects in Ukrainian studies.
Albert AB 3,000 Sele nemibvil sp tole ponys CLES Tesoro (ON at nena Walk Oslin ON 3.000 Bautista, Amy & Ken St.
You will be invited to an — annual lunch with the Chair of the Board of Governors, as well as to various campus events.
You will also receive issues of New Trail and Folio, access to the Library, and the opportunity to purchase a Faculty Club membership.
YKpalHy i ioe coves Ilouaroxk fiambHoctu IIporpamu BUBYeCHHA CydacHol Ykpainn im.
CracloKiB — 4epe3 HU3Ky 3HAYUHMX BOCATHeHb Sas ee 3aBJjaHHA — We aKkypaTHa aHasli3a NogiM B YKpaiHi JIA yKpaiHosHaBLiB, YPAMOBUX Ta HEYpAOBMX OpraHisallin, TPpOMaJ{CbKOCTM Ta 3acoOiB MacoBOl iH@opmauii.
Y 2007 BiH 3all0uaTKyBaB Oor CracioKis «HuHIMHA WOMITMKa Cy4acHoi YKpalHM». 3a Ba JECATUMITTA icHyBaHHA IIporpama im.
Aeusuo Mapna3; cmydenmu y Kemopidmcokomy yHisepcumemi; EBdokia Cmacrwk YMMasIO YCIIX1B, 30KpeMa, 3a OCTAHHIN Pik, AKMM CTAB MepeOMHUM y IIpoBeJJeHHi Ta NMOWIMpeHHi JOCI{pKeHb Ha TeMM CyyacHoi Yxpainn.
BUCTYIaB 3 JOMOBIAMM Ta 6paB yuacTb B OOTOBOpeHHAX «3a KPyIIMM CTOJIOM»; jJaBaB iHTepB 10 JIA 3MI; Ha caTi 6no0ry Cractoxis my6r1iKYBaB B/laCHi CTaTTi Ta Mpalfi, HalicaHi iHINMMM; TMcaB CTaTTi AIA pisHux 3MI Ta roryBaB aHrIOMOBHY KHVDKKy IIpodosmexnua Ha cmop.
Hypxye a cipooyto fat KOPOTKy XapaKTepMCTUKy [iAIbHOCTU KIYCy B 2013-2014 akayemiuHomy pOul U HakpeciMTM FeAKi MepcuekTnBU MOO PO3BUTKy.
B TpaBHi 2013 jlekKaHOM MDaky/IbTeTy ryMaHiTapHux Hayk J|-poM Jlecni KopMak JIA OWiHKU CTaHy CIIpaB B iHCTMTYTI, We He 3aBepmieHa.
OpraHi3aljiMHOl CTpyKTypu InctTntyty Ta 3MinM dyHKuWioHaIbHux 060B A3KiB JOMOMPDKHOTO Mepconally.
My € CBiJJOMi TOFO, I}O BACHOBKM Ta peKomeHjjaljii Komicii 6yfyTb IpuMHATI 3 ypaxyBaHHAM CTaHy CiipaB i Tl€pCMeKTMB PO3SBUTKY yKpaiHCbKUXx cTyfim B AjibOeptcbKomy yHiBepcntTeTl B IIIOMy.
KoBasIbcbKUX, i n-p Jlenpugy Mapnas3, yupextop IIpoTpaMu JOCHifPKeHHA Cy4acHol YkKpainn im.
J[-p Onenka binam i W-p Azza HeyjalikiBcbKa yCIlillHO MpaljroroTb Hajl MOJepHisauiero MeToyu4Horo IeHTpy yKpalHcbKoi MoBnm.
OntexkcaHgp IlanKees npeycTaBuB KOHIerIit0 MOpTasly 3 yKpalHCbKMUx CTYyin, i A CHOMiBaloca HaMmO2VOK4MM 4acoM mo6ayuTUu pesyibTaTu Moro poboTn.
B KIYCi Big6ysaetbca powec OHOBJICHHA Kaj[piB 1 Wi BULJeHHA piBHA ixHboro mpodecionanismy.
OkKpeMi JIeKUil Ta Ipe3eHTalLiil, opraHi3oBaHi IHcTMTyTOM, Tellep € JOCTYNHUMNM [IA KOpMCTYBauyiB IntepHety.
A po3paxoByto Ha Te, WO HMHILIHI, KONMIUHi Ta MaMOyTHi CTUNeH ATU KIYCy Bi3sbMyTb aKTUBHY yUacTb y poOoti Hay *ypHasiom.
IHCTUTYT 3allouaTKyBaB HOBY, UWOpidHy lpemiro 3a Kpallli JOC >»KeHHA BroaeteHb KIYCy 2014 Cnoso AupekTopa B rayly3i YKpalHcbKux Cryin.
EKcTlepTHMM KOMITeT y Kuesi mig ronoByBaHHAM JOKTOpa Harani AKOBeHKO IIpOBiB BemMKy poboTy Wo70 BiZObOpy KaH]{MatiB Ha Wo Wpemirto.
AxkajlemiuHa nomituka KTYCy B YKpaiHi MyCUTb Oa3yBaTMUCcA Ha IIpunuMnax WaptTHepctsa.
Spocraiunn inTeleKTyaIbHun NOTeCHIA YKpalHCbKUX CTYMiM MOXKHAa 6yHe OLIHMTU AMIMe TORI, Kon ykpaiHOMOBHi HyOjlikalil CraHyTb AOCTyIHMMM JIA AHTIOMOBHOLO YNTada.
Iloku iHCTUTYT Mae TaKUX KBamidiKOBaHMX CHeniAicTip, aK Mupocnas FOpKesuy i PoMaH Cexpkycb, HeoOxisHO 3aMOU¥aTKyBaTU CHewWiAIbHY Iporpamy llepekjlafly Kpalljux HayKOBMX JOCHIPKEHb Cy4aCHUX YKpalHCbKUX aBTOPIB aHIIMCbKOIO MOBOW. 3akiINKalo HeOalqyKUX UIeHiB YKpaiHCbKOi TpOMa{M MOCIIPMATU pOSBUTKy TaKOoi mporpamu.
YiposqoBxK MMHYIOLO aKafleMi4dHOTO poKy 3arajibHa atMocdepa B KIYCi BUSHayalaca MOMAMM B YKpaiHi.
IIpakTm4Ho Bci HayKosi cniBpobiTHnKu IHcrutyty — Tapac Kysbo, Jlensuy Mapmn13, ®pank Cucnn, borgan Lapacumis, 3eH0H Koryt, borgan Knig, Ape Bannan, Pomay UWinan, Mapxo Crex, Anypin Maxyx, Yaena Ilaciunn, Poman Cenpkycb, Mnxona Copoxa — Opayu aKTUBHY yuacTb y BUCBIT/IeHHi Ta OCMMC/IEHHI JpaMaTM4HUx NOMI, WO HajjOBro TIpMikyBasIu oO cebe yBary cBity.
J-p Tapac Ky3bo npoyjemonCTpyBaB rifHy MOAMBy eHeprito, HafjaBlM COTHi inTepB’10, OyOTiKOBaHi B 3aco6ax MacoBoi indopmayii Kanan, CIA, Yxpainn, OaraTbox KpaiH CBiTy pisH“mu Mosamn.
KIYC oprani3syBaB WeKiibKa «KPyIIMX CTOMIB», CeMiHapiB, IpeseHTaliv Ta Kondepenuin Ha BiJMOBIPHI TeMu.
Opranisaljimue Ta iHMopMatlivHe 3a6e3ne4ueHHA Iie jiAIbHOCTU — 3acityra Pomana Ulnuana Ta Onekcanypa IlanKeesa.
CporogHi Ha cxoyi Ykpainu TpuBae MIpowWec HallOHasIbHOLO posMerxkyBaHHA, Teuwjo MOZiOHMM DO Toro, IO BiOyBaBCA Ha 3aXiJJHbOMY, yKpalHCbKO-IIOMbCbKOMY KOpJ{OHi B Cepey{MHi XX cr.
PaHOo 4M 1i3HO pociMcbKa IpaBocwaBHO-iMIlepCbKa ifJeHTMYHICTb 3HOBY 3iNITOBXHETbCA 3 MOJEPHUMM BUKAMKaMu.
HaTOMicTb yKpalHCbKMM HaIOHAIbHMUM Wpowec 3}00yBae laHc fictaTu Oibil cyyacHMuM, eBporenCbKMM BUMip.
Ilogil B YkpaiHi cram HecmopiBaHKOI0 AK JIA KPeCMJIIBCbKUX poCiIMCbKMX HaljiOHaJICTIB, Tak i JIA OproccebcbKux O6ropoKparTis.
Bonu Oe3MocepesHbO 3auillaiwoTb TaKOXK MDKHapOjIHE eKCIIepTHe CepeOBuilfe.
PesynbraTOM TaKOl MO/ITMKM CTaNoO BI,YyTHe 3HYDKEHHA TpodeciMHoro piBHA BIAMOBIPHUX TMCWMIVMH y 3aXifHix yHIBepcuTeTax.
Micue Ta ponb KIYCy B mpoueci YeproBOro MepeOCMNMCIeEHHA COMiAIbHUX i ryMaHiTapHUx cTypfiM Lye Tpeba Oye 3 acyBatn.
IIpore Be 3apa3 CTa€ OYEBUJHUM, IO 3 IOCTYNOBUM TlepeTBOpeHHAM YkKpaiHMU Ha peasIbHOro cy6’€KTa MipkKHapOAHbOLO Mpaa, B YMOBax CTpiMKOi rmo6ani3aliil iH(opMaLimHoro Hpoctopy, Nosyantbutoi IHTepHalliOHasisalil ykKpalHCbKMx crymim.
BignoBiqHo, BiH NoTpebye OibI ViTKOTO BU3SHAYeCHHA JOCHITHULU bKUX IpiOpuTerTiB i pOsyMiHHA cBoei IpodecifHoi iqfeHtTuaHocTu.
I y4acTi KOOpAMHaTopa Llentpy g-pa borgana Iapacumisa 6y10 OpraHi30BaHo JeKiyIbKa MiKHapowjHix KOHepeHuin, IpucBayeHUX mpo67emam TOPTiB/li KiHKaMM, e€BPOMeNCbKOI iHTel pall, MOMTMYIHUX KOpyOHiB YKpainu.
Cporogui KIYC, CIVIbHO 3 HallMMM WapTHepaMi B YxpaiHi, po3po6#€ HOBi, JOBrOcTpoKOBi HayKOBi IiporpaMn, ClIpAMOBaHI Ha BUBYCHHA YKpalHCbKO-pOCiMCbKOrO norpaHudq4ad Ta PeHOMeHy perioHaJIbHOTO po3sMaiTTa YKpainn.
Po3spo67eHi HMMM KOHIentii Ta WAH po6otu 6yfyTb onpumtroyHeHi Hait671/OKYMM 4acom.
A 3aKmMKkato BCix, XTO 6yB IpwueTHUM lO 3ACHYBaHHA iHCTUTYTY, BCiX, XTO IiJTPMMye MOTO MiAIbHICTb CbOrosHi WU WikaBMTbCA Moro ManOyTHiM, JOM0MOITM HaM y CTBOpeHHi eeKTPOHHOrO apxiBy yKpaiHcbKux cryin KIYCy, TiJJTOTOBLi KOBIIEMHMUX MaTepiAsiB, Cepil ycHux inTepB 10, a TaKOK y BUaHHi HU3KU CHeWiAIbHUX Wpallb Bi MOBI,HOI TeMaTMKM. 3allpOulyeMo Hallinx IIPUXMWIDHUKIB 1 KONer IpMeHyBaTMcA WO Hac.
Koncdbepenuia Big6ynaca 3a yaacTro Onexcia lapana (HarioHajIbHUM yH-T «KueBo-MormiaHcbKa akajleMia»), EBreHa bucTpuijbKoro (Mixuapoguin doug «BigqpomKeHHa», Kuis), Banepia Uanoro (Lentp im.
Iperto uiei KondepeHuii 6y70 3ampomoHoBaHo Ilerpom CagaPMHOM, KOJIMMIHIM KaHWIepom Ayib6epTCbKOrO yH-Ty Ta OAHMM 3 ciiBsaCHOBHUKiB KIYCy, i npod.
JenBuyom MapiivI30M, AKU BUCTYMMB 3 JIEKIiEO Tlepey, Bi,KpuTTAM koHdepenuil.
Ipenta MaxlOeua, m0 cTamo TlepiUM MpukKajOM TaKOl CHiBIpali MbK J[BOMa 3akjlayiaMi.
Y nojiii B34 y4acTb Onexcin Tapanb, €Cpren buctpuupKnn, Banepin Uanmn i Tapac Ky3po.
Amanyja Ilon, 6puTaHka 3a 1Oxoj>KeHHAM, MOJITUYHUM aHasliTMK Ta KepiBHMK liporpamu mpu Lexntpi epponenCbKOl nomiTuKu B bprocceni ; Tapac Ky3bo, OcmIHMK y CK/afii LjenTpy momiTm4Hux Ta perioHanbHUx cTynin , Ta cnippoditHuxk komm mepcneKTUBHUX MDKHapOsHix JOCMIPPKeHb Tipu Yuipepcuteti JKoua Tomkinca (BaWwiHtToH, O.K.) ra borganH Haraino, OpuTaHellb 3a MiClleM HapOJ>KeHHA, IIMCbMeHHMK Ta (baxiBelb 3 WpoOseMaTMUKU, WO CTOCYETbCA KOIMIMHbOTO PayaHcbKoro Corwsy Ta CxigHbOl Esporm.
Ia nogia 3i6pana TIpey}CTaBHMLbKy aBJMTOpiro, Cepey] AKO pa30M 3 HayKOBLIAMM Ta CTY]eHTaMM OymM 4McieHHi IpeyqCTaBHUKN yKpaiHcbKoi rpomayiu.
Let 3axig, ipucBayennn Hopiam B YKpaini, 3i6paB Oararo 3alikaBJIeHMX MpesCTaBHUKiB rpoMagn, IKI He JIMUe yBaxKHO CilyxXayIM JJOMOBIavis, ale MU Opa aKTMBHY y4acTb B o6roBopeHHi pi3HUX TIMTaHb.
Maprapiru baibmaceqn, AKa € OJ, HUM 3 mpoBigHuMx y [lipaivnim AMepmii (axiBliB 3 IMTaHb CHepreTM4HOi No/IiTAKM Ha MOCTpafAHCbKOMy IpocrTopi.
Maprapita bampmaceyja o6iimMae T0caly ipodecopa AunNOMaril Ta MiKHaPOWHIiX BIJHOCMH B YHipepcuTeTi CeToH Ton Ta cnispo6bitHuKka YKpaiHcbKoro HayKOBOro iHcTuTYyTy lapBapyCbKOro yH-Ty.
B o6roBopeHHi CMTyallii B YkpaiHi B3AIM y4acTb Bonoyumup KpapyeHko (AupekTop KIYCy), Apocias Banay (koopynnaTop LlenTpy yKpaiHcbkKO-KaHaj[CbKMx cTygin im.
Kynis KIYCy), Tenspug Mapms3 (roroyacHun qupextop IIporpaMiM JOC >KeHHA Cy4acHol YkKpainu im.
Cracioxis KIYCy), borax TapacnMiB (KoopauHatop Llentpy noniTn4HMX Ta perioHaIbHUXx cTysin KTYCy) Ta Iesep Koma (qupextop IIporpaMM peviFIMHUX Ta Ky/IbTy pOMOFI4HUXx cryin KIYCy). [licaa cBoix BucTyniB eKCIIepTM BiJMOBIIM Ha 3allMTaHHA CilyXauiB Ta B3AJIM y4acTb y WiKaBOMY OOrOBOpeHHi OKPeMUX IIMTaHb pa30M 3 IpeqCTaBHUKaMMU aBJMTOpil.
Y poOoTi kKoHdepenuil B3AIM yaacTb daxisui 3 Kanayu, YKpaiH, DinTAHAI Ta ABCTPil, 3aBaHHA AKUX MOMATANIO B MOWYKy MOACHEHb mpowecaM Ta YAHHMKaM, LO CIOHyKal0Tb J{O 3M1H iCHYIOUMX Jep»KaBHUX KOPJ{OHIB, Ta MOMWYK MOWITMYHMX WIAXiB 36epexKeHHA KOPAOHiB MOCTpayjaHCbKMX KpalH, 30KpeMa YxpaiHi.
Bci BuujesrajjaHi nopil, 6e3yMoBHO, Clipuau (opMyBaHHIo KpalioTO pO3yMIHHA CMTyallil B YKpaini Ta 30i/IbILeHHIO y 3aXiJHbOMY cBiTi iHTepecy JO MX NOMI Ta Fo Kpainn B3arami.
Le WiIKOM y3rOI>KyETbCA 3 3aBaHHAM Llentpy nomiTM4HMXx Ta perioHa/IbHUX CTYIN MepeTBOPUTMCA Ha 3HaHMM y CBITI EKCIIEPpTHMUM WeHTp 3 JOCMPKeHHA Cy4acHol Yxpainn.
IloiOHUM MOCTyM Biepesy, HEMOKIMBUM 6e3 MiljHoro diHaHcoBoro Misr pyHTTa.
Came Tomy Lleutp 3aujikaBieHun y CTBOpeHHi baraTOMiIbMOHHOTO BidHOTO (POHAY, HasXOPPKeHHA Bifl AKOLO JOSBONATMUMYTb 3a/ly4uTn JO po6oTu NOBHOWTaTHUXx MaxiBuiBs Ta 3abe3leqUTU peamisaliio OaraTbox IIPOEKTIB, Cepef| AKUX € OpraHisaliA KOHepenuiit, BUaHHA pal, HafaHHA [paHTiB Ta MipOBes[eHHA HayKOBOTO OOMiny 3 iHIIMMM FOCTIFHMY KUM WeHTpamu.
W Mipor byze 3alexKaTU, 4M 3Moxe LlenTp momiTH4yHMX Ta perioHaIbHUX CTYMIM BIIOBHI JOCAITM WOCTaBeHUX Hien i uM Oye BiH 3faTHUM IpOosoBxKyBaTM PopMyBaTU CKCIepTHe, HacTiMbKU MOTpiOHe CbOrOf{Hi, 3HAaHHA pO cyyacHUn CTaH ciipaB B YkKpaiHi i pO WAXM pO3sBUTKy Iie] KpalHn.
MILYM texae ykpaiHoMoBHy OCBITY IWIAXOM Iif[TPUMKM BUMTENIB Ta PO3NOBCHOJ>KeEHHAM JJaHUX JOCII[DKEHb, a TAKOXK YMOKJIMBIIIOE CKIIaaHHA MDKHapogHix iCIMTIB YUHAMM J[BOMOBHOi MporpaMnu.
Kondepenuito opraHi3yBayla HaljioHaibHa yKpaiHcbKa WIKijIbHa pajja 1p Kourpeci yKpainuis Kanagn.
Y migrorosyi MLYMy go kondepennii B3anmu yuacTb lpaliBHUuku WeHTpy lammna Katia, i Mukona Copoxa.
Papi KaTOAMUbKMX WIKI EXMOHTONY, Papi nyOmivHux wKin EqMoutony Ta Papi KaTOAMUbKMX WIKI Enk-AWIeHLy.
Mamxe Bci yuHi OTpumMasIn Bue 60%, WO CBIJYUTb IIpo Te, WO BOHU MOXKYTb HaBuaTMca y Oyfb-AKOMY yHiBepcnuTeri Yxpainn.
KopnctTarounch i3 WepeBar HOBITHbOl TEXHOJIOLil, AKa BIAKPUBae OCTY WO pecypciB WMpmuin aBAMTopil cryfeutis, MI[YM uporo poxy 6ys 3aWiAHUM y WeCTU MpO€KTAaX, AKi MOB A3y10Tb iHOKOMYyHikalliMHi TexHONOTii 3 HaBYaJIbBHMMMU MatTepisiamMn.
Y paMKax boro JOcif4Oro MmpoEKTy J-p bina Ta cniBgMpeKTop J-p Poman Iletpuumu (Yuispepcutert im.
Ipenta MaxlOeua) opraHi3yBamM Hu3KY BijeO3acifjJaHb HayKOBIiB Ta OH/anHOBy KOH@epeHuito 26 uepBusA 2014, y AKI B3ANIM yaacTb Oibile TBaqWATM HayKOBIJiB Ta AKY BifBifain y KidepmpocrTopi 6inbpme Tucayi ocid.
Ipenta MaklOeua, 3amy4nB 0 CiBlpalji YOTUpM yHiBepcutTeTn AsbOeptu Ta YKpaiHu, a TAaKOXK 3alIpocus WO y4acTn ini yHiBepcureTn Kanagn, CIUA, bpasmunii, Esponu wu Yxpainn.a MatTepislamMu boro Mopymy j-p Over [ibHULbKUM, Ipodecop Bigpiny cyyacHMX MOB i KYAbTYPOMOLiYHUX CTY AjibOepTcbKOrO YH-TY, IpesCTaBMB BOceHut 2014 HOBMM MDKAMCHUMMiHapHMM Kypc, CTyJeHTU AKOLO MalOTb 3MOry MOCNYrOByBaTMCA HOBOCTBOpeHMMN OHawHOBMMNM pecypcamn.
CravlicTb Ki/IbKOCTM YUHIB Ta CTyJJCHTiB € OJHMM 3 HaMOibi rocTpux IMMTaHb WIA yKpalHO3HaBUMx Mporpam Bi] MepeMMKVIIA JO yHiBePCUTeTCbKOro pipHa.
BuBueHHa noTpe6 cTyfeHTiB ykpaiHcbkux cTyfim AnbOeptcbKoro yH-Ty CIIPMATMMe OHOBJICHHIO HaBYayIBHUX MIporpaM, i B Wbomy ikaHcoBY JOMOMOTY JIA IpoBesqeHHA JOCII[DKeHb HajjaloTb TpOMasICbKi MlapTHepn.
CraTTa, B AKiM MIpoctTe*KYIOTHCA Wi pospoOKu, NogaHa WA KPUTMUIHOTLO OIALy Ta Jpyky Oo KaHajICbKOrO HayKOBOLO KypHally.
BinbulicTb 3 WAX iHTepB 10 CTOCYETHCA MDKBOE€HHOLO Mepiosly Ta 4acis /|pyroi CBITOBOI BIMHM, TOOTO 4aciB, KOAM Li KIHKM CTA CBIKaMM Has3BUdaWVHMUx icTOpM4HMXx Nopin.
IIpaua Tako MICTUTb MepeqMoBy, Hanncany ApocnaBom IpulakoM, Ta BCTYN, aBTOpOM akoro € Ipoiga Bunuuupxa.
Jlo 36ipKn WOy4eHO KOMMaKT JMCK 3 3alMcaMu dparMeHTiB JeaAkux 3 Wx iHTepB Io.
UotTupucTa IpMMipHUKiB iei 30ipKu Oyn0 TlepeqjaHo 6e3KOMITOBHO Jo 6ibmioTeK Ta HaBua/IbHUX 3akafliB B YKpaiHi.
KuyoxkkKa lipiicpadena 35-i pivHuii 3aCHyBaHHA ApxiBy yKpalHCbKOro oukIbopy, Aku € wacruHoro LeHTpy yKpaiHCbKOTrO Ta KaHaj{CbKOro PoOuIKmbopy im.
Came B yen 4ac BiH 3aljikKaBMBCA BABYCHHAM YKpaiHCbKOrO (OMKIbOpy, 30KpeMa IIpupiJIAIOUM 3HAUHY YBary JOCMI»KeHHAM yKpalHCbKMX IIpMcyliB iB Ta IIpMKa30K, icTopiorpadii ykpaiHcbKux PouKIbopHUX CTYMiM Ta yCHiM PoOuKIbOpHiN Tpaymuil ykpainyis Kanagqn.aByqaKkn mpod.
MenBigcbKomy B Amb6epTcbKoMy YH-Ti 6y710 3aCHOBaHO i pO3BUHYTO IIporpamy BUBYeHHA yKpalHCbKOoro (ONKIbOpy, CTBOPeHO [eKiIbKa BIUHUX oui, 3a paXyHOK AKMX Mij{TpuMyBaJIMCA IIPOEKTM Ta HABYAHHA CTYEHTIB, Ta 3i0paHo MaTepiA/IM JO apxiBy, AKMM HOCUTb iM A CBOTO 3aCHOBHMKa.
Meppigcexoro 3 [lipniaHoi AMepuku Ta EBponn Ta exAKi 3 Moro KOJIMIMIHIX CTYHeCHTIB. 36iPHUK TAaKOXK MiCTUTb Oiorpadiuny iHpopmaljito po HbOTO, 6iOmiorpadito Moro pap Ta TpM WocmipxKeHHa MepBigcpKoro, AKi paHillie He Oyo HayjpykyBaHo.
TibHe Mice y ipalji 3amMae aHasli3a TOTO, AK IA yrOfa EBOLOMIOHyBala IpOTATOM JIaHOrO MepiOfly pasoM 3i 3pocTaHHAM Tif TPUMKM TipaB OAM 3 OOKy YPAMiB 3axifH1x Kpain.
I icTopii Ta 10 BroaeteHb KIYCy 2014 Kate[pi KIACMYHMX, BISAHTINCbKUX i CepeqbOBIYHMX CTYAIM pu J[bBiBCbKilt OOTOCHOBCHKiN akajemii.
J[aHe BUJJaHHA YKpalHCbKOIO MOBOW MICTUTb [BaHafWATb eceiB BUAaTHOTO PaxiByA 3 BiZaHTIMCbKMX CTypiM mpod.
I iMMepil Ta 3axifHboi EBporn, W0 NOTpal1AyIM JO yKpalHCbKMX 3eMe/Ib 4epes Ilonbuity.
ABTOPOM BIKOPUCTOBYBaIMCb MaTepiAIM 3 APXiBiB JIpbBosa, Knexsa, Baputasu, MronxeHa Ta OrraBn.Kpema, IlaBanuimHum Bileplile MOfaeTbcA eTaIbHe 300pa.
Kuyypxky BugjaHo IHcTuTyTOM icToPMYHUX JOCTiD>KeHb 1p JIbBIBCbKOMY HalllOHaJIbHOMy yHiBepcuterTi Ta IIpoTpaMoOr JOCMKeHHA CyYacHoOl icTOpIi Yxpainn mpu Lentpi im.
Kynomypa Ko3aubKol eslimu cmosiuui Mazenu Bykiet «Poskonku y barypnui 2012 poxy.
APXeO/IOTiFHi 3HaXiJ}KM JO3BONAIOTb HAaYKOBIAM Kpallle 3po3yMiTU cmoci6 *MTTA, OCBITY, iHTeeKTYya/IbHi 3allUTU Ta KY/IbTYPHIi iHTepecu 4IeEHIB TeTbMaHCbKOLO J[BOpy Ta KO3albKO1 emitu barypuua.
MMUHysie Ta Cy4aCcHICTb Ha ac, komm KIYC posnouas cBor0 JMAJIbHICTb y BepecHi 1976, OAMH 3 3aCHOBHMKiB Ta aj] IOHKT-MpeKTOp iHcTUTYTY , pod. lOpin Jlyujpkun, pospo6ms nepBicHy mporpamy my67ikauli iHCTMTYTYy: Nepwinx KijIbKa yHIBEpCUTeTCbKMX Mip[py4HUKIB 3 YKpalHCbKOI MOBM Ta JliTepaTYpU; 1 ATMTOMOBy «EHUMKTOMEepIIO Ykpainu» (cnimbHUM mpoeKT TopoutcbKoro Bigginy KIYCy pa3om 3 mpod.
Yci Wi IpOeKTU 6yno posmoyaro y Bizpini iHCTUTYTYy pn TOpoHTCbKOMY yH-Ti, ne tOpin Jlyupkum 6yB mpodecopom CJIOB AHCbKOI MiTepaTy pu.
Hesabapom lle BAJAaHHA TMIpMBepHy0 Ao cebe yBaly 3HaHUX HayKOBIIB, AKI TAKOK mova J]pyKyBaTMca y HbOMy.
Pomau Cenpkycb Cepey| paHHix aBTOpiB-acilipaHTiB KYPHasly, AK 3 YaCOM CTa/IM BiOMMMU TipodecivHumu yKpainictamMn, cnig 3rayaTu Onbpry Angpiescpky, lOpia Boowuka, Mapxa bowtyua, Cremana Benmuenka, Onera ImbHubKOrO, borqaHa Kopfana, Onexcangpa Moruna, BorgaHa Haranna, Mapxa IlapamunHa, Apociasa Ilerpuuimua, Tomaca IIpummaka, Makcuma TapHasBcbkoro, Ipana-Ilapaa Xumky, Mupocrasa Ulkangpia ta Ipana ABopcbKoro.
CHU MKIONepil Ykpainu 3MycyiM Moro Bi;MOBUTUCH FOpit Ayupkuii Bij] pefaKTOpCcTBa *KypHarly.
Y 1986 POLI pefaklia KypHasly Mepenuia no KIYCy B AnbOeptcbkomy yH-Ti, fe mOcafly rOOBHOTO peffakTOpa MOCiB Mupoczas lOpxesny.
Y 1993, 3 IpM3HaveHHAM JJ-pa Koryta qupektopom KIYCy i 3aBepWICHHAM poOoTM Haj, BUJaHHAM 5-ToMoBoi «Encyclopedia of Ukraine», PomaH CeHbkKycb 3HOBY CTaB FOsIOBHMM pejlaKTOpOM KypHally.
Bin akTuBi3yBaB y4aCTb HayKOBIiB 3 YKpaiHn AK ABTOPIB CTaTTeU Ta peleH3ili Ha IUMabTaX BUAHHA i 30i1bIIMB KibKICTb PpelWeH3iM y KOXKHOMY BUIIYyCKy.
J|-p 3akufaibcbKun CYM/IiIHHO BUKOHYBaB CBO] OO0B A3KM aK [JO CBOEI Tlepey4acHOl CMepTU y muctronami 2007 Uepes 10 cyMHY o6ctaspuny P CeHbkycb BIpeTe B3AB Ha ce6e 060B'A3KU TOMOBHOrO pejfakTOpa *ypuHasly 4o 2014 3 FomoOMoTOW pefakTOpa KHWDKKOBMX peljeHsilt 1, Broaetenb KIYCy 2014 y-pa Tomaca M Iipummaxa.
Cepey, TOMIB *KypHary Oyo 12 cneuBUTycKiB, IIPMCBAYEHMX pallAM aBCTpamiMcbKux ykpainictis YHipepcutety im.
Cim iHIMMX TOMIB CTaHOBMIM 30ipHUKM lipalib Ha MowlaHy Wpodecopis lOpia Jlyupxoro , Merpa M1.
Journal of Ukrainian Studies». [onopyum pejakTOP boro HOBOTO %KypHally — mpod.
Ilepue uncio 3 ABUIOCA BIITKYy 2014 i be3nmaTHO JJOCTYMHe Ha BeO-calTi ewjus.com/ojs/ index.php/ewjus.
Ipymescpxoro «Ictopia YxpaiHM-Pycu», AKMM 3aBepllye BUJJAaHHA TOMiB 30ipKU, IpucBaAYeHMX icTopii YKpaiHCbKOrO KO3allTBa.
IpyuesCbKMM BCTUT 3aKiHYMTU JIMIMe TPU PO3iIM IbOrO TOMY, WO CTAHOBJIATD mule Mepiity Moro yactnuy.
Camoro IpyuiesCbKOro Oys10 3aapeuiTOBaHo y OepesHi 1931 1 BucnaHo fo Mocxsn.
Kipcrin Vlo6cr nocniIDKY€ MDKHAaliOHaIbHi Ta MDKKOHMeCciMHi ACIIEKTU KYIbTY cp.
Mocadhata Kynyesuya 3 nosmuiit mepeBaxHo peniriitHUX CHiJIbHOT pPaHHBOMOJEPHOTO Mepiosly Ta Sibiu CeKy/APM30BaHMX CIiIbHOT MOJepHbOi Fon.
MOBM BIIIMHy/IM MepeBakHO MpesCTaBHUKM TpOMaf{CbKMX KI 3 yKpaIHCbKMX 3eME/Ib Tif] POCIMCbKOIO BaOlO Ta JyYXOBeHCTBO Ta6c6yp3pxkol lanuunun.
Oper Ilapamumu mpupinae ronoByy yBary IIMTAaHHW «KayleHfapaA» y [pexo-KarommupbKin Lepksi Ta IIBUAKMM MOMTMYHMM | COMA bHUM 3MiHaM TepwuiMx WecaTUMITS XX cT., WO Oyu MOB A3aHi 3 WafiHHAM immepii Ila6cOypris.
JleoHig, lepeub mpomoHye TeopeTu4Hy MOJle/Ib MOJ€PHisallil Ta IPOHMKHEHHA e/IeEMeHTIB CeKy/1ApHOi KyAbTYPM JO KyAbTYPM yKpaiHCbKOTO Cesia Ha MipfcTaBi iHTepB 10 3 KOMMITHiIMM MeUIKaHIAMMU KiIbKOX OOMKiIBCDKUX cil. [jew TOM MiCTMTb TaKOX peljeH3il Ha KH/DKKM, IO CTOCYIOTbCA YKpalHO3HaBUMXx CTY AIM. eS EST eT ne ere eens TD 14 Broaeteub KIYCy 2014 IIporpama im.
O «3axifHi AMckycil mpo OYH Ta YITA Ta ixHi icTOpM4Hi HacmifKN B YkpaiHi» B paMKax CeMiHapiB JJOKTOpCbKOI MporpamMu «ABcTpilcpKa laynyvHa Ta ii OaraTOKy/IbTypHa cnayuMHa» BifjeHCbKOrO yH-TYy.
IpMMHATHI KOMIIpOMiCM Ta B3a€MHe JIMLeMipCTBO» BiH BUCTYNMB Ha CMMIOSIIOMI « YKpaiHa B €BPOMl: MOKIMBOCTI M MepeliKoyM, AKUM BigOyBca 3-4 *KOBTHA 2013 B AmbOepTcbKoMy yH-Ti, Ta 4 2*KOBTHA — B [Jenrpi im.
Ipenta MaxOeua. 6bepesua 2013 q-p Mapmi3 Bucryms Ha 3acifjaHHAXx Kpyroro crony KIYCy npo kpumCbKi Noil.
KBiITHA, pa30M J|-PpOM Tapacom Kysbom, BiH B3AB ydacTb y 3aciflaHH1 Kpyroro crosy «PocivicbKa aHeKcia Kpumy Ta Mai6yTHe YxpatiHM», WO Big6yBca y Lentpi im.
Cepey, uncieHHMx iHTepB 10 Ta KOMeHTapiB po YKpainy bya HU3Ka iHTepB 10 fad KaHany «CTV News». 26 moToro 7-p Mapmz3 6yB 3alipoWeHum Mporpamor «Alberta Prime Time» TemeBi3iMHol craHuii «Global Television» B EqMouToHi.
Oxpemi iHTepB 10 BiH JaB KaHayiaM Ci-bi-Ci B Kanrapi ra B CackayeBaHli.
IIporpama 3amosyara CTaTTi y 3HaHMX aBTOPiB, TOM AK J-p Mapii3 caM HallMcaB MaypKe IlOJIOBUHy 3 ycix nyOnikain.
J\-p Mapm3 BucBiT/10OBaB MoOpil B YkpaiHi HU3KOI0 3allpOlleHMX JJOI0Biffeu.
OHA 3 HUX — Ha 3acijaHHi TIPOBIJHUX tOpucTis EAMOHTOHa «lOpuamannn dopym» y Kyi «Royal Mayfair Club» 21 6epe3Ha.
Mu 6axKaemo HallloMy Ko7es3i mpodecoposi Jleipugosi Mapnzsy yCIlixiB y MOrO HOBIM HayKOBiNM Ta aj{MiHiCTpaTMBHiN Mpalii.
Abn BUMpaBUTM CTaHOBMe Ta iHTeHCUBHille MOMYIAPU3yBaTU aKTYya/IbHe aKajleMidHe 3HaHHA po YKpainy Ta yKpaiHCbKi CTyf{ll Cepey, LIMpOKOi aBmuropil, KIYC na nouatky 2014 poxy 3apeECTpyBaB CBIM KaHall Ha CaiiTi Bimeorocruury YouTube.
Crisppo6irHuKu KIYCy Takox HaMaralorTbca CUCT€MaTUYHO TOTYBaTU KOPOTKi Biffeo-O710rM po HewjopaBHi Nopii B YxkpaiHi, 30pi€HTOBaHi Hacamiepey Ha MICIJeBy YKpalHCbKy aHIIOMOBHY rpomaljly.
Y nepcnextusi KIYC nianye posWIMprOBaTM MOKIIMBOCTI 3aCTOCYBaHHA cBoro YouTube kaHamy.
Koeanecekux 6 KIYCi 28 KBiTHA 2014 Ha YeproBOMy 3acifaHi Pag AupeKTOpis Nigpo3spiAiB iHCTUTYTY AMpeKTop [lporpamn im.
KopalibcbKux mpo@. 3eHou E Koryt TIOBIJOMMB IipO 3aKiH4eHHA TepMiHy cBoro HepeOyBaHHaA Ha Wit mocap 30 4ePBHA TOTO X%K poKy. oragy Ha icHy1oui PinaHcoBi MpoOMeMuU, a TAKOX 3 Olay Ha MOTpiOHi HayKOBi 39iOHOCTI Ta opraHizaTopcEKun Foci, mpod.
Ha nigctaBl Wiel Mponosuuii Paya yxBannna pilleHHA po Npu3sHayeHHA Mpod.
KoBaJIbCbKMX y XapKosi, le Wocayly WupekTopa MOciB icTopuk Bonogumup Kyiikos, 3acTylHUK JjeKaHa icTOpU4HOTO PakyiIbTeTY XapKiBCbKOrO HaljioHayIbHOrO YHiBepcutety im.
Kopayibcbkux y KIYCi gaa nommpenHA yKpalHOsHaBYMx CTyAiM y Cxiguin YxpalHi.
Ko6@anecoKux 27 6epesHA 2014 pagoro icropryHOrO @aky/bTeTy 3amopi3bKoro HalsioHaJIbHOrO yHiBepuctety 6byno IIpOBefeHO BMOOpM HOBOTO eKaHa dakxyiptety.
AHaTomia Borika , Biqomoro mpaAMM Ta MporpaMotro JOCIIipP>KeHHA icTOpil Ta KyIbrypu Cremosoi Yxpainu.
I CcbOroyq{Hi MOJIOMI Ta JOCBIA4eHI HaYKOBI1 MpOAOBKYIOTH 3a JOMOMOrOLO MepwMoKepell Ta pesy/IbTaTIB apXxeorpadivnnux i etHorpadiyHnx eKcneqnIM FOCHPPKyBAaTU COMIAIbHY icTOpito Kpato lift 3qi0HMM KepiBHM1JTBOM mpod.
KoBaJIbCbKMX Ta ipaliBHuKu KIYCy IMUpO BiTatOTb KOJIely Ta HOBOTO jleKaHa icropu4Horo Pakynbtety 3HY i OaxKaloTb MoMy JOBroi Ta ycnilHOl po6oTu Ha HOBiM Tocafi Ta HOBMX i WiKaBMX IIPO€KTIB CHiIbHO 3 KIYCom.
Y Bepecui 2013 HOKBI 3aIpocus JO TopouTo Wo yyacTu B KOHepeHUii MpoBIMHUXx PaxiBuiB 3 MpoOMeMaTUKM [IA TOTO, WIO6 mpoaHasl3yBaTU JJOCATHEHHA OCTaHH1x TPUAUATU POKiB BABYeHHA [onosoMOpy i IOrMAHYTM Ha Te, AK pesyibTaTM WUX JOCM>KeHb BINIMHYIM Ha BUBYCHHA OiIbI WIMpuiMx mpobsiem icTopil Ykpainn, icropii CPCP, «craninHi3my» Ta PeHOMeHY TeHOuMpy B cBiToBiM icropii.
Y Tpasui 2013 61m3bKo mW ATUZeCATU OCBITAH, [pOMaf[CbKUX JAUIB Ta Gan’ CTyJeHTiB 3 Kanayn Ta Criomy4eHux Iratis AMepuxu npu6ynu go ToporTO Ha 3allpOWleHHA Bij] KOHCOpIiHOMY, le B3AIM y4acTb y Mepiui Ha MiBHIYHOaMepMKaHCbKOMY KOHTMHEHTI KOHdepenuii, Temowo AKOi Oyo BUKMayaHHA Temu [omofomopy y HaByaIbHUXx 3aklafjax.
TakoxK IIpOTATOM poKy l1peyscTaBHUKn KOHCOpUIIOMY B3AJIM y4acTb y YNCIeHHMX IipeseHTallax epey WKONApaMuU, BiJ3Hayaloun BICIMJJeCATY PIYHMLIO Tparefil. 6-7 uepBHA 2014 FocmiPHUKU 3 Ykpainu, Pocii, Kasaxcrany, Iramii, CIUA, Kanan Ta AHIii B3A7IM y4acTb y poOoTi HayKOBO-lpakTM4HOi 160paTopil 3 BMBYeHHA MpoOMemMaTUKM Tonofomopy, Aka BigOymaca y MicTi Toponto.
Lev 3axig, HayaB MOKAMBICTb MOMOJMM HayKOBIJAM IpeyctaBUTM pe3yIbTaTU BAACHMX JOCMI{PKEHb i CKopucTaTMca 3 OOMiHY YMKaMnu Ta 3 MOpay, 3HaHUx PaxiBuiB, WO 3aMMaO6z0B0peHHs nid 4ac npakmu4Hoeo 3aHamma 3 Anopea Ipauiosi }oTbcA Temoro Tonofomopy.
KoxxeH 3 I ATU HayKOBUIB 3pOOMB JONOBIAD, Mica AKOi Biq6yBanoca O6broBOpeHHA 3a ydacTIO 3HaHMX (axiBliB 3 Mpo6nemaTuku.
IIpodecop HeanonitanCbKoro yH-Ty Augpea Ipariosi — oun 13 MeplIMx iCTOPNKiB, AKi CBOrO acy 3BePHY/IM yBary Ha O3HAKM TeHOLUMIY B yKpaincpKomy [onogomopi, Ta JIto7muyia IpuHeBM4y — MpoBigHa B YKpalHi nocnipHnuA lonofomMopy, 3amporoHyBa/IM MOUMHAIOUMM HayKOBI|AM CBOI MopayM 3 IpMBosy TeopeTM4YHMX 3acay] Ta METOMOJIbOFI JOCII>KeEHHA Tonogomopy.
HaykKOBO-OCBITHIM KOHCOPIiIOMOM 6y710 HaflaHo HifTpuMKy MpOeKTy LleHtTpy yKpaiHCbKO-KaHaJ{CbKMx cTymin im.
Kynis y gocniJ>KeHHI TOTO, AK pesakUil KaHaCbKUX AHTIOMOBHMX Ta3eT (30KpeMa TUX, IO BuxogMin y Bininesi) niqxoqMiu TO BUCBITI€HHA TeMU [oOMOMOpy.
IlepBMHHO BOHM O6yim nodapOoBaHi y YepBOHO-pyaMn BOXPMCTUM KOMIp 1 BUpasHo BUAIIAIIMcb Ha NoGimeHMx CTiHax.
Ha OCHOBI Ma/JIIOHKy pyil Ijboro namaiy 1744, wo 36epirca y HatjioHasibHoMy My3ei Crokro7bMy, Ta OCTAHHIX apxeOJIOTIMHNX 3HAXiJOK WOCMPHUKM MiTOTyBasM HOBi Till0TeTMU4Hi KOMII 1OTepHi PeKOHCTPyKUil eKcTep epy 6yqMHKy, Moro FekopaTusHMX €7IEMEHTIB 1 CEMM TMIIB BiZepyHKiB MOWIHHA MifOrn.
ApxeonorigHi JJOCIID2KeCHHA OKa3ayiU, WJO OCHOBHMM 30BHIIMIHIM JJEKOp IbOro Malay 3a CTUNIeM 3axifJHbOro 6apoKO JOMNOBHMJIM JIEeAKMMM MICUEBUMM Ta KMUIBCbKMMU OPHaMeHTaJIbDHMMM MpunoMaMnu.
IIpapgonopfi6Ho, noms AHi KepamiyHi IWIMTKU BUTOTOBMIM JOCKOHamI KMIBCbKi MaMCTpM Kaxili, 3allpouleHi Masenov jo Batypmua.
Tlo6mu3y nanayy excnenuuia YaCTKOBO pO3KOMla/la 3a/IMUIKU BeyIMKOI Cily2*KOoBoi cnopyyn.
Tam Mori MellIKaTM KO3albKi CTaplunHN (odiWepit), a] OTAaHTM, MOKOEBI, MMcapi 4M KAHUeIAPMCTU, AKI WpalwoBasn y fe@TbMaHCbKMX IMIOKOAX Ta [je p»KaBHMX YCTaHOBax Ip Maaui Masenn.
MoowxHa raaTn, WO I BUIMMB MiCL|eEBUM MMUCTelb y HaiBHO-peasiicTAYHIA HapowHin MauHepi.
Ha WBMHTapi 3pyMHoBaHoro Tpoilj[bKOoro coOopy Ha TepuTopii PopTelli ApXeOJIOIM EKCryMyBasIM BICiM moxoBaHb XVII-XVIII cr.
BaTypMHCbKMM IIpOeKT CMOHCOpyroTb KIYC, HTL Amepnxn, IlontnikalbHUM iHCTUTYT CepeqHbOBIYHUX crymin i Hocniguum inctruryt «YkpaiHika» B Topouti.
Y cnipnpawi 3 lactutytom aABCTPIMCbKMX Ta I|EHTpasIbHO-eBponmencbKnx cTypin im.
I]o6 o6ropoputu, AKI HaClif[KM Masa BitHa Ha 2WKUTTA KaHajJ\CbKMX iMMIiI'paHTiB, ocobmM20 becca [pyna y4acuHukis cumno3itomy biAA naM'amuHuka inmepHoBanum y mabopi «Castle Mountain» y BendbcbKkomy HauioHaAbHomy napky, akuu byao BidKpumo 12 cepnna 1995 BO IIpw6ynbyis 3 ABCTpo-YropcbKoi Immepii, y CAMMO31I0M1 B3AIM y4acTb HayKOBLi 3 yciel Kanagu Ta Esponu.
Y Tom CaM Yac, WEHTp MposoB*Kye poOuTM FociipKeHHA MyOnikauim y KaHaf[cbKin mpeci mpo Hepury IV arupiaxy B PayancpKin YxkpaiHi, 30cepesp>Ky10uN yBary Ha poxu Tonogomopy.
YxKe crae oueBUJJHMM, WO KaHajCbKi MeploqMyHi BUJJAHHA JOCUTb WIMpOKO, XOU¥ ¥acOM CyIlepeWIMBO, BUCBIT/IIOBaJIM CTajHCbKy KaMMaHilO WITY4HOro romoply Ta OpytaIbHUX YTMCKiB ykpainuis.
HOBMHA Ta nornagu» — 3 HaromN BUXODYy B CBIT COTOrO 4uNCcna GroneTeHA Y 6bepesui 2014 BuMUINIO B CBIT coTe YMC eeEKTPOHHOTO OroneTeHA «YKpaiHii 3a KOPHOHOM: HOBMHU Ta NOMAM», BAAHHA AKOTO 3/,iMCHIO€TbCA 3a MIATPUMKM THiMiATUBU 3 JOCIJ>KeEHHA YKpalHCbKOl AiAcnopu upu Kanagcpkomy inctutyti yKpaiHcbknx ctymin.
Cymy loxepTBu Oyo ni3Hille MOABO€HO AjbOepTCbKMM yHiBepcuTeTOM 3a paxyHoK koumTis @ougy «lI nax y MamOyTHe» ypany upoBinyii Anp6epta.
Y 2007 nancrBo Kynis 3po6uno ue OWHY Wenpy lox*xeptBy KIYCosi, wo O3BONUI0 CTBOpuTu LleHTp yKpalHCbKO-KaHafICbKUX CTyJiM iment Kyra.
CraHom Ha cporogni IY] oprani3aliMHO Ta CTPYKTYPHO BXOJMTb JO ckany Llentpy imenn Kyis KIYCy.
TonosHa MeTa Typy NlOMArana y MOfaIbIOMy PO3BUTKy HayKOBUX Ta OCBITHiX 3B A3KiB MDK yKpaiHCbKMMM Ta KaHayjCbKMMN yHIBepcuTeTaMn. [lepuimi qeHb nepeOyBaHHA jenerayii B EXMOHTOHI posmoyaBcsd 3 BigBiqyBaHHa AjIbOepTcbKOrO yHiBepcuteTy.
Y CyMpoBofii 1paliBHMkiB yHiBepcutery J-pis Kenrmm Ilirepcen , borfaHa Katina Ta Pomana LInana rocti 3 YkpaiHu B3AIM y4acTb y poboui 3ycTpiyi 3 FupeKTOpom KIYCy mpod.
Bonoqumupom KpaByeHkoo Ta ciliBpoOirHuKamnu Wiel ycraHoBM. [lig uac 3ycTpisi z-pu Tipxa, Xo63en Ta KBir O3HAaMOMMJINCA 3 JiAIDHICTIO Ta HaltOiIbUI BAKIMBUMMU IporpaMaMU Ta IpOeKTaMM iHCTUTYTy, 30KpeMa B YkKpaiHi.
Toro camoro JHA BifOynaca 3ycTpiy yKpalHCbKMx rocTen 3 BUK/Iayja4aMu AnbOepTcbKOrO yH-TY, cepa HayKOBMX 3aljikaBJIeHb AKUX CTOCYETbCA YKpaiHO3HaBUUx cryin.
Cepex yuacHnkis 3ycTpidi 6ymu mpucyTHi upodecopu Ojienka bina , AHapin HarayescbKuu , Harana [Imam to (cyaacHi MOBI Ta KyMIbTYPOMOridHi Crypii) Ta Anta HegaurkiscpKa (cyyacHi MOBM Ta KybryponoriaHi crypil.
Aecai Kopmak, deKaHom dbakyAbmemy eyMaHimapHux HayK KY Ii€l BaXxKIMBOI rasly3i ryMaHiTapHMux JJOCM>KeHb.
HactynHow cravia 3yctpiy 4-pis lipxu, Xo63ea Ta Kaira 3 Jjarom BewpoM, BUKOHaBYUM JMpeKTOpOM Bilgiy CTY€CHTCbKMX Iporpam i nociyr AnbOepTcbKOroO yHiBepciitery.
BBeyepi 22 muctonaya q-pu Tipxa, Xo63eu Ta KBit B3AJIM y4acTb y fpOMaj{CbKOMy 3axofi «HoBi TeHAeHUIl B OOMiHi MK yHiBepcutTetamu Kanagu uw Yxpainu», aku Oy0 OpraHi30BaHO YKpaiHCbKMM WeHTPOM 3acoOis i possuTKy Yuipepcnterty im.
HacrymHoro gua -p lipka B34B yuacTb y eKi/IbKOX po6ounx 3ycTpivax 3 HayYKOBUAMM pi3Hux Paky/IbTeTiB Ta Biggimis AnbOeptcpKoro yu-Ty. [lig uac 3yctpiyi 3 mpod.
J>xino Danio0HoM, J-p Tipka MiHAB IMTaHHA IIpo BaxKJIMBICTb Ta MepCcieKTMBU TaKOl JMCUMIVNHM, AK MeqM4Ha disuka, B Ykpaini.
OOroBoproBaiMcb MOXKIMBOCTI HaBYaHHA Ta CTaxKyBaHHA YKpalHCbKMX CTYJ[eHTIB Ta PaxiBiB 3a Wiero cileviabHicTIO B AmbOepTcbKOMy yH-TIi.
OHMM 3 HaCiIi{KIB boro Typy € OYiKyBaHHA OiIbIL TICHOI CHIBMpalli MDK KaHaj[CcbKUMM Ta yKpalHCbKMMM YHiBepcuTeTaMM, 30KpeMa Mixx AjIbOeprcbKMM YH-TOM Ta XapKiBCbKMM HaljioHasIbHMUM yHiBepcuTetom im.
Ha yporopisnin WlesyenkiBcbKin jekiil, 30praHi3oBaHint KTYCom 3a diHaHcoBOi MiFTPpMMKU e][MOHTOHcbkoro Kmro6y yKpaiHcbKux mpodeciOHAJIICTIB 1 MIAMPMeEMUiB, JOMOBIAb 6yio BUromouIeHO Mpod.
TyHqoposa orpumazia cTyTiHb JOKTOpa PistoOriMHMXx HayK y 1996 3 2002 BoHa 3aBiflye BiAiNOM Teopil iTepatypu B IHcTuTYTI mirepatypu HawionatbHOl akajjeMil Hayk Yxpainu.
Mpo3n, WA MasOBiOMa, ayle BAKIMBa FaCTUHAa MOTO TBOPYOcTM IIpMBifKPMBa€e 3aBicy Ta JO3BOIAE Kpalljle 3po3yMiTu rmm6oKe ocobucte cTaBieHHa [leByeHKa JO CBOEI MMI01 OaTbKiBIMHU — YKpaiHn.
Wlesyenko 3Min1oBaB JiTepaTypHi MaCKM 3 TaKOIO CaMOW JlerKiCTIO, AK BiH llepeBOUpaBCA 3 CeAHCbKOI CBUTU B OJ|AT 34MO%KHOTO TaHa.
JlirepaTypHa «MacKa», mig, akoro LleBueHKo TIMCaB IIpO3y POCiMCbKOIO MOBOW JIA IIpeCTaBHUKiB Tak 3BaHOl «Cepe{HbOl KIIACM», BipisHanaca Big, LlesyenKkoBO] «yKpalHCbKOI JIiTepaTypHOi MaCK», AKY ABTOP YMOBHO OJATaB, KOMI, 30KpeMa, IIMCaB CBO] JIMCTM 13 3acylaHHA [0 CIMBBITYM3HMKIB-y4aCHNKiB yKpaiHCbKOrO HalliOHasIbHOTLO PpyXy.
TekcTomoriuva aHavi3a LlesueHkoBOI IIpO3M BKa3ye Ha icHyBaHHA Wi10ro apceHasly pisHOMaHiTHMX HapaTUBHMXx MacoK onoBijjaya.
Tlepeqatoun cioBo KoO3apeBi JJapmorpato, IllesuenHko rpae 3 yABOW, po3qBoro104n ceOe Ha cllocTepiraya i CIOCTepexKyBaHOTO, Ha aBTopa i nepconaxka.
Vioro aBTopcbKa «MacKa» BUKOHYE TepalleBTM4Hy PyHKUil0 i clIpuae TepeOopeHHt0 COLiAIbHOTO, reorpa@idHoro i KyIbTypHOro Biqyy.
BifipBaHMn Bil PiHOl 3eMI1i i Big, CBOIX J[Py3iB, IIMCbMeHHUK Y BulacHIN yABi MaHgpye pasom i3 JJapmorpaem Ipoctopamu 7110601 womy YKpainu, mipurajylye MiciyA, Ae OyBaB, i m107en, i3 KOTPUMM 3YCTpiyaBCa.
CumBOJIYHMMM MPOCKIIAMM Ii CJLy2KaTb 1 MaTM, i YKpaina, i MamOyTHA pyKMHa.
MONOAUUA, Ka WOMUHO BUMIUNIa 3aMDK, He BIN3Hae y Tempasi JJapMorpas, cipuMmMaroun MOLO 3a BACHOLO YOOBIKa.
Obpas3 /jJapMorpad BiqKpMBae HaM iHMMOTO, paHille Mayo 3HaHoro Tapaca IeBuenka, WO icHYy€ Opa 3 yxKe 3HAaMOMMM HaM I1lepueHKOM, AKOrO BCi MU Tak FOOpe 3Ha€MO | IiHYeEMo.
Hosunn Mporpamn penirinHux Ta KyIbTyPONOri4HMXx CTYAIN Mnnyinn akayjeMiuHun pik BUABMBCA OBO HACMYeHMM IIA IIporpamu pemirimHux Ta Ky/IbTyponorigqHnx crypin KIYCy, axa upeyctaBMla 3aljiKaBIeHIM AaBAUTOPIl JeKiIbKa mekyiit.
Biktopa €neHcbKoro (YkpaibcbKMM KaTOMMULUbKM yHipepcutet Ta HawjioHaJIbHMUM MefaroriuHUun yHiBepCcuTeT im.
WepKBa y TpOMaj{CbKOMy IIpocTop)», WO BijOynuca 15 TpaBHa 2014 Tlepmmm 3 IX BUCTYTUB BiO6yBCA Ha TOMOBHOMY Kamilyci AjzibOepTcbKoro yHiBepcnteTY, a [pyrun — BBeYepi TOTO %*K JHA y KY/IbTyYPHOMY WeHTpi IpaBoOcwaBHOl Kateypu cs.
O. q-p K [opopyx foKayqHo 3ymnHMBCA Ha CyYacHMx Mopiax B YKpalHi, AKI BIH OXapaKTepU3YyBaB AK COL|IAIbHe I1pobysPKeHHA Ta HapOjPKeHHA TpOMajICbKOLO CYCHIIbCTBa B Wit Kpaini.
J[omoBigad 30KpeMa 3BepHYB yBaly Ha 3HauHy PO/IHO IepKBU, AKY BOHa BiflirpaBasla Mig, 4ac IPOTeCTHUX pyxis Mampany.
OTbCA HOBI Jep>KaBa Ta Hala, i BUCIIOBMB IlepeKOHaHHA y TOMY, IIo Ie OyTiBHULTBO HEMOKIMBe 6e3 yaacTu wepkBu.
W-p K [oBOPYH BpaHlji JaB iHTepB 10 Ha e7/MOHTOHCbKIM CTyMll Ci-bi-Ci papio.
PesyibraTu UMx FocntipKenb Oyu mpepctaBieHi IsaHom-Ilapiom XumKow, Harankoro KoHOHeHKO Ta DpaHcec CBupilor0 y Tpasui 2014 mig 4ac WOpi4dHol KOH@epeuHuil HAayKOBUiB-C1aBiCTiB Y Cemut-Karpnn3, Ont.a3HayMMo, IO We IpOeKT IpOFOBKye MpuBepraTn jo cebe BeIMKy yBary Ta 3allikaByleHHA 3 OOKy TpoMaf{CbKOCTM Ta 3acobiB MacoBoi ind@opmatii.
MuHyle, cy¥acHe Ta MaliOyTHE», WO BiqOyBCA 3 80 10 tpaBua 2014 y Konerii cs.
BroaeTeub KIYCy 2014 Hosunu KIYCy CHIKOIO CAMOTIOMONI Kanan 3a cupusHHa YUL Kanagn, Konerii ce.
Y poborti CMMMO3iIOMY, Wig Yac AKOTO O6TOBOPIOBAaIMCA IMTAHHA POM KMIBCHKOI WpaBOciaBHOl TpawUuil y CBITOBOMY IIpapocnaB i Ta cyaacHuii cra WepKOBHMX ClipaB 1 ePKOBHOLO X2KUTTA B Yxpaini, B3AIM yuacTb BigoMi daxisWi 3 ictopii, borocioB’s, penirimHux CTYHiM, RYXOBHi OcoON Ta MUPAHU, WO mpeyctapraiotp YIM] Kanagu, YPKL, Beenencpkun [larpiapxar i I[pasocnaBHy Llepxpy AMepuku.
Broaeteub KIYCy 2014 DS) Kpyrnun ctin 3 ictopit fetbMaHWMHM 3 Harogn 70-niTTA Npodecopa 3eHoHa Koryta 26 ueppHa 2014 Big6yBca KpyTMU CTI 3 icropil lerpbMaHWyMHN, IIpMcBAYeHUM 70-J1iITHBOMY FOBIICEBI BifOMOTO icTopMkKa i baraTONiTHBOTO ampextopa KIYCy mpod.enony Koryry.
Ilerpa Anka Ta IHCTUTYT yYKpalHCbKOI apxeorpadii Ta 7>Kepeno3HaBcTBa im.
Koryra y 2004 lonosytounn Ha IbOMY 3acifjaHHi Apocias Deopyk 3yIIMHMUBCA Ha OCHOBHMX Bixax Oiorpadii maHOBHOroO lOpiapa, HarOMOCMBIIM Ha cmipnpaii KIYCy ra ] mpotsaTOM JJMpeKTopctBa 3eHoHa KoryTa.
BiTaHHAM Big IactutyTy apxeorpadii BUCTYIMB 3aCTYNHMK JUpekTopa OnexcaHyp Mappin, Akuu 3rayjaB po migpumKy KIYCom inctutyty y BAKKMM Yac BOCeHu 2013, Kom BUPIMyBaNaca JOA JBOX 3ak1af{iB Akajjemii Hayk — InctnTyTy apxeorpadil ta [ucruryty cxof03HaBCTBa im.
Ha ton VYuacHuku KPyeAO0eO CMOAY yac Taki JOcIi~pKeHHA Oyu WiTKOM HOBaTOPCbKUMU i POpMyBaIIM HOBMM HalIpAMOK B aHIVIOMOBHIM iCTOpi0rpadii.
Jonosigay Tako 3yMMHUBCA Ha BHeCKOBi J|-pa Koryta y po3BUTOK KIYCy nig, yac cBoro AMpeKTOpcTsBa.
B. [puma fap Tako dbaxosy xapakTepuicTuKy JBOXx 30ipHNKiB CTaTeM TOpisapa.
Bixtop bpexyHeHKo 30cepequB yBaly Ha K/IKOUOBUX MOMEHTAaXx y posBuTKy ictopiorpadii kinya 1980-x poKis, Kou o6pa3 Ykpainn PopmyBaBCA iCTOpMKaMU-pycucTaMu Ta IIOJIbCbKOHO Bisier0 icropil.
Halil y CBITOBiM icTopil. mpwTaMaHHMM aia T Uyxmi6a ryMopooM BiH Bij] iMeHu 26 BroaeteuHb KIYCy 2014 KO3all, AKI KiIbKa MiCALIB crosmu Ha Mamyani, migquic mpod.
B’auecnaB CraHiciaBCbKUn, OH 3 HaliKpalMx BUJaBLIB KOpIycy AMCTIB IpaHa Masenn y cyaacnin YKpaiui, aKTyasli3yBaB TBOPYUM FOpOOoK mpod.
Koryta, MifKpecsIt01ouN 3Ha4eHHA ICTOPMUYHMX 3HaHb [VIA KOHCOMIAalil Halil, OcoO7MBO y Leu MepeOMHMM Mepiog.
Mouorpadia Aye ZoOpe moKa3ye BUTOKM alpecuBHol nomituKu Mocks ill TpayMuil.
Apocnas Ipuyak MaB BUCTYII Bil, iMeHM ciiBopraHisaropis — Ilporpamu JOCIJPKeEHHA Cy4acHOl iCTOpil Ta cyciliibcTBa im.
Ilerpa Aymxa.i wympnMM BiTaHHAMM IOBiIApOBi BUCTYNMIM Takox Depxay Typanau, Jmurpo BupcpKknn Ta Tetana ApoieHko.
Hacmif7KoM Mx 3altiKaBJIeHb CTajia MOHOrpadia, IpucBaueHa JIKBifjaljil ABTOHOMII leTbMaHLMHM Ta ll iHTerpallil B Jep»KaBHUM OpraHi3M PociitcbKoi imnepil.
BaxkimBoto € TaKOXK TEMaTUKa OOPOTBOM KO3aKiB OnekcaHgpa YepHeHko JIncaKkPyguuubka Onekcanypa UepHenko JIucaKPyHHMUbKa, MoeTeca, MMCbMeHHMLA M MiTepaTypo3HaBellp, Bisa y BiYHICTb 24 yepBHA 2014 B EqmontoHi.
BeamkumM HaTXHeHHAM 1A OjiekcaHgpn Oys ii Apyruu yonoBik, J|-p Ban JImcax-PyqHuypKun, mpodecop ictopii AmbOeptcbKoro yHiBepcutery.
JAKYBaB OpraHisaTopaM 1 BCiM TIpuCYTHIM 3a y4acTb y IbOMy KpyT7IOMy cromi.
IOBIIAp NiAKpecimB, WO WIA HbOrO 6yN0 BeIMKOIO YeCcTIO OyTM Ha Ijbomy Beyopi came B Mysei Muxauna Ipymescpxoro.
Broaetenb KIYCy 2014 Dil, Hosunn KIYCy Cemivapnu nu nekyil KIYCy B AnbOeptcbkomy yHipepcuteri 19 Bepecua.
Biktop EnencpKun (YKpaincbKuM KaTONMUbKUM yHiBepcutet, JIbBis, Ta HayionanbHun MeqaroriuHun yHiBepcntet im. [paromaHosa, Kunis), «Pemiria i momiTMKa: BAaXKIMBICTb BI3HAaYeHHA YKpainoro 1025-piyya xpemjeHHa Pycu» ta Tesep Komman (Biggin icropii i KmAcMuHMx cTypin, AmbOeptTcbKuM yH-T) «TBOpeHHA HallioHaJIbHOrO CBATOYO Ha IiBJe@HHO-3aXxiJHbOMY MOrpaHUy4i: Cs.
MOKIMBOCTI Ul WepeuikoyM»: Epren buctpuupKun (MixuapogHin doug «BigpomxKenHa», Kuis), Banepit Uanun (Llentrp im.
Pasymkoga, Kuis), Jxou ebapgene6eu (KapntouCbKMM yH-T, OTTaBa), Jlepex Dpet3ep (konMMIHIN MOCoN Kanagu B YkKpaini), Onexci Tapanb (HaujionaibHMn yHiBepcutet «KueBo-MormiancbKa akajyemia») Ta JI1060B 7KuU3HOMMpcbKa . 14 nmctonaya.
AKO JOpororo nige Ykpaina?»: AMaHga [lon (Llentp epponencpKol nowitMuKNn, bproccemb), Tapac Ky3bo (Llentp nomituanHnx i pelioHambuux cryfin, KIYC, AY), Borgan Haraino Ta Onexciu TapaHb (HaujioHaibHuu yHipepcntet «KueBpo-MormmaHcpKa akajleMia», Yepes «CKain»). 13 mroToro.
Ha Mexi BIMHM»: Bonoyumup Kpasyenko , Apc banau (LlenxTp ykpaincbko-KaHajf[cbKux cTypil im.
Kynis, KIYC, AY), Jlenpuy Mapnis (IIporpama BuBueHHA cydacHoi Yxpainn im.
Cractoxis, KIYC, AY), borgan Tapacumis Ta lesep Komman (IIporpama fociigKenHa penirii i kymbTypomoril, KIYC, AY). 25 6epesHa.
Cractoxis, KIYC, AY) i Tapac Kyspo (Llentp nomituanHnx i perionanbunx crygin, KIYC, INS) 10 kBirHa.
Onena Knimosa (Biggin aBauty Ta PinaHcis, JjoHeubKUM HayioHatbHun yHiBepcutet), «[HcTUTYHiNHa KoHYenyia Bceponoga lony6xHmyoro». 15 rpapua.
Jjanuna Tycapa Crpyxa Big6ynaca 3 tpapya 2014 y TipMMilleHHi DakybTeTy COB AHCHKMX MOB Ta JliTepaTypm TopoHTcbkKoro yHiBepcuTeTy, JO CK/lafly AKOrO CBOrO yacy BXOnMB noKinHuu npod.
Ljporopisny JIEKUIEKO BUTOJIOCUB q-p Muxanno HanjjaH, AKUM MOcifae mocafly upodecopa yKpalHCbKUXx CTYMIM im.
JIyypxoro. [lig uac Bpyyenua HaropoyM IpomMosy Buromocuja Ona KynmoBcbKa — mpeMaxcum Tapuascokuu, Oxcana Cmpyk i Muxauao Hauoan 3uyeHT Kanafcbkoi dyHgayil yKpaincbKnux crypim.
JIyUbKOTO, WO Hafja€TbCA 3a MOXRKUTTEBMM BHECOK y CIIpaBy mepeklafly YKpaiHcbKOi MiTepaTypu iHlWMMM MoBamMn.
Bomooumupa Ajustunceko2o [poropiuHa Memopianbua jekuia, AKy Oyo BUrooUeHO 4 KBiTHa 2014, Biq6ynaca 3a cipuaHHa TopoHTcpKoro Biggity KIYCy ra Incruryty im.
IIpoMOBIJeM Ha Hit BUCTyIMB J-p borgan Haranuno — mucbMeHHMK, JOCHIJHUK Ta PaxiBellb 3 IMTaHb KOAMIMIHBOTO PaAHCbKOrO Corosy Ta Cxigupoi Esponu.
Bix OYOMOBAB FOCHIPHUUKUM Biggin 3 WpoOmematTuKM CPCP mupu «Amuecti IntepHemmH» y Jlongoni . |b.
Cy KUT rpomapi y motomy 2014 KIYC pasom i3 KaHajcbkolo @yHpallieio yKpaiHCbKux cTygim Ta BigtomMuM yKpaiHCbKO-KaHajicbKuu finuem Iletpom CaBaPpMHMM OTOMOCMIM IIpo 3aCcHyBaHHA Haropogn im.
Iletpo u Ona CaBapunu qo6pe BiJJOM1 B KaHafii 3a CBOIO WexpicTb, iHIMIATMBHICT 1 MOABYOKHULbDKY Tpomajicbky lpauro.
Ilerpo Capapnu HapoguBca 1926 yc.y6peup Oinaz Byuyaua Ha TepHonimbuyni.
AKTMBHO IipaljtoBaB [IAA POSBUTKY YMCIIEHHUX TPOMaf{CbKMX OpraHisallint, TaKMX AK Kypcu yKpaiHo3sHaBcTBa im.
MapTii AmbOepTu, qieHOM Pay upaBiinHa Ambb6eptCbKOrO yHiBepcnuterTy Ta Il IpeycTaBHMKOM y ceHatTi , mi3Hite KaHLJlepoM yHiBepcutety , a 3ro}0M 20 pokis o4o710BaB ToBapucTBo upuatenis AmbOeptcbKoro yHiBepcntety.
Y 1971 BiH 6yB OJHMM i3 TMX, XTO BIUIMHYB Ha lIpem €p-MiHictpa Kanagn Il’ epa Tprwqo i mporomomenHA nomiTMKM OaraToKy/IbTypHocrTn.
HapyaHHA posmoyazia B YxkpaiHi, 1posoB Kia B HimewuHi, a 3aKiHuMia BxKe B AjbOeprTi.
Ilani Capapnu cynpoBoy>KysBasa i WOMOMarasia CBOEMY YOJIOBIKOBI B MOTO YMCIICHHMX MpO€KTAX 1 1013 }Kax. 3acHyBaHHA Haropogn im.
HanekornaAgHicTb MeljeHarTiB cnyKuTume rpomapi a Mai6yTHIM NOKONIHHAM Y Bepecui 2013 y KIYCi 3acHoBaHo Biunni doug im.
Dong nNigZTpuMyBaTMMe IIpO€KTU, HporpamyM uM nyOnikayil Ta ini JiIAHKM [iAIbHOCTM IHCTUTYTY, Te € HarayibHa oTpe6a.
BoHa — JOHbKa yKpalHCbKMx iMMilpaHTiB, AKi MepeOpamuca Jo KaHagM depes NOTM4Hi MU penirinHi llepeciifyBaHHA Ha OaTbKiBIIMHi.
M1060BM WO 3€M/Ii CBOIX Iipeq{KiB. 3 paHHbOro Biky Mapia mpiama craru [MpeKTopom wkou.
Bona HaByaaca y TIM CaMiU OJHOKIMHATHIN MOUaATKOBIN WKOMi, B Aki On.. ceHaTop Ilapro lO3nk 6ys yantenem.
YuntTembcbKy Kap epy posmouasa B CackaTyHi, Je 4epes CBO JOOpocepyeyHictTh ii MOpiBHtioBas 3 MONYIAPHUM aMepuKaHCbKMM mcuxomo0rom Ex Jlenpepc. [lepeixas32 Mapia ma Muxatao Agere uM 70 Outapio, Mapia npauiosana Ha — Ppi3HMX YANTEbCbKUX Ta a{MiHiCTpaTUBHUX MOCafjax, 30KpeMa i AK Mepuia *KiHKa-yMpeKtTop.
Mapia i Muxanno Sym 6yIM aKTUBHMMM B YKpaincpKilt KaTOMMUbKiit YepKBi Miccicaru Ta _ B yKpaiHcpKit rpomagi Te pOHTa.
Muxaino — nigrpumysas i 6yB yleHOM bpatCTBa KOJIMINHIX BOAKIB 1. i qupisii a YpaiHcbKoi HayionanbHoi apMii.
Pony NiqTpumMyBaTUMe CbKOi IporpaMM iHCTUTYTY, 30KpeMa nyOmikawii JpyKOBaHMx i eeKTpoHHMUX BUaHb, OpraHisallilo U ydacTb y KOHDepeHUiAx Ta FOCHIJHMMbKi CTyMil IIpo icropiio yKpainyis y Kanapi. 3acHOBHMKM MOHAY CKa3asin, WO WyKe MIMMWatOTbcA MOrO 3aCcHyBaHHam.
O6oe Hanexamnu Fo Corsy yKpaiHCbKOi Mojopi KaHayu Ta 11 3HAaMeCHMTOro xopy.
Mupoca orpumazia cryteni 6aKaylapa Hayk y 1979 Ta Oakanlapa ocBiTu y 1981 Bona kitbKa pOKiB BUKaflala B YKpalHCbKiNt JJBOMOBHIN IIporpaMi, Micjid YOro 30cepeyMmaca Ha poMHi WM rpoMaycHKin pooori.
OuositoBasia KOMiTeTH, TaKi AK «CaWOYOK» pu BisAI cB. lBaHa, mpeycTaBisiouwu ToBapMcTBO yKpalHCbKUXx *KiHOK KaHagnu.
Byayyuu napTHepoM kKommianii «Insight Medical Imaging», Hecrop upaktukyBaB pajiOOrito y WIMMTaAX 1 KHIKaX EQMOHTOHY MU cimbcpKoi AbOepTu.
BiH Takox o6iMae Mocajly NeKTopa KJMHIFHMX CTYAIM BiPFiy pagionorii AmpOepTcbKoro yHiBepcnTery.
MouecHa rpamota KIYCy y 2014 KIYC 3acHysBaB nouecny rpaMoTy Ha Bi3HaYeHHA MeljeHatTiB iHCTUTYTY, AKi 3pOOMIM abO NAAHYIOTb 3POOUTM 3HAYHMM BHeECOK Ha HifTPpUMKy mporpam i mpoextis KIYCy ra rpomay{cbKux i HAyYKOBMX J1AYIB, KOTpi CIpuAIM TMATPMMIU iHCTMTYTY B rpoMadi, B Kanaji i 3a KOpyoHoo.
IBaHeyb 3acHyBana BiaHum doug im. q-pa Bacuaa i Iapaci IBaxwis y 2010 y nam’aTb Mpo cBoro yorOBika 67.
Muxaiina, Bonogumupa ii Omi Tanpuyk 2007 B am’ aTb po cBoix cuHiB Muxaiina 1 Bonogumupa Ta apym*KHHy Osto. leh PoHA Npu3sHadeHHi Ha MiTpHMKy HayKOBHX, CTY@HTCbKMX Ta JOC AHUX mpoeKTis KTYCy.
Meroto ously € nisqTpumka crumensin Ta HayKOBMX IIpO€KTIB 3 yKpaiHCbKMx cTyfin.
Jo ocTaHHix {HIB q-p Pimep-Cawx bya aKTUBHOIO B YKpalHCbKilt TpoMafil, MiyqTpuMY1OUM pi3Hi IPOEKTU, 30KpeMa «IcTopito Ykpainn-Pycn» Muxanna [pyuieBcbkKoro (TOM 9, KH. 2, y.), my6mikaujia AKOi MpucBayeHa T1aM ATi ti OaTbKiB, -pa Agonpda Ta Onpru Cavox.
Wlanosyy metteHaTKy BIWaHyBaMU Ili, 4ac Mpe3eHTaljii TOMy B Topouti y 6epe3Hi 2011 Hapom>Kena B Kosiommi , BOHa 3MylleHa Oya NOKMHYTM OaTbKiBLIMHYy Tlepey] payjAHCbKOIO HaBasiow.
OTpuMaBUIM JMIMIOM ikapa y Mtonxeui , emirpyBaza Jo CINA , qe mpatoBaza MesiaTpoM B M Kankaki, wiTatT [inonc.
Kravchenko \_, 7 , CIUS Director ae a Wie ALMERIA ENO NN PRL NG ah ee AN i rf eee NS BAK ‘ SE NS EAS 3)8) Haropomn Crunengil Ta gotault CTVineHgli Ay1A acnipaHTis | HOKTOpAaHTIB loxtopcbKa cTuneHgia MemopianbHoro dougy im.
HenopaHux Jjanien Peyoposny, Biggin dinocodil B nomitTuyi, OkchbopycbKuM yHiBepcutet.
Hlonpuya MU YKpaina nig yac JIpyroi CBITOBOI BIMHM». f j ery i [punesu4 Anactacia CajibHukosa, Bisfim MomiTomporii, YHiBepcuter bpuraHcpKoi Komtomoii.
Aocnigui poTauii Iletpo bomxo, Inctutyt yKpaincpKoi apxeorpadii Ta f>Kepemo3HaBcTBa im.
Harania lapguga, TepHoniibcbKum HalioHayIbHUM TeXHi4HUM yHiBepcuteT im.
Bnayucnas Ipnnesny, lacruryT NomITMYHMX i eTHOHALiOHANbHMX JOcTip>KeHb im.
Tapac Aynya Bonogumup Macimuyk, HesanexKHUM FOcniPHMUK, BisbulaHn, XapKiBcbKa OOsacTb.
Biranim Terppak, J[poroOuypKun fepxKaBHMM MeqarorivHunm yHiBepcutet im.
BaraTo 4eHiB Halllol rpOMajIM BILAHOBYIOTD aM ATb pO CBOiX Apy3iB, KoNer, OU3bKMX i pifHMX, AKi BipiMuIM Y BIMHICTb, MOKeEPTBOO Ha posBuTOK KIYCy.
