These efforts were launched by Putin as early as the beginning of 2013 to avoid losing Ukraine as part of his Eurasian integration project.
In Ukraine, however, pro-Russian political forces were weak, clandestinely suppressed by President Viktor Yanukovych and his party.
Moscow’s major efforts, including the Rus Baptism anniversary, trade sanctions, and “Medvedchuk project” failed to turn the tide; some even backfired, consolidating support for the European project among the Ukrainian elite and public.
Although Putin interrupted the signing of the EU Association Agreement by taking advantage of Yanukovych’s personal weakness, he became increasingly frustrated with the Ukrainian president, who “sacrifices Russia’s strategic interests” and sought to become an “all-Ukrainian national leader” resistant to Russian pressures.
Russian policy was at an impasse, without any viable instruments to restrict the westward drift of Ukraine, making the situation totally different from that of 2004.
In the fall of 2016, email accounts allegedly belonging to Vladislav Surkov, the Kremlin’s ideologue and Putin’s aide on the Ukrainian issue, were made public by patriotic Ukrainian hackers.
The Internet is admittedly filled with fake “leaks,” but multiple digital forensics experts have confirmed the authenticity of these particular communications.
Unlike screenshots and PDF documents, which can easily be forged, the leaks involved nearly one-gigabyte data dumps of whole mailboxes, including valid metadata such as IP addresses, which are almost impossible to fabricate.
Moreover, many trivial details that had not previously been made public—including the names of Surkov’s secretaries, as well as that of his essay reviewer living in London—mesh with real life.
Following the Surkov leaks, the mailbox of Kirill Frolov, a researcher at the Russian Institute for CIS Countries and head of the Association of Orthodox Experts, which is close to the Russian Orthodox clergy, was disclosed in 1 Rupert Cornwell.
Although the author found little evidence, both in main body text as well as in metadata, in favor of possible forgery or modification of all or part of the leaks, the further verification of specific emails that experts find suspicious would be welcomed.
A quick examination of the publicized data makes it clear that most of the leaked emails and attached documents are routine and of little interest to sensation-seekers.
Moreover, even if certain messages contain exciting assessments or assertions, they do not make an obvious contribution to policy formation.
Nevertheless, a meticulous comparison of multiple emails with open-source information makes it possible to identify the Kremlin’s plan and elucidate its implementation in a somewhat organized manner.
He is merely an occasional functionary for the Kremlin and not in a position to make any important decisions, but his private correspondence with Sergei Glazyev, Putin’s adviser on Eurasian integration and curator of Ukrainian projects until Surkov’s arrival on the scene,7 reveals the details of the execution of the religious segment of the Kremlin’s comprehensive program, to which Frolov was assigned.
As early as the beginning of 2013, despite public claims that “under no circumstances will Russia ... impose anything on anyone,”8 Putin approved and launched a comprehensive program of covert influence operations to draw Ukraine away from its path toward European integration and back into Russia’s orbit.
The party Motherland , co-headed by Glazyev, was said to be a Surkov project to split the communist vote in 2003.
By focusing on the year 2013,14 the author challenges the assumption still accepted by a wide range of scholars and practitioners that the annexation of Crimea was a spontaneous response by Russia to the flight of Yanukovych.
The Kremlin’s strategic and tactical insights into Ukraine, revealed in the leaks, provide background to the fateful decision to annex Crimea, though the findings need to be corroborated by further evidence.
The core argument of this article is that the Kremlin began comprehensive influence operations to block Ukraine’s integration into the EU as early as 2013, but by the middle of November 2013 it had exhausted nearly all political, economic, cultural, and religious resources, and Russian policy found itself at an impasse.
This section further details the implementation of specific influence operations targeting the Ukrainian president, parliament and government, churches, oligarchs, the media and the public, as well as the Kremlin’s tireless efforts to nurture its own “candidate” for the Ukrainian presidential elections in 2015.
The final section summarizes the outcomes of the influence operations in 2013 and further attempts to interpret Russian behaviors in late 2013 and early 2014.
Review of Narratives Although policymakers and scholars alike have debated the Ukraine crisis at length in recent years, analysis of the genesis of the conflict remains relevant.
It is also reported that the Russian Defense Ministry announced a tender for the production of medals in mid-December 2013.
Like Mearsheimer, some authors take the public statements and assessments of the Russian leader and his proxies at face value.
Others may not do so overtly, but their judgements are nevertheless distorted due to intensive communication with Russian actors.
What they tell us is usually what they want us to see or keep guessing about, but seldom what they actually see.
For example, Treisman, though fully aware that “Kremlin insiders could be dissembling,” fails to correct the biased impression he gained from interviews with Putin and former Kremlin official Alexei Chesnakov.
The second problem, in part a consequence of the first, is the extensive and discursive context in which the current crisis is projected and interpreted.
They also tend to lump all “Western” nations together as parties to the conflict.
For instance, Tsygankov’s analysis is comprehensive, covering the decade leading up to the eruption of the crisis, but lacks attention to the Kremlin’s insights into Ukraine in 2013.27 It is true that Putin referred to the threat of NATO as the background of the annexation of Crimea, but note that Russian political technologists are good at “switching the points” to “confuse both time 24 Peter Pomerantsev.
The study further estimates that Putin did not expect the downfall of Yanukovych “until shortly before it happened” and “was still trying to save him” because, citing the interview with Chesnakov, “ad Putin suspected that Yanukovych would be gone in two months, he would have found some pretext to delay the disbursement” of a $3 billion loan to Ukraine in December.
It is, however, worth pointing out that Russia did not provide any bilateral intergovernmental loans to Ukraine, but it purchased a secure Eurobond governed by UK law.
With the benefit of hindsight, one might even speculate that this deal gave Russia more say in Ukraine’s international fund-raising efforts as its biggest creditor.
Moreover, according to Wilson, part of the injected money might have flowed back to Russia via fraud.
Nimmo’s analysis shows that “Russia only started a serious attempt to portray NATO as a party to the conflict four weeks after the decision to annex Crimea had been taken,”29 a point that calls into question, for example, Treisman’s contention on Russian fears about the possible loss of the Black Sea base.
Russian strategic narratives displayed the Ukraine crisis as “a struggle for influence between Russia and NATO” in the international arena.
Another all-too-common pitfall is, as exemplified in the aforementioned statement of the former United States defense secretary, treating Yanukovych as the Kremlin’s favorite, a habit formed during the Orange Revolution in 2004 that may be hard to break.
Answers to these fundamental questions can provide the basis for understanding the background of the Kremlin’s policy shift in Ukraine.
Way Back Home,” Putin says he gave the order to annex Crimea on February 22.
As we learned from the leaked information, in early February 2013, Sergei Tkachuk, project director of the Scientific Center for Eurasian Integration and a de facto assistant to Glazyev, informed Frolov that he had begun to negotiate with Victor Medvedchuk’s political movement “Ukrainian Choice”39 and asked Frolov to send “a list of organizations with a good and reliable network, which 35 Yulia Mostovaia and Tat’iana Silina.
The authenticity of the leaked document, including its possible author, was confirmed when Frolov forwarded ZN.UA’s article to Glazyev with the title “Zerkalo Nedeli published a text similar to yours” and added, “ZN—NATO’s newspaper.
These observations underline the importance of scrutinizing the Complex of Measures in the light of a series of events in 2013.
Nedeli opublikovalo tekst, pokhozhe na utechku,” 2013-08-19, 14:18:42 +0400.
After this act, the possibilities of Ukraine’s accession to the CU will be closed, and its dependence on Brussels will sharply increase.
We will lose a promising goal, and the Ukrainian leadership will pass the initiative to the pro-Western forces.
We will have to wait for the collapse of the current political regime and prepare for the next “orange” coup.
The Frolov leaks reveal that Frolov was the agent connecting Glazyev to the latter organization.
In July 2012, at the summit in Crimea, Putin proposed that Ukraine join the Customs Union, but Yanukovych rejected this invitation, instead proposing a sectoral approach to integrating the Ukrainian economy into the Customs Union.
Yanukovych Yanukovych restored the “superpresidentialist model” by overturning the December 2004 constitutional changes that had shared power with the parliament.
This led not only to the concentration of executive powers but also to the “near-total subordination of the judicial branch” to the president.
In many ways, these fears have been amplified by oligarchs close to Yanukovych and highly dependent on their Western partners and possibly intelligence agencies.
Given the negative attitude of the overwhelming majority of voters, it will be extremely difficult to keep Yanukovych in power with only administrative and criminal resources.
Having seen “the critical drop in people’s trust in the President of Ukraine,”52 the Complex of Measures argued that Yanukovych could restore relative trust among eastern voters only by beginning economic integration with Russia.
Moreover, while pro-Western forces are ideologically and organizationally ready to seize power, the pro-Russian trend remains unorganized and disoriented.
What is worse, the current consolidation of the Ukrainian public against Yanukovych contributes to the growth of antiRussian sentiments because his regime is perceived by many Ukrainians as imposed by Russia.
Objectively, this increases the threat of power seizure by forces hostile 51 The document author’s pathological suspicion about “Western intelligence agencies” was observed in the articles written by him earlier.
The repetition of the “orange” revolution in Ukraine, if the prevailing trends continue, is highly likely.
Thus, another frustration the Kremlin felt was that in the public mind Yanukovych’s regime was often associated with Moscow’s support,53 even though this link was less and less real.
Such a stereotype could mean that people’s anger toward Yanukovych was easily interchangeable with anti-Russian sentiments.
In case of the continuing drift of Yanukovych toward the West and the surrender of the sovereignty of Ukraine to the EU, the result of this work [the Complex of Measures] should be the victory of our candidate in the upcoming presidential elections in 2015.
Medvedchuk was chief of Kuchma’s presidential administration, and Putin is the godfather of his daughter, who was born in 2004.
Moreover, although Putin’s official meeting with President Yanukovych in Crimea in July 2012 was delayed by four hours, the Russian president nevertheless stopped by Medvedchuk’s private dacha on the way back to the airport.
Experts took Putin’s visit to Medvedchuk to be a signal that Moscow might be able to nominate its own candidate in the coming 2015 Ukrainian president elections, or at least show its readiness to turn the pro-Russian electorate away from Yanukovych and block his re-election.
Parliament and Government At the beginning of 2013, the political spectrum of the Ukrainian national parliament reflected the results of the October 2012 elections.
The Complex of Measures admitted that the majority of Parliament, including 53 The similar Yanukovych-pro-Russian association is observed in the narratives of some international observers discussing the Ukraine crisis.
As a rule, Ukrainian parliamentarians hold a flexible position, guided by their sponsors and leaders.
Changing their direction requires personal work, in which we should engage businessmen, journalists, voter associations, and authoritative individuals who are sponsoring them.
Its oligarchic top, maintaining ties with both the “orange” and its Western partners, will immediately run to the winners’ side, and the demoralized party caucus will collapse.
We will be confronted with the ramified network of influence agents infiltrated by Western intelligence agencies, which have already taken deep roots in all branches of power, the media, the educational system, the expert community, and law enforcement agencies.
Also, from June 2013, relations with the management of the “shadow vertical” in Zaporozhye , which entered into conflicts with other branches of the same group , developed rather ambiguously, gradually escalating the conflicts both inside and outside the system.
With the change in the foreign policy vector in Kyiv from pro-Russian to EuroAtlantic, they began to charge the system I headed with suppressing the public activity of pro-Russian groups in the Zaporozhye region, which was not my responsibility and contradicted my convictions.
In June, for this and other reasons, I prepared my resignation .56 Broide’s secret testimony suggests that the criminal authority in Zaporizhia was instructed by the powers-that-be in Kyiv to press pro-Russian organizations in the region.
In other words, as early as June 2013, preemptive measures were already in place to intercept possible pro-Russian campaigns against the EU Association Agreement.
This notion also fits the Kremlin’s pessimistic view on pro-Russian forces in Ukraine.
Yanukovych’s covert political maneuvers were, however, perhaps sensed by Russian political technologists such as Gleb Pavlovsky, a point that will be discussed later in this paper.
Zaporizhia, Mykolaiv, and Odessa were given to Yury Ivanushchenko, a friend of Viktor Yanukovych, whose interests were pursued in the criminal world as well as in the shadow economy.
For example, his interests in Zaporizhia were protected by “watcher” Evgeny Anisimov, a local criminal authority.
Vcherashnie predlozheniia,” 2014-07-10, 15:56:20 +0300. 56 brusovg@mail.ru, email to prm_surkova@gov.ru, “Fwd: Orientirovka,” 2014-07-09, 13:07:27 +0300.
Broide fled Ukraine in autumn under the threat of death from his employer as well as rivalry groups.
At the CIS summit held in Minsk at the end of May 2013, Prime Minister Mykola Azarov, who was occasionally criticized by opposition groups for having a pro-Russian stance, signed the non-binding memorandum, in which Ukraine simply expressed a desire to become an observer of the Eurasian Economic Union in the future.
Some might hastily interpret this move as Kyiv’s vacillation between the EU and Russia.
Yet as the suppression of pro-Russian forces suggests, Yanukovych was still fully geared toward Europe.
Yanukovych can get out of this situation, relying on democratic procedures that the West cannot object to.
He may agree to hold a referendum or to appeal to the Constitutional Court, postponing the signing until the completion of these procedures.
On August 7, Oleg Tsarev published the so-called “legal opinion on the compliance of the Constitution of Ukraine with the draft Association Agreement,” in which he maintained that it would be impossible to sign the Agreement without amending the Constitution.
On August 20, Vadim Kolesnichenko proposed abandoning European integration, registering a bill to amend the basic laws that define Ukraine’s foreign policy goal as obtaining membership in the European Union.
According to the deputy, “the opinion of the Ukrainian people [on the vector of the state foreign policy] was divided approximately 50/50, often even in favor 58 Tat’iana Silina.
In response to this turbulence from within the party, Yanukovych convened a meeting on September 5, where he made it clear that Ukraine would not turn from its Euro-integration course, while trying to alleviate the frustration of some party members by assuring them that some provisions of the Customs Union would still be implemented.
Citing examples of Moscow’s unwillingness to fulfill obligations, including the gas price discount allegedly promised during the 2010 Kharkiv summit, Yanukovych reportedly said that partnership and respect from Ukraine’s northern neighbor should not be expected.
He also warned that if Moscow continued to exert pressure on Ukraine in the form of economic sanctions, trade turnover might drop by half.
This damage, in his opinion, should be softened by Brussels, which would take compensatory measures, including opening European markets to Ukrainian manufacturers.
Nobody seriously argued with the president, and the participants unanimously agreed to vote for the laws necessary for EU association.
Following the party assembly, Oleg Tsarev commented to journalists that “three to five” colleagues would vote against the proposed legislation.
Church In January 2013, the Orthodox expert Frolov sent to Patriarch Kirill’s assistant the talking points for a meeting between the Russian Orthodox Church and the Russian president scheduled for February.
According to Frolov, the Ukrainian authorities were trying to turn the celebration of the 1025th anniversary of the Christianization of the Rus, which was slated for late July, into “a triumph of separatism” by giving the floor to Patriarch Filaret, who had parted ways with the Russian Orthodox Church in the 1990s, establishing the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Kyiv Patriarchate.
Frolov argued that Russia should take over this celebration and use the Russian Orthodox Church, “the sole undivided structure in the post-Soviet space,” to sway the Ukrainian and Belarusian publics toward Eurasian integration.
The correspondence between Frolov and Igor Druz, leader of the Council of Slavic Peoples, shows how the Kremlin prepares “cultural events” by hiring local collaborators.
Dopolnennyi variant,” 2013-01-27, 21:00:12 +0400. 67 frolov_moskva@mail.ru, email to glaziev@bk.ru, “PRAVOSLAVNAIA ISTERIIA PROTIV EVROINTEGRATSII UKRAINY,” 2013-06-05, 22:34:44 +0400.
This proposal seems to have been approved by Glazyev; his assistant Tkachuk further inquired about logistics for procuring activists.
The list first enumerates 20 delegates from “the Russian Federation,” including Glazyev, Frolov, and Tkachuk, and only then mentions eight Ukrainians, among them Petr Tolochko (a pro-Russian historian), Vadim Kolesnichenko, and Oleg Tsarev as “recommended participants on the topic—agreed with S Yu.
According to the investigation by InformNapalm, the account “sirius1919@ mail.ru” belongs to Victor Voronin, an ally of Ukrainian education minister Dmytro Tabachnyk.
Goebbels of the Patriarch, Recruitment of Ukrainian Generals and Baptism by Fire in Syria.
Other documents attached to the same email, Tkachuk indicated, “have been handed over by S.Yu. to his Holiness [Patriarch Kirill],” possibly for briefing the Patriarch before his visit to Ukraine.
Tkachuk asked Frolov to kindly delete the files from the mailbox after copying them to the desktop—a step that, to all appearances, was not taken by the latter.
Thus, it implicitly obliges Ukraine to fully legalize the activities of sexual minorities and their representative organizations, which will lead in the long term to the legalization of same-sex marriages and other manifestations of sodomy.
The United States and the EU will willingly pass him into the hands of their henchmen, commanding them to bring down Yanukovych.
In the absence of our support, he and his son will end up in prison, their property confiscated and eternally shamed.
This has already been the case with Hussein, Milošević, Mubarak, and many other dictators who trusted Western consultants.
The Foundation of Ukraine’s Civilizational Choice” organized by Ukrainian Choice.
Putin, who occupied the seat between Glazyev and Medvedchuk, stated in his keynote address:78 Here at this site, at the baptismal site on the Dnieper River, a choice was made for the whole of Holy Rus, for all of us.
Our ancestors who lived in these lands made this choice for our entire people.
When I say “for our entire people,” we know today’s reality of course, know that there are the Ukrainian people and the Belarusian people, and other peoples too, and we respect all the parts of this heritage, but at the same time, at the foundations of this heritage are the common spiritual values that make us a single people.
Putin characterized the Baptism of the Rus as “a great event that defined Russia’s and Ukraine’s spiritual and cultural development for the centuries to come” and urged participants to “remember this brotherhood and preserve our ancestors’ traditions,” which “built a unique system of of the Orange Revolution.
Despite the delusions of separate Russian hawks, NATO was added to the Kremlin’s expressed fears later to justify the illegal annexation.
The concerted efforts by the state and the church to remind Ukrainians of their “common spiritual values” were suddenly brought to nothing.
On September 30, ten representatives of Ukrainian churches and religious organizations signed a joint statement supporting Ukraine’s European course.
For Moscow, the most shocking part was that the document was signed not only by the heads of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Kyivan Patriarchate and Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, but also by Metropolitan Volodymyr , who leads the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Moscow Patriarchate and with whom the author of the Complex of Measures had expected to ally to influence public opinion in favor of Eurasian integration.
Oligarchs One proven method for the Kremlin to influence Kyiv’s decision-making was to target Ukrainian business, which is heavily dependent on Russia.
In 2011, Russia was the destination for 28 percent of Ukraine’s trade, whereas Ukraine received less than 5 percent of Russian exports.
This “trade asymmetry” had long given Russia “coercive power” over the smaller Ukraine.
At these events, appeals to the leadership of Ukraine and political parties can be accepted… Working with business structures, it is necessary to be ready to meet Ukrainian partners in making decisions on issues of their interest in exchange for direct support for the integration process.
Carrots were given, for example, in the form of business conferences targeting specific industrial sectors.
During the meeting, Medvedchuk explained to the managers of shipbuilding companies in Mykolaiv and Kherson that accession to the Customs Union and access to the Russian market could save the troubled Ukrainian shipbuilders.
Nevertheless, Moscow preferred sticks to carrots in its policy toward Ukraine.
And, vice versa, resort to sanctions against companies whose owners or leaders support political forces opposed to the accession or openly campaign for European integration… Given the commercialization of the Ukrainian ruling elite, the most significant is the economic channel of influence that affects the personal interests of the most influential people in the Ukrainian ruling elite.
Preliminary analysis of Firtash, Akhmetov, Pinchuk, Poroshenko, and other key figures defining Ukrainian politics (mainly anti-Russian and pro-Western in their orientation) indicates their critical dependence on Russian creditors, markets, and sources of raw materials.
The first manifestation of a Russian trade war appeared on July 17, when the Russian government decided not to extend the customsfree export of steel pipes from Ukraine, causing severe damage to Victor Pinchuk’s Interpipe and Serhiy Taruta’s Donbass Industrial Union.
At the end of that month, Rospotrebnadzor announced a ban on the import of chocolates from Petro Poroshenko’s Roshen, alleging that they had found in the company’s confectionary a toxic substance prohibited in Russia.
It also turned out that 40 major Ukrainian companies had been registered in the Russian Customs Service database as “risky,” as a result of which all of these enterprises’ exports became subject to thorough inspection.
He even implied that Russia could no longer guarantee the status of Ukraine as a state and could intervene if pro-Russian regions directly appealed to Moscow.
In response, another speaker in the same session, former trade minister of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko, ironically expressed gratitude to Glazyev, noting that for the first time in Ukrainian history more than 50 percent of the population supported European integration, while less than 30 percent was in favor of closer ties with Russia.
In October, a nationwide survey showed that the number of those awaiting the singing of the Association Agreement had increased from 39 percent to 49 percent over the course of a month.
On September 13, it was reported that Vladislav Surkov would be appointed aide to the Russian president in charge of Russia-Ukraine relations.
That same day, Glazyev asked Frolov if he “still had a desire to 86 Shaun Walker.
See serg1784@mail.ru, email to frolov_moskva@mail.ru; anpavlov77@gmail.com; schirov-mse@yandex.ru, “ot S.Tkachuka,” 2013-11-27, 15:45:22 +0400.
The Kremlin therefore had to “plan an effective propaganda campaign” that would clarify the benefits of Ukraine’s participation in the Customs Union as well as defuse the widespread fears regarding integration with Russia.
To remedy the situation, it was expected to achieve “personal agreements” with TV channel owners as well as anchorpersons regarding the access of the Kremlin’s favorite experts to airtime, create “a journalist pool,” and develop a series of programs for regional television.
OCHEN’ VAZHNO,” 2013-0913, 09:45:23 +0400. 92 frolov_moskva@mail.ru, email to glaziev@bk.ru, “Re: OCHEN’ VAZHNO,” 2013-0913, 22:24:22 +0400.
It seems, though, that the Surkov team did not think too highly of Frolov’s performance in Ukraine, and the church expert eventually failed to get an official job in the Kremlin.
See prm_glazyev@gov.ru, e-mail to frolov_moskva@mail.ru, no subject, 2013-1118, 10:55:59 +0400.
Glazyev asked Frolov to prepare a paper on religious instruments for Surkov.
See frolov_moskva@mail.ru, email to serg1784@mail.ru, “Vazhno,” 2013-11-21, 17:04:10 +0400.
But as we saw in the reaction to the trade war, efforts to coerce Ukrainian oligarchs were not entirely effective.
Experienced in the manipulation of public opinion, Surkov probably attributed the setback of Russian policy in Ukraine to the lack of an information strategy; Russia failed to convey its messages to the target audience in Ukraine.
Surkov began to recruit local political technologists and influential media figures through Vitaly Leybin, the Donetsk-born journalist based in Moscow who was editor-in-chief of “Russkii Reporter” and the news site polit.ru.
Unlike the Complex of Measures, which resorts to intimidation of media magnates to disseminate pro-Russian views, Leybin’s prescription 95 From the end of the 1990s, Leybin engaged in speechwriting and public relations for election campaigns in Russia, which perhaps gave him opportunities to get close to Surkov, who oversaw domestic politics in the Presidential Administration.
It should be borne in mind that the national character has stubbornness and pride, and we must be able to create at least an illusion of free choice, equal partnership, but not subordination.
To improve the image of Russia in Ukraine, Leybin proposed— paradoxical though it sounds—imitating the “European experience,” such as small grants for free press, urban programs, and small business, as well as academic exchanges.
Some of the suggestions apparently interested Surkov; he sent an inquiry to the minister of education and science on the current conditions of education cooperation between Ukraine and Moldova, Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia, and Crimea.
The ministry replied with detailed information on each entity, but the separate report on Crimea emphasized that the ministry “does not directly cooperate with the bodies of state administration of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea,” while mentioning some events to be implemented within the framework of Russia-Ukraine bilateral cooperation.
Warning from the Political Technology Guru At the end of October, less than a month before the Vilnius Summit, Surkov appeared to consult multiple experts about the political situation in Ukraine and the prospect of Ukraine signing the Association Agreement.
From Russian statements and publications it can be understood that Kyiv is making a choice between a “pro-Russian” and a “pro-Western orientation”; this is not the case.
Pavlovsky thus proposed to interpret the backroom politics of Bankova as revolving around the upcoming presidential elections.
However, Yanukovych’s traditional election thesis, “friendship with Russia,” would not guarantee him victory, and so he added the slogan of “Euro-integration” as an effective means of winning additional votes in the western and central parts of the country.
Furthermore, the summer Russian trade war against Ukraine had subtly changed the picture in favor of Yanukovych.
The “consensus regime” established in Ukraine creates the basis for the consolidation of any oppositional force from Klitschko, Yatsenyuk and even Tymoshenko with the current authorities.
Irreconcilable opponents in business, Akhmetov and Kolomoisky, come forward with identical positions in favor of association with the EU, although each is based on its own motives.
Yanukovych is going to the bluff, sacrificing—as he is aware—Russia’s strategic interests in Ukraine.
He cannot, under any circumstances, be a reliable partner of Russian politics.
It is worth noting that Pavlovsky’s assessment was tailored to his old colleague Surkov, contrary to those he deliberately released for mass consumption in order to manipulate public opinion.
The Kremlin was extremely frustrated with “the sole candidate for the Russian-speaking electorate of the East” and did not see him as a trustworthy ally as early as the end of October 2013.
Medvedchuk Project Meanwhile, Medvedchuk continued to monopolize the favor of the Russian president.
It was not Yanukovych but Medvedchuk who took a seat in the same row as Putin, Medvedev, and Nazarbayev at an international sambo tournament held in Sochi on August 17.102 On August 19, Frolov sent to Glazyev an email titled “the campaign rallies breakthrough” with a list of pro-Russian agitators.
Preparation of this concert, however, revealed ideological frictions between Frolov and Granovsky.
Medvedchuk and invited “economists” from Russia stressed that with the singing of the Agreement, the text of which had been approved a few days earlier by the Cabinet of Ministers, Ukraine would lose sovereignty and fall into colonial dependence on the EU, and threatened that the Customs Union would close markets to Ukrainian products.
The conference was, however, ignored by local elites such as Oleksandr Yefremov and gathered only fringe politicians.
The freeof-charge concerts with Russian and Ukrainian popular music groups were organized with the active support of Ukrainian Choice.
Initially, Medvedchuk was expected to participate in the concert, but he later cancelled it, citing pressure from the authorities.
Some Ukrainian artists refused to participate as soon as they sensed Medvedchuk’s involvement.
Although the concert was prepared under the direct supervision of Glazyev, the latecomer Surkov also showed an interest in its results.
Znachit, moei metod ‘pravoslavnogo rok-nrodda’ rabotaet,” 2013-09-22, 12:41:58 +0400.
On November 12, Chesnakov reported the result of media analysis, which suggested that the negative coverage was exceeding the positive .117 The approval ratings of Medvedchuk and Ukrainian Choice also remained low (under 1 percent) in opinion polling, making it highly unlikely that he would get back to major politics, much less be a viable presidential candidate in 2015.
One of the largest Russian political technology projects in Ukraine—and one possibly orchestrated by Putin himself—ended up having no significant political impact on the eve of the Euromaidan.
Putin’s popularity in Ukraine did not help his proxy’s ratings; for many Ukrainians, Ukrainian Choice was not a Ukrainian choice, but the Russian choice.
That being said, Medvedchuk’s close relationship with Putin seemed to offer special value to the Kremlin.
After the trade war in summer 2013, Russia shifted to negotiating behind closed doors.
On the first days of the Euromaidan rallies, triggered by his own decision, Yanukovych even “applaud those who came out for European integration” as long as the demonstration would not challenge his political ambitions for the 2015 elections.
The decision on the suspension, albeit made under great pressure from Russia, seems like a tactical respite for Yanukovych (he called it a “time out,” while Azarov described it as a “tactical” break), who engaged in bargaining between the EU and Russia, expecting, in particular, that Russia would offer loans and a discounted gas price to ensure his re-election in 2015.
During Ukraine-Russia bilateral meetings in December, the Ukrainian government only reiterated its readiness to join certain agreements of the Customs Union, but its full entry into the Russia-led economic integration was not put on the table.
At the same time, by blocking the signing of the EU association agreement, Russia had gained time to readjust its failed policy toward Ukraine.
The Kremlin’s efforts to create “an influential network of pro-Russian social and political forces” did not pay off; pro-Russian forces were marginalized both in parliament and government.
This trend was aggravated by hostile maneuvers on the part of the “shadow vertical power,”e. the administrative and criminal resources of Yanukovych’s family, which suppressed pro-Russian activities in the east.
Taking Stock of the Performance of the Complex of Measures Performance is graded on the scale Excellent—Good—Limited—Poor.
Russia mobilized its regulatory authorities, imposing economic sanctions to punish Ukrainian oligarchs.4 After the undeclared trade war, however, opinion polling registered unprecedentedly high support for EU integration, with every second respondent backing it.
It was obvious that the punitive Russian measures were counterproductive, creating a harsh backlash from Ukraine.
No “effective propaganda campaign” was developed under Glazyev, whose aggressive remarks only increased distrust toward Russia, both among the elite and in the population as a whole.
Similarly, the Kremlin-backed concert tour calling for the unity of the Slavic nations did not achieve its concealed political aim of turning Putin’s proxy Medvedchuk into a viable pro-Russian presidential candidate.
On the eve of the Vilnius summit, the scenario of “the victory of our candidate in the upcoming presidential elections in 2015” was practically invalid, nor were there any other pro-Russian political forces in Ukraine on which Moscow could reasonably pin its hope.
Russia knew that Yanukovych was never truly devoted to European values, and assessed his pivot to Europe as tactical one.
But after the summer trade war Yanukovych started to speak openly about pressure from Russia, and Moscow began to realize that the Ukrainian president planned to run his 2015 election campaign not only on a platform of EU integration, but also as “a national leader resisting Russian threats” in the eyes of the Ukrainian electorate.
This is perhaps close to the truth; Yanukovych certainly clandestinely suppressed pro-Russian activities in the country.
For Moscow, Yanukovych lost his previous “pro-Russian” value and turned out to be harmful, jeopardizing its “geopolitical interests” in Ukraine.
Although Putin managed to dissuade Yanukovych from signing the Association Agreement at the last minute, the Russian president became increasingly frustrated by his Ukrainian counterpart, who kept flirting with him without making any commitment to Eurasian integration.
It is noteworthy that the position in which Moscow found itself on the eve of the Euromaidan was totally different from that of the Orange Revolution.
In 2004-2005, Moscow was still sure that it was able to “co-opt Yushchenko by mobilizing Russia’s soft power and the two nations’ economic, cultural, and institutional interdependence,”125 while by November 2013 it had run out of all these resources.
The Russian policy toward Ukraine was thus at an impasse; their hands were tied.
Secondly, there were no alternative pro-Russian political forces left in Ukraine.
A Turn in Russian Policy Toward Ukraine The observations made in the assessment of the Complex of Measures further allow us to construct a nuanced interpretation of Russian behavior in late 2013 and early 2014.
These behaviors suggest a possible review and change of its policy toward Ukraine.
Firstly, it is perhaps no coincidence that some of the earliest manifestations of the preparation of the Crimea operation appeared in November 2013, when the Kremlin found itself without any other means of controlling Ukraine’s behavior.
According to the Surkov leaks, the Kremlin’s extraordinary attention to Crimea was first exposed on November 29, when his close aide Boris Rapoport intriguingly reported to Surkov about the election system of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol.
Earlier that day, Surkov had received from Alexei Chesnakov the daily monitoring of Ukrainian media, from which he learned that Yanukovych would not sign the Agreement during the Vilnius Summit, but it was still possible that the Agreement might be signed at the Ukraine-EU summit scheduled for February-March 2014.127 The Frolov leaks also registered the activization of Russian actors in Crimea during the same period.
The expansion of the Simferopol office of the CIS Institute was first considered in late November 2013.
Anatoly Filatov, deputy director for the scientific work of the Ukrainian branch, sent to CIS Institute director Zatulin resumes of candidates for spokesperson and office manager.
The relatively moderate agenda for the round table on “the Role of the Republic of Crimea in Eurasian Integration” on November 23 in Simferopol was radicalized to instigate separatist sentiments as well as advocate historical ties between Crimea and Russia.
Cf. institute@materik.ru, email to frolov_moskva@mail.ru;geomant-rus@yandex.ru, “Kruglyi stol,” 2013-11-21, 10:05:03 +0400.
In 2013, Russia did not have significant political instruments in Crimea, as is the case with the rest of Ukraine.
The political scene on the peninsula was, however, subtly different from that of South-Eastern regions; as Matsuzato argues, there were potential tensions between the “Macedonians” and indigenous Crimean elites.
Cf. i-sng@yandex.ru, email to frolov_moskva@mail.ru; geomant-rus@yandex.ru, “dlia direktora”, 2013-02-06, 17:09:14 +0400.
See institute@materik.ru, email to frolov_ moskva@mail.ru; geomant-rus@yandex.ru, “analitika,” 2013-12-16, 14:43:10 +0400.
The official chronology of “the Crimean spring” is silent about this two-month gap.
A strange coincidence is that Crimea parliament speaker Konstantinov was on a visit to Moscow on that day.
On December 1, a reported 200,000-250,000 people took to the streets in Kyiv to protest against the attack on students and journalists.
The violence made the process increasingly irreversible, and the demand of the protesters shifted from European integration to the resignation of the president and the government.
As Pavlovsky warned, the Kremlin perhaps saw a “consensus regime” taking shape once the national crisis unfolded, consolidating the Ukrainian politkum under the slogan of Euro-integration.
The first delegation—ostensibly for religious purposes (the tour of the Gifts of the Magi)—included Russia Duma deputy Dmitry Sablin as well as Russian orthodox magnate Konstantin Malofeev.
Mogilev’s deputy, Rustam Temirgaliev, later said in an interview that he felt some “center of management” was behind them.
On the contrary, he actively intervened to help his Ukrainian counterpart to flee the country “for humanitarian considerations”148 instead of persuading him to cling to power and defend Russian interests in Ukraine.
Some observers argue that Surkov’s task was to keep Yanukovych in power, a task he obviously failed to fulfill.
On the contrary, the Kremlin’s political technologists perhaps needed the ouster of the “legitimate” president, which would become the last piece of their grand narrative on the “coup” to justify the planned annexation of Crimea as well as the demand for federalization, effectively neutralizing international criticism.
It is illustrative that multiple Kremlin “experts” and political technologists exposed in the leaks, such as Chesnakov and Pavlovsky, orchestrated a series of narratives that the Crimea annexation was responsive, spontaneous, even improvised action by Putin, who was “infuriated” at the crisis escalation in Kyiv during the Sochi Olympics, in the Western mainstream media outlets in March 2014,151 which set the tone for Russia-led interpretation of the contested phenomenon from the very beginning.
Regarding Surkov’s role, Treisman accepts the testimony of the Russian journalist Mikhail Zygar, who says, citing the Kremlin insider, that Surkov was allegedly sidelined temporarily before the Crimea annexation because he disappointed Putin by failing to fulfill his task of keeping Yanukovych in power.
For the comments by Alexei Chesnakov and Sergei Markov, see Steven Lee Myers.
It was far from improvisation by Putin or Russia’s seizing of a tactical opportunity during the escalation of the Ukraine crisis.
The initial idea of engaging in Crimea perhaps belongs to Surkov, who took over the position of Ukrainian curator in the autumn.
The findings suggest that when Russia found it impossible to achieve its strategic goal, it did not stick to flawed tactics and was quick to take another tack—in this case, taking a piece of its neighbor’s territory hostage.
He also extends special thanks to the journal’s editors for their meticulous attention to the details of the manuscript.
