President Petro Poroshenko introduced it in response to violent seizure of 3 Ukraine military vessels and arrest of 24 sailors by Russian coast guard ships in the Kerch strait.
Some viewed the exercise of legislative checks on the desires of the president as an example of Ukrainian “messy democracy” at work since the longer duration of the ‘martial law’ or, rather, a ‘state of siege’ would have interfered with the formal start of the presidential campaign and delayed the election now officially scheduled for March 31, 2019.
Since then president Poroshenko has sent mixed signals about his intentions.
On one hand, he has resolutely dismissed the possibility that ‘martial law’ would be a pretext for canceling election suggesting that it would only be to the benefit of Russian President Vladimir Putin.
On the other, he also admitted that ‘martial law’ could be extended as long as Russian aggression continues – setting a very low bar for its possible renewal given ongoing Russian interference in Donbas and occupation of Crimea.
With the presidential election just four months away only 10% of respondents indicated in the recent poll that they were willing to vote for him in the first round.
Also, every second Ukrainian says that they will not vote for the incumbent president under any circumstances.
Losing the re-election bid will become not only a political setback for Poroshenko, but represent a personal threat.
Over the last few years he was the target of multiple corruption allegations by former political partners and activists.
Hence, the loss of power raises the risks that the new institutions established during his presidency may ultimately turn against him.
If the president ultimately chooses to demand the extension of the ‘martial law’ and, hence, postpone the election, he is likely to succeed in imposing his preference on the parliament.
As I showed in my recent article in Post-Soviet Affairs, Ukraine’s premier-presidential model still allows the president to overpower the parliament on key issues, such as the composition of the cabinet and the tenure of prime minister.
In all successful cases Ukrainian presidents had an advantage over other actors in informal powers that allowed them to reach well beyond the establish constitutional limits on their formal power.
As long as they had a decisive say over the security apparatus and the courts, presidents could use their informal leverage to achieve favorable outcomes in confrontations with the legislature and the cabinet.
The new emergency powers granted to president Petro Poroshenko extend into three broad spheres and reinforce his informal authority.
Based on the presidential decree the head of state can unilaterally limit some of the fundamental constitutional rights and freedoms of Ukrainian citizens guaranteed under the twelve articles of the Constitution.
Among them are the rights to privacy and confidentiality of personal data, freedoms of speech, movement and assembly and ownership rights.
The president can now rule to expropriate personal property, ban rallies or demonstrations, introduce curfews or restrict individual movement.
The second sphere is the intra-executive relationship with the cabinet and prime minister.
The law on the ‘State of Siege’ allows the president to supersede prime minister informing regional executive administrations if they get transformed into military administrations.
In this case the heads of military administrations are selected by the president on recommendation of the General Staff of the Armed Forces.
This, in effect, excludes the government from exercising any serious influence over the local governments.
The third sphere is the functioning of democratic institutions, particularly media and elections.
The key institutions of accountability of the authorities would thus either become suspended or seriously circumscribed in their operation.
Together these ‘emergency powers’ give the president broad discretionary powers over citizens, state officials and politicians.
They also elevate the status of the presidency above other state institutions with the Commander-in-Chief now having a final say on key national matters.
The new arsenal of informal powers improves president’s chances of persuading the parliament to extend the ‘state of siege’ beyond the initial 30 days if he chooses to do so.
It enables the president to start informal bargaining with the current front runners, particularly Yulia Tymoshenko, on security guarantees following his likely exit.
It also allows to shift the focus away from economic problems and increase the salience of national security issues int he campaign.
Over the last two weeks Poroshenko frequently appeared in army uniform meeting military personnel and planning defense operations.
Finally, martial law may serve as an elite coordination instrument that can help, for now, to prevent potential defections from his party to stronger contenders.
Since the imposition of the ‘martial law’ anywhere in Ukraine automatically prohibits removal of the president, the government and the parliament , Poroshenko will find many allies in key positions of power interested in minimizing the uncertainties related to the upcoming electoral cycle.
This strategy, however, can only be a temporary solution for the ruling elites.
If Poroshenko decides to choose existing security threats as a justification for extending his power his legitimacy at home and abroad will inevitably suffer creating the potential for even greater instability than following President Yanukovych’s ouster in February 2014.
This entry was posted in Europe, Ukraine and tagged election, martial law, president on December 12, 2018 by Svitlana Chernykh.
The decree was put forward by President Poroshenko on advice of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine in response to Russia’s seizure of three Ukrainian naval vessels and 23 sailors in Kerch Strait on Sunday.
Before the martial law was approved, the President was forced to compromise on a number of points.
First, the initial decree requested that martial law be introduced for 60 days.
It came into effect at 9am on November 28 and will be in place until December 27.
Initial proposal also suggested that martial law would be introduced on the entire territory of Ukraine.
But per the approved law, it will cover only 10 regions and territories along the Russian boarder, the Sea of Azov and the Black sea.
Second, lawmakers insisted on the relaxation of the proposed limits on the rights and freedoms of citizens.
The President also noted that neither partial nor full mobilization was envisioned unless the conflict escalates further.
Finally, during the Parliamentary session, lawmakers demanded assurances that introduction of martial law will not affect the holding of presidential elections early next year.
Only 5 minutes after the Parliament voted in favour of martial law, it approved a law officially setting the date of the next presidential election for March 31, 2019.
First, of course, comes the issue of security, territorial integrity, and independence of Ukraine.
However, other countries and international organizations have supported Ukraine.
During a press conference, NATO’s chief stated that “there is no justification for the use of military force against Ukrainian ships and military personnel” and demanded that ships and sailors be immediately released.
Concerns about what the attack and declaration of martial law could mean for the security in the region are high.
President Poroshenko was careful to insist that “martial law does not mean declaring war.
He also noted that it did not mean that Ukraine either gave up or was not amenable to diplomatic solutions to the crisis, insisting that Ukraine will continue to comply with the Minsk agreement and all other international obligations.
The opposition has accused the President of using martial law to divert public attention from his failing popularity.
Some even expressed concerns that martial law will allow the possibility of postponing or cancelling the election complete.
According to opinion polls, only 5-10 percent of citizens were ready to vote for him in the last couple of months.
However, other presidential candidates have similar low levels of support and trust.
For instance, 75 percent of those surveys did not trust Yulia Tymoshenko, one of the main candidates running for president next year.
This entry was posted in Europe, Ukraine and tagged martial law, president, presidential election, Ukraine on November 29, 2018 by Svitlana Chernykh.
The process of replacing CEC commissioners whose terms expired has started more than 2 years ago.
After years of failed attempts, the appointment of new commissioners has been determined to be one of the main tasks on the agenda of the 9th session of the Ukrainian parliament.
According to the Law on the Central Electoral Commission, Parliament appoints and dismisses 15 members of the CEC on the proposal of the president.
The president is supposed to take the proposals of political parties into account during the nomination process.
The terms of 12 of the 15 commissioners expired in 2014, and another member reached the end of his 7th year in office in 2017.
With quickly approaching presidential and parliamentary elections in the country, the policy-makers have agreed that the issue could no longer be postponed and had to be addressed as soon as possible.
Furthermore, since 2016, its chairman has been under investigation for receiving illegal bribes.
Given the salience and importance of the composition of the commission, the process of appointing a new CEC in Ukraine has been on-going for a couple of years now.
The first attempt to replace the commission was made in June 2016 but at the time the process stalled.
The members were proposed by political parties in proportion to their representation in Parliament.
The new CEC will organize the upcoming presidential and parliamentary elections and will play a critical role in ensuring that elections are conducted in a free and fair manner.
This entry was posted in Europe, Ukraine and tagged central election commission, elections, president on September 27, 2018 by Svitlana Chernykh.
Although the concept of coalitional presidentialism is not new, until recently, the question of how presidents form and manage their coalitions has been explored primarily in the context of Latin American presidential democracies.
However, we know little about how and whether these theories travel outside Latin America.
With few exceptions, the country has been governed by multiparty cabinet coalitions since 1996 and thus offers rich macro-level data.
Ukraine is also a difficult case with which to test institutional hypotheses.
Many scholars of Ukrainian politics have questioned the applicability of notions of coalitional behavior to the country and have suggested that coalitional solutions to the problems of limited legislative support are difficult to operate in the Ukrainian context.
Finally, presidential coalitions in Ukraine frequently contain cabinet parties as well as parties that do not have cabinet representation.
This allowed us to explore the non-cabinet strategies that presidents used to manage the support of coalition parties.
In the first part of the paper, we test a now well-established hypothesis in Latin American literature that cabinet portfolio payoffs to coalition allies raise the level of legislative support for presidents.
It is measured as the percentage of legislators belonging to cabinet parties who voted in favour of bills introduced by the executive branch.
We find that cabinet coalescence has a positive and statistically significant effect on cabinet coalition discipline in Ukraine.
To put it in substantive terms, an increase in cabinet coalescence by 10 percent increases cabinet coalition discipline by 2. percent.
Thus, the dynamics of coalitional presidentialism in Ukraine are similar to those that we find in Latin America.
The presidents who compose their cabinets more proportionally can expect a higher degree of satisfaction from allied parties and thus higher levels of discipline.
However, Ukrainian presidents also rely on the support of parties that do not receive portfolio payoffs.
As the figure below shows, the number of non-cabinet coalition parties is significant in the Ukrainian case.
In fact, the inclusion of non-cabinet parties was crucial in giving each president minimum winning majorities or near majorities.
The number of Ukrainian parties in cabinet and floor coalitions, 1996–2011.
To answer these questions, we interviewed 50 legislators, of whom 60 per cent were members of the coalition in 2012.
We designed an interview sample and a number of structured and semi-structured questions to help us explore whether the perceived benefits of coalition membership differed significantly between members of coalition parties that had and did not have cabinet representation.
As figures 2 and 3 show, that the motivation to support the president differed between coalition parties that were members of the cabinet and those that were not.
Percentage of non-cabinet and cabinet coalition party members who identified the importance of extracabinet benefits in the formation of coalitions.
Members of the cabinet party were significantly more likely to identify policy influence and cabinet positions than the members of non-cabinet parties within the floor coalition.
In contract, members of non-cabinet parties were more likely to mention budget influence and especially the informal exchange of favours than members of cabinet parties.
Percentage of non-cabinet and cabinet coalition party members who selected as the first or second most important reason why a political party might choose to join a presidential coalition.
Therefore, on the one hand, the Ukraine case validates extant analysis on the effects of cabinet management on legislative behaviour.
This suggests that coalitional presidentialism is not simply a unique Latin American phenomenon and gives us good reasons to expect similar dynamics in other regions of the world.
Given the increasing preponderance of minority presidents in new democracies, this presents the opportunity to compare a diverse range of presidential cases across other parts of Europe as well as other regions including Africa and Asia.
On the other hand, the Ukrainian case also highlights the multivariate nature of the strategies that presidents deploy to maintain their legislative support.
This adds a new dimension to the extant literature, which has mainly focused on the tools deployed by presidents at the cabinet level.
By distinguishing between cabinet and floor coalitions, it is possible to identify parties that are motivated to join presidential coalitions by reasons other than cabinet portfolios.
This entry was posted in Europe, Ukraine and tagged coalitional presidentialism, government formation, president on September 21, 2017 by Svitlana Chernykh.
