Since 3 joining the Foreign Service in 1992 he has served among other 4 postings in Warsaw, Poland.
George 9 Kent conducted by the House Permanent Select Committee on 10 Intelligence, pursuant to the impeachment inquiry announced 11 by the Speaker of the House on September 24th.
I am the senior adviser and 3 director for investigations for the HPSCI majority staff.
It is the committee’s expectation, however, that neither the questions asked of you nor the answers that you provide or your counsel provide will require discussion of any information that is currently, or at any point could be properly classified under Executive Order 13526.
If any of our questions can only be answered with classified information.
Today's deposition is not being taken in executive session, but because of sensitive and confidential nature of some of the topics and materials that will be discussed, access to the transcript of the deposition will be limited to the three committees in attendance.
Now before we begin the deposition, I would like to go over some of the ground rules.
I have been instructed by my 6 employer, the United States Department of State, not to appear.
I worked in Washington from 2012 to 2015. in 24 several policy and programming positions directly affecting 25 United States strategic interests in Ukraine, most notably, as director for taw enforcement and justice sector programming for Europe and Asia, and then as the European Bureau's senior anticorruption coordinator.
I will do my best to answer your 15 questions today and I understand there are going to be a lot 16 of them.
I'm ready to answer all your questions regarding the subject of the subpoena, which has ordered me to appear before you today.
I'm going to pick up just where you left off there about the documents.
And initially, when I asked in email form whether I should start collecting documents, because I had received a personal request.
I was instructed to await formal guidance, meaning formal instructions on how to fulfill the document production request, so that was the first interaction.
A She needed to go and give a response to ISO people about taking care of your people.
He objected to my raising of the additional 7 information and said that he didn't think -I do not 8 remember his exact words, but -he made clear that he did 9 not think it was appropriate for me to make the suggestion, 10 I took the opportunity, then, to point out that that was the 11 first -the meeting was the first time that we were 12 discussing guidance for being responsive to a subpoena.
The 21 conversation ended at that point, but later on when I then 22 picked up this issue of guidance and our responsibilities, he 23 raised his voice again, suggested, as I told you before.
I 24 should not be talking to you, it is against the bar ethics. 25 for me to contact and talk to you directly.
I 20 don't think it is appropriate for you to go back into that 21 room.
Did you have any conversations with anyone else in the State Department about your interaction with A Yes.
K-i-n-d-t. and then my great-great-grandmother changed to anglicize it to K-e-n-t.
I had full faith that it was bunch of hooey, and he was looking to basically engage in a con game out of revenge because he'd lost his job.
A To the best of my recollection, to my awareness based on the email exchanges.
He may have had between two and three conversations with the Assistant Secretary in that period of time, Giuliani to Risch.
A When the State Department was not being responsive, my understanding is that former Mayor Giuliani attempted to call the White House, and deputy chief of staff, my understanding deputy chief of staff.
And his comment about Lutsenko's trip and meeting with Giuliani was and.
Oh, by the way, probably the last thing he said before we finished the meeting.
Q You said there were some, I think you said, surprising Twitter -A I honestly -I have forgotten my Twitter password.
Q Clear statement of support, and obviously there was a media statement -A The initial media guidance that we released and was quoted extensively was.
I think, complete fabrication, utter nonsense as well as in rebutting Prosecutor General Lutsenko's allegation that somehow we had misdirected assistance met for the prosecutor general.
I would characterize the interactions as different because what we warned both Lutsenko and others that efforts to destroy NABU as an organization, including opening up investigations of Sytnyk. threatened to unravel a key component of our anticorruption cooperation, which had started at the request of Petro 71 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Poroshenko.
It included very bizarrely a person who was a 74 1 friend of the current -the ex-President Poroshenko and was 2 head of the overseer of the defense industry named 3 Gladkovskiy, and in parentheses it had his previous name.
To the best of my recollection, in this case it's actually quite good because I was with Ambassador Herbst at the time when Yanukovych told us that he'd hired Manafort, and that was the spring of 2005.
A I first became aware of the owner of Burisma, 80 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 Mykola ZTochevsky. when I first went to our embassy in mid-January 2015.
He was going back to ' to go out. because so much was happening at the time, the Russians were pushing the final push to take as much territory as they could, that they needed an extra officer.
The first case that U.5., U.K., 81 1 and Ukrainian investigators worked on was a case against 2 Zlochevsky, and that's because the British Serious Crimes 3 Office had already opened up a case, an investigation against 4 Zlochevsky.
I had a fiduciary responsibility -I'd previously 9 been the director of the office which provided that funds to 10 find out what had happened and why were our monies being 11 wasted.
Poroshenko, appointed a new deputy prosecutor 13 general named David Sakvarelidze. that's a Georgian name.
Several 4 months after he became prosecutor general in the spring of 5 2016, for instance, former President Poroshenko in one of his 6 calls with then-Vice President Biden asked for a former, I 7 believe, New Jersey State prosecutor |__ _ "" . -'IJ by 9 ^ had served for 2 years as an anti cor ruption 10 adviser under contract to the Department of Justice in 11 Ukraine and spoke Ukrainian fluently.
Prosecutor General Shokin, exploded in what was known as the diamond prosecutor affair -because one of the things they confiscated from his former driver was a cache of diamonds -his support levels.
Poroshenko's support levels, as polled by the International Republican Institute in particular, plummeted from about 55 percent to the mid-20s over that period of time.
Mr Jordan, I've had very little luck in getting 18 members to abide by that.
I want to just ask you a few questions to 4 follow up on my colleague's questions, and then I'm going to 5 turn it over to Mr Mitchell to continue going through the 6 timeline with you.
There have been a number of public press Ill 1 reports that Attorney General Bill Barr and others at the 2 Justice Department are essentially doing an investigation of 3 the investigators into the origins of the Russia 4 investigation.
March 20, was the day 11 that Mr Solomon published the article in which there was 12 video of part of the interview that he had with Mr Lutsenko.
Normally the acting assistant secretary is the one who engages officials above our bureau, to include the Under Secretary of Political Affairs.
David Hale, who has oversight over our bureau; on occasion, the counselor of the Department, Ulrich Brechbuhl; and then depending on the situation, as appropriate, the Secretary himself.
Avakov, had 13 been in the United States in February, he had communication 14 that Mayor Giuliani had reached out to him and invited him to 15 come and meet the group of them in Florida.
Q If I recall when you had this conversation with Mr Avakov in February.
Q Now, you indicated that you had another conversation with -I can't read my own writing.
Yuriy Lutsenko has said publicly 17 that he investigated Burisma on nonpayment of taxes.
I mentioned earlier that at the 16 request of Petro Poroshenko, we made available a former New Jersey prosecutor , 18 let that contract lapse after roughly 9 months because it was 19 clear that Lutsenko was not going to push forward reform as 20 he had promised to us.
And in 13 the course of the first 2 weeks, he was caught trying to 14 suborn a witness, coach him to lie. as well as obstruct 15 justice in a case that involved his hometown, in an effort to 16 bribe the minister of health, Ulyana Suprun, f So agreed to wear a tap 18 for NABU and caught the effort on trying to give her a bribe.
A I may have shared with other people in the European front office, which had a focus on that, and that includes people like Tyler Brace, who is our one political appointee, schedule C, former staffer for Senator Portman, who has a specific interest in Ukraine and Russia, as well as the acting assistant secretary.
A At this point she was back in the United States, and so we did have reason to have communications, yes.
It's several days later, 17 depending on what day the call happened, during the week, it 18 could have been the next Monday, it could have been the 19 Friday.
Immediately after President Zelenskyy 23 raises this desire to purchase more javelins, the President 24 says, I would like you to do us a favor, though, because our 25 country has been through a lot and Ukraine knows a lot about it.
I would like you to find out what happened with this whole situation with Ukraine, they said CrowdStrike.
So we could go down the richest 20 Ukrainians and have a long conversation about the structure of the Ukrainian economy, and certainly most of the billionaires in the country became billionaires because they acquired state assets for largely under valued prices and engaged in predatory competition.
Going back to that July 25th call, there was a lot of exchanges between Ambassador Sondland.
Mr Volker. and also the Charge Taylor about whether or not the aid would be forthcoming, whether or not the statement would be written.
Former National Security Advisor Bolten weighed in at some point in the process, and eventually the White House settled on a list, which was, in the end, Secretary Perry, Lieutenant Colonel Vindman representing the NSC, Ambassador Sondland, Ambassador Volker, and then our Charge in country at the time.
I don't remember when the ship visit was to 10 Odesa. but I think Sondland's visit to Ukraine to Odesa for 11 the United States port visit was the start of his involvement.
There was no conversation, but that was the first time I had met him, without a substantive conversation, in January.
Specifically Fiona Hill whom I'm gathering that the committee talked to yesterday.
So when I came back from my New England vacation, I had three different versions of that conversation in my inbox.
A I should say that in addition to those secondhand accounts I eventually heard Kurt Volker's account directly from him, the way he characterized it to a number of interlocutors when we were together in Toronto on the 1st and 2nd of July for the Ukraine Reform Conference and the interlocutors included President Zelenskyy himself.
On the other hand, by the end of the meeting there was agreement that they would work moving forward to work towards an Oval Office visit, a visit to the White House which Presidents Zelenskyy and Trump had talked about in that initial call on April 21st.
And as you might expect on a Sunday call when it was 5 probably past midnight in Ukraine on election night.
Ukraine is an 8 important country that Congress appropriates roughly in the 9 ballpark S700 million a year in assistance and Zelenskyy won 10 a clear mandate for change and so we were supportive of a 11 visit to the White House, yes.
A The President of the United States is a longtime acknowledged leader of the free world, and the United States is Ukraine's strongest supporter.
The foreign policy argument is it's a very important country in the front lines of Russian malign influence and aggression.
And citing the fact that they had briefed the President coming out of that meeting, they felt they had the mandate to take the lead on coordinating efforts to engage the new Ukrainian leadership.
Ambassador Volker from the State Department, Acting Assistant Secretary Reeker, my direct supervisor, Tyler Brace, all attended that meeting in Secretary Perry's office, and they also connected recently arrived Charge Taylor from Kyiv.
I believe I got an email with of a conversation with Fiona, Chris Anderson's readout that he got from Kurt Volker and a third readout from someone in the State Department who worked with our mission to the European Union that would have had Ambassador Sondland's version.
A My understanding from what I heard from relaying what he heard from Fiona his impression was that that came from Kupperman who was in the meeting.
A To the best of my knowledge, the principals -209 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 Q Ambassador Volker.
A Again, I don't -I go over to the NSC when there are meetings that the NSC does not want to allow the State Department to be on the secure video conference system, but apart from specific meetings that I'm invited over.
I 17 believe, until early March, so 3 weeks after Vice President 18 Biden's visit in December 2015.
I was in -briefly in Ukrainian language 10 training at the time of his visit so I was not in Ukraine.
So if we're going to pursue additional 25 information on that, we would probably have some documents to inform us that we could ask for.
But specifically about how the Vice President's trips messaging was managed by that point.
I then came back to the U.5. the day before Thanksgiving and was in the United States for 3. months for language training and then returned to Kyiv in late March 2016.
Q If the State Department found out about this, do you think they would dispatch their legislative liaisons to talk with the Senators or their Senator's staff to -A Honestly, again.
I was in Kyiv at the time, so I do not have knowledge of any interaction between the Senate's -three senators, their staff -Q Fair enough.
A To be honest, I have no knowledge of that, and I can't say either yes or no.
KENT; Mr Lutsenko has held many positions on many 20 issues that are mutually exclusive, and including on this 21 issue.
And Kurt Volker and I were the ranking United States officials who attended for the U.5.
We'll aim for that perhaps next week, and hopefully 21 that will lead into a meeting by the end of the month, 22 July 29 and 30, which was roughly, I think, the dates that 23 were discussed in the June 18 meeting that Secretary Perry 24 chaired.
I've never been on a Presidential call, and 3 that is not normal for officials that are at the Embassy or 4 at the State Department.
And of the meetings that 5 I had with Zelenskyy previously, the meeting in March 6 of 2019, which is when he was running as a candidate that was 7 Under Secretary Hale, Ambassador Yovanovitch, and myself, 8 when I came back in May, when he was President-elect 9 Zelenskyy.
There is a full paragraph of President 5 Zelenskyy in the middle of the page, and towards the bottom 6 of that paragraph.
She would not accept me as the new President well 13 enough, end quote.
I just don't want to put any words in 12 your mouth, that's why I'm asking the question.
A Generally, again, I've never worked at the NSC, but my general understanding is it's 1-year renewable.
A Well, he's obviously in his second year now, and I get the sense that there are mechanisms to allow for renewable, even though that's not standard.
So my principal interlocutor when I would go to the NSC to have conversations generally was the State Department travel on their own, but they often accompany principals.
A I recall that those were documents apparently found at the former estate of the previous President who fled to Russia.
Viktor Yanukovych, and it indicated individuals who had been receiving payments by the former ruling party.
I know that he was an investigative journalist, and there were, as I recall, hundreds of names.
I met him for the first time in the 18 fall of 2004 when he was the think tank -19 Q And he had written an op-ed.
So the use of WhatsApp by United States official, 11 State Department official.
I flew out to Ukraine to take part in that conference as did Ambassador Volker.
And I told Bill Taylor, that's wrong, and we shouldn't be doing that as a matter of U.5. policy.
I said the 15th and 16th, 17 because the next day, I had a conversation with Charge Taylor 18 in which he amplified the same theme.
And he indicated that 19 Special Representative Volker had been engaging Andriy 20 Yermak; that the President and his private attorney, Rudy 21 Giuliani, were interested in the initiation of 22 investigations; and that Yermak was very uncomfortable when 23 this was raised with him. and suggested that if that were the 24 case, if that were really the position of the United States. 25 it should be done officially and put in writing, essentially mouth, but there was a significance to August 15 and 16.
Q When you described that readout in addition to emphasizing how Mr Vindman was uncomfortable and the sensitive nature of the call, so he wasn't comfortable talking about it, you did say.
I wrote down here, that he mentioned that there was a -that President Trump had discussed the extreme narratives that had been discussed publicly.
You 6 heard from Ambassador Taylor at the end of June that there 7 was -correct me if this summary is wrong -that at the end 8 of June, that there was a conversation with Taylor.
I don't recall the last time 10 we had a conversation, and when we had the conversation would 11 be important to what we talked about.
Did you speak to Charge Taylor about the three amigos, or Rudy Giuliani or and lower my profile in Ukraine.
Acting Assistant Secretary Reeker message relayed from Under Secretary Hale.
A Well, I oversee policy for six countries, and this was a day or two before I was going on leave to go visit -attend my daughter's and go hiking in Maine.
Fine, you're not going to hear me talk about any country for the next week and a half.
Q And at that point, did you sense that you were cut out of the loop in terms of State Department policy discussions and dealings with Ukraine given this Volker.
He went 13 around to the Ukrainian side of the table and pulled 14 Zelenskyy. his chief of staff.
I 15 was standing about 10 feet of the way. introducing myself to 16 Andriy Vermak and talking to him.
I 24 would say that Kurt Volker had not provided additional 25 details.
It was more that President Zelenskyy needed to be Georgia is a country which Congress appropriates over $100 million a year.
And the direction in how we 24 spend that money is usually determined in a joint military 25 commission between EUCOM and the Ukrainian general staff administrative heads.
A I believe that it is a factually correct statement to say that there's broad support among both parties in Congress, both Houses in Congress, and among the State Department, the Defense Department.
And then Senior 2 Director Morrison was looking to schedule a principal small 3 group meeting that would involve the Secretary of State 4 personally.
Secretary of Defense, and Ambassador Bolton so 5 they could discuss the issue and then take it to the 6 President.
Acting Chief of Staff Mulvaney, had attempted a rescission at the end of the year, and indeed the next week, at the beginning of August, he sent out a data call with the intent potentially to execute a rescission involving billions of dollars of assistance worldwide, not just Ukraine.
Under Secretary Hale represented the State Department, and I cannot recall the exact outcome.
Q And this conversation with Charge Taylor, was that over WhatsApp or was that in person or -A That was a part of our regularly scheduled Monday secure calls, video conferences.
A I recounted to the best of my knowledge what those conversations were.
I didn't have to worry about that hypothetical because it was resolved essentially as I arrived in Ukraine.
A The next conversation would have happened at the breakfast table Sunday morning, which I believe was September 15th.
A We talked about the meeting that ambassador -Charge Taylor and Special Representative Volker had had the night before with Andriy Yermak, the close personal aide of President Zelenskyy.
A Well, that meeting was the one meeting on Kurt’s schedule in Ukraine that he felt uncomfortable with me joining.
Charge Taylor -17 that Kurt, Special Representative Volker, was referring to 18 prior conversations that he had with Yermak and prior advice, 19 meaning you should deliver the messages as we've discussed 20 before.
The President's engagement of Orban included a 1-hour one-on-one. and then subsequently the Hungarian foreign minister.
There were two institutions that were the instruments of oppression in the Soviet Union.
So if you want to see the successful transformation of any of the post-Soviet countries, reform of the security service in Ukraine, that's known as the SBU , and reform of the prosecutor general’s office are the fundamental keys to transforming the country.
And if there is 7 other information that people want to provide context to try 8 to trigger additional information.
I would not have -no, I did not 14 review them before coming to testify.
What was different was that -his concern that he did not feel at liberty to share alt the substantive details of the call.
To the best of my knowledge, these were the only two calls between President Trump and a head of government of the six countries for which I have responsibi1ity.
As far as I recall, those are the only two individuals or officials of Ukraine that the National Agency to Prevent Corruption went after based on the asset declarations of high ranking officials and members of parliament.
