But experts say countries aren’t doing enough to limit dangerous global warming.
Coups, Military Rule, and Ethnic Conflict The 2021 coup returned Myanmar to military rule and shattered hopes for democratic progress in a Southeast Asian country beset by decades of conflict and repressive regimes.
Backgrounder by Lindsay Maizland January 31, 2022 Americas Asia Europe & Eurasia Global Commons Middle East & North Africa Oceania Sub-Saharan Africa Explainers Featured Pharmaceuticals and Vaccines A Guide to Global COVID-19 Vaccine Efforts The swift development of effective vaccines against COVID-19 was an unprecedented scientific achievement.
But production challenges, vaccine nationalism, and omicron and other variants have all presented hurdles.
Backgrounder by Claire Felter April 1, 2022 Backgrounders In Briefs Podcasts Videos Timelines Special Projects InfoGuides Research & Analysis Featured China China and the Belt and Road Initiative in South Asia To support its allies and partners in South Asia, the United States should assist South Asian countries in assessing Belt and Road Initiative risks and benefits.
For more information about the International Affairs Fellowship , please visit CFR’s Fellowship Affairs Page.
Conflict at the Crossroads of Europe and Russia Email Share Search Backgrounder Ukraine: Conflict at the Crossroads of Europe and Russia Ukraine’s Westward drift since independence has been countered by the sometimes violent tug of Russia, felt most recently with Putin’s 2022 invasion.
A protester sits on a monument in Kyiv during clashes with riot police in February 2014.
Russia’s unprovoked invasion of Ukraine in 2022 is viewed by some experts as part of a renewed geopolitical rivalry between great powers.
Introduction Ukraine has long played an important, yet sometimes overlooked, role in the global security order.
Today, the country is on the front lines of a renewed great-power rivalry that many analysts say will dominate international relations in the decades ahead.
More From Our Experts Stephen Sestanovich Ukraine Should Wait on Cease-Fire Talks With Russia.
Robert D Blackwill CFR’s Blackwill on U.S.-China Relations, Ukraine, United States Pivot to Asia Thomas Graham Preventing a Wider European Conflict Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022 marked a dramatic escalation of the eight-year-old conflict and a historic turning point for European security.
With expanding Western aid, Ukraine has managed to frustrate many aspects of Russia’s attack, but many of its cities have been pulverized and one-quarter of its citizens are now refugees or have been displaced.
Ukraine’s place in the world, including its future alignment with institutions such as the European Union and North Atlantic Treaty Organization , hangs in the balance.
Ukraine Russia NATO United States Military Operations Ukraine was a cornerstone of the Soviet Union, the archrival of the United States during the Cold War.
Behind only Russia, it was the second-most-populous and -powerful of the fifteen Soviet republics, home to much of the union’s agricultural production, defense industries, and military, including the Black Sea Fleet and some of the nuclear arsenal.
Ukraine was so vital to the union that its decision to sever ties in 1991 proved to be a coup de grâce for the ailing superpower.
However, Kyiv struggled to balance its foreign relations and to bridge deep internal divisions.
A more nationalist, Ukrainian-speaking population in western parts of the country generally supported greater integration with Europe, while a mostly Russian-speaking community in the east favored closer ties with Russia.
Ukraine became a battleground in 2014 when Russia annexed Crimea and began arming and abetting separatists in the Donbas region in the country’s southeast.
Russia’s seizure of Crimea was the first time since World War II that a European state annexed the territory of another.
More than fourteen thousand people died in the fighting in the Donbas between 2014 and 2021, the bloodiest conflict in Europe since the Balkan Wars of the 1990s.
Robert D Blackwill CFR’s Blackwill on U.S.-China Relations, Ukraine, United States Pivot to Asia Thomas Graham Preventing a Wider European Conflict In February 2022, Russia embarked on a full-scale invasion of Ukraine with the aim of toppling the Western-aligned government of Volodymyr Zelenskyy.
Kyiv, Ukraine’s capital, is sometimes referred to as “the mother of Russian cities,” on par in terms of cultural influence with Moscow and St.
It was in Kyiv in the eighth and ninth centuries that Christianity was brought from Byzantium to the Slavic peoples.
And it was Christianity that served as the anchor for Kievan Rus, the early Slavic state from which modern Russians, Ukrainians, and Belarussians draw their lineage.
Approximately eight million ethnic Russians were living in Ukraine as of 2001, according to a census taken that year, mostly in the south and east.
Moscow claimed a duty to protect these people as a pretext for its actions in Crimea and the Donbas in 2014.
After the Soviet collapse, many Russian politicians viewed the divorce with Ukraine as a mistake of history and a threat to Russia’s standing as a great power.
Losing a permanent hold on Ukraine, and letting it fall into the Western orbit, would be seen by many as a major blow to Russia’s international prestige.
However, since the fall of the union, many Russian nationalists in both Russia and Crimea longed for a return of the peninsula.
The city of Sevastopol is home port for Russia’s Black Sea Fleet, the dominant maritime force in the region.
Russia was for a long time Ukraine’s largest trading partner, although this link withered dramatically in recent years.
Prior to its invasion of Crimea, Russia had hoped to pull Ukraine into its single market, the Eurasian Economic Union , which today includes Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan.
Russia has relied on Ukrainian pipelines to pump its gas to customers in Central and Eastern Europe for decades, and it pays billions of dollars per year in transit fees to Kyiv.
The flow of Russian gas through Ukraine continued in early 2022 despite the outbreak of wider hostilities between the two countries.
Russia had planned to transport more gas to Europe via its new Nord Stream 2 pipeline, which runs under the Baltic Sea to Germany, but Berlin froze regulatory approval of the project after Russia’s invasion.
Russia has been keen to preserve its political influence in Ukraine and throughout the former Soviet Union, particularly after its preferred candidate for Ukrainian president in 2004, Viktor Yanukovych, lost to a reformist competitor as part of the Orange Revolution popular movement.
This shock to Russia’s interests in Ukraine came after a similar electoral defeat for the Kremlin in Georgia in 2003, known as the Rose Revolution, and was followed by another—the Tulip Revolution—in Kyrgyzstan in 2005.
Yanukovych later became president of Ukraine, in 2010, amid voter discontent with the Orange government.
It was Ukraine’s ties with the EU that brought tensions to a head with Russia in 2013–14.
Many Ukrainians perceived Yanukovych’s decision as a betrayal by a deeply corrupt and incompetent government, and it ignited countrywide protests known as Euromaidan.
Putin framed the ensuing tumult of Euromaidan, which forced Yanukovych from power, as a Western-backed “fascist coup” that endangered the ethnic Russian majority in Crimea.
In response, Putin ordered a covert invasion of Crimea that he later justified as a rescue operation.
And with Ukraine, our western partners have crossed the line,” Putin said in a March 2014 address formalizing the annexation.
Putin employed a similar narrative to justify his support for separatists in southeastern Ukraine, another region home to large numbers of ethnic Russians and Russian speakers.
He famously referred to the area as Novorossiya , a term dating back to eighteenth-century imperial Russia.
Armed Russian provocateurs, including some agents of Russian security services, are believed to have played a central role in stirring the anti-Euromaidan secessionist movements in the region into a rebellion.
However, unlike Crimea, Russia continued to officially deny its involvement in the Donbas conflict until it launched its wider invasion of Ukraine in 2022.
Some Western analysts see Russia’s 2022 invasion as the culmination of the Kremlin’s growing resentment toward NATO’s post–Cold War expansion into the former Soviet sphere of influence.
Russian leaders, including Putin, have alleged that the United States and NATO repeatedly violated pledges they made in the early 1990s to not expand the alliance into the former Soviet bloc.
They view NATO’s enlargement during this tumultuous period for Russia as a humiliating imposition about which they could do little but watch.
Months later, Russia went to war with Georgia, seemingly showcasing Putin’s willingness to use force to secure his country’s interests.
Despite remaining a nonmember, Ukraine grew its ties with NATO in the years leading up to the 2022 invasion.
Ukraine held annual military exercises with the alliance and, in 2020, became one of just six enhanced opportunity partners, a special status for the bloc’s closest nonmember allies.
Moreover, Kyiv affirmed its goal to eventually gain full NATO membership.
In the weeks leading up to its invasion, Russia made several major security demands of the United States and NATO, including that they cease expanding the alliance, seek Russian consent for certain NATO deployments, and remove United States nuclear weapons from Europe.
Alliance leaders responded that they were open to new diplomacy but were unwilling to discuss shutting NATO’s doors to new members.
Other experts have said that perhaps the most important motivating factor for Putin was his fear that Ukraine would continue to develop into a modern, Western-style democracy that would inevitably undermine his autocratic regime in Russia and dash his hopes of rebuilding a Russia-led sphere of influence in Eastern Europe. “ wants to destabilize Ukraine, frighten Ukraine,” writes historian Anne Applebaum in the Atlantic.
Putin’s Russia has been described as a revanchist power, keen to regain its former power and prestige.
By seizing Crimea in 2014, Russia solidified its control of a strategic foothold on the Black Sea.
With a larger and more sophisticated military presence there, Russia can project power deeper into the Mediterranean, Middle East, and North Africa, where it has traditionally had limited influence.
Some analysts argue that Western powers failed to impose meaningful costs on Russia in response to its annexation of Crimea, which they say only increased Putin’s willingness to use military force in pursuit of his foreign policy objectives.
Until its invasion in 2022, Russia’s strategic gains in the Donbas were more fragile.
In July 2021, Putin authored what many Western foreign policy experts viewed as an ominous article explaining his controversial views of the shared history between Russia and Ukraine.
Throughout that year, Russia amassed tens of thousands of troops along the border with Ukraine and later into allied Belarus under the auspices of military exercises.
In February 2022, Putin ordered a full-scale invasion, crossing a force of some two hundred thousand troops into Ukrainian territory from the south , east , and north , in an attempt to seize major cities, including the capital Kyiv, and depose the government.
Putin said the broad goals were to “de-Nazify” and “de-militarize” Ukraine.
However, in the early weeks of the invasion, Ukrainian forces marshaled a stalwart resistance that succeeded in bogging down the Russian military in many areas, including in Kyiv.
Many defense analysts say that Russian forces have suffered from low morale, poor logistics, and an ill-conceived military strategy that assumed Ukraine would fall quickly and easily.
By March, some Western observers said that, given unexpected setbacks it incurred on the battlefield, Moscow could curtail its aims and try to carve out portions of southern Ukraine, such as the Kherson region, like it did in the Donbas in 2014.
Others warned that continued attacks on Kyiv belied any of Moscow’s claims of a shift in military operations away from the capital.
Immediately following the Soviet collapse, Washington’s priority was pushing Ukraine—along with Belarus and Kazakhstan—to forfeit its nuclear arsenal so that only Russia would retain the former union’s weapons.
At the same time, the United States rushed to bolster the shaky democracy in Russia.
Some prominent observers at the time felt that the United States was premature in this courtship with Russia, and that it should have worked more on fostering geopolitical pluralism in the rest of the former Soviet Union.
Former United States National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski, in Foreign Affairs in early 1994, described a healthy and stable Ukraine as a critical counterweight to Russia and the lynchpin of what he advocated should be the new United States grand strategy after the Cold War.
In the months after Brzezinski’s article was published, the United States, the United Kingdom, and Russia pledged via the Budapest Referendum to respect Ukraine’s independence and sovereignty in return for it becoming a nonnuclear state.
Twenty years later, as Russian forces seized Crimea, restoring and strengthening Ukraine’s sovereignty reemerged as a top United States and EU foreign policy priority.
Following the 2022 invasion, United States and NATO allies dramatically increased defense, economic, and humanitarian assistance to Ukraine, as well as ramped up their sanctions on Russia.
The United States remains committed to the restoration of Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.
It does not recognize Russia’s claims to Crimea or to the Donetsk and Luhansk republics, and it encourages a diplomatic resolution to the war.
Western powers and partners have taken many steps to increase aid to Ukraine and punish Russia since it launched its 2022 offensive.
The United States provided Ukraine with more than $1 billion in emergency security assistance in early 2022 and then passed a supplemental law that includes several billion more dollars in aid.
Meanwhile, the international sanctions on Russia have vastly expanded, now covering much of its financial, energy, defense, and tech sectors and targeting the assets of wealthy oligarchs and other individuals.
The United States and some European governments also banned some Russian banks from the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication, a financial messaging system known as SWIFT; placed restrictions on Russia’s ability to access its vast foreign reserves; and blacklisted Russia’s central bank.
Moreover, many influential Western companies have shuttered or suspended operations in Russia.
The Group of Eight, now known as the Group of Seven, suspended Russia from its ranks indefinitely in 2014.
The invasion also looks to have cost Russia its long-awaited Nord Stream 2, after Germany suspended its regulatory approval.
Many critics, including United States and Ukrainian officials, opposed the natural gas pipeline, claiming it would give Russia greater political leverage over Ukraine and the European gas market.
Russia’s aggression in recent years has galvanized public support for Ukraine’s Westward leanings.
In the wake of Euromaidan, the country elected as president the billionaire businessman Petro Poroshenko, a staunch proponent of EU and NATO integration.
In 2019, Zelensky defeated Poroshenko in a sign of the public’s deep dissatisfaction with the political establishment and its halting battle against corruption and an oligarchic economy.
Before the 2022 offensive, polls indicated that Ukrainians held mixed views on NATO and EU membership.
In the weeks after the invasion, a public opinion poll found that large majorities of Ukrainians surveyed supported the armed resistance against Russia and rejected Russia’s claims to Crimea and its backing of the breakaway republics in the Donbas.
Just over half of those surveyed said that Ukraine should not concede future NATO membership to end the war.
Close This work is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.
Authorities are failing to contain the chaos, risking the future of Africa’s powerhouse.
In Brief by Ebenezer Obadare June 9, 2022 Africa Program Iran Three Challenges That Are Testing Iran’s Regime Iran is facing international pressure over its nuclear program and assassinations of top officials.
In Brief by Ray Takeyh June 8, 2022 Middle East Program Indo-Pacific The Quad Is Getting More Ambitious in the Indo-Pacific The leaders of the United States, Australia, India, and Japan held their fourth Quad meeting in May.
After a year dedicated to fighting the pandemic, here’s what they pledged to take on next.
In Brief by Sheila A Smith May 27, 2022 Asia Program Top Stories on CFR Cybersecurity The Risk of Russian Cyber Retaliation for the United States Sending Rockets to Ukraine United States rocket shipments to Ukraine will not trigger Russian cyberattacks against the United States.
Russian is too focused on attacking Ukrainian systems and defending their own networks to mount a response to the weapons shipments.
Blog Post by Scott Jasper June 15, 2022 Net Politics Energy and Environment Global Energy Tracker As the effects of climate change mount, high-carbon energy sources continue to provide most of the world’s power.
On average, 83 percent of tracker countries’ energy comes from high-carbon sources such as oil, whereas 17 percent comes from solar and other renewables.
Low-carbon sources, however, are on the rise, particularly in developed countries.
Tracker by Benn Steil and Benjamin Della Rocca June 14, 2022 Greenberg Center for Geoeconomic Studies Saudi Arabia The Keys to the Kingdom The Time is Ripe to Reset U.S.-Saudi Relations.
