On 21 April 2019 the Ukrainian people are casting their ballots in the second round of the presidential elections as no candidate won an absolute majority in the first round held on 31 March 2019.
The Council library has complied a bibliography to help readers understand better the political developments in the country over the past 5 years.
The list includes books, articles and papers from our Think Tank Review.
This bibliography is not exhaustive; it provides a selection of resources made by the Council Library.
Most of the titles are hyperlinked to Eureka, the resource discovery service of the Council Library, where you can find additional materials on the subject.
Access to some resources might be limited to registered Council Library users or to users in subscribing institutions.
Resources linked from this bibliography do not necessarily represent the positions, policies, or opinions of the Council of the European Union or the European Council.
Reuse of the covers is prohibited, they belong to the respective copyrightholders.
As more territory was taken from Eastern Ukraine, Western countries countered with economic sanctions directed against Russia.
While the conflict did not escalate to the levels originally feared, over time, it became apparent that President Putin had failed to affect the regime change intended in Ukraine, and Russia's economy had been damaged.
Sir Lawrence Freedman provides an account of the origins and course of the RussiaUkraine conflict through the lens of the theory and practice of strategy.
That is, he explores Putin's near, medium, and long-term strategies when he decided to initiate the conflict.
In contrast to many who see Putin as a master operator who has resuscitated a supine Russia against all odds, Freedman is less impressed with his strategic acumen in terms of the long-term fallout.
By exploring concepts such as coercive diplomacy, limited war, escalation and information operations, Freedman brings the story up to the present, where a low-level conflict between Ukrainian and breakaway rebel forces in the east grinds on, and illuminates the external challenges faced by the governments' involved.
In this way, it presents a new perspective from which institutional practices in this specific area can be examined.
This contribution is particularly valuable for scholars and students of EU foreign and security policy; of external relations of the EU; of international relations more in general; and of EU integration and politics.
Democracy promotion and the normative Power Europe framework : the European Union in South Eastern Europe, Eastern Europe, and Central Asia Marek Neuman Cham : Springer , 2018 Access via Eureka This chapter analyzes the positivist dimension of the EU as a normative power with regard to Ukraine.
Ukraine is a country that in its still relatively short existence as an independent actor on the international stage has seen two episodes of revolutionary upheaval; both of which were fuelled by their participants’ desire to establish close ties with the EU and to give a fresh impetus to the stalled process of political transformation.
When judged by the goals of the Orange Revolution and the Euromaidan protest movement, Ukraine appears more than willing to join the EU’s proverbial ‘ring of friends’ and to absorb the values of democracy, respect for the rule of law, human rights, and fundamental freedoms.
For its part, the EU seems only too happy to engage in close cooperation with its eastern neighbour and to act as a changer of norms.
In the first section of this chapter, the European side of the story is addressed by focusing on the various agreements, policy frameworks, and supporting instruments that have been designed to guide the relations between the EU and Ukraine.
The second section of this chapter focuses on the Ukrainian side of the story and explains that a combination of elites with oligarchic tendencies and wavering foreign and security policies has stood in the way of a concerted effort to pursue a European path and to adopt the values of democracy, respect for the rule of law, human rights, and fundamental freedoms.
It is explicitly comparative, considering how the United States and EU responded to ostensibly the same crisis.
It also adopts a “360-degree” perspective, focusing on how the United States and EU interacted in their dealings with Russia, and how Russia and Ukraine have responded.
Chapters focus on each of the four protagonists – the EU, the US, Russia and Ukraine – and on key, cross-cutting aspects of the crisis – sanctions, international law and energy.
Woodrow Wilson Centrer Press, 2016 Available at Council Library Main Collection Access via Eureka In February 2014, Russia initiated a war in Ukraine, its reasons for aggression unclear.
Each of this volume's authors offers a distinct interpretation of Russia's motivations, untangling the social, historical, and political factors that created this war and continually reignite its tensions.
The exploration of these and other questions gives historians, political watchers, and theorists a solid grasp of the events that have destabilized the region.
Barbara Budrich, 2015 Available at Council Library Main Collection Access via Eureka Oft forgotten but simmering ""frozen conflicts"" continuously mark the political map of Europe.
The analytical chapters and comments in this volume present different viewpoints on the cases of Northern Cyprus, Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia, Nagorny Karabakh, Kosovo, and Crimea.
Palgrave Macmillan, 2015 Available at Council Library Main Collection Access via Eureka ""Crimea, Global Rivalry, and the Vengeance of History critically examines the causes and consequences of Russia's annexation of Crimea and reviews differing annexations in history from the Seven Years War to today.
It develops a unique comparative historical approach designed to compare and contrast alliance formations after Soviet collapse with alliance formations in previous eras.
It argues that contemporary Russia-Ukraine conflict is more reminiscent of conflict during the Bolshevik revolution than Hitler's annexation of the Sudetenland, but that a nascent Russian-Chinese alliance can be compared to that between Weimar Germany and Soviet Russia.
And although the US-NATO-European-Japanese reaction is not that of 'appeasement,' it is reminiscent of French reaction to Prussian annexation of Alsace before World War I, or European reaction to Russian annexations before the Crimean War.
Ever since 1945 it had been understood that the borders of States must not be the object of forcible change by other States.
However, Russia has now revived long-buried historical claims—and prosecutes them by dint of arms.
The annexation of Crimea in March 2014 and the subsequent armed incursions in eastern Ukraine under color of separatist movements in Donetsk and Luhansk challenge not just one State's territorial integrity, but jeopardize the general settlement on which international law for almost three generations has rested.
This is the settlement which enabled human rights and modern institutions of international law to flourish.
Russia's domestic rejection of human rights and its new geopolitics of territorial seizure in this light should be seen not in isolation but as connected developments—and as a challenge to international law and global public order at large.
The world was stunned when Vladimir Putin invaded and seized the seaport region of Crimea in March 2014.
In the weeks that followed, separatist rebels aided by Russia took over territory in the area surrounding Crimea in eastern Ukraine.
The United States and its Western allies immediately imposed strict sanctions on Russia and have continued to tighten those sanctions.
This sharp deterioration in East-West relations has raised basic questions about the policies of Vladimir Putin and the future of Russia.
Marvin Kalb, who reported from Russia in the 1950s for Edward R Murrow and served as the CBS Moscow bureau chief in the early 1960s, argues that, contrary to conventional wisdom, Putin did not ""suddenly"" decide to invade Crimea and then instigate a pro-Russian rebellion in eastern Ukraine.
He had been waiting for the right moment in the months after Ukrainians rose up in bloody protests against the pro-Russian president in Kiev's Maidan Square.
Those demonstrations had led Putin to the conclusion that Ukraine's opposition constituted an existential threat to Russia.
Imperial Gamble examines how Putin reached that conclusion by taking a critical look at the recent political history of post-Soviet Russia.
It also journeys deeper into the Russian past to more fully explain the roots of Russian nationalism that drives both Putin and the Russian people who support his actions in Ukraine.
Kalb argues that the post-cold war world today hangs on the resolution of the Ukraine crisis.
So long as it is treated as a problem to be resolved by Russia, on the one side, and the United States and Europe, on the other, it will remain a danger zone with global consequences.
The consequences of the popular rebellion and Russian President Putin’s attempt to strangle it remain uncertain.
Presenting a collection of essays by leading Russian and Ukrainian military, security and political analysts, Brothers Armed charts the history of military reform and progress in Ukraine and Russia from the collapse of the Soviet Union to the 2014 annexation of Crimea.
Ukraine, Europa Claudia Dathe; Andreas Rostek Berlin : edition.foto Tapeta, 2014 Available at Council Library Main Collection Access via Eureka Die Ukraine ist das einzige Land Europas, in der die Annäherung an die EU mit Blut bezahlt haben, sagen Beobachter der Proteste am Majdan-Platz in Kiew.
Es sind Sätze wie wir sie von den Dissidenten in Warschau, in Budapest, in Prag kennen – Sätze aus den achtziger Jahren des vergangenen Jahrhunderts.
In der Ukraine des Jahres 2014 hat es viele, sehr viele Tote gegeben, bevor ein korruptes Regime weggedrängt werden konnte in einen Kampf zwischen der Gesellschaft und Machthabern, die das Land systematisch ausgenommen haben.
In diesem Buch kommen vor allem Stimmen aus der Ukraine zu Wort, Schriftstellerinnen, Dichter, Intellektuelle.
Deshalb geht es in diesem Buch immer auch um Europa, und Autoren aus anderen europäischen Ländern beschreiben das aus ihrer Sicht.
Mit Beiträgena. von Juri Andruchowytsch, Elmar Brok, Orlando Figes, Jörg Forbrig, Timothy Garton Ash, Rebecca Harms, Tamara Hundorowa, Halyna Kruk, Maxym Kidruk, Adam Michnik, Timothy Snyder, Martin Pollack, Natalka Sniadanko und Serhij Zhadan.
Wer kommt mit?"", schrieb der ukrainische Journalist Mustafa Najem im November 2013 auf Facebook.
Mehr als hundert Menschen wurden getötet, als der friedliche Protest in Gewalt umkippte.
Nach dem Sturz des korrupten Regimes nutzt der russische Präsident Vladimir Putin die Fragilität der Übergangsregierung aus und lässt seine Armee ins Nachbarland einmarschieren.
Während eine reife ukrainische Zivilgesellschaft die Bildung neuer staatlicher Strukturen bewacht, schwört der Kreml die Bürger auf einen nationalistischen imperialen Kurs sein.
Schriftsteller, viele von ihnen Aktivisten, erzählen von den aufwühlendsten Tagen ihres Lebens.
Historiker, Soziologen und Politikwissenschaftler versuchen sich an einer Anatomie des Augenblicks.
Judicial reform in Georgia, Ukraine and Moldova Steven Blockmans; Nadejda Hriptievschi, Viacheslav Panasiuk; Ekaterine Zguladze.18 Access online This study identifies innovations in the three associated states’ justice sectors.
It analyses changes to both the ‘hardware’ of the justice system,e. the constitutional and institutional frameworks, as well as the ‘software’,e. selection, appointment, promotion and disciplinary procedures and other means to fight corruption in the justice sector.
Michael Emerson; Denis Cenușa.18 Access online For Ukraine, the signing of the Agreement in 2014 was an act of strategic geo-political significance.
Emblematic of the struggle to replace the Yanukovych regime at home and to resist the attempt by Russia to deny its ‘European choice’, the Agreement is a defiant statement of Ukraine’s determination to become an independent democratic state.
This book adds new value in charting Ukraine’s progress in putting the Agreement into effect.
Yet Ukrainians on both sides of the Donbas front lines face a humanitarian crisis and a growing sense of abandonment by both Kiev and Moscow.
Their goal was to identify the positions of stakeholders with an eye to defining the possibilities for future negotiations and paths out of conflict.
After decades of Soviet style top-down governance, the status and role of local governments has been pushed to the fore.
If implemented successfully, it could increase local development and political engagement, ultimately contributing to increased political stability in Ukraine and Europe.
Yet the significance of decentralization reforms is often lost in the noise surrounding Crimea, the secessionist conflict in the east, and the political power struggles in Kiev.
Yet, we have little evidence about the nature of trust and its implications for decision-making, in particular in times of crisis.
In the case of the Ukrainian crisis, this happened in parallel to the decreasing levels of trust in EU–Russia relations.
Consequently, the EU was able to agree and implement the instruments of coercive power.
To illustrate our argument, we look at the adoption of EU sanctions in reaction to the annexation of Crimea, the downing of the Malaysian Airlines MH17 plane and the war in Donbas.
Ukraine since the annexation of Crimea and the outbreak of the conflict in the Donbass Gabriele Baumann ; Moritz Junginger; Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung.17 Access online The principle of border inviolability within Europe was put into question in 2014 with the Russian annexation of Crimea and the breakout of the conflict in Eastern Ukraine.
He argues that many of these articles have been written using orientalist stereotypes of Russia, Ukraine and the Crimea that have deep roots in Western academia.
It also considers whether Ukraine is ready to actually absorb and use such aid effectively.
Russian strategy of deception and the conflict in Ukraine Katri Pynnöniemi ; András Rácz; Ulkopoliittinen instituutti.16 Access online This report analyses Russian propaganda and disinformation – here collectively called strategic deception – concerning the conflict in Ukraine.
The strategic deception is not exclusively a Russian term, but it does capture what the authors think is an essential feature of the current Russian foreign and security policy.
It is driven by attempts to put the adversary into a defensive posture and off balance, and thus, to create conditions for surprise.
Civil society intervened to fill the gap created by the state's failure turning de facto into a security actor.
Hence, post-Maidan civil society has displayed the potential to act as a ""change agent"" determined to induce substantial reforms in Ukraine.
Volunteer battalions in post-Maidan Ukraine Rosaria Puglisi ; Istituto Affari Internazionali.15 Access online The war in Eastern Ukraine started unexpectedly in a moment when the Ukrainian army was not combat ready.
The new government had to employ battalions made of self defence groups of the Maidan.
This article describes their role, composition, how there are perceived by the public opinion, their political activism and concludes with some reform proposals.
The other two scenarios see Ukraine either in an unchanged position or in a stronger involvement in the Eurasian space.
Responsibility is not of course the same as blame, and the EU can be blamed for only one thing; it overestimated the European aspirations of the Ukrainian government at that time, and underestimated the anti-European Russian authorities' plans for Ukraine.
The disappearance of Ukraine as a sovereign entity would be a thunderclap in Europe as it would be very difficult to manage and might trigger a possibility of a long civil war.
If Ukraine survives it will be with the Crimean region in the best case under the supervision of an international agreement, and in the worst under direct supervision of Moscow.
Framing the international context of the Ukrainian crisis Marco Giuli ; Madariaga College of Europe Foundation.14 Access online This paper focuses on specific aspects of the current crisis in Ukraine, taking into consideration the positions of the major players in the international system.
It argues that Russian assertiveness is a sign of extreme weakness which is not in the interest of the US, whilst the approach of European countries risks becoming a factor of significant instability within Ukraine.
Avoiding such a scenario would require substantial decentralisation of power and guarantees of cultural autonomy to predominantly Russian speaking eastern and southern Ukraine.
Should the government succeed in staving off secessionism and preventing a Russian military intervention, international loans that are expected to come in over the next one to two years are likely to be sufficient to prevent a sovereign default and collapse of the country’s financial sector.
Nevertheless, risks of a Russian military intervention will remain acute until at least June 2014.
Even if a Russian intervention is not triggered by the crisis in eastern Ukraine, Russia is likely to continue to maintain its troop levels close to Ukraine’s borders as a means of applying pressure and to offer a contingency in the event that it wishes to launch a military intervention.
This view, he says, will become a relic of the past, as the range of political opinions in the regions will become more complicated.
We should expect the emergence of Poroshenko's own party, and the United Opposition will certainly be split between a pragmatic wing supportive of Poroshenko, and a populist wing that remains loyal to Tymoshenko, the author predicts.
It looks at pro-Russian unrest in the South East, the actions of Ukrainian far-right groups and Russian and Western policies toward Ukraine.
Diagnosis and prospects for Ukrainian politics Wojciech Konończuk ; Tadeusz A Olszański; Ośrodek Studiów Wschodnich.14 Access online As argued by the authors, Maidan should be seen as the first clear manifestation of a new generation of Ukrainians raised in an independent Ukraine, well-educated and familiar with new social media, but nonetheless seeking to ground themselves in national tradition.
As a consequence of the radicalisation and escalation of the protests following 19 January, the political opposition has lost a significant proportion of the control.
Marius Laurinavičius ; Rytų Europos studijų centras.14 Access online The author gives an outlook on the future of Ukraine by pointing out its most important determinants, namely Russia's projected model of Ukraine, Russia's possible role as a veto player in questions of EU and NATO expansion into Eastern Europe, the Ukrainian domestic structure of politics and economics, as well as Ukraine's economic dependence on Russia.
Written before the tragedy, this working paper argues that the ‘Euromaidan' protests, that occurred between December 2013 and February 2014, have provoked two fundamental changes that give grounds for cautious optimism about Ukraine's incipient transition to democracy.
Second, state-society relations are being reconfigured, with citizens demanding greater oversight of and accountability from state institutions, and civic activists pushing for a greater role in policy-making.
András Rácz ; Arkady Moshes; Ulkopoliittinen instituutti.14 Access online The situation in Eastern Ukraine is often compared with that of Transnistria, the separatist region of Moldova.
However, the two cases differ for a number of reasons, all of which will make the ""Novorossiya"" project much harder for Russia to sustain than Transnistria, according to this Finnish Institute of International Affairs paper.
The step backwards into a bipolar confrontation in Europe could be prevented by a rejuvenation of the pan-European security cooperation instruments established in the 1990s.
Andrew Wilson ; European Council on Foreign Relations.14 Access online Europe needs a clearer and more unified strategy for a diplomatic settlement if Ukraine is to avoid becoming a frozen conflict.
Results of the research displayed that the world supports Ukraine not only with declarations and statements, but also with real actions, providing consultants, humanitarian aid and bulletproof vests.
