A lot of times there isn’t much coverage about the topics you are covering so for us it’s been a very good aid.
Owner of PR agency mm It’s very useful to have the Russian perspective.
This year, when morning headlines proclaimed doom and disaster day after day, it began to feel routine to hope, fiercely, for just that a grace that would emerge from the evil and destruction afflicting the world.
In late winter, a revanchist Moscow laid claim to Crimea, setting off months of violent, pro-Russian separatism on Europe’s eastern periphery, leaving more than 3,600 dead and hundreds of thousands displaced.
Then emerged the Islamic State, an army of thousands that poured out of northern Syria into Iraq, leaving a trail of death and wanton bloodshed.
Add to these events an Ebola epidemic that has ravaged the fragile states of West Africa, racial tensions in the American heartland, the hottest year on record for the planet, and you have 2014.
They include Russian President Vladimir Putin, Islamic State leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, Boko Haram chief Abubaltar Shekau, and others whose ideas and actions have rocked the foundations of geopolitical order.
It’s a metaphor for violence, certainly, but also one for defiance, for resistance, for unleashing the startlingly new.
The history books might remember this year as one in which people sowed chaos and fear.
But it was also a year when health workers risked their lives to save thousands of strangers in West Africa, when protesters took to the streets demanding government reform from Hong Kong to Caracas, when innovators worked to ensure a nuclear-zero world.
Others, as environmentalist and author Bill McKibben notes in his essay, galvanized grassroots movements to guard humanity from approaching environmental calamity.
Artists’ explosive creativity, meanwhile, offered new visions of the past, present, and future, and advocates supported civilians caught in the cross-hairs of war with boldness and determination rivaling in strength even the megalomania of the agitators.
Add to this businessmen and businesswomen who are reinvigorating marketplaces and chroniclers telling the most important stories of our time in pioneering ways, and you have 2014.
In this tumultuous year, FP’s Global Thinkers are individuals who shook the world as we knew it.
And, in doing so, many of them have helped build a far better one. —The Editors FOREIGN POLICY 3 Earn Your Master of Arts in Diplomacy Online Norwich’s Master of Arts in Diplomacy online program can help you develop the specialized skills you’ll need to build cooperation and solve problems on an international scale.
Whether your background is business, military, government or in the non-profit sector, you’ll gain a new perspective on the complexities of communicating and negotiating global affairs.
Visit dipiomacy.norwich.edu/fpp or caii 1-800-460-5597 ext.78 to iearn more.
No part of this publication may be reproduced in any form without permission in writing from the publisher.
OUR NEIGHBORHOOD, WORLD (4' IMF THE GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY 4 THE ELLIOH SCHOOL STATE BANK OFINTERNATIONALAFFAIRS DEPARTMENT GW's Elliott School of International Affairs is located just steps from some of the most important policymaking institutions in the world.
Our proximity to United States and international organizations puts our scholars in a powerful position to analyze policy problems as they unfold, and it draws world leaders to our campus to address some of the most important issues of our time.
Every school of international affairs bridges the theory and practice of foreign policy.
Elliott School of International Affairs THE GEORGE WASHiNGTON UNIVERStTY CONTRIBUTORS ""BASICALLY, WE JUST PACK A CLEAR GLASS bottle with a small amount of explosives.
And of course the walls are bulletproof; you never know where the shards of the bottle will go.
We want to photograph the exact millisecond after we detonate, right when you can see the fire of the explosion, but also with the shape of the bottle still intact.
We are using very highspeed flash equipment that goes up to a 1/50,000 of a second, but it’s still difficult to get the timing right and we often have to re-engineer the explosion multiple times.
It’s nice, though; you see amazing details each time— all kinds of interesting textures and color combinations.
In his reporting, Packer has covered the Iraq War, atrocities committed in Sierra Leone, civil unrest in Ivory Coast, and counterinsurgency worldwide.
Since joining the FT, she has worked in the former Soviet Union, Western Europe, and Japan.
From undersea to outer apace, Northrop Srumman's advanced platforms and tech nal ogles offer a wide range at new capabilities for every mission.
LETTERS ‘Needless Euphemisms’ Polemicists, politicians, and tyrants have long understood that language does not just express ideas; it also shapes ideas and influences the way people think.
Nowhere is the manipulation of language and perception more evident than in the contemporary debate about immigration policy.
Illegal Alien,” September/October 2014) illustrates, the battle over terminology pertaining to immigration can be as heated as the policy debate itself.
If proponents of open immigration and amnesty for illegal aliens (there, I used the term) are to achieve their political ends, they must first control the language of the debate.
They must create the false impression in the minds of the American people that violation of United States immigration laws is, at minimum, a completely innocuous act, and perhaps even noble.
Rather than lawbreakers, the people who settle in the United States illegally must be defined in euphemistic terms that obfuscate both their deeds and their impact on the people whom United States laws are meant to protect.
While it may be in the interest of foreigners to immigrate, and while immigration may also serve some narrow domestic political and economic interests, excessive inflows of illegal aliens can inflict significant harm on American workers and taxpayers.
The use of the term “illegal alien” clearly and accurately describes people who are living in the United States without legal authorization.
An illegal alien is a foreign national who is in a country in violation of United States law.
Euphemism and neargobbledygook are precisely the objectives of those trying to create the impression that taking up residence in the United States illegally is on par with forgetting to put a quarter in the parking meter.
Perhaps the most chilling example of the effort to manipulate the language of the debate is the recent publication and distribution of the “Media-Friendly Glossary on Migration”; funded by George Soros’s Open Society Foundations in collaboration with an obscure United Nations agency, the Alliance of Civilizations, it amounts to nothing less than a frontal assault on clear language.
If there is to be actual reform of United States immigration policies that truly serve the interests of the American people, then the current debate must be framed using sharp but respectful language.
Illegal aliens are not inherently bad people, but they are foreign nationals who have no legal right to be in America.
Solid Foundation The White House’s rhetoric during President Barack Obama’s first term suggested he wanted to be more engaged and more transformative internationally than any United States president since John F Kennedy.
Consequently, Obama set himself up for the criticism— offered so eloquently by David Rothkopf (“National Insecurity,” September/October 2014)— that, in practice, his foreign policy has been marred by a lack of interest.
It is true that the president’s policy toward the broader Middle East, as well as al Qaeda and its affiliates, is in serious trouble.
He neglected Syria for three years, and now the Islamic State chickens have come home to roost.
In Iraq, his unwillingness to put some special forces and military Foreign policy welcomes letters to the editor.
For more debate and discussion of our stories, go to FOREiGNPOLiCY.com.
In Libya, Obama’s main failing is not his handling of the Benghazi attack per se, but the hands-off approach the United States has tal<en to helping the country get back on its feet since the overthrow of Muammar al-Qaddafi.
In addition, the president’s overall rhetoric about the need for minimalism and retrenchment in US. foreign policy, while apparently what voters want at one level, is not actually what they expect from their commander in chief— and it is not adequate to the task at hand.
Yet the allegations of weakness and irresoluteness now being made against the president are, to my mind, badly wrong.
On most of the big issues, his policies are at least pointing in the right general direction, even if, in some cases, they are in need of refinement and reinvigoration.
On Ukraine and Russia, Obama rightly began the US. response with mild sanctions over the Crimea issue.
He avoided pursuit of immediate escalation, in both military and economic terms, which European allies would not have supported in any event, and rightly focused on deterrence of even more egregious action by Moscow in eastern Ukraine.
It is much too early to declare success, but the current situation looks far more promising than it did just a few months ago.
On China (and North Korea), Obama’s April trip to the region restored some momentum to his “rebalance” policy.
This policy is not overly muscular, but that is correct for a situation in which the United States should be demonstrating resolve while also seeking to reassure and cooperate with Beijing, something James Steinberg and I argue in our new book.
On Iran, building on President George W Bush’s legacy, Obama has patiently put together progressively stronger sanctions using creative formal and informal means, establishing the conditions that gave rise to President Hassan Rouhani’s election there.
These conditions now give at least some hope for a negotiated settlement over the nuclear issue.
And if force does prove a necessary last resort, few will be able to say that Obama invoked the military option too soon.
Add it up, and it is a decent grand strategy at the broad level, even if it has serious shortcomings with regard to the Middle East.
BUT THIS SAVING IS LESS FRDMA DISASTER THAN FRDMAFDREIGN PDLICY THAT HAS LDSTSDMEDFTHE ENERGY AND FDCUS DF EARLIER TIMES. some of the energy and focus of earlier times.
The needed repair work is more akin to carpentry than to wholesale construction of a new edifice.
Full Names and Complete Mailing Addresses Publisher, Editor and Managing Editor SVP Global Advertising Sales; Amer Yaqub Same address as no.
E., Jacksonville, FE; Morgan Stanley Smith Barney EEO, 1300 Thames St, Baltimore, MD; Morgan Stanley S Co.
Publication of this Statement of Dwnership will be printed in the December 2014 issue of this publication.. 1 certify that all information furnished on this form is true and complete.
FOREIGN POLICY 11 Special Advertising Supplement NIGERIA Fast Growth; Big Problems No other emerging market offers the potential of Nigeria.
Projected to have the world’s fourth-largest population by 2040 and to become an economic leader by the mid-21st century, the oil-rich nation is trying to improve governance and modernize its economy.
But its challenges are immense-not least the corruption, oil theft, poverty, and a brutal insurgency.
T he International Monetary Fund predicts that Nigeria’s economy will grow by 7 percent this year and by slightly more next year; then it will ease to 6. percent by 2019.
But what’s really exciting is where this prolonged expansion path could lead— if Nigeria’s problems can be overcome.
By the middle of this century, according to projections by Goldman Sachs, Nigeria could boast the world’s 13thlargest economy, right behind France and Germany.
Moody’s puts Nigeria in the top 15 within the same time frame, up from 28th place now.
Former Goldman economist Jim O’Neill includes Nigeria in a select group of “MINTs” along with Mexico, Indonesia, and Turkey— four large emerging economies that all have ‘Very favorable demographics for at least the next 20 years, and their economic prospects are interesting,” O’Neill wrote.
The IMF does not project so far ahead, but it is quite positive about the near-term outlook.
A Long Road Ahead Dealing with generational legacy issues is rarely quick or easy, and Nigeria is not without its share of problems, many of which dominate international press reports about the country.
A year later, he launched the Transformation Agenda, with an emphasis on bringing private investment into oil, gas and power.
Since then, Nigeria has privatized much of the power sector (see the infographic on the following pages), and essential investments are starting to flow.
Recent pension reforms, in addition to a gradual easing of some old-age poverty, may help steer local funds into infrastructure.
Inflation is under control, bureaucracy is improving, and welfare reforms are promised.
Most of the reforms have so far benefited the more developed and peaceful south of the country, doing little to help the underdeveloped northern region, where violence from Boko Haram feeds on poverty and systemic corruption.
The Lessons of Ebola Often criticized for its corruption, social problems, and inefficiency, Nigeria showed the world a dramatically different face durNIGERIA Special Advertising Supplement ing its recent brush with Ebola.
Rapid response, well-organized public officials, dedicated health workers, and good preparations helped prevent the virus escaping into the densely packed shantytowns of Lagos, one of the world’s largest metropolitan areas with a population of 21 million.
Vaz was speaking in late October, just three months after Patrick Sawyer, a Liberian-American, landed in Lagos with symptoms of fever, diarrhea, and vomiting.
Stella Ameyo Adadevoh, who— according to reports— refused to believe Sawyer’s denial of any exposure to Ebola, physically restrained him in his hospital bed, and resisted official pressure to discharge him.
But after some early mistakes and initial hesitation, the government rapidly adapted an emergency-operations center that had been established earlier with foreign aid to fight polio.
The widespread mobile phone network was crucial, as was the existing Lagos hospital and ambulance system, which is much better than in many other parts of the country, and indeed most of sub-Saharan Africa.
Nigeria has conducted the iargest privatization of pubiic utiiities in Africa-a modei for other countries.
But it wasn’t just the government handing over the power sector; privatization was the reaiization that government aione couid not continue to run the power sector as a matter of sociai weifare.
Government did not have the funds, and it needed to give Nigerians the ievei and quaiity of power suppiy that they ciamor for.
Without power, none of this is possibie. in the past, some companies even ieft Nigeria because of inadequate power suppiies.
The government is committed to taking eiectricity to the most distant rurai popuiations.
We are going to position ICT as a credible economic sector, possibly surpassing oil and gas in the future.
Created in 2001, NITDA is charged with promoting ICT development by drawing up standards, fomenting e-government, fostering ICT training, and sponsoring infrastructure development, particularly in rural areas.
Omobola Johnson, Nigeria’s minister of communication technology, is equally optimistic.
More people in Nigeria have mobile phones than have a bank account, she points out, meaning that the potential for going straight to mobile financial services is huge.
Currently about 28 percent of Nigerians have some Internet access, but broadband penetration, counting mobile and fixed, is just over 6 percent.
However, around 75 percent of people have mobile phones that use the older GSM-2G technology and cannot access the Internet.
Now the challenge is to extend networks further into poorly served rural areas and upgrade the whole system to 3G or even 4G technology to allow for services such as mobile banking.
Nigeria recently announced that it would license seven infrastructure companies to expand broadband networks and adopt an open-access policy whereby carriers will be required to lease network space to competitors.
Subscribers would multiply fivefold, to around 50 percent of the national population.
Yeariy funding needs for power sector over the next five years Conceived in 2004 as a fast-track pubiiciy funded initiative to add significant new generating capacity to Nigeria’s eiectricity suppiy system, aiong with the eiectricity transmission and distribution and naturai gas suppiy infrastructure that is required to deiiver the additionai capacity to consumers throughout the country.
There were independent Power Producers present in Nigeria prior to the privatization process.* *70 licenses issued by NERC to iPPs to improve power in the country.
Unbundling of PHCN companies commences. competition in the market. umbrella of the Power Holding of Public Enterprises to advise on privatization of the 11 Company of Nigeria . distribution companies and 6 generation companies.
Manitoba Hydro International takes charge of TCN in a US$24. million contract expected to run for three years, aiming to reorganize TCN into a market-driven company that is technically, financially and commercially viable.
US$100 m pledged by the World Bank for a development plan in Nigeria to diversify the country’s reliance on oil SEPTEMBER 30th, 2013 President Goodluck Jonathan formally hands over share certificates and licenses to 14 new core owners of PHCN successor companies.
FEBRUARY 2013 The privatization agency sends a request for proposal to 48 prospective bidders.
R S ] T V o F KENTUCKY' If your dream is a career in international affairs, the Patterson School can put you on the right track.
Each year, just 35 exceptional students gain entry into our unique masters program.
PASSIONATE Your colleagues hail from across the country and around the world with backgrounds as diverse as the challenges they hope to tackle.
PROEESSIONAL Theory and practice are taught by top scholars and former officials.
Classroom learning, corporate and government site visits, professional internships, and more are fused to provide the skills you need to achieve your goals in the global arena.
E Is for Egalitarian I found an mstitution that was under shoek P.26 P.18 EPIPHANIES CHRISTINE LAGARDE o THE THINGS THEY CARRIED IDEAS THE CLIMATE SCIENTIST LORD OF THE FLIES ANTHROPOLOGY OF AN IDEA BIOMIMETICS FOREIGN POLICY 17 banana banana foguete rocket E IS FOR EGALITARIAN candidato candidate happy belly ossinho bone dinheiro money toucan In 1962, Brazilian educator Paulo Freire implemented a radical method for teaching people how to read.
Instead of using textbooks, Freire encouraged his pupils-300 adult sugar-cane cutters-to learn from one another by sharing their life experiences.
Freire then used the students' working vocabulary as untao united fogo fire tongue the building blocks for language lessons.
The pedagogy, which rejected the normal hierarchies of the student-teacher relationship, worked.
His pupils were literate within weeks, and the initiative soon became a federal program.
When the military took power in 1964, Freire was ARTWORK BY JONATHAS DE ANDRADE 18 NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2014 faca excesso razao honey saque looting riqueza wealth money.
This new approach, however, ultimately denied prospective students the agency at the heart of Freire's mission.
It is this history that undergirds Jonathas de Andrade's ""Educagao para Adultos"" , a series of GO educational posters that combines the science of knife brasil brazil faisca sparks linguistics and the art of interpretation in Brazil over the past five decades.
In 2010, de Andrade worked with a group of illiterate seamstresses to choose 40 words to be displayed on the prints, co-opting the graphics-based teaching tradition from the military years but imbuing it with Freire's colonia cologne perdido lost methods.
By carefully juxtaposing 20 government vintage posters into the work, he not only introduced unique and, at times, provocative word combinations to unpack Brazil's recent history-he also provided a sobering commentary on an aspirational pedagogy that had been forgotten. ♦ atrasado late tijolo brick exiled and his program was dismantled.
Sold at newsstands, the prints displayed popular concepts, such as food and FOREIGN POLICY 19 INBOX ■ ANTHROPOLOGY OF AN IDEA V 1505-1506 Leonardo da Vinci writes Codex on the Flight of Birds, which specuiates that human air travei couid be modeied on the mechanics of avian flight.
Just over a decade iater, the worid's first commerciai passenger flight traveis from St.
No stranger to bio-inspired technoiogy, Schmitt had invented an eiectricai circuit modeied after the neurai impulse systems of squids in 1934, when he was a doctoral student.
Schmitt's word catches on and, five years later, is adopted into Webster's dictionary.
Small indentations tailed riblets are attached to the outer shell of an aircraft with adhesive to reduce drag in the air and make Jets more aerodynamic.
Today, Lufthansa is developing technology to ""painf these grooves directly onto commercial aircraft exteriors to lower fuel consumption by about 1 percent. (it may not sound like much, but the savings could yield significant environmental benefits.
Annually, the United States alone consumes about 20 billion gallons of aviafion fuel.) byJAKESCOBEY-THAL ILLUSTRATION BY ALEX EBEN MEYER 1996 Architect Mick Pearce designs the Eastgate Centre in Harare, Zimbabwe.
Inspired by self-cooling mounds of African termites, the large office and retail space does not have a conventional heating and cooling system; rather, it uses chimneys that naturally draw in cool air to maintain a temperate environment.
According to Pearce, the ventilation system costs one-tenth of that in a comparable, air-conditioned building, and it uses 35 percent less energy.
Benyus, now considered the field's chief proselytizer, frames the concept of biomimetics around the urgent goal of ending environmental destruction.
The suit replicated the scaly skin and bioluminescence of certain fish.
Although the suit eventually lost out to a different model, it showed that nature might offer important keys to unlocking the cosmos.
Human innovation, some thinking goes, should take cues from naturally occurring processes, because after billions of years of evolution, nature has determined what is efficient, effective, and enduring.
From airplanes to Velcro, inventors have long turned to flora and fauna for inspiration and instruction.
But now more than ever, biomimetics is generating product designs-not to mention hundreds of millions of dollars in capital investment-that are not just pioneering, but also potentially sustainable.
Bonser finds that between 1985 and 2005, the number of patents worldwide containing the word ""biomimetic"" or ""bio-inspired"" increased by a factor of 93.
Like the insect, which draws water from air by collecting condensation on microscopic bumps on its back, the bottle would harvest air moisture; the team estimates the device could store up to 3 liters of drinking water every hour.
JANUARY 2014 Harvard scientists and engineers publish a paper in Nature introducing a new, metalfree battery that relies on naturally abundant, carbon-based molecules called quinones— similar to those that store energy in animals and plants.
JULY 2014 India's Lavasa Corp. files for an initial public offering, its second attempt in four years, to raise 7. billion rupees to develop the country's first city based on biomimetic principles.
The company has worked closely with biologists to develop the city's master plan, which incorporates reforestation efforts, rainwater harvesting, and green construction practices.
The firm, whose name is a reference to 3. billion years of natural life, consults for, trains, and educates companies on how to incorporate bio-inspired innovation into their practices.
Measuring the frequency of biomimetics terms used in scientific Journals, patents, and grants, the index aims to quantify the expansion of bio-inspired research and innovation.
According to a report on biomimetics, the f eld is set to explode; By 2025, biomimicry could represent $300 billion of United States GDP annually, 1. million jobs, and $50 billion in terms of resources conserved.
While Arctic sea ice continues to melt, down in the Antarctic, ice is actually accumulating-and at record levels.
That's a small one for investigating the upper 5 to 10 meters of snow layering in great detail.
The layers give a historical picture of what's happened there, like the rings of a tree.
Starrett 5-meter measuring tape During an expedition led by Australia in 2003, we wanted to mount a piece of equipment— our thermal radiometer— on the railing of the ship to measure the skin and air temperature on sea ice, but we didn't have a tape measure.
September 2014 saw 7.7G million square miles covered in ice; that's more than 500,000 square miles above the average documented between 1981 and 2010.
Glaciologist Ted Scambos and his colleagues are trying to figure out what, exactly, is happening.
His trips typically run ""eight weeks, door to door,"" he says, which means two to three weeks on the ice collecting samples and deploying ground-penetrating radar and other technologies to determine how the ice is changing.
Despite this year's good news about ice, Scambos notes that people shouldn't assume the Antarctic is in great shape.
This year, two studies posited that the collapse of the Amundsen Sea ice sheet in the western Antarctic appears inevitable-and that it might raise global sea levels by some 4 feet.
Scambos says it can be a struggle to communicate the urgency of his work, which is highly detailed and done in a faraway, isolated place.
Scambos's next big trip likely will be to a ridge on the East Antarctic Plateau, thought to be the coldest place on Earth.
Foreign Policy recently caught up with Scambos to learn what is required to live and work at the bottom of the world.
A want to hear what the weather Mighty Wind was a favorite one is like-wind speed and year.
Bumble Bee sardines, Lake Champlain Chocolates dark chocolate, Nature Valley granola bar Good pocket food is important, it's amazing how many more calories you consume in the coid, but i aimost aiways lose weight in Antarctica.
I never eat sardines while in the U.S., but in Antarctica I realiy like them.
LifeLink avalanche shovel If you get into trouble, you can dig out your snowmobile with this.
The way you work at -30 is you pull out your hands and work for maybe three or four minutes on some fine instrument; then your fingers get so cold that you really can't do what you want to do anymore.
Iridium satellite phone and Goal Zero solar panels That's become essential equipment.
Scientists used to be issued big shortwave radios that required big batteries and antennas.
We use the solar panels to charge the satellite phone out on multiday treks.
It was designed specially for working at McMurdo Station in Antarctica, but it's actually a bit of overkill for most of the work we do.
When you're out burying equipment and taking samples, you can heat up quickly— and you really don't want to sweat.
FOREIGN POLICY Grivel ice ax and climbing rope This is the field mountaineering gear we carry in a crevassed area.
We try not to work in places where falling into crevasses is a danger, but sometimes you can't avoid it.
We've been trained to rescue somebody, if we had to, but we always have a field mountaineer that works with us to be safe.
INBOX ■ IDEAS Swedish Fish » Give a man a fish, and you'll feed him for a day.
Tell him he has more fish than his neighbors-and apparently he'll vote conservative.
They did not; When asked to estimate the percentage of their compatriots who earned a yearly income below their own, 74 percent of respondents were off by more than 10 percentage points.
The vast majority of those who guessed wrongly underestimated their own positionsmeaning, they thought they were poorer than their compatriots.
All those surveyed were also asked several questions meant to assess their political leanings.
The subjects were then queried again about their politics; Among other questions, they were asked what level of wealth redistribution they would prefer, which political party they supported, and what changes they would make to Sweden's income tax system.
They were also more likely to express support for the Sweden Democrats, the country's far-right party.
Why different countries have different predilections when it comes to wealth redistribution remains a puzzle for political scientists.
Some experts have suggested that the United States, for instance, prefers lower levels of redistribution relative to other developed countries in part because many Americans have a skewed sense of how well off they actually are.
Now evidence suggests that the famous Nordic socialism may be less about adhering to the Law of Jante-thatis, a mentality that emphasizes the collective-and more about a big misunderstanding.
The Tsetse Fly that the unpleasant little inseet, its nasty bite, and the sleeping siekness it earries had fundamentally shaped agrieulture aeross a wide swath of Afriea.
Turns out, Nash was onto something— but it may have been an even bigger phenomenon than he imagined.
Well beyond agriculture, the tsetse fly may have left an indelible mark on numerous aspects of life in parts of Africa.
These traits include the degree of political centralization of a government— that is, whether a central authority could marshal taxes and provide public goods— and whether there was indigenous slavery.
She then compared those traits to what she calls the “tsetse suitability index,” or a scoring system that gauges how hospitable a Alsan found that important societal traits could be explained, in part, by the presence or absence of the tsetse fly.
A lack of agricultural development brought on by the fly, for instance, meant a population could never grow dense enough for centralized government. region’s climate is to the troublesome fly, based on temperature and humidity.
Alsan found that important societal traits could be explained, in part, by the presence or absence of the tsetse fly.
A lack of agricultural development brought on by the fly, for instance, meant a population could never grow dense enough for centralized government.
Meanwhile, a lack of domesticated animals to work equipment meant that slavery remained a relevant institution.
Consider Nigeria, which sits in the heart of the fly-friendly zone but has nonetheless grown into Africa’s largest economy.
By contrast, the ancient city of Great Zimbabwe, the capital of a oncepowerful civilization that nurtured agriculture and trade, has been relegated to the history books, despite its location on a tsetse-free highland, while present-day Zimbabwe is one of the world’s most dysfunctional states.
For its size, the study emphasizes, the fly was— and might still be— a surprisingly mighty force.
A study in the Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, due out in early 2015, looks at the connection between gender equality and how well a country's athletes-both male and female-have fared in the Olympics.
The study, which looked at results from both the Summer 2012 and Winter 2014 games, found that the better a country scored on metrics of equality between the sexes as measured by the World Economic Forum (across the realms of economics, politics, health, and education), the more medals it accumulated.
Equality in education was an especially good predictor of performance by a country's athletes.
Interestingly, greater gender parity at home not only seemed to provide female athletes with a boost, but it was also linked with male performance.
For example, men who are considered too feminine by societal standards may leave their sports early.
The results echo those of another study, released in April 2014, which looked at Summer Olympics between 1996 and 2012.
It found that athletes of both sexes had a better chance of medaling if they were from a more gender-equal country.
The authors of the new study say their findings belie the idea that measures such as Title IX, which has enhanced resources for United States women's sports, creates gains for female athletes at the expense of male success in the long term.
Credited with heiping to save Europe's economy, Lagarde is now ieveraging the bank's resources in other ways.
This year, the imp piedged $17 biiiion to Ukraine, and in September it committed $130 miiiion in emergency financing to West African countries embattied by the Eboia epidemic, ""if more is needed,"" Lagarde said at an October news conference, ""itwiii be there,"" Foreign Policy spoke with Lagarde in Washington, D,C,, prior to presenting her with the magazine's annuai Dipiomat of the Year award in iate October, Lagarde discussed risks to financiai stabiiity, the imp's current internationai roie and reputation, and her frustrations with iawmakers in the worid's iargest economy.
When I arrived on July 4, 2011, 1 found an institution that was under shock.
The precipitated departure of the previous managing director had occurred under circumstances that put the institution on the front page of pretty much every newspaper around the world.
With staff that was discouraged and a bit at a loss as to where the compass was going to be.
My first priority was, then, to try to bring people together, I think the fund is and will be as relevant as ever, if not more.
We have seen moments of economic euphoria, during which members suddenly question the relevance and necessity of the institution.
Then comes the crisis, and everybody struggles to urgently increase their resources.
On Ukraine, everybody went, ""Oh, we need to help,"" but then everybody scratched their heads as to how they were going to bring together financial packages.
We were the institution that put $17 billion on the table and negotiated and eventually approved a program of reforms that Ukraine has to go through if it wants to restore economic stability and eradicate corruption.
When you see the number of young people, about 75 million of them, held back again because of high unemployment in many countries of the world, including in all the Middle East and North African countries, as well as in some of the European countries, those are really key issues.
The risks brought about by climate change are a major concern, it often goes unnoticedunless people find out that 12 of the last 13 biggest climatic disasters have occurred in the last 10 years or they figure out that the actual rise of temperature will definitely exceed the 2 percent threshold that players had set for themselves five years ago.
Congress and the executive branch are at odds with each other on a number of issues.
One of those is the IMF's quota and governance reforms, which were agreed upon by the 0-20 in 2010 but have not yet been ratified by the United States Congress, it's a sad reflection of a real dichotomy between the leadership that should be exercised by the United States of America, which still holds the international currency of reserve, it is still the largest economy in the world and the biggest player, yet it doesn't deliver on its international commitment to multilateralism.
Doing what seems impossible The Square Kilometer Array is the most ambitious radloastronomy project ever undertaken.
Technological breakthroughs of all kinds must still be made before the SKA becomes fully operational.
South African scientists and engineers are already finding the answers.
W , „ Jnipmtig naw >va>i www.southafrica.info INBOX ■ DISPATCH Residents walk in Puente Nayero's ""humanitarian zone"" in Buenaventura.
The Forgotten Streets While ongoing peace talks may finally put an end to Colombia’s guerrilla fighting, it remains to be seen what will happen to Buenaventura, the urban monster the war created.
By Scott C Johnson Photographs by Fabio Cuttica □ BUENAVENTURA, COLOMBIA One day in the middle of August, a gaunt 20-yearold who goes by the name of Jeilin approached a middle-aged man and shot him several times in the chest with a pistol, killing him.
The victim was a carnicero, a butcher, who worked in the San Pedro neighborhood of Buenaventura, a sprawling, rain-soaked port city on Colombia’s Pacific coast.
He refused to pay the two months’ worth of extortion money, about 400,000 pesos , to the gangs who control the city’s streets.
What’s more, Jeilin said, the butcher had threatened to call the police.
Jeilin and I met in a hotel room not far from his home turf, a quadrant of streets in a waterfront neighborhood called Santa Monica, where rickety wooden shacks on stilts jut out precariously over the brackish water of the bay.
Wearing a black wool 28 NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2014 beanie, a T-shirt, blue jeans, and a pair of green Nike sandals, Jeilin was unassuming, but he explained that he was a primero—a. kind of block leader for his gang, known as the Gaitanistas.
Along with the Urabenos and La Empresa, Jeilin’s gang is one of three main armed groups that control large parts of Buenaventura’s waterfront through a combination of extortion, murder, kidnappings, and threats.
For now, the Gaitanistas are the weakest of the gangs, but Jeilin said that his bosses have ordered him to keep fighting until the group controls the city completely.
An expansive port system has turned the city into the gateway for roughly 60 percent of Colombia’s imports and exports, but very little of the profits have trickled down to residents.
In 2013, some 15 million tons of legal goods, along with untold quantities of illicit drugs and weapons, passed through Buenaventura.
The mix of high-end development prospects, a strategic international port with easy access to Asia, Europe, and North America, and the city’s poverty— roughly 80 percent of the population is considered poor— has helped make Buenaventura a battleground for all sorts of competing interests, legitimate and criminal alike.
Often called bacrim, for bandas criminales (criminal bands), Jeilin’s group and others like it fight each other over drug-trafficking routes, but also for control of valuable waterfront property, which large companies are, in turn, eyeing for high-end development.
For decades, the Colombian government paid scant attention to the stretch of Pacific coastline where Buenaventura sits.
With the exception of the port, the state largely abandoned these areas, leaving Buenaventura and its residents— mostly AfroColombian descendants of slaves— isolated and impoverished.
Geographically separated from the rest of Colombia by the Andes Mountains, the city is a signature of government indifference and continues to lack the necessary infrastructure that could connect Buenaventura with the rest of the country.
In 2012, Colombia joined the Pacific Alliance, a trading bloc that includes Mexico, Peru, and Chile, whose principle aim is to aggressively pursue economic ties with Asia, in particular China.
But when government officials presented Buenaventura as a location for a Pacific Alliance summit the following year— a Pacific gateway to South America, the city had the region’s largest port and could establish Colombia as a key player in the Pacific Alliance, the thinking went— the idea was shot down because the city was far too dangerous.
The summit was ultimately held hundreds of miles away on the Caribbean, serving as a wake-up call for those intent on moving the country into the next century.
President Juan Manuel Santos has worked with city officials to improve Buenaventura’s image by developing an aggressive plan to promote tourism and downtown development that includes a multimillion-dollar waterfront esplanade and luxury hotels.
But the state of affairs in this city have made such an about-face nearly impossible.
Peace talks, which began in October 2012 and now continue in Havana, Cuba, could potentially put an end to Latin America’s longest-running conflict.
But the problem is that, while the government is making progress on negotiations with the FARC, there are consequences of the war— seen most extremely in Buenaventura— that aren’t likely to be healed by the peace process.
Years of fighting, combined with a largely absentee government, have turned Buenaventura into a kind of feral place in which Jeilin and the other members of the bacrim— descendants of paramilitary groups that once fought the FARC— operate with impunity.
Unless Santos’s government can deliver, quickly, on promises to tend to the consequences wrought by years of neglect, Buenaventura is only likely to become more violent, with or without a national peace agreement.
And that could be disastrous for Colombia’s long-term vision for its future.
MORE THAN 220,000 PEOPLE HAVE DIED IN Colombia’s war, thousands more have been wounded, and some 6 million have been internally displaced.
All told, around 6. million people are considered victims of the conflict.
The government and the FARC first tried in 1984 to engage in peace talks and have continued to try, in vain, ever since.
That year, the Colombian government promised widespread changes, including agrarian reform, increased political participation, and a reconciliation process.
But when these reforms failed to materialize and the commission that the government had established turned out to be ineffectual, the talks quickly broke down, and the FARC ramped up its campaign of attacks and ambushes.
Landowners and small-business owners, outraged by the continued campaign of kidnappings and extortion, began backing right-wing paramilitary groups in Buenaventura, often with the tacit knowledge of the Colombian National Army and government.
The most prominent of these paramilitary groups, the United SelfDefense Forces of Colombia , employed many of the same tactics of the FARC— assassinations, kidnappings, and massacres, often of civilians— in their bid to beat back the rebels.
By this point, however, the FARC was actively engaged in large-scale drug trafficking to help fund its operations, increasing the nebulous ties among organized crime, terror, and economic survival.
As part of the campaign, the government also signed a peace deal with the AUC and offered fighters reduced prison sentences in exchange for laying down their arms.
But the government didn’t provide job training or education COLOMBIA FOREIGN POLICY 29 INBOX ■ DISPATCH programs to many of these ex-paramilitary fighters.
Consequently, they began drifting back into drug smuggling and criminality, and, as such, the bacrim was born— a network that overwhelmingly consisted of people who had been caught up in the war, on both sides.
On the streets, the bacrim members applied the same zeal to their lawless endeavors as they had as soldiers.
Some former FARC members trafficked drugs, for instance, using the very networks that had helped them fund the war.
And Buenaventura, with its open ocean access and general lack of rule of law, proved more than fertile ground for the bacrim to prosper.
If there was any hope for ex-combatants to trust the government’s promises, that was squashed in 2006, when the government— which had promised former fighters protection from extradition during the demobilization process— began sending some of them north to the United States to face drug-trafficking charges.
Supporters of the paramilitaries thought the government had betrayed its promise to protect them, while relatives of those whom the paramilitaries had killed lost hope they would ever learn what happened to their loved ones.
Today, President Santos is so committed to the peace process that he pegged his narrow re-election campaign to it, and recently he has had to push hard for patience and tolerance with a public that has grown wary of both the rebels and government rhetoric.
The meetings in Havana have been plagued by setbacks, threats by both sides to walk away, and continued attacks and counterattacks as the FARC and government leaders jockey for position and leverage.
Javier Florez, the Colombian military’s second-highest officer, met with senior FARC officials in person— the first time a serving general in Colombia has agreed to such an intimate and public encounter with sworn enemies.
The meeting signaled that the two sides had opened discussions about the decommissioning of weapons and had moved one step closer to a final agreement.
BUT FOR ALL THE OPTiMiSM THE PEACE TALKS have generated in Cuba— and, to a lesser extent, Colombia— for the residents of Buenaventura, the talks might as well be happening on another planet.
When Santos visited the city this past April, he vowed to develop job-training programs for young people, as well as increased credit lines for small businesses.
The FARC responded by exploding a makeshift bomb at Buenaventura’s central electrical tower, leaving the city dark for days.
That is to say, for those in Buenaventura, the neighborhood is the new battlefield.
In March, Human Rights Watch published a damning report documenting widespread human rights abuses in the city, including scores of murders, dismemberments, and disappearances.
One of the more disturbing revelations was the existence of several casas de pique, or chop houses, where gangs torture their victims by cutting them to pieces— sometimes while the victims are still alive.
This spring, residents of Puente Nayero, a small sub-neighborhood that juts out into the bay, found themselves sandwiched between two warring bacrim groups, the Urabenos and La Empresa.
The 19-year-old remembers gangsters pulling people down the street and into the wooden shed.
Faced with daily death threats and terrorized by the violence, a group of leaders had little choice but to organize themselves into a neighborhood watch and self-defense coalition to confront the tyranny of the gangs.
With the help of the police and the Inter-Ecclesiastical Commission of Justice and Peace, part of the World Council of Churches, an NGO that places volunteers in violent communities as “witnesses,” they walled off overnight the entrance to their street with wooden barriers and declared Puente Nayero a violence-free “humanitarian zone”; one of their first acts was to tear down the chop house.
A humanitarian zone existing on a single street anywhere seems improbable— and it is.
But for all its fragility, the zone does provide a necessary sanctuary for a beleaguered population.
Nevertheless, when local children argue with each other, they resort to a language they know works.
FEW NEIGHBORHOODS IN BUENAVENTURA haven’t been affected by violence, and some have been emptied completely as residents succumb to pressure and flee.
According to Human Rights Watch, some 56.000 people were displaced in and around the city from 2010 through 2013, more than in any other municipality in Colombia.
Many of these were children who became prey for gangs that are constantly on the lookout for new recruits.
Although there are no official tallies of how many kids have been conscripted.
Father Adriel Ruiz, who runs a parish and community center in a particularly rough neighborhood called barrio Lleras, estimates that as many as 4.000 children have been swept into the bacrim in recent years.
Julio Cesar Biojo has seen a generation of children disappear into this underworld in the Palo Seco neighborhood, a jumble of half-finished wooden huts, open sewage canals, and rocky, trash30 NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2014 strewn dirt lanes.
A native of Buenaventura, Biojo says the bacrim first appeared in his neighborhood in 2005 and immediately held a community meeting in a nearby school.
Over time, however, the newcomers began recruiting children and teaching them how to fight— and the children have since become the lifeblood of the bacrim.
In 2008, a group of armed men from La Empresa forced Biojo out of his home at gunpoint; they wanted to control the neighborhood, and he had refused to budge from his lot.
He only returned in 2012, when control of the neighborhood had passed to the Urabenos and his former tormentors had been driven out.
The new gang, he explained, wasn’t necessarily a safer option, but, for the time being, the men who had threatened his family were gone.
With some meager government assistance, he created a safe haven where kids can read and play music.
The NGO, called the Junta de Accion Comunal , is run out of a cement building with bars on the windows.
It’s a far cry from a high-end day care or anything even resembling one, but it provides kids with a sense that there is at least one place outside their homes where they can feel a modicum of safety and where the bacrim might leave them alone.
Jeilin, the primero and assassin for the Gaitanistas, was one of the unlucky ones— a child who fell into the gangs early on.
He was 13 years old in 2007, when two men from the Urabenos broke into his home while his family was eating a dinner of chicken and rice and shot both of his parents in the face as he watched.
That year, Jeilin’s cousin Longi, himself a gang member, taught Jeilin how to use a machete, then a gun, and finally schooled Jeilin on “technical things,” such as how to dismember people properly.
The victim was a woman who had transgressed somehow— it was never clear to Jeilin exactly what her crime was.
School of International Service professors Maria De Jesus and Nina Yamanis apply community-based research to local and global health challenges, training students in health research and promotion in Washington, DC, and around the world.
Learn how you can join Professors De Jesus and Yamanis and their SIS colleagues in world-class conversations at american.edu/sis.
SCHOOL of INTERNATIONAL SERVICE AMERICAN UNIVER-SITV • WASHINGTON , DC FOREIGN POLICY 31 INBOX ■ DISPATCH with machetes.
Jeilin’s gaze is vacant and cold, and he expresses no remorse for his victims, though he did concede that thinking too much about his parents is difficult.
IN MANY RESPECTS, BUENAVENTURA HAS already crossed a Rubicon of sorts, from being a city where police can be effective to one where a quasi-military occupation is required just to prevent complete anarchy.
The violent waterfront neighborhoods in particular are swarming with police officers, all of whom are equipped with automatic assault rifles, pistols, and fatigues that make them look much more like soldiers than police.
Virtually every corner of these neighborhoods is manned by at least one officer, often two.
Colombian officialdom insists that violence has been decreasing in Buenaventura.
In late October, President Santos visited Buenaventura again and claimed that a security plan called Vamos Seguros had led to a 25 percent reduction in crime in Colombia’s 11 biggest cities, including Buenaventura, within the first week of implementation.
Jose Miguel Correa, the commander of the local police force, similarly claimed that progress was already underway in Buenaventura.
In early September, Colombian National Police and United States Drug Enforcement Administration operatives nabbed two leaders of La Empresa during a raid in Panama.
Edgar and Ever Bustamante were believed to be responsible for large-scale drugand money-smuggling operations in Buenaventura.
But many people in Buenaventura question this claim, maintaining that the police are complicit with the gangsters, actively working with them to keep revenues from the drug trade flowing.
Even the district attorneys responsible for bringing criminals to justice express skepticism about the loyalty and diligence of the police with whom they work.
When I was searching for evidence of Jeilin’s murderous exploits, a highly placed official at the district attorney’s office agreed to speal< with me on the condition that I not use his name.
There was a killing and an arrest, but the paperwork shed no light on whether they were connected.
The stories he came across in his docket every day said as much about the authorities’ incompetence and corruption as they did about the criminal networks operating in the city, he believes.
Even with a functioning, ethical police force and a fully staffed prosecutor’s office, he said, the violence in Buenaventura would still be overwhelming.
Many of the victims were innocent merchants caught up in the violent politics of extortion, he said.
But this caseload doesn’t even take into account a portion of the other types of crimes, he said, such as kidnappings and disappearances, that are also routine occurrences.
What the city really needs, he added, is massive investment in infrastructure, education, and health.
In that kind of environment, the prospect of thousands of trained soldiers, guerrilla fighters, and paramilitary thugs wandering around looking for work, or food, or simply a means to survive, is a sobering one.
One evening I met with a former paramilitary soldier who had gone through the demobilization program; he requested anonymity.
Originally from a rural area called Pital, he was recruited in 2001 into the Bloque Calima, a notorious paramilitary organization.
That same year, in April, he was involved in an infamous chainsaw massacre along the banks of a river, which flows down from the mountains toward Buenaventura.
A few weeks later, the group’s leader forced him to kill a friend, apparently for a minor infraction involving a rifle.
Scared and emotionally overwhelmed, the soldier entered the demobilization program.
And though he received modest payments from the government, he didn’t receive any job training or education.
He can’t return to his ancestral village along the river because too many people who sympathize with the FARC are still there, and his affiliation with the paramilitary groups would be a death sentence.
So he’s scraping by in Buenaventura as yet another possible recruit for the gangs who control the city.
In other words, with no prospects and no further support from the government, he may find that his only means of survival involve crime.
ON BUENAVENTURA'S WATERFRONT SITS THE neighborhood of Colon, which, like the others, is little more than an assemblage of shanties.
Several former FARC rebels occupy one set of houses at the end of a dirt road.
Nearby are several known members of the Urabenos, who in recent years have taken control of the neighborhood.
Here, in this forgotten corner of the city, the guerrilla war seems like a distant memory, but the threat of violence to everyone remains stark.
Although I understood the toll that violence is taking on Buenaventura’s residents, in the first week of my reporting I hadn’t seen any bloodshed myself.
That all changed one late afternoon, when it was still bright outside and the streets of Colon were filled with people.
A crowd, screaming and crying, ran away from the noise and toward the water.
In their midst, a large man held a woman by her hair and dragged her across the street; both of them were shouting.
About 50 feet away from me, lying by the side of a black Kia sedan, was the woman, a 42-year-old wife and mother of two named Yolanda del Socorro Guerrero, the 16th woman murdered in Buenaventura this year.
She ran a small business selling panela, or brown cane sugar, and according to witnesses and police, she had come to Colon to meet a customer.
It emerged later that she had probably refused to pay the requisite bribe to the local gang, in this case the Urabenos, and for that she was murdered.
None of the residents told the police they saw anything; saying too much was dangerous.
Meanwhile, Yolanda’s killer disappeared on the back of a motorcycle, trailed by a small car with black tinted windows.
Around Yolanda’s head was a large pool of blood and, on her back, a large smoke burn, indicating that the last bullet was fired at short range, when she was already down, the latest assassination of 2014.
Master of Arts in Law and Diplomacy Master of International Business Global Master of Arts Program Master of Laws in International Law Doctor of Philosophy Master of Arts Executive Education Visit fletcher.tufts.edu or email fletcheradmissionstufts.edu From From security to humanitarian aid. investment to sustainable development.
The world you inherit will require you to be agile across borders of many kinds — between countries, between academic fields, between knowledge and practice, between top-down policies and bottom-up ventures.
The Fletcher School's multidisciplinary approach to complex problem solving transcends the classroom and prepares graduates for leadership positions that span traditional boundaries.
Across myriad backgrounds, fields of interest, perspectives and cultures, they work collaboratively and study collectively.
As a result, Fletcher students emerge networked, engaged and equipped with the skills to build bridges toward a more secure and prosperous future.
The Accidentai Admirai, AnnC' Marie Slaughter, pnesideni of the New America J^odalion. wrote, “He is equal parts thinker and doer, asking hard questions and continually challenging himself and the men and women under his Leaders in Higher Education command I*"" And former Secretary of Defense Robert Gates wrote, “Adm.
Jim Stavrldis is one of Ltie most forwafil'-tliiDkjag military officers and enlightened leaders of his gcncratioi] "" Stavridis also happens to be a Hctcbcr atuimius.
Some academic leaders have an unusually deep affiliation with their institution.
As inaugural deaa, he envlsioas a school that U groundlbncaking in its approaches yet builds on BU'a long tradition In global sludiCSr Sometimes the influence of a dynamic leader reaches well beyond the school Itself.
His knack for identifying research topics relevant to current global condicts that are not well understood has led U> work that could have substantial impact on global policy and improve the quality of life of mlLtions.
Realizing a Vision Adil Najam has been a sports reporlert a T’V talk show host, a university vice cbanccUor, a UN negotiator, and aprolcSiior of inico:national affairs.
As the inaugural dean of BU's l^dcrick S Fardcc School of Global Studies, he leads the effort to put meaning into the £Chool’‘s mission of hdvuaciug human progress.
Organ izatienal leaders in academra atee need to provide enough thought leadership to really shetoh the facuH^.” BfriHfdiw Chitek Fong, ditrettfto/lfodership initiatnvi, Slan/ord Univenity. and teni^r tnanaaing patlnr/"", Camtgir Foundation Jof Advanament ofTtaching Aidit Najum, ifrun, Fraieridl S Pnrdce JSrAznt vf Gtidml Sniabei, Sasmn tjnivinby Najam secs the school as an outstaiidLngplace for strong college graduates from a variety of backgrounds to foillaw their passions in cultivating a mijUkliscipliniiTy career path in InlcmutionHl affaire.
He believes that careers in global policy will increasingly require combined compeLencies and that students will benetit from the Pandcc Scbool's wide rrage of poutw selections, progrtin choices, aod joint degree options. '^fn addition to all the courses within the Pardee School, we offer an amazing array of courses at UU in the humanities, social sciences, and naturBi sciences,'’' says Najam.
The school aims to foster a senseof global citizenship together with a sense of the cannections among dirferent disciplines and issues.
Pardee, for whom the school is namedThe Pardee School Lneorporates strengths from BU’s history of focus on global studies, which daites back to the l&90s.
At the same time, Najam not-es, ""We ate trying to do something new and different.
The sense of newness comes with an obligation to lespond to the great challenges of our lime.
Sludents will have access to courses in (he 22 languages currently offered at BU, arB trying to do something new and different.
The sense of newness comes with en obligatfon to respond to the great challenges of our time.
We are asking, ^What does international affairs In ttie 21 st century look like^ and how can we prepare our students for this?’"" — Adii Najam. inaugural d^ait.
Advancing Human Progress bu.edu/pardeeschool ■ BUPardeeSchool BOSTON ' UNIVERSITY FP Guide Leaders in Higher Education which ioclude not only Arabic, Chicesfi, iapaoese, Korean, and numemu& Enmpeau languages^ but al^ Hausa, Hltuli-UnlLi, Igbo^ Persian, Swahili, 'HiTkish.
Wolof, Xhosa, and Zulu, dinong others, ’^Wc want students to appreciate the fajd that people thick in dilTeTeat languages and in diffenaat cullural contexts.
Hendrix is also part of a team at the school that is dcvck>ping new approMhes to measure and model slate fragility, thanks to a major U,S, Department of Defense grant, “It's a pretty exciting time to be here at the Josef Korbcl School^ says Hendrix.
Hendrix foCUSOS on research topics that are relevant to current global oonriicls and not yet well understood, such as the role of food insecurity in conflict and the security impltcalions of climate change, “We’re really trying to make sure that the knowledge wc'rc geoeiaiing academically is useful to our society and to the global community,''' he says.
Hendrix is co -director of the Geographic Information Systems Center at Luke Victoria, where bis team studies the complex inlerrclationships between fisheries and food security in ELaiit Africa's £.ake Victoria basin, IncoHaborailoti with the National Fisheries Resources RcseuTch Institute in Uganda.
In addition to partnering wllh NaFlRRl in scientific studies, he and his team offer GI5 training for local seientists and natural resource managers.
Now, when potential employers or graduate school mentors query these students about their skills and experiences, they will bring a more diverse, applied toolkit to the table-'' Heixtrii'i work is driven by his curiosity about how people interact with their natural environment.
The Siraiis Times^ has referred to him as ""the ultimate insider-outsider’' for his ability to challenge the status quo while remaining a loyal, responsible citizen.
He has received more than 10 teaching awards and Is also a member Of the Arts Advisory Pnricl of Singapore's National Arts Council BJid the rounding ebaJr of the Asian Film Archive's board of directors.
The Necessary Stage, Tan has composed music for some of Its pcrfonnanccs.
Tan sees the arts as critical in shaping a progressive and selfreflcctive society.
Our integrated and multidisoiplinary curticulum ensures an education that addresses realworld challenges head-on.
This where phi losophets, artists, lilmmakerSn public intellectuals, rescajichcr?, and academics will have to play an important rok/' LKV School is already playing an important role in inspiring and preparing fuiuie glohal li:^tders.
Team leaching encourages LKY School siudeuls to take an interdisciplinary approach to probtem-soIvLng.
For example, the school offers a course on policy challenges that uses a team of professorii from economics, political science, and managemeiat. ”lmmed lately, it. becomes obvious to the students that reality is complex aod multidimensional, and thal solutions derived from only one Geld of Study are going to be fragile and ioadequale,” says I'an.
Study trips also encourage interdisciplinary thinking and problem-solving.
The LKY School is also in the early stages of pfodaciog one Of EwD MOOCs focusing on policy design and water governance.
Responding to Current Global Challenges As divisionaJ dean of the MYU School of Frofcssional Studies Center for Global Affairs , Vejra Jelinek value-s flexibility.
CGA has a history of growiug and evolving to address cmergins global treuds and developments, and it continues to do so.
In 2D04, when Jelinek created the Center's first degree, the Master of Science in Global Affiairs, she envisioned a graduate program that would be responsive to current global challenges and practica] in Its appi [cations.
The mjLvtcr's degree program initially offered a choice Of five Lnterdisciptinary conceutraLeods; envlroumeni^energy policy; human rights and internationai law; International development and bumaoitarian assistance; international relations; and private sector studies.
Two years ago, two additional concentrations were introduced; transnational security and pcocebuiklmg.
It bas evolved and increased in number of students, in program depth, and in coverage of global issues ” In adilition to the masiler's degree, CGA now offers Ihr^ graduate certificate programs; Global Energy, TransnaiionaL Security, and Peacebuilding.
Students ami faculty have explored private sector initiatives in China, development in Ghana, human trafficking in India, ^security in Prague, and other issues.
Their work has expanded to respond to tcusions created by the influx of refugees and civilian displacement in the area.
The Uses and Abuses of Military Force”... just some of the courses that Dr.
Mark Galeotti teaches at the NYU School of Professional Studies Center for Global Affairs.
His areas of specialty include organized crime, security affairs, and modern Russia.
His depth of knowledge is based upon years of experience working as a researcher in the British Houses of Parliament and in the Gity of London, serving as an advisor to the British Foreign & Gommonwealth Office, and collaborating with commercial, law enforcement, and government agencies— from the United States Department of State to Interpol.
Galeotti explores organized crime and its impact on the international order, providing students with a knowledge base that could only be acquired through years in the field.
It is this caliber of education and this level of expertise that defines the programs offered by the Genter for Global Affairs, as well as those across the NYU School of Professional Studies.
Preparing Future World Leaders A school that prcpaiics unci supports the netl generation of world leaders needs ncl only a broad-ranging eurrieuium, but also a seasoned leader wlLh broad experience.
Department of Justice, and adjudicaling international trade disputes as one of seven members of the World Trade Organization Appellate Body. ”1 am convinced that ibc solutions ID policy challenges today and into the future will require internationa] and interdisciplinary perspeclivt^, as well as collaboralion between the public and private sectors ” says Janow.
SIPA places a simng emphasis on rigorous academic analysis and Icaraing In combination with practical skills and applied knowledge.
The curriculum culminates in required capstone work^ shops in which small teams of students solve leulworld problems for clients that range from multilateral financial insritutions to city governments and NGOs around the worl± SfPA faculty arc recognized inlcmationally for their research □D pressing global issues such as the Impacts of dImale change, lbe shifting priorities of United States foreign policy, innovatkm in emerging markets, ibc ccofiofnics and geopolitics of energy, And the challenges facing International financial institutions.
Students benefit from the school’s dynamic blend of scholars, and practitioners, which produces an innovative curriculum across its core fields, from finance in ernerging markets to conflict resolution.
Merii E Seitoot aj lnitma:i{>tuiiiindPuhiicA^lrt, ""SIPA is the interdisciplinary bub of global-policy teaching, research, and engagement at Columbia,"" says Janow.
One of Janow’s first initiatives as deao has been to extend the school's focus on the ways in which technology is reshaping the political economic, legal, social, and global public policy landscape.
In the past year, SIPA has also added new programs in gender and public policy, humaniiaiJan policy, and the United Nations. prepare students for careers of the coming century, in which they will move between countries and sectors "" says Janow.
Stavridis and bis col leagues at FteDcher have been thinking about new areas of focus for the curriculum, such as women in LntemaliDna] security; Lhe use and power of social networks to shape iDEcrBaricaaJ diplomacy; and issues related to developments in biology, such as genetic engineering and bioLerrorism.
SlavTiJis secs effective communication as a key skill ibar senior leaders need today and a growing area of focus throughout the Fletcher curriculiLcn.
In a recent article in TiME, he said, ”It’s not only a terrific way to team-build and create acohereat way ahead, but also a gcHTid exercise in learning where the fault lines and flsSuiCS i>f an institution lie.
D.C., in cemnedion witti ihe buslnasa departtjo^ Editor; RxeW HdVeany mern of FOREIGN POUCY, und dkf iw< lawfve (he edito^al staff of Ihia magaai Aoewint Manager, Edixattoa; Brian AdtariMn.
ALL RIGHTS RESBHVEB SPOWSDRED REPOflT Kyleanne Hunter is a former officer in the United States Marine Corps, serving as an AH-1 W Super Cobra attack pilot.
Now she's a Sie Fellow at the Josef Korbel School's Sie Cheou-Kang Center for International Security & Diplomacy.
As such she's working alongside world renowned faculty doing relevant research on today's most pressing global issues.
And we've played a part in saving 8. million lives through our support of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
The Agitators I FROM THE MIDDLE EAST TO EUROPE TO AFRICA, 2014 WAS A YEAR OF I unprecedented geopolitical fracturing.
These Global Thinkers— terrorist leaders, I ideologues, wily financiers— are the brains behind these I splintering operations.
In the course of just a few months, they I have upended the world as we know it, leaving the future of I whole regions and the lives of tens of millions looking I dangerously uncertain.
Terrorist leader \ Syria In under a decade, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi is said to have gone from being an Islamic preacher to a prisoner at a United States military base to the man at the helm of a terrorist organization that is redrawing the Middle East's borders.
As United States airstrikes decimated al Qaeda in Iraq's leadership during the Iraq War, Baghdadi began a meteoric rise through the organization and shifted its efforts into war-ravaged Syria.
As the Islamic State, it has conquered swaths of Syria and Iraq and shocked the world with graphic images of beheadings and mass executions.
Baghdadi has revolutionized the way the group makes money; instead of relying on foreign patrons, the Islamic State reportedly reaps millions of dollars per day from sales of crude oil, racketeering, and kidnapping plots.
This wealth has granted him vast autonomy, and in June, he announced a new caliphate, or Islamic empire, and declared himself its ruler.
President \ Russia The way Russian President Vladimir Putin tells it, the Soviet Union’s collapse marked not only the dissolution of a political system, but the estrangement of a civilization.
To Putin, Russia is not defined by its current borders, but by the shared culture, language, and history of the Russian people.
And it is his state’s manifest destiny— territorial sovereignty of other countries be damned— to unite them.
Putin has led a crackdown on political rivals, ngos, and minorities in the name of defending so-called Russian values from the West’s liberal excess and other forces.
In 2014, the international community decried Putin’s machinations, both at home and abroad, as belligerent and even irrational.
Amid NATO expansion and growing economic ties between former Soviet states and the West, Putin sees Russia as a civilization under threat.
Politieal philosopher \ Russia If Russian expansionism has an ideologue, it is Alexander Dugin.
Since Russia’s annexation of Crimea, Dugin’s ideas have found new life.
Called the “brains” behind that takeover, Dugin has since claimed that southern and eastern Ulcraine— or Novorossiya — “pleads” for Moscow’s intervention.
He is in close contact with rebel commander Igor Strelkov and has reportedly even given instructions to separatists.
A former advisor to the Russian parliament who appears frequently on state television, Dugin has a strong foothold in the Russian establishment.
He is a potent reminder that there is more behind Russia’s bravado than realpolitik.
Over the past year, Shekau’s military savvy has proved devastating to Africa’s most populous country and largest economy.
He has transformed the jihadist group Boko Haram into the African equivalent of the Islamic State, bent on enforcing its medieval version of sharia law through brute force.
LEAOING GLOBAL THINKERS 51 k THE BIRTH OF A NEW CENTURY What the world lost in 2014.
These disasters included the Great War itself, which claimed some 20 million lives, including victims of the new century’s first genocide, in Turkey; the October Revolution in St.
Petersburg, which gave birth to an ideological empire that would Ml tens of millions of people and imprison hundreds of millions more; the rise of Nazism out of Germany’s defeat; World War II, with another 60 million deaths, including genocide on an unprecedented scale; the upheavals and wars beyond the borders of Europe that followed the end of colonialism; and the division of the postwar world into two nuclear-armed camps, which fought each other through proxies in post-colonial lands.
The years that followed were characterized by rapid globalization in communications, technology, capital, and human migration.
The world’s markets, institutions, and wars were presided over by the one superpower, the United States.
In some ways, it was a continuation of the post-World War II decades, in which American power was preeminent if not undisputed.
But it was also a transitional phase— and from the vantage point of the present, it’s pretty clear that the transition is over.
There is a strong case to be made, following Hobsbawm’s lead, that it happened this year, a century after Sarajevo.
By the metric of corpses, the catastrophes of 2014 have hardly been more severe than those of any given year in the past 100; in some cases, they’ve been much less so.
We’ve seen sectarian slaughter, Russian revanchism, and the ravages of a deadly epidemic before.
What’s more, there has been no Sarajevo in 2014, no triggering event of transformation, no thunderbolt out of a blue sky.
They originated in unhappy places well outside the charmed circle of safety, comfort, and freedom, but their impact was deeply felt in the West, where the structures of power and principle that used to contain such disruptions no longer seem to exist.
Russian President Vladimir Putin’s annexation of Crimea and subversion of Ukraine shocked Europe— above all the Germans, who believed that they were living on a continent that had learned well the lessons their country once inflicted on it, a continent of peace, unity, and inviolable borders.
To see such a figure stoking wars as the head of a resurgent power, in 2014, suddenly cast a strange light upon the map of Europe.
In July, hundreds of bodies— most of them Dutch— fell into a looters’ field after a civilian airliner was shot out of the sky by Russianarmed separatists.
Only then did the shock of Ukraine fully penetrate Western complacency.
The Islamic State was a second shock— a very ugly one— with its takeover of at least one third of Iraq, its consolidation of land and resources in Syria, its obliteration of borders drawn by European imperialists during and after World War I, and its drive to exterminate or expel ancient minority populations from territory under its control.
Videotaped beheadings of civilians by jihadists date back to the murder of Daniel Pearl, in Pakistan in 2002, and Nick Berg, in Iraq in 2004.
Yet it somehow took the Islamic State’s series of foretold and dramatized ritual decapitations (which seem doomed to continue) on a bleak stretch of desert to bring home to Westerners the reality of the violence that Syrians and Iraqis had already experienced firsthand.
Both of these events began with a promise of replacing dictatorship with democracy, but both have produced chaos and tragedy on a terrible scale.
Much of the responsibility falls on the United States, which has meddled in the region for decades, supporting corrupt oil regimes, arming tyrants, and then launching an ill-advised war and botching the consequences beyond repair.
But it’s a mistake to allow American solipsism— the notion that the United States is the source of all the world’s troubles, or the solution to them— to reinforce Middle Eastern victimism.
Shiite-Sunni conflict is an indigenous phenomenon; so are jihadi terrorism and the dream of a restored caliphate; so is a social system that marginalizes women, stigmatizes minorities, and binds religion to force in everyday life.
Ebola, meanwhile, has claimed thousands of lives in West Africa this year, with many more inevitably to come.
The virus isn’t new— Ebola in human beings is nearly 40 years old— and neither is the reality of a quickly spreading, highly lethal plague.
Yet Ebola also counts 54 NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2014 among the year’s shocks.
It has brought home the fragility of entire countries, where economic life has come to a standstill and social stability is threatened.
It has illuminated the vast gulf between the world’s lucl<y and its unlucky, who nonetheless can be joined by contagion.
This year of shocks has produced an unmistakable sense of disintegration.
What’s gone is not peace and stability— those are always ephemeral— but any sense of a framework, an order, a system in which they could be restored.
The United Nations, with its vanishing secretarygeneral, Ban Ki-moon, is barely an afterthought.
Congress, with Russia and China playing the spoiler role of the Republican caucus.
NATO seems increasingly like a relic of Harry Truman’s era, without the vision or will to play a role in keeping order along its own edges.
The Baltic states, full-fledged members of the alliance, unlike Ulcraine, seem less than fully convinced that their European allies will come to their defense under Article 5 in case Russian subversion spreads to Estonia— and there are early warning signs that this might occur.
It’s possible to imagine Putin testing the integrity of NATO, hoping to find that it exists on paper only.
The collapse of global structures has opened the way for bad behavior on the part of elected and unelected regimes around the world.
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has moved Turkey into the ranks of regional powers that are rising with the eclipse of Western influence.
His rule is increasingly authoritarian, illiberal, and paranoid, using anti-American rhetoric to silence domestic critics and distract from allegations of corruption, while justifying support for some of Syria’s most brutal rebel groups.
When the Syrian Kurdish city of Kobani, on the Syria-Turkey border, seemed poised to fall to the Islamic State and the specter of massacres loomed large, the U.N.’s special envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, appealed to the world for help, and especially to Turkey, which had sealed its border against resupply of the besieged Kurds.
Even as it pursued a bid for a nonpermanent seat on the Security Council, Turkey ignored the United Nations envoy’s plea— it preferred to see the Islamic State crush a Syrian Kurdish group, the People’s Protection Units, that it considers an ally of its own separatist Kurdish party.
Turkey’s actions have made this NATO member a de facto supporter of the Islamic State, which has declared its murderous intent toward citizens of every other member of the NATO alliance.
Erdogan is following Putin’s lead— what Putin is to Greater Russia, Erdogan hopes to be to the Muslim Brotherhood.
It’s a strange, and likely selfdestructive, turn for a non-Arab, historically secular country that was created after World War I out of the ruins of the caliphate that the Islamic State claims to be restoring.
But for now, the initiative is with Turkey, as it is with Russia and China.
In grabbing pieces of Russian-speaking Europe, Putin has counted on this same erosion of international order.
He doesn’t want to strengthen the United Nations— his dream is of a Eurasian alliance led by Russia.
Throwing the West’s own arguments back in its face, he justifies the annexation of Crimea by blaming the United States and NATO for setting the precedent in Kosovo in 1999, an air war fought without the blessing of the Security Council, though it was precipitated by an imminent Serbian genocide against Kosovar Albanians, not by a popular movement against a corrupt leader, as was the case in Ukraine with Putin’s client, Viktor Yanukovych.
Putin is signaling that he will tear down the security architecture that he claims America started trashing 15 years ago.
It’s a cynical and disingenuous play that he knows will make the world safer for thugs, but it has enough truth to keep Europe off balance.
The West has agreed on escalating rounds of sanctions against Russia, from ones targeted at individuals to sanctions on financial and other institutions.
There’s no possibility of NATO intervention, while Russia intervenes more and more openly with heavy weapons, armored vehicles, and unmarked troops.
The European Union is another debilitated institution— a collection of mostly stagnant economies joined together by an ailing currency and political dysfunction.
Elections in May to the European Parliament in Brussels favored parties on the left and right that want to see the European Union weakened to the point of irrelevance.
Above all, the year’s disruptions have revealed the waning of America’s ability to control events— not just its willingness and ability to project force, but the attractive power of liberal democracy as a counterweight to authoritarianism and extremism.
President Barack Obama, along with the heads of most governments in Europe, is mired in domestic unpopularity and international confusion, while Putin, Erdogan, China’s Xi Jinping, India’s Narendra Modi, and other anti-Western nationalists have an increasingly free hand.
That was in April, and the girls are still missing, while hashtag activism has moved on to Gaza and autism.
Obama’s foreign policy in his second term has been hesitant, self-contradictory, at times even feckless— and American hawks blame the year’s violence squarely on him for tempting the world’s Putins and Baghdadis with displays of weakness.
The Islamic State might have exploited the American exodus from Iraq after 2011, but its strength mainly comes from bad governance and chaos in Iraq and Syria, as well as the unkillable power of jihadism as a Muslim ideology for all grievances.
Putin’s well-known contempt for Obama might have played a role in the annexation of Crimea, but his first irredentist war— in Georgia in 2008— was launched during George W Bush’s presidency.
No one could make a serious case that Bush’s brand of nationalism, with its waste of American money, prestige, and lives, did anything to check the rise of illiberal regimes, sectarian violence, and extremism any more than did Obama’s attempts to manage the decline that followed.
The end of a century, including the American century, is always a long time coming.
The postwar international order was underpinned by American democracy in a period of functioning institutions, shared prosperity, and public optimism.
The global disorder of this new century is both accompanied and enabled by a sharp deterioration within the United States itself.
The United States economy, in recession or recovery, is more and more built on a profoundly unfair distribution of rewards; the political system, strangled by organized money and partisan extremism, has no answers to the country’s deepest problems; large numbers of Americans have lost faith in their children’s future.
The United States is no longer in a condition to impose its will by asserting or demonstrating its values.
But the liberal ideas that brought freedom, security, and hope to millions of people around the world in the last century remain essential in this one.
America can promote them best if it restores its own democracy to health.
Boko Haram has extended its control over Nigeria’s northeast; it now claims a territory about the size of Ireland.
State security forces, which are corrupt, mismanaged, and abusive in their own right, have been no match for Shekau’s fighters.
As the Islamist group’s power grows, Shekau’s ambitions also appear to be expanding.
ALEXANDER BORODAI FOR RAISING A SELF-DECLARED REPUOLICTOITSFEEt Former prime minister, Donetsk People’s Republic \ Ukraine When eastern Uleraine’s Donbass region declared independence, the self-styled government in Donetsk needed a leader.
Unsurprisingly, and to the chagrin of Western powers, it found one in Moscow.
Borodai has been described as “the Karl Rove of Russian imperialism,” hailing from a group of ultranationalists whose Zeitgeist of a Greater Russia has permeated the Kremlin.
Critics insist that he has strong ties to Russian intelligence services— a claim he brushes off but does not deny.
Over the summer, Borodai was a key liaison and negotiator with both Moscow and Kiev.
He stepped down after just three months, saying “a genuine Donetsk native” should be in charge.
As the “grizzled face of the separatist movement,” according to the Washington Post, Borodai helped a self-declared republic rise firmly to its feet.
Jihadi financiers \ Kuwait; Syria while the United States has dithered about arming the Syrian opposition, its opponents have wasted no time at all.
Throughout 2014, and building upon previous efforts, Hajjaj al-Ajmi and Abd al-Rahman Khalaf al-Anizi dmmmed up cash for the Islamic State and the al Qaeda-affiliated al-Nusra Front; the men have advanced jihadi fundraising methods, adding handsomely to the militants’ revenues from oil sales and extortion rackets.
JIHADI JOHN Today, according to the International Centre for the Study ofRadicalisation, Western Europeans account for some 18 percent of the foreign-fighter population in Syria, with the most recruits coming from France, Britain, Germany, Belgium, and the Netherlands.
Above, a chart shows the highest estimated number of fighters from each of the countries.
Dubbed ""Jihadi John"" by Fleet Street, he is among the thousands of foreign fighters who have traveled to the Middle East to fight alongside the Islamic State.
From the mujahideen to Chechen rebels, Islamist groups have long looked to foreign nationals to swell their ranks.
Yet, relying on propaganda, the Islamic State has attracted foreign fighters on a massive scale.
As many as 15,000 foreigners, including some 1,900 Westerners, have joined militant groups in Syria, according to some estimates.
Western officials say they have identified Jihadi John, presumed to be the killer of three other hostagesone American and two Britonswhose beheadings have been videotaped.
But even if the hooded militant can be tracked down, there will be plenty of foreign recruits to take his place.
The DecisionMakers^ MASTERMINDING A NATIONAL ELECTION IN THE WORLD'S LARGEST democracy, Steering the West's response to Russia's forays into Ukraine.
Presenting a pian for reconciiiation and accountabiiity in an African country torn aiong reiigious iines.
Piotting major reforms in one of Europe's most siuggish economies, These are just a few of the diverse, and unenviabie, job descriptions of tbe men and women in this category.
Working to give governance a good name, these decision-makers have taken risks, chaiienged norms, and demanded change.
Prime minister \ India Narendra Modi faced a United States visa ban for nine years, and the European Union ostracized him for 10.
The West coldshouldered the Hindu nationalist for the same reason many Indians distrusted him; his tolerance of sectarian violence in 2002 that left at least 1,000 people-mostly Muslimsdead in Gujarat state, where Modi was chief minister.
But by India's 2014 elections, after years of corrupt and inefficient Congress party rule.
Modi had convinced many that his record as a charismatic, business-friendly leader made him just the person to revive India's flagging growth.
His speeches drew hundreds of thousands, and he reached millions via 3-0 holographic projections.
Amid the disasters of 2014, the year was notable for the fact that open warfare among major powers did not return to Europe.
Although Russia’s shadowy war in Ukraine nearly provoked all-out confrontation with the West, catastrophe never came, and much of the credit for that goes to German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
Russian President Vladimir Putin is a wily leader, and it has fallen upon Merkel to manage the former kgb agent.
Throughout the crisis in Ukraine, no world leader has talked more with Putin than Merkel.
Her Russian is so good that she can correct her official interpreters; Putin’s German is equally good, a remnant of his days as a spy in East Germany.
Berlin’s economic ties with Russia might make Germany more interdependent with Moscow, but they also give Merkel leverage that Washington lacks.
Germany, then, could be the heavyweight capable of containing the Russian bear.
But Merkel has been nimble in using her power, embracing sectoral sanctions while preventing Putin from feeling cornered.
In July 2010 he was incarcerated on various charges, including murder, for his alleged involvement in extrajudicial killings.
But with Modi’s support, Shah rose to the powerful post of bjp president in early July.
There he will likely remain, serving as the party’s Karl Rove and Modi’s enforcer.
President \ Iran Hassan Rouhani made this list last year for opening a door that would lead to nuclear talks with the United States; he appears again this year because that door remains open.
The Iranian president continues to defend the talks vociferously in Iran, beating back a concerted effort from hard-liners to undermine the tentative rapprochement with the West.
Rouhani has remained relentlessly upbeat about the discussions, even as his boss.
Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, has stuck to the anti-American tone that has characterized Iranian rhetoric for decades.
Still, Rouhani seems to be doing his best to convince the supreme leader, as well as an Iranian population weaned on three decades of anti-Americanism, that it’s time for a new beginning.
Interim president \ Central African Republic when Catherine Samba-Panza was selected to lead the Central African Republic in January, violence between Christian and Muslim militias had left thousands dead and hundreds of thousands displaced.
Under her predecessor, a former rebel leader, state institutions had basically stopped functioning.
Yet Samba-Panza, only the third female president in African history, welcomed her challenging job.
She announced a four-point plan in June to integrate youth— who have fed the country’s rapacious militias— into economic and political processes, and she launched a dialogue to reduce tensions between Christian and Muslim communities.
Demanding government accountability, she introduced three-month trial periods for ministers, and she is laying the groundwork for democratic elections in 2015.
The Central African Republic is still in tatters; a United Nations peacekeeping force arrived in September.
Finance secretary \ Mexico Luis Videgaray showed that his reputation as the brains of Mexico’s government is no overstatement when a comprehensive energy reform bill he designed was signed into law in August.
For the first time in 76 years, direct foreign investment will be allowed in the country’s energy sector— a move that is estimated to bring in an additional $20 billion annually.
Expected to expand the availability of low-cost energy to Mexicans, Videgaray’s reforms focus on the sustainability of existing economic institutions, including small Mexican firms, and input quality such as broadband and credit.
Although he was appointed finance secretary in 2012 and spent his first year out of the limelight, Videgaray isn’t entirely new to politics.
The mit graduate has worked with President Enrique Pena Nieto since the latter was a state congressman; when Pena Nieto was elected a state governor in 2005, he made Videgaray his finance chief.
Eor decades, the continent has struggled to integrate immigrants from Muslim-majority countries, sometimes demonizing them as a demographic threat or relegating them to ghettos that breed radicalism.
Aydan Ozoguz, Germany’s new integration minister, hopes to change all that.
Born to Turkish parents who came to Hamburg as guest workers, Ozoguz has risen meteorically in German politics.
LEADING GLOBAL THINKERS 59 In December 2013, she became the first Muslim woman of Turkish origin to serve as a state minister, charged with implementing a controversial new law that gives children of immigrants in Germany the right to hold more than one passport.
She wants Germans to reimagine citizenship itself and embrace a sense of belonging for all, “whatever their name or background,” she told dw-tv.
Foreign minister; president \ Uruguay Jose Mujica is something of a radical, both at home and abroad.
The leftist guerrilla turned statesman opted for a small farm over Uruguay’s presidential palace, donates about 90 percent of his income to charity, and legalized marijuana.
Pursuing an equally provocative approach to international affairs, he has railed against the power elite’s obsession with economic growth and has blasted showy United Nations summits.
This year, the president and his foreign minister, Luis Almagro, set out to show that a country like Uruguay— with its tiny population of some 3 million and gross national income per capita of around $14,000— could do its part in addressing one of the world’s worst crises.
Wealthier countries should also step up and provide safe havens to the more than 3 million Syrian refugees.
This group is the first in Uruguay’s pilot program offering a path to Uruguayan citizenship; another 78 refugees are expected early next year.
Prime minister \ Italy Matteo Renzi stormed into Palazzo Chigi in February vowing to “rottamare,” or scrap the old order in Italy.
Renzi’s goal was to get Italy’s house in order and then use the country’s enhanced credibility to take on the European Union’s austerity policies.
The effervescent Florentine is finding that Italy’s vested interests— its civil service and labor unions among them— are not so quick to yield to his charm.
If he can hang onto his office— Italian politics can be notoriously treacherous— he may be the best hope to lift Italy out of its worst economic slump since the 1930s.
LUISVIDEGARAY SECRETARY OF FINANCE ANB PUBLIC CREBIT, MEXICO Interview by Julie Schwietert Collazo It's important to remember that in Mexico there is no single party that ever has a majority in the House or the Senate.
So what the president did was to open a space for very frank dialogue, one in which we all listened to one another.
And it was from that space that the initial reform plan, ""Pacto por Mexico"" (""Pact for Mexico""), was born.
All of the reforms are important, but the one that I think has the potential to make the greatest impact on the Mexican economy is the package of energy reforms.
This set of reforms requires a fairly radical shift in approach with respect to our natural resources-namely, permitting private investment, both domestic and foreign, which opens up competition.
The idea is that this will attract capital and technology to this sector.
The size of the energy sector in Mexico is just so vast; it has an outsize impact on the rest of the Mexican economy.
We are in the implementation phase of the reforms, but there are some specific successes we can point to in the work that has been done so far.
In finance reform, for example, we were committed to making credit more accessible and more affordable, and today we can already see progress.
Before, small and medium-sized businesses did not have access to credit.
The accessibility of credit has been particularly helpful to small farmers and producers.
That background has been vital to the reform process; it has served me well, allowing me to have a close conversation with legislators.
PABLO PORCIUNCULA/AFP/GETTY IMAGES; ALMAGRO: VANDERLEI ALMEIDA/AFP/GETTY IMAGES 1 MASS PROTESTS ROCKED EVERY CORNER OF THE GLOBE IN 2014.
In Kiev and Bangkok, Hong Kong and Caracas, passionate individuals led movements that defied powerful government institutions in the hope of defining new trajectories for entire countries and populations.
Similarly, passionate individuals tested the status quo-and some sacred cows-by pushing for Scottish independence from the United Kingdom, exposing the cracks among Silicon Valley's elite, and scaring big banks with a tough, expansive vision of 21st-century financial regulations, Although their goals and tactics may not have been universally lauded, these Global Thinkers were indefatigable.
The rate of return on capital, r, will typically be higher than the rate of economic growth, Capital, then, funnels wealth toward those who already have it.
Piketty mined tax data to provide the best-lmown historical record of wealth concentrations and showed that the United States and Europe have entered a new Gilded Age, with levels of inequality not seen since before World War I The book in which Piketty sets forth these conclusions— CuTsito/ in the TwentyFirst Century— is a living symbol of the anxiety this inequality has created in the post-industrial, financialized economy.
It spent weeks at the top of best-sellers lists this year, and the book anchored heated dinner-party conversations across two continents for months.
Co-founder, Oeeupy Central With Love and Peaee; eo-founder, Seholarism \ China Hong Kong, once a British imperial prize and now China's financial center, is experiencing its most acute political tension in decades.
Since late September, thousands-and at times tens of thousands-of students, workers, and activists have taken to the streets, protesting the Chinese government's resistance to democracy in Hong Kong.
Occupy Central With Love and Peace, has provided the intellectual framework for the protests; Wong is the youthful, charismatic leader of Hong Kong's ^ most important student movement, Seholarism.
Wong and his allies of all ages aim to preserve and advance an identity that is separate from China's.
As of press time, the protests are still ongoing, but will likely soon dissolve or be dissolved.
Tai and Wong, however, show X-f that one can stand up to Beijing-even if only for a month or two.
With her face battered nearly beyond recognition, Chornovol fearlessly accused President Viktor Yanukovych— another target of her investigations— of ordering the assault and asserted that the attack would not dissuade her from going after crooked officials.
After Yanukovych fled Ukraine in February 2014, Chornovol joined the country’s new anti-corruption task force but later resigned, citing frustration with the lack of “political will ... to carry out a hard-edged, large-scale war” against graft.
Separatist leaders \ Spain; United Kingdom European separatists are a beleaguered bunch these days.
Europe’s recent history has seen states inexorably smothered by the prosperous, if stifling embrace of the European Union.
Add to that a globalized financial system, and calls for self-rule and devolution feel ever more anachronistic.
But in Catalonia and Scotland, nationalist independence movements showed a surprising resurgence in 2014 and caused a rethink of the ever-intensifying centralization of power in Europe.
LEON NEAL/AFP/GETTY IMAGES; TAI; LAM YIK FEI/GETTY IMAGES; WONG; ALEX OGLE/AFP/GETTY IMAGES UMBRELLAS: PAULA BRONSTEIN/GETTY IMAGES; FIGHTER; AHMAD AL-RUBAYE/AFP/GETTY IMAGES Cameron.
Although independence didn’t come to the Scots, they likely will now have more say over their own affairs.
In Catalonia, Oriol Junqueras, leader of the Republican Left of Catalonia, has helped push the region’s president, Artur Mas, into a headlong confrontation with Madrid over independence or at least greater political and economic autonomy.
Madrid has steadfastly refused to acknowledge Catalonia’s aspirations— which, at press time, had been reduced to a symbolic vote that the Spanish Constitutional Court suspended on Nov.— but the separatist fires are still burning in Spain’s economic engine.
Marine Le Pen had used image management and opportunistic timing to lead her extreme-right National Front party to a historic victory in the European Parliament elections, taking almost 25 percent of the French vote— more than either of France’s two major parties, whose popularity is dwindling.
In September, the National Front went on to win its first-ever French Senate seats.
Le Pen shrewdly distanced herself from her anti-Semitic father, the former National Front leader, and rebranded her party as a refuge from political dysfunction.
She voices disdain Demonstrators demanding democratic reforms take to the streets in Hong Kong on Oct., 2014.
The protests, also known as the ""Umbrella Revolution,"" began in late September. for racism, despite a heavily anti-immigration platform, and keeps her rhetorical guns trained on Brussels.
Le Pen has become something of a standard-bearer for Europe’s far-right, Euroskeptical forces— a model for how they, too, can become serious political contenders.
Combatants \ Iraq, Syria As Islamic State fighters swept through large areas of Syria and Iraq this year, Kurdish forces met them on the front lines.
The Western media have obsessed over these women, but their significance goes well beyond their gender on the battlefield.
Although Kurdish areas in the Middle East are often perceived to be progressive in their gender politics, that’s not quite the case for some communities, particularly in Iraq, where female representation in government is limited, divorced women are stigmatized, and rural families still resort to honor killings.
Eor many women, Kurdish military institutions offer refuge and are a way to resist this patriarchy.
Not only are the soldiers required to be literate, but they are also schooled in politics and human rights as part of their military training.
This spring Thomas Piketty, a 43-year-old Paris-based economist and expert on wealth and inequality, published Capital in the Twenty-First Century in English.
The book compares how wealth patterns have evolved in different countries over the past few centuries and points out that inequality has been rising almost everywhere, including in the United States.
Piketty’s academic publisher initially expected to sell only a modest number of copies.
Sales of the book were so high that it even beat out two literary adaptations of Frozen, the hit Disney film.
When Piketty appeared at literary events to discuss his work, he attracted such crowds that American media dubbed him a “rock star” economist.
Piketty’s success is a startling sign of how the Zeitgeist can sometimes shift— or, more accurately, how the framework for public debate can be reshaped suddenly to make ideas that once seemed almost irrelevant go mainstream.
A decade ago, during the heady days of the credit boom, inequality was infrequently discussed with passion outside the ranks of the political left.
It topped climate change and banking crises, among other issues, even though this was the first time inequality had ever appeared in the survey.
Around the same time, an opinion poll by the Pew Research Center showed that two -thirds of Americans think the gap between rich and poor is widening, and a report released in September showed that almost half consider this to be a “very big” problem for their country.
The concern is markedly higher than it was before the 2008 credit crisis.
In October, at a conference in Boston, United States Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen said, “Inequality in the United States greatly concern me,” before devoting part of her presentation to the topic, which was previously considered largely taboo for central bank governors.
Worldwide, according to the Factiva database of global press sources, the word “inequality” cropped up 28,000 times in the second quarter of 2014; back in 2006, during the height of the credit boom, the word only appeared 3,000-odd times.
Back in 1980, according to economist Emmanuel Saez, the top I percent of Americans garnered “just” 10 percent of all income; these days, he finds, the ratio is around 22 percent because salaries have become less equal and the wealthy have enjoyed capital gains.
This divergence was partially concealed during the credit boom because middle-class Americans borrowed heavily to maintain consumption and offset their stagnant wages.
To a certain extent, this was also true in places such as the United Kingdom.
When the bubble burst, however, the divergence was revealed with cruel clarity.
The Bank of England, for example, calculates that the richest 5 percent of Britons have captured 40 percent of the benefits of quantitative easing since 2009.
The pattern in the United States is almost certainly similar, if not more extreme, though the Federal Reserve has not hitherto had the courage to publish comparable research.
The shifting debate on inequality also reflects a stealthy change in how the craft of economics is perceived.
Anything that really mattered in policy terms, it was thought, could be plugged into a spreadsheet or algorithm.
The most important digits pertained to productivity or growth; a big GDP number was considered the holy grail.
These days, however, it is clear that these digits aren’t the only things that matter.
The quality of growth and the distribution of its benefits are important too.
A world that is growing, in economic terms, but doing so in a profoundly unequal manner behaves differently from other, previous models.
When most of the gains from wealth are concentrated in the hands of the rich, those individuals’ propensity to spend is different from the pattern that arises when the middle class is enjoying prosperity.
Namely, rich people spend a far smaller proportion of their income than poorer families do.
To put it crudely, it is harder to reflate an economy on the backs of luxury goods than on those of middleclass cars.
More importantly, the growing gap between the haves and have-nots creates new political risks that cannot be ignored.
These parties and their popularity are born from, among other things, economic distress, emergent forms of local identity, and people’s enhanced ability to organize themselves via social media.
As the wealth divide widens, it becomes less clear to the poor that they have a stake in preserving the status quo, and mainstream politicians, in turn, struggle to create sensible, long-term trade-off strategies for the economy.
In short, what matters today in economics is not simply data, but questions of social cohesion and trust— or “credit,” in the old-fashioned Latin sense.
Traditionally these “soft” issues were considered the preserve of social scientists, not economists.
But it is rapidly becoming clear that they are important to economic growth.
It is little wonder that many of Wall Street’s largest banks are hiring analysts skilled at discussing cultural and political trends or that ratings agencies such as Standard & Poor’s are placing a new emphasis on “social” factors, such as perceived inequality, when they analyze economic and fiscal risks.
If Western economies do start to grow again, the anxiety about political risk, cohesion, and credit may seep away.
After all, people care less about how a pie is being divided if that pie is expanding fast.
An economist affiliated with the Palo Alto Research Center and the Santa Fe Institute, Arthur analyzes the impact of digitization on the economy.
He estimates that if all the economic activity now performed by digital networks around the world, without any human intervention, were added up, it would soon be equivalent to the economic output of the entire United States economy.
This activity is replacing a vast swath of middle-class jobs, leaving most gains of growth in the hands of a skilled, highly paid elite— and it is only trending upward, with no end in sight.
Or, to put it another way, to understand why Piketty’s book struck such a chord in 2014, think about how Capital has been sold.
Once upon a time, it would have been retailed predominately by salesclerks staffing bookstores; today it is as likely to be sold online, with just a few low-paid warehouse staff and postal workers handling copies.
Six years after the start of the financial crisis, not that much has changed for the world’s big banks.
Banks almost exclusively finance their operations through debt backed by governments; but rather than relying on loans, Admati argues, banks should behave more like other companies, relying on a mix of equity and debt to finance their work.
The ideas she and her co-author laid out in their recent book— The Bankers’ New Clothes: What’s Wrong With Banking and What to Do About ft— reached President Barack Obama; she testified before the Senate Banking Committee; and Federal Reserve Vice Chair Stanley Fischer has praised her proposed reforms, which could drastically reduce government loans when the next financial crisis rolls around.
Lawslcy also has attacked Standard Chartered for laundering money for Iran, and in August he slapped the bank with a $300 million fine for failing to crack down on such transactions.
Public protector \ South Africa When he appointed her public nrotvTor in 2009, South African President Jacob Zuma couldn't have known that he would wind up at the business end of Thuli Madonsela's formidable will and tactical wiles.
The report found that Zuma had unduly benefited from state-funded improvements worth $23 million to his estate.
But at home her efforts have brought insults and scorn from those who fear her most the powerful.
BEN GABBE/GETTY IMAGES FORTIME VENEZUELA: JUAN BARRETO/AFP/GETTY IMAGES; ABASSI: FETHI BELAID/AFP/GETTY IMAGES Will party, is the chief thorn in Caracas’s side.
Demanding new policies to combat high crime rates, record inflation, and food shortages, thousands amassed.
In jail ever since, he now faces up to 13 years in prison on charges of seeking to topple President Nicolas Maduro.
While many of Maduro’s critics favor dialogue with the current government as Venezuela’s path forward, Lopez’s more confrontational approach has resonated.
According to a recent poll, his approval rating has risen above 49 percent.
That makes him— even behind bars— the most popular figure in Venezuela’s long-splintered opposition.
Former chief, People’s Democratic Reform Committee \ Thailand A former Thai deputy prime minister for security affairs, Suthep Thaugsuban has been embroiled in a range of scandals, including his role in a violent crackdown on protesters in 2010 that left some 90 people dead.
Yet his recent feat of political mobilization may overshadow even that taint.
In late 2013, he prompted thousands into Bangkok’s streets to demand the resignation of then-Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra, the sister of exiled former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra.
Suthep’s supporters destabilized the capital for months and ultimately helped oust Yingluck’s government.
The ruling junta briefly detained him following the coup; he now lives as a monk in southern Thailand, far from Bangkok politics.
Journalist \ San Francisco If there is a scribe of Silicon Valley, it’s Kara Swisher.
A longtime technology journalist, Swisher covered aol back when it was run behind a Virginia car dealership; today she is feared by tech titans the world over for her uncanny ability to expose their dirty laundry.
She helped bring down Mozilla CEO Brendan Rich for his opposition to same-sex marriage, and she made Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg squirm during a public interrogation about his company’s privacy practices.
This year, after breaking with Rupert Murdoch’s News Corp, Swisher launched Re/code, a technology news and conference start-up.
Known for her fearlessness and wit, Swisher writes to inform and empower technology consumers.
She also has emerged as an outspoken advocate for women in the industry.
Union leader \ Tunisia Houcine Abassi tirelessly and cunningly unified moderates and Islamists, settling entrenched grudges and using the threat of protests to secure the passage of the road map to Tunisia’s new political order.
Without Abassi, the country’s new constitution, signed into law on Jan., may not have been.
Then, in 2013, he directed hundreds of hours of arbitration to distill a consensus.
The road map led to the dismissal of the entire cabinet, the appointment of a new prime minister, and the creation of an independent election commission.
That Tunisia is the only post-Arab Spring country in relatively stable condition can be credited largely to Abassi’s gifts as a unifier.
G7 environmental progress for these Global Thinkers, who are showing that it is possible for a large, bustling city to be free of cars, for a small tribe to shield its homeland from powerful energy interests, and for trees-just trees-to protect a country from catastrophe.
Botanist \ Japan The 2011 tsunami in Japan overwhelmed concrete barriers along the country's coastline and destroyed some 120,000 buildings.
Yet nearby coastal Shinto shrines, nestled in forests, remained largely untouched.
To botanist Akira Miyawaki, this showed that trees could be the keys to averting future catastrophe.
Miyawaki has been restoring forests for decades and has been involved with planting some 40 million trees in 15 countries.
Now, in his home country, he is using tsunami debris to construct beds in which to plant oak and other tree species native to Japan-together the trees will act as a tidal-wave shield.
Under the banner of the Great Forest Wall Project, at least one forest has already been completed in a city near Fukushima; and over 10 years, some 90 million seedlings will be planted.
Miyawaki also hopes to export the shield model to other countries with vulnerable coastlines.
Activist I Peru The Ashaninka people have lived in South America’s Ene River valley for centuries, surviving Spanish conquest and civil war.
But that nearly changed in 2010, when the governments of Peru and Brazil agreed to build hydroelectric dams that would have produced jobs and energy in the region— and also would have flooded the indigenous group’s homeland.
As president of the organization Central Ashaninka del Rio Ene, Buendia has united her people in a campaign against the dams.
She has filed lawsuits insisting that both national and international law require authorities to consult the Ashaninka before starting projects that affect the group— and she has kept the dams at bay for four years.
Eor her exceptional activism, Buendia received the prestigious Goldman Environmental Prize this year.
Atmospheric scientist; econom ist; atmospheric scientist \ Lubbock, Texas; United Kingdom; San Diego In fighting the ill effects of climate change, scientists and religious leaders might seem like awkward partners.
Today, she continues to argue that protecting natural resources is in line with conservative Christian values and has emerged as the most prominent religious climate communicator in the United States.
Earlier this year, the scientists had met with Pope Erancis at a Vatican sustainability conference.
BY BILL MCKIBBEN illustration by Emmanuel polanco TTI^ ES 2014 SEEMED like AN exercise i; extremity, a test to see JLLM IIUW -rlr already terrible trends could be pushed.
The violent world to which people. sadly, have become accustomed felt even uglier when the Islamic State began beheading prisoners with knives and posting videos of the murders online.
Meanwhile, as poor people around the globe continued to die of preventable diseases, the ghastly Ebola epidemic emerged, claiming thousands of lives and turning whole countries into de facto no-go zones.
Unless something remarkable and unexpected happens this December, 2014 will rank as the hottest year since humankind started officially recording temperatures in the late 19th century.
The year boasted the warmest May, June, August, and September ever recorded.
Humanity’s relatively short spree of burning oil, natural gas, and coal has already changed the pH of every ocean, melted most of the Arctic’s summer sea ice, and set the Earth’s greatest glaciers oozing.
Put another way, humans have taken the biggest physical features on the planet and broken them.
The record heat of 2014, however, coupled with other recent developments, indicates that this devastation isn’t just getting worse— it may be unstoppable.
While the drought has certainly stoked political debates, particularly in California, about who controls water resources and how, imagine if such an intense dry spell had occurred in a far less stable place.
Great ideas are represented on this list of Global Thinkers, from making Helsinki (and eventually other major cities) free of personal cars, to mitigating the impact of tsunamis and storms by planting more coastal trees, to organizing local populations against powerful interests to block dam construction, mining, and other environmental dangers.
Katharine Hayhoe, for instance, has shown great skill in reaching evangelical Americans, a group traditionally resistant to hearing the climate change message.
What’s more, 2014 marked a turning point in the scale and impact of the grassroots fight against climate change.
On Sept. 21, demonstrations in 2,800 cities around the planet culminated in a massive march in Manhattan, which I had a hand in organizing. with more than 300,000 people streaming down Sixth Avenue— the biggest demonstration about any issue that the United States had seen in some years.
That same day, in a late-night announcement at the Cathedral Church of St.
John the Divine, the Rockefeller Brothers Eund announced that it was beginning the process of divesting from fossil fuels.
Great universities, including Stanford, have already taken this step, and so have some huge religious bodies.
But when a fund set up by the Rockefeller family, which accumulated the greatest original oil fortune the world has ever known, decides that its traditional investments are both immoral and unwise, a tide has started to turn.
Perhaps one day historians will decide that Sept., 2014, was the day that marked the beginning of the end of the fossil fuel era.
The question is how fast that end will come, and in the answer probably rests the fate of humanity.
In another 2014 record, there were days this summer when Germany generated three-quarters of its power from the wind and sun, demonstrating that what the world lacks in addressing climate change is less technical prowess than political will.
On the other hand, the transition to a world without fossil fuels could drag on too long, to the point where carbon dioxide overwhelms the planet’s climatic system.
In October, Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England, pointed out that if catastrophic climate change is to be avoided, the “vast majority” of the planet’s fossil fuel reserves must be considered “unburnable” starting now.
That would conflict, however, with the business plans of major players in the world’s richest industry, from Gazprom to Exxon Mobil to Shell to Coal India to Shanxi Coking.
In other words, shutting off the tap cold turkey is not going to happen.
Even finding a moderate pace at which it’s possible to at least ameliorate the worst consequences of what humanity has done to the environment can feel like an impossible fight.
Powerfully and inexorably, whether growing hotter, sloughing off ice, or withholding water, she keeps showing the folly of humanity’s ways.
Above all, perhaps 2014 will go down in the books as the year when the costs of short-term thinking truly began to sink into people’s brains and inspire action.
Composed of 32 atolls and one island— which average only about 2 meters above sea level— it is among the countries most vulnerable to devastation from climate change.
Given the impact of rising sea levels and increased danger from storm surges, some have predicted that the country will become uninhabitable in as little as 30 years.
Teitiota introduced the term “climate refugee” last year, when he requested asylum in New Zealand, arguing that not only had high tides destroyed the fisherman’s livelihood, but unsanitary water and rising tensions among locals had made the island too dangerous for his family.
In seeking refuge, Teitiota insistently focused the world’s attention on the victims of rising tides and their need for legal remedies.
Teitiota failed to convince New Zealand to grant him refugee status in 2013 and his appeal was shot down in May of this year, but his quest isn’t over.
His lawyer, Michael Kidd, says they are considering taking his case before the United Nations Human Rights Committee in Geneva.
At the moment of the Big Bang, the universe suddenly expanded with a massive burst of energy. faster than the speed of light.
So goes the decades-old theory of cosmic inflation, for which John Kovac and his collaborators— using a telescope perched on the South Pole— provided hard evidence for the first time this year.
They documented traces of that moment in swirls of polarized light in the background radiation that suffuses the cosmos.
If Kovac’s findings hold up— and early indications look good— they will be remembered as one of the greatest achievements in the history of physics.
That the answer lay in swirls of microwave radiation is itself a form of poetry.
People would have less need for cars, which could mean fewer emissions and a cleaner city, not to mention territory reclaimed from parldng decks and street spaces.
Finnish engineer Sonja Heikkila dreamed up this very transportation infrastructure for the 21st century.
Called “mobility on demand,” the 24-year-old’s idea is to bundle various modes of travel and allow customers to compare options with the touch of a screen.
Helsinld is already moving forward with Heilddla’s plan, designing pilot programs for 2015 and aiming to have mobility on demand fully in place by 2025.
Environmental activist, lawmaker] Indonesia For more than a decade, Aleta Baun battled marble mining in West Timor.
A member of the Molo, an indigenous people who traditionally venerate their natural habitat, she organized demonstrations against the marble industry's environmental impact.
By 2010, marble-mining companies had withdrawn from four sites in West Timor.
Now Baun, who won a 2013 Goldman Environmental Prize, is moving her fight off the rocks.
This April, the woman known as ""Mama Aleta"" won a seat in the parliament of her home province, which has a wealth of natural resources in addition to marble, including gold, oil, and gas.
She hopes to influence policy-and take on other companies if necessary.
NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2014 COURTESY OF GOLDMAN PRIZE T The Innovators IN TODAY'S WORLD, INNOVATIONS EMERGE AT A RATE THAT IS I nothing short of fast and furious.
And whiie some inventions I may be cooi, sieek, and handy, others have the capacity to I transform entire fieids and individuai iives, The scientists, I engineers, and entrepreneurs in this category are deveioping I rapid, comprehensive biood tests that couid change the face of I preventive heaith.
They aren't just making new I things; they are defining the contours of humanity's future.
Nowadays, it’s fairly easy to 3-D print a model of the United States Capitol or a smartphone case.
Materials scientist Jennifer Lewis is developing a broad range of functional “inks” that contain ingredients ranging from human cells to metal compounds.
These inks could bring 3-D printing to the cutting edge of various fields, from renewable energy to biomedical engineering.
In February, her team reported that it had printed cellular tissue constructs with embedded blood vessels— a step toward the manufacture of artificial organs.
Lewis’s work shows that 3-D printing won’t just change how people make things.
Janet Iwasa enhanced her skills in complex 3-D animation at a Hollywood training program for workers in the film and video game industries.
Aerospace engineer \ India In September, India’s space agency brought an orbiter to Mars for less than the cost of a high-end Hollywood blockbuster.
It was the cheapest interplanetary voyage ever, the first successful Asian mission to Mars, and the only national Mars project to reach the red planet on its first try.
Annadurai’s work at the Indian Space Research Organisation offers a new model for space exploration.
Lightening payloads, limiting experimental goals, and condensing production schedules, as MOM did, could help other space agencies slim the fat budgets that plague so many missions.
NASA’s most recent Mars orbiter, for example, cost around $671 million.
For about a tenth of that, Annadurai’s team showed that cosmic achievements don’t have to breal< the bank.
Biologists often resort to simple renderings— a virus might become a circle, a membrane a line.
Iwasa’s Flipbook, which relies on open-source technology, streamlines the animation process so that new users can create and share a project within hours, accelerating the research process and encouraging scrutiny of hypotheses more detailed than 2-D models could ever allow.
Much about Hiv’s life cycle remains unknown, and detailed representations could guide scientists to new research questions.
In this and other ways, Iwasa’s work might literally add a new dimension to the study of microbiology.
In 2012, Emmanuelle Charpentier and Jennifer Doudna were among the co-authors of a seminal paper on a gene-editing technique that could produce new treatments for diseases ranging from Hiv to Huntington’s.
Known as CRISPR/Cas9, the approach allows scientists to snip genetic code letter by letter with a programmable enzyme.
It’s the most versatile and precise gene-editing method discovered yet, and it promises revolutionary, if controversial, treatments for medical problems long thought intractable.
Scientists could potentially disrupt, or knock out, genetic 74 NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2014 LEWIS; COURTESY OF HARVARO UNIVERSITY; IWASA; OOURTESY OF TEOTALKS/RYAN LASH MANJUNATH KIRAN/AFP/GETTY IMAGES conditions like Down syndrome from embryos in vitro, for example, or they could edit the DNA of blood cells of adults affected by sickle cell anemia.
Today, on opposite sides of the Atlantic, Charpentier and Doudna are separately racing to develop CRISPR/Cas9 into commercial therapies.
Backed by millions of dollars in venture capital, Doudna’s Massachusettsbased firm, Editas Medicine, and Charpentier’s CRISPR Therapeutics, in Switzerland, are staffed with some of the biggest names in genetics.
In 2010, Russia and the United States inked the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, agreeing to limit their number of deployed strategic nuclear warheads and reducing their inventories to 1,550 each by 2018.
A great move toward a peaceful world, but a tricky one for future weapons inspectors, who aren’t allowed access to specific information about the warheads that are to be destroyed— that information is classified.
Scientists and engineers work on a Mars orbiter vehicle at the Indian Space Research Organisation's satellite center in Bangalore.
Historically, this problem has been resolved by trashing the systems that deliver the warheads— bombers, submarines, and ballistic missiles.
But once nuclear talks pivot from strategic to tactical and non-deployed weapons and focus on actual warheads rather than delivery systems, verification becomes even trickier.
So Boaz Barak, Alexander Glaser, and Robert Goldston designed a “zero-knowledge” verification system to compare a warhead under inspection with a known true warhead without ever revealing top-secret information about the device’s composition.
If the number of neutrons that passes through it is the same as that for an actual known warhead, it’s real.
The trio’s work, published in Nature this year, could “change the course of nuclear disarmament worldwide,” Bruce Blair, co-founder of Global Zero, which aims for the elimination of all nuclear weapons, said in a statement.
When exposed to sunlight, rust-based photoelectrodes can split water into its elemental components, producing clean, storable hydrogen.
It only works when rust is layered paper-thin, which allows sunlight to bounce away.
Florent Boudoire, Artur Braun, Edwin Constable, Jakob Heier, and Rita Toth found the answer in moths.
CEO, Siregex; CEO, Via Afrika Publishers \ Ivory Coast; South Africa As education grows ever more entwined with technology, Thierry N'Doufou and Christina Watson are bringing e-learning tools to African classrooms and libraries; N'Doufou by introducing Africa's first educational tablet, and Watson by making electronic learning materials more widely available.
This year, N'Doufou's team is deploying the Qelasy tablet, which he calls a ""digital backpack,"" to pilot programs in Ivory Coast and Morocco.
Qelasy can hold a student's entire curriculum and provide a kid-friendly, interactive experience.
Watson heads Via Afrika Publishers, a Cape Town-based company that is working to expand schools' access to e-learning materials.
Breadline Africa and the Nelson Mandela Centre of Memory, to launch their first digital centers-libraries built from upcycled materials and equipped with both books and tablets-in rural South Africa.
By the mid-1990s, however, after companies had invested millions of dollars, interest | fizzled.
Big developers failed to j design a cheap headset that j immersed the wearer in a convincing 3-D world.
Then a [ home-schooled teenager in Long ' Beach, California— who passed his time by tinkering with any VR headset he could get his hands on— stepped in.
In 2010, Palmer Luckey created his first | virtual reality headset, with a j 90-degree visual field, nearly j twice that of previous devices.
The headset that his team has developed in the four years since ; could sell for between $200 and $400, as compared with the $1,000 to $50,000 models currently used largely for military and industrial applications.
A 2012 Kickstarter campaign raised $2. million for Luckey’s company, Oculus VR, and this , March, Facebook made a deal to acquire it for $2 billion.
By attaching tungsten oxide spheres— in effect, artificial moth eyes— to photoelectrodes, the Swiss team was able to trap light under a nano-thin layer of rust.
The advance opens up a new method for hydrogen-fuel production and could let the next generation of solar technologies take wing.
Founder, Oculus VR \ Greater Los Angeles A generation ago, virtual reality seemed to hold great The Oculus Rift, a virtual reality headset, could be available on the commercial market within months.
The 30-year-old CEO of Theranos has spent the past 11 years developing cheap, straightforward blood tests for everything from cholesterol to viral infections.
The Theranos process uses as little as one-thousandth of the amount of blood normally required for such testing, drawn from a finger prick and sent off immediately for analysis.
Holmes is dead set on changing the way preventive medicine works by providing a quick but comprehensive picture of a patient’s health.
In the fall of 2013, Theranos penned a deal with Walgreens to collect blood at the chain’s pharmacies, with the goal of eventually expanding to ah of its roughly 8,200 locations.
This was a first step toward Holmes’s goal of making personal health information available within five miles of every American at a fraction of what hospitals charge.
CEO, Qualcomm \ San Diego Traditional smartphone chips are computing powerhouses, but they have a hard time recognizing patterns— and learninglike the human mind does.
Qualcomm, a semiconductor company headed by Steven Mohenkopf, could be the first to introduce brain-like chips on a broad commercial scale, as early as next year.
By mimicking the brain’s simultaneous processing patterns, Qualcomm’s so-called “neuromorphic” chips, currently under development, could bring adaptive learning to devices such as smartphones and navigation systems.
A phone could learn to go silent when you go to bed, or to recognize acquaintances in your photos— without programming specialized for those tasks.
WaterGen \ Israel In Israel, where the Negev Desert covers more than half the country’s land area, water is more than just a resource— it’s a national security priority.
That’s why Arye Kohavi developed devices to turn desert air into potable water.
Kohavi’s team isn’t the first to develop such technology, but its devices, Kohavi says, are more efficient than earlier models.
The machine cools incoming air to extract liquid water, and after the water is culled, it passes through a filtration system, yielding potable liquid.
The cooling mechanism— usually an energy drain in other machines— is partially self-sustaining by recycling the already cooled air.
Water-Gen has sold devices to seven militaries around the world, including the United States armed forces.
Silent Circle \ National Harbor, Md., Switzerland Mike Janke and Phil Zimmermann are on a mission to make personal electronic communications truly private.
They teamed up— along with the group’s Chief Technology Officer Jon Cahas— in 2011 to found their company.
Silent Circle, which encrypts voice calls, text messages, and attachments through mobile and desktop data services and calling plans.
In October 2012, the company released a group of mobile encryption apps that allow users, among other things, to send text messages that quickly evaporate.
Silent Circle launched another app that can transfer encrypted files securely between smart devices.
Janke and Zimmermann’s new calling plan, which launched this summer, broadens the confidentiality that the co-founders consider a basic right.
Silent Circle’s technology was used this year by Ulcrainian protesters evading their government’s surveillance systems.
The company is also providing privacy protections for Blackphone, the world’s first smartphone optimized for privacy, developed in collaboration with the Spanish start-up Geeksphone.
In October, the company announced plans to release their first privacyfocused tablet.
A member of the Civic Sector of the Euromaidan, a pro-democracy group, she was a leader among the thousands of protesters who spent the long winter months demanding change in Kiev.
Since February, Ukraine’s democratic revolution has entered the arguably tougher stage of ensuring meaningful government reform, and Hopko is again on the front lines.
Already, the government has embraced some of the policies; laws on media freedom and public procurement, for instance, passed in April.
Activists claim that legislators have failed to show up for votes and that they focus too much on personal interests.
Director, Syrian Observatory for Human Rights; director, B’Tselem \ Britain; Israel As Syria’s civil war dragged into its fourth year, with the death count topping 191,000, Israel and Hamas traded blows for 50 days over the summer, leaving more than 2,100 people dead, the vast majority of them civilians.
Rami Abdul Rahman and Hagai El-Ad have remained defiantly committed to documenting the atrocities of war.
El-Ad took the helm of Israel’s premier human rights organization, B’Tselem, just six weeks before war broke out.
Although the assault on Gaza was wildly popular in Israel, he insisted on accountability for harm done to civilians.
Through his Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, Abdul Rahman, who is in exile, has monitored every death and military development in Syria since the war began, becoming a crucial information source for international human rights groups, journalists, and the United States Defense Department, among others.
When the United States bombed Syria, Abdul Rahman’s group counted those casualties too.
With hatreds apparently deepening in much of the Middle East, Abdul Rahman and El-Ad share an evermore-urgent, yet increasingly thankless mission.
As a teenager, Zainab Bangura almost bled to death during the procedure.
Advocacy and support systemswhere they exist at all-are typically designed for women, and victimized men who speak up may even risk prosecution in countries where homosexuality is a crime.
As the United Nations special representative on sexual violence in conflict, Zainab Bangura is working to bring attention to this long-overlooked problem.
In a March Security Council report, she highlighted sexual violence against men and boys in countries such as Colombia, Afghanistan, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Catholic priests \ Central African Republic In January, a Christian militia started slaughtering Muslim civilians and torching their homes in Bossemptele, a small town in the interior of the Central African Republic.
The attacks were reprisals for crimes committed over several months by Muslim rebels, whose leadership had seized control of Bangui, the capital, in March 2013.
As Christian fighters hunted Muslims, Father Bernard Kinvi and Father Patrick Nainangue searched for survivors to protect, while also retrieving and burying the dead.
In all, more than 1,000 people found shelter in their church’s compound.
Although the African Union, France, and, most recently, the United Nations have committed peacekeepers to quell attacks, more than 5,000 people have been Idlled in the Central African Republic since December 2013.
Kinvi and Nainangue helped most of Bossemptele’s Muslims flee to neighboring countries, and they continue to shelter those few who remain.
LENA KLIMOVA, YEVGENY VITISHKO FOR TRAINING THE OLYMPIC SPOTLIGHT ON ROSSIAN DISSENT Activists I Russia With the world’s eyes on Sochi, Russia, Lena Klimova and Yevgeny Vitishko helped expose the oppressive forces behind the pageantry of the 2014 Winter Olympics.
Just prior to the games, the Kremlin undertook a severe crackdown on activists in Sochi and around the country. detaining dozens of dissenters for minor or trumped-up offenses.
LGBT rights activist Klimova, the creator of Children 404, a web support group for gay teens, was charged with promoting gay propaganda to minors.
Klimova’s case was ultimately dismissed, but Vitishko, whose advocacy dealt more specifically with the Olympics, is still serving time.
In February, five days into the games, a court upheld an earlier decision to imprison the environmental activist for three years.
He had previously documented the dire environmental impact of the games.
Klimova and Vitishko’s treatment at the hands of the Russian authorities was a reminder that, beneath their symbolism of international peace and unity, the 2014 Olympics had a dark underbelly.
Judge I Guatemala No national tribunal had ever brought genocide charges against its own former head of state until Judge Iris Yassmin Barrios Aguilar tried Gen.
Pians changed when Tohti was detained at the airport by security ojficials and barred from leaving China.
His daughter went alone and ultimately became a student at the university.
She has not seen him since, but until his arrest in January, they spoke via Skype every day.
Economist, activist \ China Over the past two years, clashes between citizens and police have reportedly killed hundreds in China's Xinjiang region, a part of the country that has witnessed sporadic interethnic violence for decades.
The perpetrators are terrorists and secessionists seeking to undermine the state.
For speaking so candidly, Tohti was arrested in January on the spurious charge of separatism; this fall, he was sentenced to life in prison.
The silencing of such a moderate voice marks a troubling setback in the debate over Uighur rights.
Activists I Colombia As armed gangs vie for power in the iatest manifestation of Coiombia's decades-iong civii conflict, they continue to torture, rape, and kiii women to show their strength.
Since 2010, a group of brave voiunteers known as the ""Butterflies"" has been working to repair the damage.
The voiunteers, many of whom once suffered abuse, sheiter victims in their homes, educate them about their rights, find them medicai and psychoiogicai care, and heip them report crimes to authorities.
Despite receiving threats from gangs, the group has managed to heip more than 1,000 women and famiiies.
In September, Gioria Amparo, Maritza Aspriiia Cruz, and Mery Medina accepted an annuai prize from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on behaif of the Butterflies.
The Ixil were among Rios Montt’s key targets during his time in power amid Guatemala’s 36-year civil war; the country’s army carried out a brutal scorched-earth campaign against leftist rebels, burning villages, carrying out massacres, and raping women and girls.
In May 2013, Barrios sentenced Rios Montt to 80 years in prison, vindicating his victims’ long search for justice.
Shortly after the mling, allies of the old regime struck back against Barrios and her colleagues.
That same month, the Constitutional Court invalidated the sentence and scheduled a new trial for early 2015.
In April of this year, Guatemala’s bar association suspended Barrios from practicing law for a year in a move that Barrios and her supporters consider politically motivated.
Abolitionist \ Mauritania More than three decades after Mauritania became the last country to abolish slavery, the practice remains endemic there.
With some 150,000 people enslaved in a population of some 3. million, the Muslimmajority country has the world’s highest incidence of slavery.
Some of the country’s abolitionists favor dialogue with the government, but not Biram Dah Abeid.
Mauritania’s most prominent anti-slavery activist has staged hunger strikes, burned Islamic texts that he contends legitimize the practice, and even fought a policeman who failed to arrest a slaveholder.
This March, Mauritania’s government adopted a United Nations plan to end slavery once and for all, having last year set up an agency to address the crisis.
Attention to unaccompanied minors crossing into the United States surged this year.
Kids in Need of Defense , have been working with these children since 2008.
The group pairs pro bono lawyers with migrant minors from Latin America who would otherwise lack the means to defend themselves in court.
With legal representation, the migrants are several times more likely to be permitted to stay in the country, kind’s efforts became all the more significant this summer, when, by July 2014, more than 57,000 unaccompanied minors had already poured into the United States, partly due to gangand drug-related violence.
KIND has trained a network of more than 5,000 lawyers— many of them accustomed to working with corporate clients and unfamiliar with immigration law— to navigate the complexities of the children’s cases.
Feminist \ China Talldng about gender-based violence may be taboo in Chinese society, but it’s one taboo that Xiao Meili has walked all over— literally.
From September 2013 to March 2014, the activist treld<ed from Beijing to Guangzhou, or more than 1,300 miles, to galvanize people’s support and petition local governments, educational institutions, and police bureaus to reform gender-based violence policies and disclose related statistics.
Nearly a fourth of married women in China are victims of domestic violence. according to the All-China Women’s Federation, but many of these incidents remain unreported.
Fighting that assumption, she works with local feminist groups and helps to organize demonstrations; on Valentine’s Day in 2012, she and two others donned bloodspattered wedding dresses to protest domestic violence.
Over the following year, university students protested in major cities, garnering widespread attention and making “bloody wedding dress” a well-known Internet meme in China.
LEADING GLOBAL THINKERS 81 The Ch mniniprs A GOOD STORY ALMOST ALWAYS INVOLVES AN INTRIGUING PLOTANO skillfully drawn characters, but the way a tale is delivered can nnake it truly exceptional.
These Global Thinkers are masters of storytelling forms, whether they are live-tweeting the events of war, empowering marginalized populations to report news through something as simple as a phone call, explaining the nature of the universe in the 1,000 most common words in the English language, or weaving humor into televised coverage of the world's most pressing issues.
They are modern-day raconteurs, telling people what they need to know— and often using groundbreaking platforms to do it.
HAJOOJ KUKA FILMMAKER, SUMN Interview by Jake Scobey-Thal The creation of South Sudan was the result of a failure to create a Sudanese identity that encompasses everybody.
If you just go to Khartoum, the capital of Sudan, and then go to Juba, the capital of South Sudan, you will get the idea that these people aren't connected.
But if you take the route, starting from Khartoum and going slowly south to Juba, you realize that these communities, ethnically and culturally, change gradually.
There is actually a very strong collective identity between Sudan and South Sudan.
And then the Antonovs-the Russian-made airplanes that the government employs to homh the Nuha Mountains and Blue Nile region-come and shell the area.
When you are living there, you can almost forget that the country is at war.
First, the government can peacefully hand over power to a transitional government that calls for a national dialogue.
Fourth, a rebel group manages to overpower the government and take power.
The last three options are better left to the Sudanese people to accomplish.
The first option can be achieved if enough pressure is placed on the already weak Sudanese government.
This is a peaceful road to achieving democracy in Sudan and should be the official stand of Western governments.
Founder, CGNet Swara \ India In the early 2000s, while covering a decades-long Maoist insurgency in Chhattisgarh state, bbc producer Shuhhranshu Choudhary realized that local residents lacked the technology and literacy skills to share news and information with each other, and with the outside world.
So he left his job and, in 2010, launched the mobile news service CGNet Swara in a country with 23 official languages— and where less than 7 percent of people have access to computers, but 70 percent have cell phones.
Covering everything from local corruption to national elections, Swara’s stories have been picked up by major international media.
In fact, one account of police violence led to a United Nations report and prompted the Indian Supreme Court to demand an investigation.
In March, Choudhary beat out leaker Edward Snowden for the Google Digital Activism Award.
Novelist I Unknown There are no known photographs of Italian novelist Elena Eerrante.
She or he— the name is a pseudonym— has never appeared in public, at least not as such.
But when Eerrante says, as the author did via email in an August interview with Vogue, that “in fiction it’s possible to sweep away all the veils,” it’s convincing.
Filmmaker \ Sudan Eor the displaced in the Blue Nile and Nuba Mountain regions of Sudan— victims of a conflict between the government and various rebel groups— life vacillates between feeling calm and feeling hellish.
This is the reality that filmmaker Hajooj Kuka captures in his award-winning 2014 film Beats of the Antonov.
Departing from traditional documentary reporting about conflict, Kuka tells the story of Sudan’s internally displaced people through a series of nonlinear vignettes in camps, interspersing footage of government shelling with scenes of music-maldng and dance.
While the movie is meant to shine a light on the underreported violence, it is fundamentally about what it means to be Sudanese.
The government, dominated by Sudanese Arabs, pushes a monolithic brand of national culture in a country with dozens of distinct ethnicities.
Sudan, Kuka seems to be saying, is not just at war— it is facing an identity crisis. literature’s power comes from recesses deeper and more personal than the gloss of fame.
Those Who Leave and Those Who Stay, is the third in a series tracing a bond between two women who, like the author, grew up in Naples, Italy.
It’s a raw study of the distance brought by diverging circumstances of education and family.
LEADING GLOBAL THINKERS 83 Among the words not included in Roberto Trotta’s book about the universe are physics, astronomy, cosmology, science, scientist, planet, energy, hydrogen, particle, galaxy, gravity, orbit, cosmos.
A Wall Street Revolt appearing in bookstores this spring, six governmental bodies announced investigations into the book’s subject: high-frequency trading in financial markets.
Such success was yet another reminder of Lewis’s rare ability to pinpoint and illuminate the complex practices that define current finance.
High-frequency traders buy and sell huge volumes of shares in split-second transactions.
Lewis’s most recent book argues that the practice— which in 2012 accounted for more than half the volume of shares traded in American stocks— enriches firms that contribute little to the broader economy and, in the process, leaves other investors behind.
By fusing documentary photography with her own casting, props, and scenic design, De Middel captures the essence of complex narratives.
The Afronauts, based on the true story of Zambia’s short-lived space program, De Middel transmuted vivid, patterned fabric into spacesuits and oil drums into spaceships.
This year, De Middel completed This Is What Hatred Did, a retelling of the 1954 novel My Life in the Bush of Ghosts, by Amos Tutuola, in which a Nigerian boy flees violence and spends 30 years in the bush among Yoruba spirits.
De Middel chose Makoko, a Lagos slum, as her visual metaphor for that mythical landscape.
ROBERTO TROTTA FOR JUNKING ASTRONOMY'S Theoretical cosmologist \ United Kingdom The origins and destiny of the universe are hard to explain.
One Day I Will Write About This Place, Wainaina describes missing the chance to share his sexuality with his mother before she died.
The essay was a controversial sensation-a ""gay bombshell,"" according to Nairobi's Daily Notion-as Wainaina joined a very small group of prominent, openly gay African figures.
It was intended as pushback against violations of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender rights across sub-Saharan Africa.
Uganda's Parliament had recently passed its infamous Anti-Homosexuality Act, and Nigeria had just criminalized same-sex relationships.
Mathematician \ Palo Alto, Calif By the time she completed her doctorate at age 27, Maryam Mirzakhani’s contributions to pure mathematics had earned her the praise of scholars around the world.
Among other subjects, Mirzakhani studies abstract surfaces, shapes that exist outside three-dimensional space.
Try measuring multiholed doughnuts on which straight lines can loop back on themselves (but sometimes don’t) or tracking the movement of a theoretical billiard ball through spaces with limitless configurations of edges.
Although highly abstract, her work could influence the direction of other areas in pure mathematics and theoretical physics.
Mirzakhani’s office is scattered with sketches of the shapes she studies.
John Oliver uses his comedic gifts and his team’s rigorous reporting to put interview subjects in a pitiless hot seat.
His 30-minute, Sunday night slot premiered with the comedian asking former National Security Agency Director Keith Alexander why Americans should trust the agency when Oliver himself would abuse its power if given the chance.
By staffing up with pros to dig through tax records and track down experts, Oliver’s segments blur the line between satire and reporting.
After he disparaged Thailand’s strict restrictions on critiques of its royal family, the country’s military government identified Oliver as a threat who is “undermining the royal institution,” according to a document obtained by Vice News.
Its premise, that many Americans prejudicially associate African-Americans with crime, was part of the country’s sociopolitical conversation long before the shooting of Michael Brown in Eerguson, Missouri, this summer.
By bringing experimental evidence to bear on the issue, however, Eberhardt’s work breaks new ground by showing just how deeply entrenched racial biases are.
She also has shown that test subjects are more likely to associate images related to crime, such as guns, with black faces than with white ones, even if those subjects see the faces for mere milliseconds.
With this in-depth understanding of racial bias, Eberhardt, awarded a MacArthur “genius” grant in September, has begun advising police departments about how best to avoid harmful, subconscious perceptions.
As a child, Maryam Mirzakhani dreamed of one day becoming a fiction writer.
LEADING GLOBAL THINKERS 85 MAXIMIZING MINIMALISM ILLUSTRATION BY JOHN POBOJEWSKI / THIRST Call it an exercise in creative restraint; In his 2014 book, The Edge of the Sky: All You Need to Know About the AII-There-ls, theoretical cosmologist and Global Thinker Roberto Trotta describes the origins and future of the universe using only the 1,000 most common words in the English language.
All the words in the book were analyzed, excluding the most common conjunctions, prepositions, pronouns, and articles (for example, ""or,"" ""out,"" ""she,"" and ""the"") and formal names.
Coincidentally, if phrased together, this is what the universe, in Trotta's terms, would be called if it ceased to exist.
V y .-t’ N V V 86 NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2014 J -A-, ^ i» f , ^ , ■* % '^ <*> O lO ^ S O ^ -^ ^ e -f 13 5; ^ UP LfJ IlU tf n LkJ _ ^ o ^ ^ ^ J ^ ™ ^ ^ ^ ^ u ^ Hi i tt tc ct cc ^0>v <y.
News anchor \ India When Padmini Prakash read the news for Lotus News’s 7m. broadcast on Aug., she became India’s first transgender tv anchor.
The anniversary of India’s independence, the day was fitting for a step away from a history of discrimination.
In precolonial India, some hijras—a term that describes transgender and intersex people as well as eunuchs— held prominent positions in society.
But British colonial law criminalized them and pushed them to the margins, where they have largely remained.
Prakash’s family disowned her when she was 13, and she attempted suicide before becoming an activist for the transgender community.
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender rights inched forward in April, when India’s Supreme Court recognized the right to identify as a third gender, neither male nor female.
Many of India’s estimated 2 million transgender people identify as such, though others choose to be male or female.
In a country where gay sex remains illegal, Prakash’s Tamil-language broadcasts, which viewers highly praise, are an important advance for the LGBT cause.
But as of 2013, only 13 percent of Wikipedia’s contributors were female, according to the site’s co-founder, Jimmy Wales.
Since the inaugural gathering, many more editing meet-ups have followed.
And in October, ArtAndFeminism held the first of a series of workshops, called “Train the Trainers,” to prepare aspiring activist-editors for future projects.
Baker's tweets landed at a rapid-fire pace, like the Israeli bombs that pounded her neighborhood.
Her words, combined with powerful photos, helped place her followers on the scene during the war, which left more than 2,100 Palestinians dead, the majority of them civilians.
From advocating for effective, affordable hepatitis C treatment, to spearheading the campaign that eradicated polio from India, to developing a new method of detecting malaria, to challenging the way clinicians and cultures describe schizophrenia, they are helping provide the world with tools that can Inject much-needed strength and hope Into global health.
Nurse I Sierra Leone Health workers in West Africa have been hit hard by Ebola.
Those numbers have only risen since, and many health workers have fearfully fled their jobs.
For deputy nurse matron Josephine Finda Sellu, working in the Ebola wing of a government hospital in the Sierra Leonean city of Kenema was all but a death sentence.
By late August, 15 nurses had died, reportedly comprising around half the health workers killed in Sierra Leone at the time.
But Sellu, called “Mummy” by her staff, refused to abandon her post despite pleas from her family and the biting social stigma heaped on many health workers who have remained on Ebola’s front lines.
Scientists \ San Diego As Ebola began tearing through West Africa early this year, no drug existed to stop it.
Then, in August, an experimental serum of antibodies that had never even been tested on humans was given to two American missionaries infected with the disease— and they survived.
Almost overnight, ZMapp, made by Kevin Whaley and Larry Zeitlin’s San Diego-based Mapp Biopharmaceutical, became a household name.
The United States Department of Health and Human Services quickly allotted $24. million to Mapp to fast-track development and testing over 18 months.
The drug’s safety and effectiveness are not yet fully understood, and there are serious ethical questions about who should get the drug and how to do human trials.
But in late August, lab tests showed that ZMapp cured monkeys infected with Ebola, suggesting the serum might be a real game-changer.
Paleopathologist \ United Kingdom Being diagnosed with cancer at age 22 might stop a lot of people from digging in the desert for ancient bones.
Just two months after her chemotherapy ended, the budding archeologist spent part of her senior year of university on a dig in Egypt.
She says she hopes this expanding field of archeological inquiry will add to contemporary understandings of cancer, proving that it isn't only caused by modern pesticides or pollution.
A 2010 paper claimed that only a handful of cancer cases had been found in Egyptian mummies, but Hunt says the paper lacked data.
Anthropologist \ Stanford, Calif According to modern medicine, the voices that people with schizophrenia hear are symptoms of a disease that can he taclded with medication and other therapies.
In June, Luhrmann coauthored a study in the British Journal of Psychiatry that was based on interviews with people with schizophrenia in the United States, India, and Ghana.
The study suggests that culture affects how people experience psychosis, a finding that could lead to a new tailoring of treatment.
In the United States, for instance, patients could be encouraged to interact with their voices, instead of fearing them.
As Luhrmann told the Huffington Post, this would be a “radical way ofthinldng” about voices— one that could reap enormous clinical benefits.
This year, the Gates Foundation gave Mapp Biopharmaceutical a $150,000 grant to explore whether the drug could be made in Chinese hamster cells-a proven process for other drugs that could yield larger quantities of the treatment. has been reproducing functional human cartilage.
The crucial tissue doesn’t regenerate on its own, and replacements made from animal cells aren’t strong enough.
After years of working to create replacement cartilage, they announced in April that they successfully used a 3-D printer to produce the tissue.
Don’t expect to find this new cartilage in your knees or elbows anytime soon.
He checked his watch to know “exactly when history was made,” he told the Wall Street Journal.
It has a huge population, poor sanitation, impure drinldng water, and malnutrition.
As recently as 2009, the country was home to around half of the world’s cases of polio.
Complicating matters, the campaign to vaccinate millions of children faced resistance among India’s Muslims.
Kapur’s Rotary Foundationrun committee was instrumental in convincing Muslim leaders of the virtues of vaccination, and he sees their about-face as a key ingredient in polio’s eradication, alongside the use of a vaccine that targets two strains of the disease at once.
The success carries lessons for other countries where polio remains as endemic as suspicions about vaccination.
Enzymes in the organ would then break down the cloak, allowing the drug to fight the disease without harming the rest of the body’s cells.
Marketed by the pharmaceutical company Gilead as Sovaldi, the drug, taken in combination with other therapies, can cure more than 80 percent of patients undergoing as little as 12 weeks of treatment.
So in July, John Rother, a longtime advocate of affordable pharmaceuticals, sent an open letter to Gilead, urging the company, which made $3.48 billion in Sovaldi sales in the second quarter of 2014, to lower prices.
Although Gilead has yet to drop the cost, in September the company did license the drug to seven Indian firms that will sell cheaper generic versions in some 90 developing countries.
Scientist; biologist; Ph.D. student I Singapore; Cleveland; Boston Although Ebola has dominated headlines this year, it is still malaria— avoidable malaria— that remains one of Africa’s biggest killers.
Of those, 627,000 died— and 90 percent of the deaths occurred in Africa.
Public health advocates have long sought ways to diagnose the disease that don’t involve labor-intensive lab testing and are cheap, easy, portable— and, most importantly, reliable.
Researchers have long known that the malaria parasite feeds on iron-rich hemoglobin.
So for the past few years, the race has been on to design a magnetic device that, to put it simply, can detect the “iron-laden poop that malaria parasites leave behind,” as one reporter wrote in Cleveland’s Plain Dealer.
Each with their own prototype device in hand, Weng Rung Peng and John Lewandowski, who refined his technology from an original concept developed by Brian Grimberg, are now eyeing the finish line.
Requiring only a drop of blood, both devices, which are technologically different, can generate diagnoses within a matter of minutes.
Not only can both detect the disease before symptoms show, but their results could be far more reliable than today’s testing methods.
The technologies are currently under development, but could save thousands from one of the world’s biggest killers.
But only 40 percent of those afflicted are diagnosed early, in part because screening requires expensive and invasive tests such as colonoscopies.
This year, Bhatia and her team at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have been working on a technique for a simple, cheap diagnostic that could make colon cancer screenings nearly as easy as a pregnancy test.
In a positive test, enzymes produced by tumors would break down these particles, which would then be detected in a simple urine sample.
Now, Bhatia and her team are working on a method to deliver the nanoparticles with a spoonful of yogurt, which could make testing even simpler.
The technique is still in the early testing phases, but preliminary experiments in which nanoparticles are injected into mice seem to have shown promise.
If successful, the procedure could be particularly important in the developing world, where the test could be performed in rural settings, without specialized equipment.
It is an idea epitomized by these Global Thinkers— painters, sculptors, architects, and filmmakers.
From searing images of children doing everyday things against the backdrop of the Syrian war, to a massive sphinx made of sugar that forces an intellectual confrontation with racism in America, to a satirical installation that questions the ethics and efficacy of Western aid to Africa, the works created by these artists demand that viewers reconsider what they know to be true.
But her exhibit on display this summer, A Subtlety, or the Marvelous Sugar Baby, brought her treatment of these issues to monumental proportions.
In a massive, derelict sugar-processing factory in Brooklyn stood a 75.5-foot-long, 35.5-foot-tall sculpture of a nude, sphinx-like woman resembling a caricature of a house slave, coated in white sugar.
A Subtlety garnered critical acclaim, furthering a long run of subversive achievements for which Walker is justly celebrated.
More important still, it forced a public conversation about America’s legacy of white supremacy, sexual exploitation, and capitalism.
The exhibit is curated by Maymanah Farhat of the Ayyam Gallery, and its finest pieces are the haunting paintings of Mohannad Orabi, who brings to life the war’s devastating effects on children.
Streaked over with paint, their huge, dark eyes seem at once curious, innocent, and afraid.
In one painting, a child pottytrains as a battle scene unfolds behind him.
Artist I Spain When sculptor Jason DeCaires Taylor created the world’s first submerged sculpture park off the coast of Grenada in 2006, he deepened the concept of intervention in natural habitats and imagined a subaqueous testament to humanity’s connection to the oceans.
It was such a marvel that National Geographic named it a man-made wonder of the world.
Ocean Atlas, his I8-foot-tall, 60-ton sculpture off the Bahamas, depicts a local girl holding the ocean on her shoulders.
Modeled on the Greek Titan Atlas, the sculpture— made with pH-neutral materials— will ultimately transform into a fishand coral-friendly artificial reef.
Artist; eurator \ Russia; Britain and Germany At this year’s Venice Biennale of Architecture, artist Alexander Ponomarev and curator Nadim Samman debuted an Antarctica that was not the one of public imagination— that vast, unforgiving place inhabited by legions of penguins and a few thousand ANDREW BURTON/GETTY IMAGES; PONOMAREV; GDORTESY PHOTO; SAMMAN; COORTESY PHOTO Kara Walker's A Subtlety, or the Marvelous Sugar Baby featured a sculpture of a sphinx-like woman coated in sugar. scientists in utilitarian metal buildings.
Rather, the duo’s vision of Antarctica was futuristic, beautiful, and hospitable.
Their project, “Antarctopia,” the continent’s first pavilion at the biennale, featured projects from a range of architects showing the artistic possibilities the southernmost continent might embrace.
Sergiu-Radu Pop, a student of Pritzker Prize winner Zaha Hadid, for instance, designed a sleek facility that would rise seamlessly from the continent’s topography and include space for both research and tourism.
Another design showed a research station in the shape of a snowflake, covered with solar panels.
Filmmaker \ Cambodia, France Between 1975 and 1979, the Khmer Rouge was responsible for the deaths of some 2 million people and nearly annihilated Cambodia’s rich cultural traditions.
Rithy Panh, then a teenager, lost his parents, siblings, and other relatives.
For Panh, now a film director, this period has been the focus of more than a dozen movies.
Yet he struggled with how, on screen, he should resurrect his family, given how few images of the brutal era and its victims exist.
The Missing Picture, took home several film-festival awards in 2013 and an Academy Award nomination upon its public release this year.
Artist; photographer \ Kenya; Angola, Portugal Each year, some $30 billion in aid flows into Africa from developed countries.
But the culture that surrounds this aid is often considered paternalistic, excluding Africans from the aid organizations themselves.
Such was the message implied by Sam Hopkins and Kiluanji Kia Henda at the 2014 Dak’Art biennale in Senegal.
LEADING GLOBAL THINKERS 95 mock meetings led by European politicians, who are actual leaders photoshopped with African hairstyles.
His work is a comment on the “financial machine called charity,” as the artist puts it.
Hopkins exhibited “Logos of Non Profit Organisations worldng in Kenya (some of which are imaginary),” a screen-print collection of genuine aid organizations’ logos intermixed with the artist’s fictional logos, leaving one to discern which are which and to contemplate the Western branding of charity.
Henrot’s work insists that just as the past is limitless, so are the legitimate ways of interpreting and conveying it.
Camille Henrot’s work has captivated the art world by moving beyond that paradox and into new forms of storytelling.
As shown in her first comprehensive American retrospective, at Manhattan’s New Museum this summer, the Erench artist creates novel epistemologies from an array of media, including film, sculpture, and illustration.
In one series, she paid homage to the books in her personal library with an installation of Japanese ikebana floral arrangements, transforming written information and its presumption of immutability into pieces of ephemera.
Singer \ South Sudan War had torn apart the life of 26-year-old South Sudanese singer Silver X In early summer, civil war was sowing the seeds of famine while cholera swept the land, and the conflict between Nuer and Dinka fighters raged.
The artist responded with “Let’s Stand Together,” an auto-tuned peace anthem that he wrote and recorded with 11 other singers from across the ethnic spectrum of the world’s newest country.
Displaced by fighting in 2000, Silver X returned four years ago from a refugee camp in Uganda to be part of South Sudan’s budding music scene.
In June, he turned his sights on the looming famine, helping to launch the campaign Music Against Hunger.
Graffiti artist \ Afghanistan Supply Shamsia Hassani with spray paint, and the lasting effects of Afghanistan's war will be covered with street art.
In Afghanistan, where women have historically been oppressed, those murals run counter to stereotypes about the culture.
In one, a woman draped in a bright blue burqa stands before a cityscape; in another, a woman holds a guitar, her flowered hair flowing in the wind.
Hassani sometimes takes photographs of inaccessible sites in the city and paints the prints.
These projects are part of a collection called ""Dream of Graffiti,"" and she has used the technique to transform a variety of areas around Kabul, including Darulaman Palace.
This year, her graffiti got her shortlisted for the Artraker Award, which honors artists in war-torn places.
JOEL SAGET/AFP/GETTY IMAGES; ASPEN: KATHRYN SGOTT OSLER/THE DENVER POST VIA GETTY IMAGES In one painting by acclaimed artist Hong Sung-dam, the democratically elected president of South Korea, Park Geun-hye, has just given birth to a baby resembling her late father.
Park Chung-hee, the autocrat who led the country for nearly two decades prior to his 1979 assassination.
Park dances to Psy’s “Gangnam Style” below a noose, symbolizing the many people hanged under her father’s regime.
Critics say a poorly equipped coast guard and a disorganized government response heightened the disaster.
As a scarecrow controlled by her father, as he revealed in a collaborative work produced with other artists.
The Aspen Art Museum opened its new building, designed by Shigeru Ban, in August 2014. theme in her art.
A recent work, “Effacing Memory,” features sketches of 12 dictators and members of their inner circles with their faces erased— stripping the men of their power.
An accompanying video documents her almost violent erasures of their visages.
She saved Enver Hoxha, the communist who ruled over her homeland for 41 years, for last.
In 2014 alone, Rubiku’s work has appeared in museums and galleries in Belgium, Albania, Montenegro, and France.
The artist crosses borders with equal frequency, ever attuned to the psychology of displacement.
Other Citizenships” featured a collection of hats embellished with written passages intended to reflect the thoughts of immigrants acclimating to new cultures.
Artist I South Korea The Gwangju Biennale, one of Asia’s most prestigious art exhibitions, often celebrates a spirit of freedom.
This year, the biennale removed his painting under pressure from public officials “because of its explicit political intention,” according to a vice mayor of Gwangju.
Architect \ Japan when Shigeru Ban won a commission to design the Centre Pompidou-Metz, an art museum in northeastern France, he built himself a stylish studio at the museum’s Paris branch— out of paper tubes.
That’s because Ban, who won the 2014 Pritzker Architecture Prize, thinks that in his line of work, frugality shouldn’t preclude elegance or function.
Ban’s commitment to simple materials— most famously, paper and cardboard— is the link between his high-culture commissions and his widely praised humanitarian projects.
Ban has designed spaces for fashion houses and art collections, but with cheap, recyclable materials, he has also designed temporary shelters, schools, and churches for natural-disaster survivors in places such as Haiti and the Philippines.
LEADING GLOBAL THINKERS 97 m i2g Jason deCaires Taylor's creative process is driven by his ecoiogical mission: to alleviate pressure on the globe's remaining coral reefs.
The results of that effort are ethereal, underwater worlds in which time feels arrested and objects may appear magnified.
Symbiotically, nature itself-the sea life that lives on and around the art-will gradually transform and embrace Taylor's work.
To that end, the sculptor works with pH-neutral materials that actively promote coral growth, and he leaves rough patches on his sculptures' surfaces to make them hospitable to larvae.
LEADING GLOBAL THINKERS 99 Atlas, as a Bahamian girl, supports the sea; flora and fauna coat the art with vivid colors in this silent underworld.
From I Russia to China, Saudi Arabia to India, these Global Thinkers are I doing anything but business as usual, They are revolutionizing I e-commerce, welcoming women into long-unequal workplaces, I bringing down the cost of medicine, making genetic sequencing I available to the masses, and striking deals that undercut traditional I East-West energy politics.
Some of their aims are noble, and I others not, but all are undoubtedly original.
Alibaba’s late-September initial public offering, which raised roughly $25 billion, was the largest in history and made Ma the richest man in China.
The company’s market capitalization at press time— $271 billionmakes it worth more than Amazon.
In May, the billionaire Russian oilman secured Moscow a 30-year, $400 billion gas deal with Beijing.
Europe, not exactly thrilled with Russian expansionism, had been the company’s only major client.
China shored up its energy security while Russia set the stage for a new era of lucrative trade with its eastern neighbor.
In March, he was hit with United States sanctions for being a close associate of Putin, and he has sold off stakes in companies to protect them.
Yet thanks to the gas deal, Gennady seems to be on Putin’s good side— which, in Russia, can make all the difference for a person’s future prospects.
Chairperson and managing director, Biocon I India Kiran Mazumdar-Shaw started Biocon out of a garage in 1978.
Thirty-six years later, her company is India's biggest biotechnology firm, and Mazumdar-Shaw is the country's richest self-made woman.
Now she is using her position to expand access to affordable health care among India's 1. billion people.
Biocon launched CANmab, a breast-cancer drug 25 percent cheaper than its nearest competitor.
In India, where around 150,000 people are diagnosed with breast cancer each year, Biocon's drug should significantly expand access to lifesaving treatment.
Mazumdar-Shaw funds an affordable cancer-treatment center, underwrites a health-insurance program for rural residents, and has promised to donate three-quarters of her $1. billion fortune to charitable causes.
Co-founder, Xiaomi \ China Lei Jun wears a black shirt and blue jeans like Steve Jobs did, and much of his phone’s design shares similarities with Apple products.
But the ideas behind his sales and marketing edge are anything but imitative.
Lei’s cell-phone company, founded in April 2010, has passed Samsung to become China’s leading cell-phone vendor, claiming 30 percent of the country’s market share in this year’s third quarter.
Xiaomi, which didn’t release its first smartphone until 2011, is already planning to expand into foreign markets, including Russia, Brazil, and Mexico, later this year.
ARUNDHATI BHATTACHARYA FOR TELLING HARD TRUTHS ABOUT INDIA'S DEBt Chair, State Bank of India \ India while the money of a few corrupts America’s politics, the money of many corrupts India’s.
As chair of the State Bank of India, overseeing $400 billion in assets, Arundhati Bhattacharya is aiming to bring greater discipline to the country’s banking system.
A tried-and-true tactic by politicians before Indian elections is to promise to waive sometimes billions of dollars in farm loans in an effort to win the votes of the rural poor.
To fight this scourge, in July Bhattacharya called out the newly elected leaders of the states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana for their proposed policies on debt forgiveness, and she has suggested that Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government turn away from waiver policies.
Yes, she admits, this would benefit her bank— but it would greatly benefit India as well.
REEMABINT BANBARALSAUD FOR CATERING TO THE KINGDOM'S Princess, corporate executive \ Saudi Arabia More than half of Saudi Arabia’s university students are female, yet women make up less than a fifth of the country’s workforce.
Princess Reema Bint Bandar A1 Saud, CEO of the Saudi luxury retailer Alfa International, is working to tip the balance.
At the Riyadh branch of luxury department store Harvey Nichols, Princess Reema has hired dozens of female salesclerks, created in-house day care, and provided transportation stipends to female employees over the past three years.
It’s an encouraging model for female hiring in Saudi Arabia— one that not only introduces women to work outside the home, but also helps them integrate their private and professional lives.
As Saudi women inch their way into the private sector— this year saw the opening of the country’s first female-run law firm and the promotion, for the first time, of a woman to the top editorial position at a daily newspaper— Princess Reema’s high-profile example could lead the way to gradual but profound changes far beyond the workplace.
CEO, Illumina \ Rancho Santa Fe, Calif In January, Jay Flatley's Illumina, the leader in genetic-sequencing technology, unveiled a system that will sequence a human genome for less than $1,000, making far more affordable a process that has typically cost around $10,000.
The device, called the HiSeq XTen, completes sequences faster and more accurately than previous designs.
It sells for about $10 million and could be a game-changer, allowing doctors new insights into diseases even before symptoms start.
Under Flatley's leadership, which began in 1999, Illumina has grown to claim about 80 percent of market share.
By Ruth Franklin Illustrations by Maayan Pearl n THE TWITTER FEED OF American novelist Elliott Holt usually includes remarks on what she’s reading, retweets of friends’ book news, and occasional political commentary.
As Holt’s followers watched, she retweeted the feeds of three guests at a swanky party in SoHo.
In addition to Holt’s murder mystery, readers could follow, among others, a nanny in a fictional White House tweeting about her eerie visions (an updating of Henry James’s The Turn of the Screw) and a “memoir in Tweets” by a fictional English B-movie star.
Although much of the material seemed promising, the festival felt a little below the radar.
There, writers, editors, and readers milled around as tweets were projected onto TV screens.
Although it was conceived as a way for people to broadcast brief status updates, it caught on primarily as a means for users to connect with each other.
Yet tweeting has permeated the popular culture so deeply that the concept of Twitter literature was inevitable.
Today, writers around the world such as Jennifer Egan, David Mitchell, and Teju Cole are producing original works on the platform.
Even best-selling British writer Philippa Gregory, whose historical novels range in focus as far back as the 15th century, created a fictional feed for one of her characters.
If Twitter literature started out as a scrappy affair, it is now moving rapidly into the mainstream.
And, certainly, moments of literary beauty and wit are to be found on Twitter.
While many writers seem primarily attracted by the platform’s casual immediacy, others have been galvanized by the possibility of creating ambitious works fundamentally different from anything on the printed page.
But their experiments show that rather than a new path for the novel, what Twitter offers is a platform for an increasingly sophisticated form of literary performance art.
Whether it works as literature, as we understand it, is another question.
ONE MIGHT THINK THAT A WRITER WOULD MOST naturally use Twitter to unspool a narrative gradually, moment by moment.
But when some novelists, including Egan, Mitchell, and McCall Smith, have tried to put this method into practice, the results have been mixed.
Egan had been wondering “how to write fiction whose structure would lend itself to serialization on Twitter,” she told the magazine’s Page-Turner hlog.
Although she wrote the story by her usual method— in a notebook, by hand— its format as a step-by-step primer seemed suited to tweeted installments.
Some readers enjoy watching these sorts of stories unfold, but others don’t— and for good reason.
If the tweets aren’t sequenced by an external site such as Storify, good luck finding them again.
There are other reasons it doesn’t work to tweet a linear story line by line.
Deep, immersive reading suspends time, but attempting to follow a live narrative on Twitter makes readers hyperaware of the down time between tweets.
It’s hard not to read those lines as a comment on our collective addiction to repeated pings of new information.
But the British novelist also finds poetry in Twitter’s fictional constraints.
Each tweet, Mitchell has said, ought to be a “balanced entity,” as compact and elegant as a haiku.
Yet despite his idealistic intentions, Mitchell’s story, like Egan’s, was defeated by the mechanics of the Twitter platform.
A user following from the beginning of a story must wait for each new passage of text to arrive.
But that’s not how it works for most readers— those who join the stream in the middle of the sequence or after it has already ended.
Those users are forced to scroll back to the opening of the story, experiencing the tweets in reverse sequential order.
While McCall Smith has touted serialization as a “standard way of writing” for authors from Charles Dickens to Leo Tolstoy, it gained popularity in Victorian times as a way to sell newspapers, not as a spur for fictional experimentation.
Rather than adding literary value to a story that’s intended to be read as a whole, serialization on Twitter seems nothing more than the latest way for authors to augment their readerships and market themselves.
Even Twitter itself has gently discouraged would-be fiction writers from serializing.
For Nigerian-American novelist Teju Cole, that “something more” has taken a variety of forms.
Arrested for theft in Mecca, the Nigerian immigrant Ibrahim is now learning to use his left hand. @tejucole: Prince Monday Whiskey was, on Monday, whisked away by persons unknown.
Cole’s project “Small Fates,” which ran from 2011 to 2013, was inspired by the genre offaits divers, piquantly brief crime stories popularized by French periodicals around the beginning of the 20th century.
He combed Nigerian newspapers for tales of especially resonant crimes and retold them in single tweets.
Like epigrams, his tweets relied on careful word choice and devices such as rhythm, alliteration, and puns.
Each tweet stood on its own, as Cole explicitly declined to weave them into a larger narrative.
The people responded, and Cole became one of the more popular highbrow authors on Twitter, with around 168,000 followers.
F ounded in 1982 by former United States President J immy Carter and his wife, Rosalynn, The Carter Center was created to advance peace and health worldwide.
As a nongovernmental organization, the Center has helped to improve life for people in more than 80 countries by resolving conflicts; advancing democracy, human rights, and economic opportunity; preventing diseases and improving mental health care.
For additional information regarding accomplishments, leadership, governance, and current programs, please go to www.cartercenter.org T he Carter Center seeks a Vice President for Peace Programs.
The Vice President , Peace Programs is responsible for the overall direction, strategic planning, development, and implementation of initiatives aimed at advancing peace with justice in countries around the world, most commonly in economically poor and politically weak states.
The VP, Peace Programs oversees the leadership and professional development of 35 staff members and the development and implemention of 30 program activities with annual budgets of nearly $25 million.
He/she reports to the CEO of The Carter Center and works as part of the senior leadership team with three other Vice Presidents of Health Programs, Finance, and Operations and Development.
The VP, Peace Programs must have broad experience and a deep substantive knowledge of international affairs.
Candidates must have proven managerial and leadership skills, including the ability to oversee several complex international multi-disciplinary initiatives simultaneously.
The successful candidate will be a team-builder with an inclusive and collegial approach.
Africa, Central America, South America, the Caribbean, the Middle East, or Asia.
This is an Atlantabased full-time position with domestic and international travel as required.
But the novel, while brief, is discursive and ruminative, written in a style very different from Cole’s Twitter voice.
In other words, he seemed to have discovered a way to use Twitter not as a delivery system for the kind of fiction he had been accustomed to writing, but as an impetus to create something entirely new.
Finishing “Small Fates” freed Cole to try out yet another method of using Twitter.
In January 2014, he disseminated a story called “Hafiz,” composed as a series of tweets, to a number of friends who had agreed to tweet the work.
Cole then retweeted the story, line by line, so that the narrative appeared in sequence in his own feed.
In March, Cole published a long narrative essay, “A Piece of the Wall” , about a visit to the United States -Mexico border in Arizona.
For this hybrid work of literary journalism, he incorporated the voices of people he interviewed, assigning a Twitter handle to each.
Conversations usually take place out in the open, where anyone can listen.
Its literary analogue isn’t the Proustian genius sealed in his chamber; it’s an open-mic poetry slam, with the audience constantly interrupting to clap or boo.
While Cole’s recent efforts mimic this interactivity, they function effectively as literature because they do not actually surrender to it.
In selecting and arranging the tweets to suit his purposes, he remains the puppeteer behind the scenes— as he must.
A few writers have gestured toward the idea of responsive fiction on Twitter, notably best-selling fantasy author Andrea Cremer , who responded to comments from her roughly 16,000 followers as she tweeted a story about a person who finds a mysterious unopened letter in an attic.
But ah serious fiction has to be hermetic, because writers must maintain control over their work.
Some regard Elliott Holt’s Manhattan murder mystery, from the original Twitter Fiction Festival, as the most creative use yet of the platform.
American author Chris Arnold recently did something similar with his piece “#PolarVortex,” which depicts the fictional @NEX_Airport in the throes of a winter storm.
Public relations tweets from fictional airlines and ads for the airport’s sushi bar mingle with the stories of stranded passengers and crew members— one anxiously en route to a job interview, another watching his relationship fall apart via text.
With a nod to the increasing use of Twitter as a means for sharing images, Arnold’s narrative takes advantage of the platform’s visual capabilities, coilaging weather maps, photographs, and video in his feed.
But the thrill they provide is primarily that of seeing a recognizable world faithfully duplicated, with ah its attendant conventions and idiosyncrasies.
So far, the most successful works of fiction on Twitter have been compelling precisely in re-creating the experience of being on Twitter.
Burney is an environmental scientist focusing on global food security and climate change.
She designs technologies for poverty alleviation and agricultural adaptation, and studies the links between energy poverty and food security.
Zhang is an environmental economist focusing on climate change, water resources, renewable energy and fisheries, with a particular interest on East Asia.
Zhang teaches classes on sustainable development and Chinese environmental and energy policy.
Walter is an expert on international security, with an emphasis on internal wars, bargaining and cooperation, and terrorism/counter-terrorism.
Walter teaches classes on international politics and security and policy responses to global problems.
UC San Diego an established leader on economic development and global public policy Earn a two-year professional or one-year executive master’s degree in international affairs Concentrations available in environmental policy, economics, development, public policy, politics and management irps.ucsd.edu UC San Diego School of International Relations and Pacific Studies David Victor Dr.
His research focuses on energy markets in emerging countries and environmental regulatory law.
Victor teaches energy policy, international law, and climate change courses.
McCord focuses on understanding the changing role of geography in economic development.
His research explores using weather to model the effect of malaria on child mortality and fertility behavior, as well as the role of geography in Chinese city growth.
IN OTHER WORDS they do something fundamentally different from what novels and other ambitious works of fiction are meant to do.
Twitter fiction, so far, has been best at showing us how Twitter works— hashtags and all.
More importantly, the way we experience Twitter is fundamentally different from the deep engagement that takes place when we read immersive fiction.
A tweet is so brief that it can be consumed at a glance; conversely, a user can spend hours scrolling through the alwaysfluctuating stream of words and images, eyes flickering from nugget to nugget.
We use various cognitive processes as we shift back and forth between paper and screen.
Our brains are adaptive and plastic throughout our lives, so excessive screen reading can cause our deep -reading skills to atrophy and our comprehension, in particular, to slack off.
We wind up skimming through If we are doomed to end up reading novels the way we read Twitter, it doesn't follow that we read Twitter the way we read novels. the paperback in our hand the same way we allow our eyes to wander in and out of our Twitter feeds.
But if we are doomed to end up reading novels the way we read Twitter, it doesn’t follow that we read Twitter the way we read novels— deeply, empathically, creatively.
The feed simply does not lend itself to that kind of reading experience.
What it does lend itself to— even more so than conventional literature— is conveying short bursts of beauty.
Pentametron (@pentametron) is a hot that finds tweets written in iambic pentameter— almost always unintentionally— and matches them with others that rhyme, pairing strangers in odd duets.
But it’s a new way of making sense out of the stories the world tells all day, every day— which is what writers have always tried to do.
These organizations produced almost 12,000 events, papers, and research reports over that time.
Of these, the vast majority concentrated on just a few topics— such as the Middle East, the war on terror, and China— linked closely to whatever was in the headlines at the time.
Other areas, deserving of focus but outside the “buzz zone,” got much less attention.
Science and technology— never mind that they are responsible for most of the changes redefining life on the planet and many of the emerging threats with which humanity is grappling.
In short, the city most in need of big, new ideas may be home to the most dumbed-down smart people of all.
Combine a lack of creative thinking, organized stupidity like the war on science, and political paralysis, and you get today’s Washington, sleepwalking into America’s future.
A symptom of this problem is seen in FOREIGN Policy’s list of the Leading Global Thinkers of 2014.
Of the people we selected— each of whom had to meet our criteria of generating an idea or series of ideas that actually resulted in actions influencing people’s lives, whether positively or negatively— precisely two work in Washington, D.C., and neither of them works in the United States government.
But candidly, this year, when it came to Washington, there just weren’t that many choices.
At the moment, the Beltway is pretty close to brain-dead, especially according to our criteria.
That’s not to say people in D.C. did not take actions that affected many people; but when they did, those actions did not flow from new thinking or anything remotely like a big idea.
The good news is that there are many thinkers out there who deserve the recognition we hope our list brings— for challenging convention, stimulating thought, improving lives, disrupting the status quo.
They are scientists, engineers, designers, artists, writers, leaders, politicians, and more who show that America is finding ways to flourish PEACE AND SECURITY FELLOWSHJE pi N'WflSHINGTONT DC THE HERfiflU SCOVILLEi» ptAct miowsHip The Herbert Scoville Jr.
Peace Fellowship invites recent college and graduate school graduates to apply for six to nine month fellowships in Washington, DC, focusing on arms control, peace, and international security issues.
Scoville Fellows work with one of more than two dozen participating public-interest organizations.
They may undertake a variety of activities, including research, writing, and advocacy on a range of security issues including nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, non-proliferation, missile defense, weapons trade, environmental and energy security, and regional security and peacekeeping, that support the goals of their host organization, and may attend coalition meetings, policy briefings and Congressional hearings.
Fellows are supervised by and learn from senior level staff and often have the opportunity to publish articles or reports.
The program also arranges meetings for the fellows with policy experts.
Many former Scoville Fellows have gone on to pursue graduate degrees in international relations and taken prominent positions in the field of peace and security with public-interest organizations, the Federal Government, academia, and media.
Candidates must have an excellent academic record and a strong interest in issues of peace and security.
The program is open to all United States citizens and nonUnited States citizens living in the United States eligible for employment.
The next application deadline is January 5, 2015 for the fall 2015 semester.
There are bad guys too— offering up bad ideas and translating them into bad acts— who show that, without strong leadership and ideas in Washington, the world may find itself at greater risk for tumult and chaos.
Before the anti-government types start saying it was ever thus, let’s not dismiss the impact of the birth and growth of American democracy; the push westward fostered by federally sponsored expeditions, such as that of Lewis and Clark; the abolition of slavery; the cultivation of national infrastructure; the space program; the Internet; and a host of other things that, if not exclusively born of Washington, were at least nurtured there.
When Washington has been a source of creativity, America and the world have benefited greatly.
The absence of Washingtonians on our Global Thinkers list isn’t just a reflection of the fact that we thinl< America’s capital has hit a new low or that we worry about how that low is linked to the broader dumbingdown trend limiting America.
Rather, we are also casting light on the situation in the hope that it triggers a discussion about how Washington must change.
It is high time for America to identify and work to reverse the developments that have led to the quashing of imagination in Washington.
This work includes bringing new perspectives to a city that has far too many lawyers and lobbyists and not enough scientists, technologists, entrepreneurs, and other creative thinkers.
The world certainly does not always need Washington to function, even thrive— the past few years have proved that.
But it is clearly better off when the business of Washington is driven by new ideas rather than when, as seems to be the case today, it is stunted by fear of them.
Periodicais Postage Paid in Washington, D.C., and at additionai maiiing offices.
They are perfectly happy to celebrate genius, provided it doesn’t make them uncomfortable or require too much of them.
They are more concerned that their children get into college than they are that those kids are graded against the kind of tough standards that might ensure understanding of important concepts.
One particularly odious element of it is what might be called pop intellectualism.
Big, buzzy ideas are boiled down into short books that provide more cocktail-party conversation than significant concepts that require a little work to grasp.
Worse still is the whole TED talks phenomenon, which offers the intellectual equivalent of diets in which someone can lose 10 pounds in two weeks without giving up ice cream sundaes or pizza.
In just 18 minutes, a person can be exposed to breathlessly earnest genius— a slickly marketed brand of chicken nuggets for the brain.
The talks enable non-scientists and non-technologists to feel smart, but that is not the same as actually being smart or. alternatively, feeling dumb in the way that hard ideas sometimes make you feel— and should— when you first encounter them.
Perhaps worst among the consequences of the dumbing down of America is the hyper-politicization of discourse.
This has led to the rise of media outlets and debates that are tailored to specific audiences who seek out viewpoints that support already-held beliefs.
So people watching or reading the news tend not to see both sides of any issue— much less issues that have more than two sides.
Litmus tests and the ability to articulate already-popular views are valued more than what is really new or challenging.
Unsurprisingly, this trend’s impact on creativity and imagination in Washington— the epicenter of political polarization and the wellspring from which all litmus tests flow— has been particularly egregious.
In the policy community, people who may wish to do more than tailor ideas to pre-existing, polled audiences have discovered that in doing so they run the risk of offending someone on Capitol Hill who might not vote to confirm them in top jobs were they ever to want them; that is to say, originality is not only frowned upon, but it is actually institutionally quashed.
Thus, far too little bold thinking goes on in the country’s think tanks.
It is safer to write an article that doesn’t offend than it is to write one that actually breaks new ground.
SOLDIERS AND MARINES CALL IT A SAFE RIDE HOME Wars ane won on the ground.
You also need to bring them safely home agsin, Thait's where the new Joint light Tactical \^hkle (JLTVj from Lockheed Martin and BiAE Systems conies in.
JLTV offers the best crew protection, peiiormarce and payload— not to mention greater reliability, outstanding fud efficiency; and lower operations and sustainment costs.
And with a demonstrated capacity for growth, protected mobility isn't just back.
Our surveys in Afghanistan over the past decade provide a powerful resource for decision makers and an unmatched barometer of Afghan opinions over time.
