I am particularly grateful to ISW analyst Hugo Spaulding for his thorough and perceptive analysis of Russia’s operations in Ukraine.
I also extend my deepest thanks to ISW’s interns, who supported this project throughout the summer of 2015 and Casey Jaquez for laying out this report.
Fiona Hill, Jeremy Shapiro, Gemma Pörzger, Peter Pomerantsev, David Kramer, Natalia Arno, Samuel Sharap, and ISW analyst Harleen Gambhir offered astute observations that shaped many of this report’s conclusions.
I would also like to thank ISW Research Director Jessica Lewis McFate, for her thoughtful advice and deep analysis.
Her academic research focuses on the prerequisites for the emergence of populist autocracies in the post-Third Wave of Democracy order, and the radicalization of party systems.
She also closely monitors domestic developments within Russia and Ukraine in the context of international security, and regularly travels to Russia and Ukraine.
Snegovaya runs a biweekly column at Russian business daily “Vedomosti,” and regularly contributes to United States publications, including The Washington Post’s political science blog the Monkey Cage, The New Republic, and The American Interest.
Maria’s articles have been referenced by, among others, David Brooks , Andrew Sullivan , Bloomberg, The Economist and The Telegraph, and she is regularly invited to give talks at United States think tanks, including the Carnegie Endowment and the Wilson Center.
ABOUT THE INSTITUTE The Institute for the Study of War is a non-partisan, non-profit, public policy research organization.
ISW advances an informed understanding of military affairs through reliable research,trusted analysis, and innovative education.
ISW is committed to improving the nation’s ability to execute military operations and respond to emerging threats in order to achieve United States strategic objectives.
ABOUT OUR TECHNOLOGY PARTNER ISW believes superior strategic insight derives from a fusion of traditional social science research and innovative technological methods.
ISW recognizes that the analyst of the future must be able to process a wide variety of information, ranging from personal interviews and historical artifacts to high volume structured data.
ISW thanks its technology partner Praescient Analytics for their support in this innovative endeavor.
In particular, their technology and implementation assistance has supported creating many ISW maps and graphics.
Praescient Analytics is a Veteran Owned Small Business based in Alexandria, Virginia.
Our aim is to revolutionize how the world understands information by empowering our customers with the latest analytic tools and methodologies.
Reflexive control causes a stronger adversary voluntarily to choose the actions most advantageous to Russian objectives by shaping the adversary’s perceptions of the situation decisively.
Moscow has used this technique skillfully to persuade the United States and its European allies to remain largely passive in the face of Russia’s efforts to disrupt and dismantle Ukraine through military and non-military means.
The West must become alert to the use of reflexive control techniques and find ways to counter them if it is to succeed in an era of hybrid war.
Reflexive control, and the Kremlin’s information warfare generally, is not the result of any theoretical innovation.
All of the underlying concepts and most of the techniques were developed by the Soviet Union decades ago.
Russian information operations in Ukraine do not herald a new era of theoretical or doctrinal advances, although they aim, in part, to create precisely this impression.
Russia’s information warfare is thus a significant challenge to the West, but not a particularly novel or insuperable one.
It relies, above all, on Russia’s ability to take advantage of pre-existing dispositions among its enemies to choose its preferred courses of action.
The primary objective of the reflexive control techniques Moscow has employed in the Ukraine situation has been to persuade the West to do something its leaders mostly wanted to do in the first place, namely, remain on the sidelines as Russia dismantled Ukraine.
These techniques would not have succeeded in the face of Western leaders determined to stop Russian aggression and punish or reverse Russian violations of international law.
Russia has kept the West from intervening materially in Ukraine, allowing itself the time to build and expand its own military involvement in the conflict.
It has sowed discord within the NATO alliance and created tensions between potential adversaries about how to respond.
It has not, however, fundamentally changed popular or elite attitudes about Russia’s actions in Ukraine, nor has it created an information environment favorable to Moscow.
Above all, Russia has been unable so far to translate the strategic and grand strategic advantages of its hybrid warfare strategy into major and sustainable successes on the ground in Ukraine.
It appears, moreover that Moscow may be reaching a point of diminishing returns in continuing a strategy that relies in part on its unexpectedness in Ukraine.
Yet the same doctrine of reflexive control has succeeded in surprising the West in Syria.
The West must thus awaken itself to this strategy and to adaptations of it.
Russian information war is not information warfare as the United States thinks about it.
It is, rather, part of Russia’s method of conducting hybrid warfare, which consists of a deliberate disinformation campaign supported by actions of the intelligence organs designed to confuse the enemy and achieve strategic advantage at minimal cost.
The nature of hybrid operations makes it very difficult to detect or even determine ex post facto when they begin, since confusing the enemy and neutral observers is one of its core components.
It has become clear, however, that Russia is actively using its information warfare techniques in support of a hybrid-warfare effort to achieve its current objectives, namely the federalization of Ukraine or Kyiv’s concession of special legal status to the separatist-controlled regions of eastern Ukraine.
Russia’s information warfare approach is designed to work FROM RELATIVE MILITARY WEAKNESS within the limitations of the 21st century strategic environment TO HYBRID WAR and within Russia’s budget constraints.
It is essentially an approach born out of weakness that provides greater flexibility This more aggressive strain of Russian politics first appeared against adversaries with much greater aggregate economic and openly in February 2007, when Russian President Vladimir technological resources.
The novelty of this approach should not Putin gave his famous Munich Speech.
In this speech, Putin be overestimated, however, as it is fundamentally based on older, asserted that Russia would no longer accept the U.S.-led, well-developed and documented Soviet techniques.
It appears unipolar model of international relations and that Russia different today partly because of the new characteristics of the would implement its own independent foreign policy in global environment.
It makes use in particular of Washington’s pursuit of its geopolitical interests.
In the same month, neuralgic need to justify its foreign policy and military responses Anatolyi Serdyukov became Russia’s Minister of Defense and in highly legalistic ways. was tasked with fighting corruption and inefficiency in the armed forces.
Serdyukov’s appointment signaled a shift in Disinformation serves the obvious purpose of concealing Russia’s offensive strategy that would ultimately incorporate Russia’s actual objectives.
It allows Russia information operations, but military reforms did not take to deny that its forces are present in Ukraine because its combat place right away. operations are hidden under an active propaganda campaign.
It also creates diplomatic cover for Russia’s military and foreign Full-fledged reform of the Russian military only started in policy activities, thereby preserving the Kremlin’s freedom of 2008, when Russia’s performance in the war with Georgia action.
The disinformation campaign also makes it more difficult signaled the need for change.
Despite Russia’s success in for military analysts to estimate the actual size of Russia’s military evicting Georgia from South Ossetia and Abkhazia, Russian presence in the conflict zone.
Active disinformation therefore forces suffered from outdated equipment and poor training provides Russia with more flexibility in choosing methods to when fighting the more technically advanced, Westernexacerbate the conflict in Ukraine and broadens the spectrum of equipped Georgians.
The Georgian war thus highlighted potential diplomatic solutions it can pursue. many of the shortcomings of the Russian military.
By some estimates, Russian forces were responsible for the crashes of WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG 9 RUSSIA REPORT 1 | PUTIN’S INFORMATION WAR IN UKRAINE | MARIA SNEGOVAYA | SEPTEMBER 2015 three out of the four Russian aircraft downed in the conflict this tactical dimension exceptionally well.
Russian commanddirector at the Russian Institute of Strategic Research , and-control structures lacked effective coordination.
The the Kremlin’s think tank, which is headed by a former Russian military used Soviet-era mass-mobilization techniques that Foreign Intelligence Service officer.
Russian forces consults with the Presidential Administration and was one often lacked necessary training because of the military’s heavy of the most eloquent advocates of Ukrainian war.
Technological deficiencies were also has written extensively on the use of information warfare apparent, as Russian forces used Soviet-era weaponry that against the West and even wrote his Ph.D. dissertation on the frequently broke down mid-conflict.
Moreover, most of his publications elaborate on the had recognized many of these challenges in previous years, West’s own information warfare tactics.
Bedritsky’s research the war itself provided the impetus for reform, which began could have been used in the Kremlin’s information warfare in 2008.3 campaigns.
Nevertheless, Bedritsky’s findings were far from innovative, as most of them paraphrase preexisting Soviet The Kremlin examined its mistakes after the Georgian elaborations on information warfare. war.
Looking at Russia’s large-scale military operations in Chechnya and Georgia, as well as the responses of the MAIN PRINCIPLES OF INFORMATION West, the regime decided it had room for improvement.
In WARFARE 2008, the administration raised military spending by almost a third and overhauled both the armed forces and defense Russia’s modern information warfare adapts Soviet reflexive industry in order to tackle Russia’s post-Cold War military control to the contemporary geopolitical context.
The overall goal of the reform was to shrink the size control” is defined as a means of conveying to a partner or an of the army while making it more efficient and mobile. opponent specially prepared information to incline him to However, Serdyukov’s reforms were not popular among voluntarily make the predetermined decision desired by the Russian officers and he was replaced by Valery Gerasimov initiator of the action,” writes Timothy L Thomas.
Gerasimov became the face of Russia’s words, reflexive control is a method by which a controlling ‘hybrid war’ approach, which some assess to have been first party can influence an opponent into unknowingly making applied in Ukraine in 2014.5 bad decisions by interfering with its perceptions.
In the context of warfare, the actor that is most capable of predicting Russia’s concept of hybrid warfare relies heavily on and mimicking the reasoning and actions of its opponent information warfare.
Around the time Gerasimov replaced has the highest probability of success, as Thomas points Serdyukov, Vyacheslav Volodin replaced Vladislav Surkov out.
Vladimir Lefebvre, one of the premier Soviet scholars as the First Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential on reflexive control, wrote that “in making his decision the Administration, a position that manages domestic adversary uses information about the area of conflict, about opposition.
The reshuffling at the top of both the Ministry his own troops and ours, about their ability to fight, etc.
We of Defense and the Presidential Administration reflected the can influence his channels of information and send messages, Kremlin’s major rethinking of its future survival strategies. which shift the flow of information in a way favorable for In Volodin’s new administration political analysts worked us.
The adversary uses the most contemporary method of to develop a response to anti-regime mobilization on the optimization and finds the optimal decision.
The Kremlin’s internet information campaigns, not be a true optimum, but a decision predetermined by us. which target both the domestic Russian opposition and the In order to make our own effective decision, we should know West, lack innovation.
In their initial stages, the campaigns how to deduce the adversary’s decision based on information were characterized by the meticulous mimicking of actions he believes is true.
The unit modeling the adversary serves taken by the Kremlin’s opponents.
In its information warfare the purpose of simulating his decisions under different against the domestic opposition, the Kremlin extensively conditions and choosing the most effective informational used this mirroring tactic on the “Runet” influence.”10 with hashtags, trolls, hackers and direct denial of service attacks.
In his overview of Gerasimov’s doctrine, Mark Galeotti provides a useful analysis of the Kremlin’s hybrid war The Kremlin uses the same mirroring approach in attacking concept, which gives key insight into how the Kremlin itself the West.
The publications of Alexander Bedritsky illustrate conceptualizes information warfare.
First, as Galeotti points 10 WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG RUSSIA REPORT 1 | PUTIN’S INFORMATION WAR IN UKRAINE | MARIA SNEGOVAYA | SEPTEMBER 2015 Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu and armed forces Chief of Staff Valery Gerasimov attend the 4th Moscow Conference on International Security in Moscow April 16, 2015.
According to Russia’s military expert Pavel cost-effective alternative.
This may explain why Russia has Felgengauer, the Kremlin has been planning for a global war shifted greater resources towards developing the asymmetric around 2025-2030 and hence has been extensively redirecting its warfare capabilities of the Russian intelligence community, resources in preparation.
However, under its current resource exemplified by tactics such as “spreading despair and constraints, the Russian military understands it would lose this disinformation, encouraging defections, and breaking or full-fledged war.
Hence, the Russian military compensates for corrupting lines of command and communications.”14 its relative weakness with indirect, subtle strategies that aim to confuse the enemy about its goals.
Confusing the enemy is key Second, another principle of Russia’s new method of to Russia’s information war concept.
It simply begins with already developed strategic approach and, likely, its objectives there – as its secret military forces.
Serdyukov’s first the use of the “little green men,” the masked soldiers in reform turned out to be difficult and expensive and Gerasimov’s unmarked green army uniforms who first appeared during WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG 11 RUSSIA REPORT 1 | PUTIN’S INFORMATION WAR IN UKRAINE | MARIA SNEGOVAYA | SEPTEMBER 2015 Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea, provided Russia with a Finally, Russia’s information warfare operations, unlike military advantage in action.
This deception gave the Russian combat operations, do not attempt to contain the conflict military enough time to occupy and blockade most military and pursue its resolution in its early stages.
Instead, these bases in Crimea. information operations aim to prolong the conflict by supporting one of the warring parties in a way that gives Russia Third, as Galeotti describes, nonmilitary modes of warfare will the ability to influence the conflict more decisively at a time play a key role in achieving political and strategic goals, more of its choosing and even potentially pursue regime change. important than even military weapons.
Any direct military action will be supported by active use of disinformation and OLDIE BUT GOODIE special-operations forces.
As Galeotti points out, this is precisely the tactic Russia used in the annexation of Crimea, when little Today’s Russian military system is characterized by an aversion green men were “duly unmasked as Russian Special Forces and to innovation.
Predominantly, the system is composed of Naval Infantry only once the annexation was actually done.”17 former KGB officers with particular views and preferences, which block innovative ideas and contribute to the institutional Concerning information warfare, Gerasimov stresses that the inertia that typifies the regime as a whole.
Gerasimov himself “information space opens wide asymmetrical possibilities for stresses the lack of extraordinary people of bright ideas in reducing the fighting potential of the enemy.
The lack of innovation is probably we witnessed the use of technologies for influencing state one major reason why most contemporary research on structures and the population with the help of information information warfare in Russia combines previous Soviet networks.
Galeotti emphasizes that in eastern Ukraine, this information openness, and social networks). approach manifested itself through FSB penetration of the Ukrainian security apparatus, encouragement of defections, The concept of reflexive control has actually been in place for and monitoring Kyiv’s plans. much longer than the contemporary concepts of information warfare and information operations.
It first appeared in “The Interior Ministry has used its contacts with its Ukrainian Soviet military literature 30 years ago.
The Soviet and counterparts to identify potential agents and sources, the Russian governments employed it not only at the operational military has been used to rattle sabers loudly on the border– and tactical levels, but also at the strategic level in association and may be used more aggressively yet–while the GRU not with internal and external politics.
Although the concept is only handled the flow of volunteers and materiel into the somewhat alien to the U.S., some Russians consider Ronald east but probably marshalled the Vostok Battalion, arguably Reagan’s Strategic Defense Initiative as a classic example the toughest unit in the Donbas.
Since the early 1960s, many Russian context of Russia’s hybrid warfare. prominent intellectuals have emerged in the field of reflexive control theory.
Some United States military officials estimate twelve More accurately, basic analysis reveals that all of the main thousand Russian soldiers, including “military advisers, principles and approaches the Russian government utilizes weapons operators, and combat troops” are active in eastern today were taken from Soviet toolkits.
The report largely repeated all of the Soviet the alleged crucifixion of a boy in the city of Slovyansk. propaganda arguments made in 1968-69 in order to destroy Some pro-Kremlin journalists went so far as to allege that the Prague Spring movement and justify the Soviet invasion Ukrainian forces were mailing residents of separatistin Czechoslovakia.
The documentary also included footage held Donetsk the severed heads of their relatives.
Such innovations enemy perceives as routine plans, publishing a deliberately mostly have to do with technologically improved coordination distorted doctrine, striking elements of the enemy’s control and integration capacity and the new opportunities provided system or key figures in it, transmitting false background by network, grid, and internet technologies.
Bedritsky data, lying in wait in order to provoke a response, and other stresses the key networking aspect of contemporary actions to neutralize the enemy’s operational thinking.”35 information warfare, which provides fast, efficient coordination between the military and other elements of the Russia carries out reflexive control in Ukraine by campaign.
He also points out that rather than improving obfuscating its objectives and repeatedly denying its military the efficiency of traditional military operations, the new presence in the country, despite overwhelming evidence to information warfare campaign will attempt to destroy pieces the contrary.
The absence of a declaration of war against of the enemy’s critical infrastructure.
Hence, informational Ukraine in 2014 also allowed Russia to limit the enemy’s means such as cyber-attacks can cause the failure of powerdecision-making time.
Through the unexpected launch of supply facilities, transportation paralyses, etc.
In this way, combat operations Russia ensures that “the enemy, when information warfare can induce the target country’s political working out what seems feasible and predictable, makes a and economic collapse.
In case of the Ukrainian conflict, the hasty decision that changes the mode and character of its most innovative approach is probably the widespread use of operation” .37 internet technologies – hackers, bots and trolls.
Russian trolls are individuals in online discussion forums who try to The current 4D approach thus comes straight from old derail conversations, spam them with indecent comments, Soviet toolkits.
Russia’s current practice of establishing a spread misinformation and steer online conversations with web of foreign-language news outlets and sympathetic think pro-Kremlin rhetoric.
By contrast, Russian bots are people tanks in Western countries, two measures that the Soviet or, more often, programs that automatically send mass Union also widely used, further demonstrates the similarity spamming with short, sometimes identical, messages. between contemporary Russian and Soviet disinformation tactics.
Moreover, the active use of secret services in these Some analysts argue that the equation of today’s propaganda tactics comes from the same Soviet propaganda machine. to that of the Cold War ignores a central shift in Russia’s According to journalist Luke Harding, “In fact, the ‘little behavior, however.
Russian trolls may be crass and green men’ – undercover Russian soldiers who seized unconvincing, but they do gain visibility by occupying a lot Crimea – come straight from the KGB playbook.
The phrase encompasses disinformation, worldview, it is about trying to distort information flows and propaganda, political repression and subversion.
The Soviet Union also in the eyes of the world, especially the developing world.”39 used a primitive propaganda and, according to former KGB The parallels between Russian and Soviet propaganda general Oleg Kalugin, the overall goal was not far from the sometimes are striking.
Unlike in the Soviet war in Afghanistan, many Russians volunteered to However, Russia’s denials may indeed have a particular goal fight in Eastern Ukraine because they watched state television in mind.
Since one main point of hybrid warfare in Russian not because the military directly mobilized them.
Television doctrine is to avoid communicating one’s actual goals, remains the primary information source for 90% of Russians understanding Russia’s strategy in Ukraine is a difficult task. and, according to some analysts, it surpasses the military as Initially, Russia’s invasion in Ukraine aimed to take control the driving instrument of Russian aggression.
Most analysts agree television hosts offer to “burn the hearts of gays” and “turn that at the moment, Russia’s objectives include preventing America into radioactive ash” and suggest that Russia could send Ukraine’s accession to NATO and the EU, along with tanks to Warsaw.
Such statements would have been unusual in securing some degree of control over Ukrainian policythe Soviet period, when propaganda functioned in accordance making.
Russia attempts to achieve the latter by demanding with a more restrictive set of rules.
This particular aspect of the federalization of Ukraine, or at least granting some modern Russian disinformation does in fact mark a shift from special status to the separatist-controlled regions in Donetsk Soviet disinformation tactics.
The escalation of contemporary and Luhansk in the Ukrainian Constitution.
It should Russian rhetorical aggression in state media is unprecedented be mentioned that this understanding represents only an and dangerous.
First, this rhetorical aggression suggests assessment, because Russia is deliberately trying to obscure that the Russian authorities approve of further escalation of its goals to remain flexible, to preserve options, and to conflicts like the war in Eastern Ukraine.
But keeping this understanding in possibility that Russian state media aggression could escalate in mind, Russia’s application of these goals can be sub-divided uncontrollable ways. into diplomatic and military approaches.
APPLICATION OF RUSSIA’S INFORMATION Diplomatic Applications WARFARE On the strategic level, the Russian government uses Russia’s political and military officials have repeatedly denied informational cover and consistent denial of its forces’ the existence of Russian military operations in Ukraine since presence in Ukraine to complicate the monitoring of Russia’s the beginning of the conflict.
In January 2015, Russian Foreign actions and alter the enemy’s calculus.
But nobody which complicates the Ukrainian military’s analysis of the can present the facts, or doesn’t want to.
For example, with its true goals concealed, Russia can threaten the enemy to provoke a costly response.
In In his book about Soviet disinformation, a former Soviet Ukraine, the strategy provides Russia with a wider set of intelligence officer and high-ranking defector, Ion Mihai, strategic goals to choose from.
If one approach fails, such as, points out that a typical KGB campaign always involved the presumably, Russia’s initial intent to create a Ukrainian land denial of its direct involvement.
He writes that a three-pronged bridge between Transnistria and Crimea – the enemy will not disinformation campaign precisely follows “the KGB necessarily perceive it as a failure, ensuring Russia’s image of superiority.
WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG 15 RUSSIA REPORT 1 | PUTIN’S INFORMATION WAR IN UKRAINE | MARIA SNEGOVAYA | SEPTEMBER 2015 Such an approach also facilitates the Russian exit from Ukraine rather than annex.
The absence of a precedent like Ukraine in case Russia decides that its military engagement Kosovo for its operation in eastern Ukraine likely explains why is no longer required or desirable.
If Russian troops are not Russia has denied its presence in Donetsk and Luhansk instead officially in Ukraine, it is relatively easy to withdraw from of attempting to justify it. the country without significant cost.
Some analysts point out that by consistently denying its presence in Ukraine, Putin has an affinity for juridism or the use of formal Russia mitigated the hard and soft power response of the documents to justify his actions, as Fiona Hill and Cliff Gaddy international community, which might have led to disastrous argue in their book on the Russian leader.
Acknowledging Russia’s presence in Ukraine legal perspective, Russia’s actions in Ukraine do not cross the might have forced international institutions to introduce a threshold of international conflict despite ample evidence more severe punishment and might even have led to a fulldemonstrating Russia’s military involvement in the country. scale war.
Instead, a consistent denial of Russia’s military Russia’s actions in eastern Ukraine also fail to meet the law of presence allows for more flexibility in resolving the Ukrainian belligerent occupation, which applies only when the following crisis.
Once he stops doing that, a point of position to carry out the normal functions of government over no return will be passed and the conflict will escalate until the affected area.
To prove that Russia is occupying eastern Russia, as the stronger side, wins a decisive military victory Ukraine “it must be proved that the State wields overall control or until the West drops its reservations and sends in troops, over the group, not only by equipping and financing the group, too.
Sam Charap, from IISS, points out that So far, the documented degree of Russian involvement “paradoxically, Moscow could well be lying about its behavior in Ukraine is insufficient to meet the overall control test. in Ukraine not because it wants to destroy the international Although the evidence is enough to prove Russia finances and system but because it wants to preserve it; hypocrisy, after all, equips the pro-Russian separatists, it is insufficient to meet is the homage vice pays to virtue.
As the legal successor of the the requirements of organizing, coordinating and/or helping Soviet Union, Russia was one of the system’s architects.
In sum, from a purely legal a veto-wielding permanent member of its central decisionperspective, the conflict between the Ukrainian government making body, the UN Security Council.
The Kremlin sees and the pro-Russian separatists is an internal conflict, not itself as behaving much like Washington, which devises an international one.
That, in turn, tremendously benefits clever legal arguments for what are considered in Moscow Russia, which is formally able to present itself as an outside major instances of rule-breaking; the invasion of Iraq, say, observer, rather than a party in the conflict.
Many in the Kremlin would provides Russia with enhanced influence in international say great powers can and do break the rules but they must organizations, as illustrated by the February 2015 “Minsk II” cloak their violations in rhetoric to prevent others following ceasefire agreement.
Russia mimicked Kosovo’s precedent of unilateral secession, which was later recognized by the United Nations, in the Russia’s legal status as an influential outside observer rather annexation of Crimea.
Thus, despite the role of Russia’s than a belligerent enables it to pursue a variety of possible exit military in overthrowing the Crimean government prior strategies and peace settlements.
The current “hybrid peace” to its declaration of unilateral succession from Ukraine, that has replaced the earlier “hybrid war” allows Russia to shift the Kosovo precedent gave Russia pseudo-legal grounds to from combat operations to non-military modes of war such as justify its annexation of the peninsula.
Unlike Crimea, there economic coercion in order to continue pursuing institutional was no legal precedent that could be construed as relevant to change in Ukraine.
Again, under the Minsk accords, Russia, its combat operations in Donetsk and Luhansk, which Russia as one of the signatories rather than a warring party, formally seeks to use as instruments of political influence within bears no responsibility for the settlement.
It will also permit Russia to avoid clashes with heavily armed, but less mobile Military Applications parts of the enemy and quickly neutralize or eliminate these units’ command structures, paralyzing resistance.
On the tactical level, information warfare allows Russia to achieve surprise in the time or manner of an attack.
Since, officially, the war in Ukraine is not declared, and the separatists conduct high-intensity operations in The military and strategic objectives of Russia’s information short bursts that limit the amount of time that the United campaign include confusion, obfuscation and constraining States has to respond before the situation goes quiet, the United States decision-making.
Russia’s assessed goals (federalization enemy is usually taken by surprise and/or presented with an of Ukraine, or special status of Donetsk and Luhansk erroneous or incomplete image of the situation.
This factor separatist-controlled regions) represent a substantive change has helped Russia’s successful operation in Crimea with very from its previous objectives because of the failure of previous few casualties.
If anything, at this point the success of Russia’s is that as the West understands Russia’s tactics better, the information warfare seems limited. advantage of novelty in Russia’s approach to Crimea is less likely to benefit its next adventure.
A Russian information campaign is most effective at the early stages of a combat operation, when it provides cover for Informational cover provides more flexibility and efficiency rapid military actions.
Galeotti, in his comparative overview to the military, improves speed of maneuverability and of Russia’s actions in Crimea and the Luhansk and Donetsk the speed of battlefield responses.
For example, the initial regions of eastern Ukraine, points out that the element of denial by the Russian chief commanders of the presence of uncertainty present in the annexation of Crimea injected the Russian soldiers in Crimea allowed Russia to gain time doubt into both Kyiv and NATO’s calculations.
Since the start of notes that “deliberate maskirovka or deception operations” the Crimean campaign President Vladimir Putin repeatedly presented the Russia and pro-Russian factions in Crimea the denied that the men in green were part of Russian Armed opportunity to assume strategic positions on the peninsula.
Forces, insisting they were groups of local militia who had However, Russia has lost this opportunity in its operations obtained their weapons from Ukrainians and even suggesting in the Luhansk and Donetsk regions.
Russian troops were that they may have acquired their Russian-looking uniforms unable to penetrate these regions as promptly as in Crimea from local shops.
Only on April 17, 2015 did he finally due both to the lack of military resources (the best forces were publicly acknowledge that Russian Special Forces were kept in Crimea) and to Russia’s overestimation of the support involved in the events of Crimea. it would receive in eastern Ukraine.
Galeotti also points out that the political disorder in Kyiv, which helped Russia in the The informational cover also offers the military more Crimean operation, now plays against it, since the Ukrainian autonomy – which is in line with the new realities of combat, government is not capable of making the concessions Russia when the greater precision and autonomy of the troops demands due the existential threat it would face from its is in more demand than ever before in Russian history. domestic opponents.
As a report by NATO StratCom Russia has managed to avoid a larger confrontation with the West Center of Excellence points out, the evolution of the crisis in despite having committed severe violations of international law.
Ukraine beyond Crimea demonstrated that “disinformation Second, since the conflict in Ukraine still lacks recognition as an campaigns erode over time as more and more evidence is international conflict, Russia is not acknowledged as a belligerent revealed to negate lies and falsifications, hidden information in the Minsk ceasefire agreements, and so the burden of fulfilling is discovered, anecdotal mistakes are made by the less wary the agreement largely lies on the Ukrainian government.
The Limits of the Russian Information Campaign However, one could argue that Russia’s information campaign did achieve partial success by obfuscating its goals in Ukraine.
However, Russia’s propaganda campaign has not been particularly As stressed above, Russia’s denial of its military presence successful writ large.
RT and other Russian propaganda channels in Ukraine did provide it with a larger toolkit to shape the insist that the Western audience craves alternative information outcomes of the crisis.
In his book, Lukas Alpert explained how RT reached campaign serves as cover for its military operation in Ukraine, out to disaffected citizens in Europe and North America from on the diplomatic level it expands the spectrum of Russian exit both the political left and right by combining “clever use of the strategies from the conflict as well as peace settlements.
Afterwards, its reputation dramatically overstating the success of their disinformation suffered a major blow due its biased coverage of the conflict, campaigns in order to boost personal promotions or which did not go unnoticed by the audience. remunerations.
Surveys expose limitations of Russia’s propaganda especially in Germany, where Russia’s propaganda effectively machinery within Ukraine.
In April 2014, Gallup polls found targets European antiUnited States sentiment and Germany’s postthat only 2 percent of Ukrainian respondents named Russian WWII guilt complex towards Russia.A number of leading federal broadcasters among their three most important sources German media, for example, have helped spread many of of information.
Such low figures demonstrated the success of an the Kremlin myths in one form or another.
The case is order imposed in March 2014, which banned these channels on either that Germans are supersensitive to anything related Ukrainian cable networks.
In fact, the Russian news channels to nationalism (the post-war syndrome of the Second World that enjoyed a weekly reach of almost 19 percent in Ukraine in War) or a result of the ‘close connections’ between the 2012, now are reduced to around 9 percent.
Likewise, cross-border information flow Ukraine. failed to generate a majority of support for Russia’s behavior towards Ukraine in any region besides Crimea.
Russia’s role in In 2014, an investigative report by the newspaper Welt the crisis was perceived as ‘mostly positive’ by only 35 percent am Sonntag revealed how a shady network of Russia of respondents in the East and 28% in the South of Ukraine.
Even the Center, West and North, less than 3 percent of respondents dialogue forums with Russia, co-sponsored by the German considered Russia’s role to have been ‘mostly positive’.71 government, were full of friends of Mr Putin, even on the German side.
And yet, when in 2014 companies like If Russia’s strategists hoped to use their TV campaign for ‘soft Siemens, E.ON, gas companies and machinery companies power’ they failed to do so.
Most Ukrainians do not want traditional lobbyists of pro-Russian policies in Germany what the Russian government wants, as demonstrated by their tried to lobby against anti-Russian sanctions, they were consistent aversion to the idea of federalization.
Analysts even completely ignored by the German government. point out that in Ukraine, Russian propaganda localized dissent rather than making it massively attractive.
However, one cannot Gemma Pörzgen, a German journalist who has published ignore the possibility that destabilization might well be one of extensively on Russia’s media campaign, argues that in Russia’s goals.
In Germany, RT Deutsch only broadcasts on the internet, and Similar failures are present in Western countries as well, where, does not have access to main TV channels (with occasional for example, RT, following the outbreak of the Ukraine crisis, minor exceptions), offering a professionally weak “trash was unable to sustain a good reputation.
German hosts of analysts point out that RT’s power to shape the narrative in and journalists working on RT Deutsch are not recognizable the West is overstated.
Then it’s proved coverage about the program has been very critical from the wrong and Russia is embarrassed and vilified once again…The very beginning and has created a very negative image of the whole campaign is just to stay relevant and keep Western media program.
It is hard for RT Deutsch to find serious interviewpumping out the anti-Russia stuff.
Then they can cherry-pick partners as politicians, scientists or spokes-persons.
RT from all the rage and sell it back to the domestic news audience, Deutsch has about 107,000 followers on Facebook and where they have a media monopoly.
But in the open market of 7,500 followers on Twitter, far less than the English page journalism, in the West, Russian propaganda is worthless.”73 of RT, which has about 3 million followers on Facebook.
WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG 19 RUSSIA REPORT 1 | PUTIN’S INFORMATION WAR IN UKRAINE | MARIA SNEGOVAYA | SEPTEMBER 2015 According to Pörzgen, many of RT Deutsch publications for international news channels.
RT’s Russia’s image in Germany. official Twitter account has 815,000 followers, compared to 8 million followers of BBC World News and the 14. million Another tool of Moscow’s information campaign – Sputnik CNN’s 14.9m followers.
On Facebook the station fairs slightly Deutschland News Agency, previously known as Voice of better but still loses out to competitors by a huge margin.
Russia (~5,500 Twitter followers and 108,500 Facebook RT has around 2. million fans on Facebook, compared to followers), provides higher quality news, but is hardly the 8. million and 16 million fans of BBC World News and known in Germany since it only broadcasts at a local CNN.82 The most successful period of RT has likely passed. level with negligible reach.
It failed to get access to radio Its audience has drastically shrunk following the Ukrainian frequency waves, and only constitutes a part of some regional crisis and unfavorable view of Russia spreading around the digital radio programs.
A third element of the Kremlin world. information campaign, “Russia Beyond the Headlines,” which is now being distributed as a PR-supplement to CONCLUSION the economic daily “Handelsblatt,” does not enjoy large outreach either.
The more influential German daily The information war and the war in Ukraine are by no means “Süddeutsche Zeitung”, which previously distributed the over; Russia is re-accumulating forces to strike again.
Hence, same PR-supplement, produced by “Rossiyskaya Gazeta” in it will keep learning, and is likely to come up with more Moscow, with a different title “Russia Today”, stopped the sophisticated informational tactics. supplement in the wake of the Ukraine crisis.
Russia will attempt to continue informational warfare in the Overall, the current degree of effectiveness of Russia’s future, albeit through potentially more subtle means, even propaganda in Germany is hard to estimate, but it can though the strategy failed to meet some of its goals.
According to a June 2015 Pew other approaches, it will keep using its Security Service very Survey, fewer than three-in-ten Germans hold actively to influence Western decision-making.
Although this assessment has using Andronik Migranyan, who has never been respected improved 8 points since last year, it was still down from a in the United States policy-making circles, a more subtle cooptation recent high of 50 percent in 2010.79 Opinions of Putin and of Western think-tanks will continue.
In the future, a Russia’s actions in Ukraine (including the of downing flight continued de-escalation in Ukraine and Western conflict MH17 by pro-Russian separatists) are also at their lowest fatigue might benefit the Russian side as well by providing levels for the last decade. more fuel for its disinformation.
In general, the effect of Russia’s international media In seeking to improve, Russia would have to centralize its outreach is currently less than it should be, considering the information techniques and increase its coordination among funds the Kremlin has devoted to it.
One of the biggest reasons for calculate RT’s global audience, many experts agree that the the limitations of Russia’s disinformation campaign is the numbers are surprisingly low, given the amount of effort campaign’s extremely decentralized tactics– multiple proRT has put into using the internet to reach out to a younger, Kremlin agencies are responsible for generating poor-quality more tech-savvy audience.
According to a Nielsen study, the English, German, and Finnish-speaking internet trolls. weekly audience of RT more than doubled in seven major The multiple excuses of various pro-Kremlin companies United States cities to 2. million viewers.
According to a survey attempting to fabricate evidence of downing the Malaysian by Ipsos EMS in 2015 RT has become the fastest-growing Airlines Flight17 to blame Ukraine is the most illustrative international TV channels in Western and Central Europe. example of such coordination failures.
The disinformation In 21 European countries RT weekly audience increased campaign failed to establish a unified alternative hypothesis by 24% .81 However skeptics argue that for how the plane crashed.
Along with that, multiple poorly faked in conflict by surrounding the conflict with confusion and pieces of evidence were generated by numerous pro-Kremlin controversy.
Like a good judo move, it works best when it helps agencies, culminating with a pro-Kremlin broadcasts on a push the adversary in a direction in which he wanted to go in major TV channel showing a poorly doctored photo of an the first place.
In the case of Ukraine, the West prefers inaction, Su-25-firedmissile, which was immediately discredited on and Russia’s information operations have provided support to the web.
If anything, the abundance of poor-quality fakes the policy of inaction.
The Kremlin despite Russia’s multiple violations of international laws, its will probably re-analyze these failures in order to come support for the first major mechanized war on the European up with a more unified approach to disinformation in the continent since 1945, and the steady destruction of a Ukrainian future.
Indeed, it is ironic that Russia failed so badly in the state that had been seeking to join the European Union and very network coordination issue Bedritsky emphasized so NATO. strongly as one particular innovation of the new century of information warfare.
But this reflexive control strategy was aimed at preventing the West from intervening in Ukraine rather than at accomplishing Overall, the above analysis suggests that the novelty of objectives within Ukraine itself.
It bought Putin plenty of time Russia’s information warfare is overestimated.
Most of the and space in which to operate in Ukraine, but he could not allegedly ‘new’ approaches come from the Soviet toolkit, and convert that opportunity into success because of failures on the if anything, they are implemented with poorer quality and ground.
Miscalculations regarding the degree of active support decreased efficiency.
For the U.S., NATO, and Ukrainian the separatists would receive and the benefits of inducing forces dealing with Russia’s use of information warfare, disruption and paralysis in Kyiv have led to a difficult stalemate this means that addressing the problem requires calling to rather than the rapid success Putin initially sought.
But the mind approaches used by the West in addressing the Soviet protraction of the conflict in the current state generally reduces disinformation campaigns during the Cold War. the effectiveness of Russian information operations that were not designed for a long fight in this case.
Putin has a wide Fundamentally, the goal of hybrid warfare is to take advantage variety of options—the nature of this form of hybrid warfare is of the domestic weaknesses of other countries.
Its success diplomat in a private conversation recently suggested that depends heavily on certain conditions holding in the minds while in countries like Czech Republic the influence of RT or of the adversary.
The about the EU integration and the U.S.’s international role, or hybrid strategy will always pose significant challenges to the West, nostalgic about Communism who often become susceptible to and it must be much more alert to the indicators of Russian Russia’s propaganda.
But the West is not helpless in the Pörzgen suggests that Russian propaganda is much more face of such a strategy either.
It can and must, in fact, develop a effective in influencing a broader public through certain theory and doctrine of its own to counter it. opinion-makers, anti-Ukrainian books and a concerted antimedia campaign.
Hybrid warfare relies for success on taking advantage of the Layout by Casey Jaquez vulnerabilities of a stronger adversary.
Non-Linear War,” July 6, 2014, reuters.com/article/2014/02/27/us-russia-military-cloutHttps://Inmoscowsshadows.Wordpress.Com/2014/07/06/ idUSBREA1Q1YR20140227.
Mark Galeotti, “The ‘Gerasimov Doctrine’ And Russian And National Security Edited By Franklin D Kramer, Stuart Non-Linear War,” July 6, 2014, Https://Inmoscowsshadows.
For example, Eurocommunist movements, which were used against the deployment of United States intermediate-range missiles 10.
Clifford Reid, “Reflexive Control In Soviet Military in Europe under Reagan.
Later, crater analysis of the shells that imheres-what-hes-trying-to-do-2015-6. pacted in the square, along with other supporting evidence, indicated that the incident did not happen as originally 32.
This evidence also threw into doubt the identities And The Military,” Journal Of Slavic Military Studies 2004, of the perpetrators of the attack.
A United States and hopeless Zugzwang”], Politicheskoye Obozreneye, September Canadian officer soon backed this position.
Bedritsky, [“Realization of the Concepts of Information Warfare by the Military Political Leadership of the 35.
Timothy L Thomas, “Russia’s Reflexive Control Theory USA during the Modern Era”], RISI, 2007.
Gabriela Baczynska, “Russia Says No Proof It Sent war-in-ukraine-and-boris-nemtsov-s-putin-war.
Timothy L Thomas, “Russia’s Reflexive Control Theory crisis-lavrov-idUSKBN0KU12Y20150121.
Kox Alfred “Situation with the international trial on the Malaysian Boeing, downed in Donbas is hellish,” Face41.
Alexey Levinson, “Public opinion and propaganda in acrobatics,” Financial Times, March 24, 2015, www.
RT is a Russian Ukraine olive branches delivered by Russian tanks,” The state-funded television network which runs cable, satellite Guardian.
Democracy, December 5, 2014, www.opendemocracy.net/ od-russia/daniel-kennedy/who%E2%80%99s-afraid-of61. , Radio russia-today.
Ukraine-and-Russia-E-IR.pdf. org/the-limitations-of-russian-propaganda-in-ukrainerussian-tv-is-waging-a-propaganda-war-against-ukraine63.
Bedritsky, [“Realization of the Concepts of Inforbut-is-it-working/. mation Warfare by the Military Political Leadership of the USA during the Modern Era”], RISI, 2007.
Open Democracy, December 5, 2014, www.opendemocracy.net/ WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG 25 NOTES od-russia/daniel-kennedy/who%E2%80%99s-afraid-of-rusShot Down MH17,” The Daily Beast, July 17, 2015, www. sia-today. thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/07/17/how-we-knowrussia-shot-down-mh17.html.
The Untold Secrets of Russia’s Master Spy in America After the End of the Cold War,” Pen86.
Wary of Russia, Leery of Action on Ukraine,” Pew Research Center, June 10, 2015, www.pewglobal.org/2015/06/10/1-nato-public-opinion-wary-of-russia-leary-of-action-on-ukraine.
Open Democracy, December 5, 2014, www.opendemocracy.net/odrussia/daniel-kennedy/who%E2%80%99s-afraid-of-russiatoday.
James Kirchick, “How a United States Think Tank Fell for Putin,” The Daily Beast, July 27, 2015,www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/07/27/how-a-u-s-think-tank-fell-for-putin.html.
