The Case for the Breakup of the Ukraine 5 out of 5 based on 8 ratings. user reviews.
Just as the corporate media is not reporting that the USA and Russia are on a collision course which can end up in nuclear war, the corporate media is not reporting that the Ukraine is falling apart.
But the signs are all over the place, ranging from the outright bizarre attack by Ukronazi saboteurs on Crimea to the quasi daily reports of an “imminent”, but apparently never coming, Ukronazi attack against the Donbass.
Frankly, the Ukronazi project has outlived its utility and nobody gives a damn what will happen to the Ukrainian people.
Even a cursory look at what is happening in the Ukraine clearly shows that Stage 5 has already been reached, quite a while ago, really.
But a big, really big, Somalia, with millions of assault rifles circulating in the population, with major industrial sites capable of triggering another Chernobyl-like disaster, with various death-squads freely roaming around the country and imposing their rule with armored vehicles and heavy machine guns.
So if the always Euro-centric West could afford to ignore a Somalia in Somalia there is no way it can ignore a Somalia on the EU and NATO border.
Once the inevitable, and this time catastrophic, final collapse happens the resulting explosion will simple take the path of least resistance.
To the east we have Russia, with her superbly capable state security agencies, the newly created National Guard, large military formations deployed along the borders and, most importantly, an excellent understanding of what is taking place in the Ukraine.
To the west we have basically Conchita Wurst’s Europe, unable to formulate any policy at all , with parade-type military forces mostly hallucinating about the “Russian threat”, with security services who can’t even cope with the current flow of immigrants and, most importantly, with a ruling class and population which has no clue or understanding whatsoever of what is happening in the Ukraine.
Yup, while western leaders were busy blaming Russia for everything and making absolutely crazy promises to the Ukrainians, Russia has already had to absorb about 1,5 million refugees which did not only have to be carefully vetted for Nazi saboteurs and terrorists, but then also intelligently relocated.
All this is to say that when the inevitable explosion happens the Europeans will be the ones to get hit the hardest and who will have to scramble to cope with the situation.
Seeing how utterly incompetent and clueless the EU comprador elites are, we can fully expect them to make a total mess of the situation, as they always do, and end up worrying mostly about the political fallout resulting from the disaster.
I will never cease to mantrically repeat that Russia is much weaker than what most people think.
Her landmass is immense and her military arguably the best on the planet, but population is relatively small, and her economy a struggling one.
Yes, the future does look bright for Russia, but presently she simply does not have the means to single handedly rescue the Ukraine.
The reality is that even Crimea has presented Russia with major challenges.
After 25 years of total neglect, Crimea basically needs to completely rebuilt most of its infrastructure.
The Kremlin has poured billions of Rubles into numerous and large modernization programs, including an immensely expensive but vitally needed bridge over the Kerch strait, and she will continue to rebuilt Crimea in spite of the immense costs involved.
Down the road, of course, Crimea will end up being very wealthy, courtesy of an immense touristic potential, the presence of a much expanded Black Sea fleet and because of its strategic location.
But for the foreseeable future, Crimea will remain a major burden which Russia will struggle to deal with.
If Crimean was neglected, the Donbass has been almost totally destroyed.
Right now the Russians are paying the pensions of the local population because the Ukronazis have stolen them, in direct violation of the Minsk Agreements.
Russia is also alone in supporting the Novorussian republics with humanitarian, medical, technical, administrative and military programs.
And while the Novorussians have done an amazing job rebuilding much of Donetsk and a few other cities, most of what lies within artillery range of the Ukronazi forces still lies in ruins and the economy is more or less at a standstill.
What is already quite evident that regardless of who will be in the Kremlin and regardless of how much good will and self-sacrifice the Russians will have, Russia simply does not have the means to salvage the Ukraine.
Furthermore, polls show that most Russians are categorically opposed to a full reintegration of the entire Ukraine into Russia.
They are not only acutely aware that the Ukraine has turned into one bloody hell of a mess, but that an entire generation of Ukrainians has now been terminally brainwashed with russophobic hatred.
And, frankly, Russia has no use for Nazis of any kind, even if they are fellow Slavs or even if they are basically the very same nation as the Russian one.
At most, Russia will let the DNR/LNR get back the territories which belonged to their regions and Mariupol might be liberated.
And even if by some miracle the Novorussian tanks end up in Kiev, I don’t see them staying there for very long because the Kremlin fully understands that if they grab it, they own it and they have to fix it.
Eventually Russia will, of course, simply be forced absorb the Donbass and make it a part of Russia, mostly because there is no way the Donbass will ever go back to the Ukraine again, but even this process will take time.
So the Russians can’t afford it, the Europeans can’t do anything and the Americans have left.
What happens next is that the worse the situation becomes the stronger the obvious need for an international effort will become.
Once the Russians tell the Europeans in no equivocal terms “forget about our invasion, we are not doing it” , the Europeans will have to turn to their American masters and tell them that the EU will be regime-changed unless something is urgently done.
But even if that happens, I don’t see the main donors agreeing on a Ukrainian project.
In purely political terms, the most likely solution would be to have a neutral Ukrainian Federation of some kind.
Add to this a level of corruption and an expertise in misappropriating funds which Somalis can’t even begin to imagine, and you have a country which can probably “absorb” even a major donor’s help effort and remain in ruins.
Finally, there is the reality that the folks living in the western Ukraine are completely different from those in the south or east and that even if we remove the Nazi Banderites from the equation there is no such thing as a “Ukrainian nation” with a common project.
But imagine if the unitary Ukraine was allowed to break-up, under international supervision and, if needed, even under international military protection, into several smaller states.
A break-up of the Ukraine into several independent states could also make it much easier for each newly created state to sign bilateral agreements with its neighbors without having to get the agreement of folks living hundred of kilometers away and interested in a totally different set of agreements with their own neighbors.
Finally, small states are much easier to integrate into larger unions than huge ones.
Breaking up the Ukraine also presents a number of advantages to any peacekeeping/peace-enforcement efforts.
For example, while I don’t believe that the Russians would be willing to invade or annex most of the Ukraine, even east of the Dniepr river, I do believe that the Russians would be willing send in a peacekeeping/peace-enforcement force to provide security during a stabilization and transition phase provided that this operation is sanctioned by a UN Security Council resolution and has the support of all the major players.
Of course, just as any other break-up of a country, this plan does have major flaws and creates as many risks as it offers opportunities.
First and foremost, breaking-up any country no matter how artificial that country is, just creates more artificial borders, at least temporarily.
What is left of the Ukraine today is already extremely violent and it is pretty darn clear that things ain’t gonna get better anytime soon.
So we have to compare the comparable and not compare an admittedly bad situation to an invented ideal one.
Humpty Dumpty is broken now, and all that can still be salvaged are his various pieces.
So it’s not like we are discussing the break-up of, say, Japan or France.
Finally, I don’t see why some countries are considered prime candidates for break-up while other WWII borders would be sacrosanct.
Some will, no doubt, accusing me of being a “Putin agent” for suggesting that the Ukraine ought to be broken up.
Others will accusing me of being a CIA/Mossad agent for suggesting that NATO might actually have a legitimate mission west of the Dniepr river.
That kind of ad hominems come with the territory and I have long learned to ignore them.
All I will reply to those accusations is that while I lay 100% of the blame for the disaster in the Ukraine on the AngloZionist Empire, I also see that now this has become a common problem which will soon turn into a common threat which will require a common solution.
I just don’t see anybody capable of bringing back law and order east of the Dniepr besides Russia.
It should be obvious that Kiev squandered their one opportunity to reintegrate eastern Ukraine by not implementing Minsk in a timely manner.
They have also created extreme bitterness by shelling civilian areas for a year during the ceasefire.
Diplomatically, Putin should propose a deadline where either Kiev 1. modifies their constitution to define a federated state for Donbass, 2. grants amnesty for the rebels, OR recognizes a referendum by Donbas where they either join Russia or become a separate state.
But all of their leaders are Zionist-Jews, who are the arch nemesis of Europeans and NS was formed to fight against the spread of Zionism/Marxism.
The enemy now is the same enemy who funded the Marxist revolution in Russia.
London and DC funded the Marxist-Jew revolution that genocided Russians and Ukrainians and Europeans.
They would arrest their Zionist leaders and fight valiantly against the UK’s-SAS in their country and kick out NATO for good.
