Referendums by separatists in Ukraine, such as Sunday’s in Donyetsk, “don’t count,” NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen told CNN’s Christiane Amanpour on Monday.
Pro-Russian separatists claimed victory in a vote in the eastern Ukrainian region; they say that 90% of voters wanted independence from Ukraine.
And I urge all actors to make sure that those general elections can be conducted in an orderly manner,” Rasmussen told Amanpour.
NATO has tried, through limited troop deployments, military exercises, and air flights to present an enhanced deterrent to Russia, its erstwhile Cold War foe.
Amanpour asked if Russia could move against the Ukrainian port of Odessa or the surrounding area in an effort to land-lock the country.
NATO has seen no evidence of Russian withdrawal from the Ukrainian border, as Russian President Vladimir Putin has claimed, he told Amanpour.
Rasmussen also, of course, has much responsibility in Afghanistan, which just held the first round of presidential elections.
President Hamid Karzai has refused to sign a security agreement, which he negotiated, to keep foreign security forces in the country past 2014.
All of the major Afghan candidates, including the front-runner Abdullah Abdullah, have pledged to sign an agreement in interviews with Amanpour.
He praised the Afghan security forces’ performance securing the country for the presidential elections.
Instead, Russia should hire some mercenaries to overthrow the nazis in kiev using a bit of peaceful protesting.
Seems like Putin has played this guys around to where he actually wants them all.
Not one Russian was ever harmed by a Ukrainian before Putin moved in an took the Crimea and stirred up trouble in Donbas.
Such message from NATO chief is a direct way to a civil war because many-many thousands of peoplewho give their votes believe that thay are right.
That is not a fair and accurate representation, that is rigged to one outcome only.
Vote for me as much as you like, vote for him and never see the light of day again.
I'd take a bit of glee in the west having its hypocrisy thrown in its face if there weren't a lot of real people being hurt by these worthless games.
And if they're no Kremlin trolls, then their ignorance about Russia and the concept of democracy is downright scary.
A referendum that is so badly organized that anyone can vote as often as one likes is a joke.
The only difference I see is that most western nations are much more slick about it.
The difference is they threw a corrupt dictator out of Kiev through peaceful demonstrations.
Then a corrupt dictator came right back in with guns and took what he wanted.
The United States selecting the next leader of Ukraine sure doesn't sound like democracy to me.
You buy the United States and other western nations' propaganda because it's slicker.
Even if one person say that he/she disagree with current goverment he/she must be listened and usderstood.
Yes, he should probably write Putin a stern letter in the strongest terms.
Somehow these NATO dudes do all look like longing for the old days when SS goosestepped across Europe and Russians were killed by the hundred thousands.
It was recognized by the EU and United States observers as fully legitimate.
As for Germany, Merkel sides with her ""foe"" Schroeder in denying any real sanctions on their buddy Putin.
Schroeder even mocks the west with his hugging & kissing of his master, Putin.
As for Schroeder, sanctions should be put on him as well when entering N.America....not welcomed, period.
Odessa, Slavyansk, Mariupol – murders there were carried out NOT by Russians.
And now instead of ordering Kiev to stop the massacre Rasmussen is talking about further weapon deploying.
Amanpour has always been a propaganda tool for CNN's agenda, she's just an image.
To think otherwise you'd either have to be braindead or brainwashed by russian propaganda.
Lots of evidence of people voting several times at different polls, with no control.
So this Ratmonger guy was happy with a fascist coup that removed a democratic government.
Rasmussen and NATO leaders seem to have an obsession with Putin because NATO is the most powerful military force in the world and yet Putin does not bow down to them.
The hypocrisy is now so blatant that even European and American citizens are starting to question NATO's blind obsession and particularly, that it could lead to a very destructive world war.
Everybody in the world has seen how loudly NATO has supported separatist votes in Sudan, Yugoslavia, Kosovo yet now that the Donetsk region aspires to freedom from what they see as Ukrainian government with fascist partners.
This is a clear double standard and suggests an emotional obsession with Putin.
One positive thing about recent events is that the Ukrainian government forces have not gone in and simply shot the protestors like has happened in Egypt and other countries.
It suggests that, if left alone, the Ukrainians can sort out their differences because they are both Slavic people.
Rasmussen must stay out of their affairs because he and NATO, seem only to understand the use of force and violence.
Iraq, Libya and Afghanistan are all examples of why NATO should stay out of conflicts.
With these kind of comments you can probably brainwash your own fogy people.
Rasmussen is a piece of feces I really had no opinion before, but this is pure propaganda.
Any citizenry who would elect an american as president of Estonia deserves to be flattened.
I recommend you move to Russia for a ""working vacation"" for a few years.
Europe for Regions and Peoples – ethnic Russians have the right to seperate if they wish.
Send NATO troops to these 2 states and squash the people there, that is right.
I don't expect my gardener to give me medical advice and if he does, I ignore it.
Developing & poor countries, BEWARE, ban all the NGOs, stop trading in dollars & Euro, withdraw your Gold from federal reserve bank.
