Thousands of people have since died, towns and cities such as Mariupol lie in ruins and 13 million people have been displaced.
The Russian leader's initial aim was to overrun Ukraine and depose its government, ending for good its desire to join the Western defensive alliance Nato.
His declared aim was to protect people subjected to what he called eight years of bullying and genocide by Ukraine's government.
His adviser said Russian troops made two attempts to storm the presidential compound.Image source, Yevgeny BIYATOV/Sputnik/AFPImage caption, President Putin has spoken of Russia's invasion as a ""noble"" causeRussia's leader refused to call it an invasion or a war.
The claims of Nazis and genocide in Ukraine are completely unfounded but part of a narrative repeated by Russia for years.
However, an opinion piece by state-run news agency Ria Novosti made clear that ""denazification is inevitably also de-Ukrainisation"" in effect erasing the modern state.And it is Russia that is now accused by the international community of carrying out war crimes.
Several countries including the United States and Canada go further and call it genocide.
A month into the invasion, Russia pulled back from Kyiv and declared its main goal was the ""liberation of Donbas"" broadly referring to Ukraine's eastern regions of Luhansk and Donetsk.
More than a third of this area was already seized by Russian proxy forces in a war that began in 2014, now Russia wanted to conquer all of it.The Kremlin claimed it had ""generally accomplished"" the aims of the invasion's first phase, which it defined as considerably reducing Ukraine's combat potential.
Putin needs a victory,"" said Andrei Kortunov, head of the Russian International Affairs Council.
Russian officials are now focused on seizing the two big eastern regions and creating a land corridor along the south coast, east from Crimea to the Russian border.
They have claimed control of the southern region of Kherson and a leading Russian general has said they have hopes of seizing territory further west along the Black Sea coast towards Odesa and beyond.
The powerful head of Russia's security council, Nikolai Patrushev, has spoken of Ukraine disintegrating into ""several states"", blaming Ukrainian and Western hatred of Russia.The question is whether Russian forces have the numbers to press forward.
There is little sign of any negotiated end to this war in the immediate future.A few weeks into the war, Russia said it was considering a Ukrainian proposal of neutrality, but there have been no negotiations since the end of March.President Putin told the UN Secretary General at the end of April ""we are negotiating, we do not reject "", but he earlier declared negotiations at a dead end.
Ultimately wanted to divide the country and I think it's becoming more evident that's what he wants,"" says Barbara Zanchetta of King's College London's Department of War Studies.
Russia then seized Ukraine's southern region of Crimea and triggered a separatist rebellion in the east and a war that claimed 14,000 lives.
As he prepared to invade in February, he tore up an unfulfilled 2015 Minsk peace deal and accused Nato of threatening ""our historic future as a nation"", claiming without foundation that Nato countries wanted to bring war to Crimea.
For Russia's leader the West's 30-member defensive military alliance has one aim to split society in Russia and ultimately destroy it.
In a Victory Day speech on 9 May he accused Nato of launching an active military build-up on territories adjacent to Russia.
That means Central Europe, Eastern Europe and the Baltics.In President Putin's eyes, the West promised back in 1990 that Nato would expand ""not an inch to the east"", but did so anyway.
That was before the collapse of the Soviet Union, however, so the promise made to then Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev only referred to East Germany in the context of a reunified Germany.
Mr Gorbachev said later that ""the topic of Nato expansion was never discussed"" at the time.
Nato maintains it never intended to deploy combat troops on its eastern flank, until Russia annexed Crimea illegally in 2014.
If he has, his military setbacks in Ukraine may have put paid to any wider ambitions beyond its borders.
The most immediate threat is to Moldova, which is not part of Nato and has already come under Russian threat.But President Putin's ambition to roll Nato back to the late 1990s has taken a hit, with Finland and Sweden looking closely at joining an alliance that now seems as unified as ever.
He wanted to weaken Nato but Nato is now much stronger,"" says Barbara Zanchetta.Nato has warned of a war that could last weeks, months or even years, and said its members need to be prepared for a long haul.Russia has already punished two Nato members, Poland and Bulgaria, for the West's support for Ukraine, by cutting off their gas supplies.Having witnessed Mr Putin's willingness to lay waste to European cities to achieve his aims, Western leaders are now under no illusion.
Protest of any kind is banned and more than 15,000 people have been detained.
After a meeting with the Russian leader, Austrian Chancellor Karl Nehammer gave a very downbeat assessment of a man who had entered into a \\\""logic of war\\\"". \"",\""blocks\"":\\\"", but he earlier declared negotiations at a dead end.
