Russia has been using its natural gas exports, prices, and contracts as a tool of hybrid warfare against Ukraine and other former Soviet republics for decades.
On 28 February Ukraine’s state natural gas company Naftogaz won in an epic four-year legal battle against the Russian gas giant Gazprom in the Stockholm arbitration tribunal.
The Cabinet enacted its energy crisis response action plan, instructed power generating companies to switch from natural gas to boiler oil, recommended all academic institutions, from kindergartens to universities, to completely suspend work until 6 March.
Naftogaz signed an urgent contract with Poland’s company PGNiG arrange alternative supplies.
Gazprom announced that the company launched procedures in the Stockholm international arbitration court to terminate its supply contracts with Naftogaz.
The United States urged Russia not use gas as a political weapon against Ukraine.
On 5 March, Naftogaz announced that it would close its representative office in Russia by 12 March 2018.
Naftogaz demanded compensation from Gazprom for gas imports from EU amid the brief energy crisis.
Gazprom officially informed Naftogaz of the beginning of proceedings through the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce on the termination of gas contracts.
It was Russia’s revenge for the victory of Naftogaz over Gazprom in the Stockholm arbitration court.
Cutting the gas off, Gazprom acted as a political leverage of the Russian authorities.
In 2014, Gazprom cut off the gas supply to Ukraine, amid the unfolding Russian invasion in the Donbas, an eastern Ukrainian region.
Under the contract, Ukraine had to pay for more than 50 billion m³ of natural gas annually whether it was consumed or not – over 1/3 more than it needed after the Ukrainian economy took a dive following the Russian-inspired war in eastern Ukraine.
Moreover, as Russia occupied Crimea in 2014, Russia denounced the 30%-gas-discount Kharkiv Pact granted for extending Russia’s lease of a naval base in Crimea, increasing gas prices for Ukraine.
Plus, Naftogaz considered the 2011-2015 prices and “take-or-pay” volumes not appropriate.
In the fall of 2014, both sides filed lawsuits to the Stockholm Court of Arbitration.
This is the first time Ukraine beat the Russian monopolist in a European court.
Gazprom got used to dictating its terms to Ukraine under pressure of Russian gas blackmail for decades and it’s a great blow to Russia’s ego.
In December 2017, the Stockholm arbitration court revised the terms of the “take-or-pay” clause, obliging Naftogaz to only purchase 5 bcm of gas from Russia annually – a far cry from the initial 52 bcm/year.
In result, the court obliged Naftogaz to pay Gazprom $2 bn in arrears, much less than the $56 bn the Russian gas monopolist had sought.
Then, on 28 February 2018, the same court ruled in favor of Naftogaz once again, deciding that Gazprom under-delivered transit gas to Ukraine, which cost Naftogaz $4.63 bn.
After accounting for Ukraine’s arrears from 2014, Gazprom now owes Naftogaz a total of $2.56 bn – which, however, is a fragment of the $37 bn which Naftogaz had sought.
This time, Gazprom vocally disagreed, returned Naftogaz’s prepayment, and cut off supplies.
Ukraine did stop buying the Russian gas from Gazprom back in 2015, buying it from European companies instead.
But the ruling of the Stockholm arbitration court obliged Ukraine to renew buying gas from Gazprom according to the current contract – though, in much smaller volumes than Moscow demanded, according to its needs, and at lower prices.
This supply had to start on 1 March 2018, when Gazprom suddenly refused to perform the contract and returned the prepayment.
Such a dramatic drop was the result of the popular support of Naftogaz and President Poroshenko’s initiative #Prykruty , and of the emergency measures by the Ukrainian government.
Kyiv had ordered power companies to replace gas with alternative fuels where possible, temporarily close schools and universities, and ask industrial enterprises to revise their plans in order to save energy.
It was before Russia occupied Crimea and orchestrated a war in Donbas in 2014, but that changed.
Now, Ukrainian domestic natural gas production covers some 60% of its total consumption, which stands at around 32 bcm/year.
Ukraine still remains dependent on natural gas of Russian origin, but not on Russian supplies.
Starting from 2015, Ukraine purchased gas exclusively from EU companies.
Today, domestic production, imports from the EU, and Ukraine’s huge subterranean storage facilities provide the country with a balanced consumption of gas.
In 2017, Ukrainian domestic production was 20. bcm with the consumption of 31. bcm, while 14. bcm were imported from Europe.
The government plans to increase gas production up to 35 bcm and lower the consumption to 30 bcm by 2035 to export annually 5 bcm of natural gas.
The Stockholm arbitration court obliged Ukraine to renew gas imports from Russia, and Ukraine prepaid for the volumes it expected Russia to supply, relying on them, but Russia refused to supply gas according to the ruling of the Court and returned the prepayment.
Although Ukraine had enough gas in underground storages to make up for the lost volumes, it’s difficult to quickly extract it and transfer within the national pipeline system to consumers.
Moreover, at the end of the heating season, when the supply is nearly exhausted, the underground pressure drops and the gas extraction rate decreases with it.
Imagine a beach ball – if it’s pumped up to a maximum pressure, the air will be released faster from its valve than if it’s half deflated.
The problem was made even worse by Gazprom’s maintenance of the lowest available pressure at the entrance to Ukraine’s gas transport system throughout the entire winter of 2017-2018.
Gas blackmail like this was an element of Russian foreign policy and a “political weapon” to either keep its neighboring countries in Russia’s orbit or at least to influence them.
Since Ukrainian independence in 1991, Russia temporarily suspended its gas pressure on Ukraine only during the presidency of Viktor Yanukovych , the pro-Russian president ousted by the Euromaidan in early 2014.
Russia suspended gas exports several times between 1992 and 1994 as a result of disputes over non-payments by Ukraine.
In 1993, then Russian President Boris Yeltsin offered to annul Ukraine’s gas debt to Ukrainian president Leonid Kravchuk in return for control over the Black Sea fleet and Ukraine’s nuclear warheads.
Kravchuk could have agreed, but a strong rebuke from politicians in Kyiv made him abandon the idea.
In 1994, a Ukrainian deputy prime minister agreed with Russia that Gazprom could acquire a 51% stake in the pipeline system.
However, in 1995, the Verkhovna Rada adopted a law prohibiting the privatization of oil and gas assets.
In 1998, Gazprom alleged that Ukraine had illegally diverted gas meant for export to other European countries and suspended exports of oil and electricity to the country in 1999.
The debt issue was settled only in 2001, by the signing of an intergovernmental gas transit agreement.
In 2005 as the Orange Revolution disrupted Russia’s plans for the Ukrainian presidency of pro-Russian Viktor Yanukovych, Russia trebled the gas price for Ukraine.
The Ukrainian government accepted the Russian demand with the stipulation that price increases were to be gradual.
Later in 2005, Gazprom stated that 7. bcm of its gas deposited in Ukrainian storage reservoirs was not available.
It remained unclear if it was missing, had disappeared due to technical problems, or had been stolen.
As the negotiations between Gazprom and Naftogaz over prices and a new gas supply agreement failed, Gazprom started reducing the pressure in the pipelines from Russia to Ukraine on 1 January 2006.
The supply was restored on 4 January 2006, after the preliminary agreement between Ukraine and Gazprom was settled.
In January 2008, Gazprom threatened it would reduce supplies to Ukraine if $1. bn in gas debts were not paid.
Later in February 2008, Gazprom claimed that Ukraine didn’t pay a $600 mn bill, stating that Russia supplied its own gas instead of cheaper Central Asian gas for several months.
Ukraine disagreed with Russia’s claims and on 3 March 2008, Gazprom claimed that the $1. billion debt still was not paid and cut the shipments to Ukraine by 25%, and an additional 25% the next day.
On 7 January, Russia cut off all gas exports via Ukraine and several countries reported a major fall in supplies.
Bulgaria, Moldova, and Slovakia were among the most affected by the drops.
Several days after Russia initiated the crisis, Gazprom and RosUkrEnergo filed lawsuits against Naftogaz in Stockholm arbitration court and later won $200 mn as a penalty as well as the return of 12. bcm of natural gas for breaches of contracts.
Again, as usual, Russia also accused Ukraine of illegal diversion of natural gas, however, these accusations were not confirmed.
In March 2014 amid the Russian invasion of Crimea and its further annexation, Russia seized Ukrainian assets in Crimea, including the oil and gas company Chornomornaftogaz, a subsidiary of Ukraine’s state-owned Naftogaz.
Formally, Gazprom has no dealings with the seized company to avoid facing sanctions itself, but Chornomorsknaftogaz continues to illegally extract gas on the fields of Ukraine’s occupied Crimea.
In March 2014, having annexed Crimea, Russia denounced the 2010 Kharkiv Pact and its 30% gas discount.
Later in June 2014, Gazprom stated that Ukraine’s debt to the company was $4. bn.
Unilaterally Gazprom decided that Ukraine had to pay upfront, and completely halted gas supplies to Ukraine.
This instance of blackmail accompanied the direct invasion of Russian regular troops in the East-Ukrainian region of the Donbas.
The Russian regulars came support the irregular formations which were losing battles to Ukrainian forces.
Russia agreed to resume gas supply only in October 2014, after the peace deal known as the Minsk Protocol was signed by the representatives of Ukraine and Russia.
In November 2015, Gazprom halted its exports of gas to Ukraine because Ukraine had stopped buying it.
Naftogaz and Gazprom filed lawsuits to the Stockholm arbitration court.
In February 2018, Naftogas won the epic four-year legal battle in Stockholm.
In retaliation, on 1 March Gazprom tried to provoke another gas crisis in the EU and to blame Ukraine in what Putin calls “snatching gas,” as Russia did in 2006 and 2009.
However, Ukraine is not that gas dependent anymore, and Ukrainians, having lowered the daily gas consumption by 14%, saved the uninterrupted gas supply to the European Union.
As a result, Gazprom itself shot in the foot, having given Ukraine grounds for further lawsuits against itself.
It does, but in this case, Gazprom’s actions were politically motivated.
Gazprom could have halted gas supplies to Ukraine in order to cause drops of pressure in the EU, as Gazprom succeeded in 2006 and 2009, and later to sue Ukraine as in 2009.
German energy expert Claudia Kemfert commented to DW on the current Russian attempt to instigate another gas crisis, “There are certainly also political motives here.
Just a day before the cut-off, on 28 February 2018, Naftogaz won the lawsuit against Gazprom in the Stockholm arbitration court regarding the Russia-Ukraine contract on transit, as a result of which Gazprom was obliged to pay Naftogaz $2.56 bn.
Gazprom announced it disagrees with the Stockholm court’s ruling and on 1 March 2018, Gazprom’s deputy head, Alexander Medvedev that Gazprom was not going to resume gas deliveries to Ukraine and returned a prepayment.
Meanwhile, Gazprom CEO Alexei Miller claimed that the Stockholm court was guided by double standards.
On 5 March 2018, Miller announced Gazprom was preparing to terminate the 2009 contract with Naftogaz.
This is a standard position, so it’s extremely likely that there will be attempts to not implement the decision,” he told, referring to the time when Russia appealed to the arbitration court in The Hague.
Economic expert Yevhen Oleinykov also mentioned the case of the Noga company, when Russia effectively ignored the decision of the Stockholm arbitration court.
On 6 March 2018, Gazprom announced it appealed the decision of the court in the gas supply case and expects to submit an appeal in the gas transit case by the end of March.
Therefore, the theoretical possibility of the decision being canceled exists, but it is small.
Regarding how the decision can be implemented, Ukrainian President Poroshenko said that Ukraine will aim to arrest Gazprom’s assets in Ukraine and seize its foreign assets.
However, Marchenko notes that such actions take a long time and require efforts, as each country has its own procedures for such seizures.
Meanwhile, Naftogaz’s commercial director Yuriy Vitrenko said that even if Gazprom will appeal the Stockholm Court’s decision, it is still effective starting from 1 March, which means that Gazprom will be additionally fined $500,000 daily until it repays the debt.
Moscow’s reaction to the Stockholm verdict shows that Russia can attempt to repeat gas blackmail anytime in the future.
This latest attempt, unlike those in the previous decades, when Ukraine was extremely dependent on Gazprom’s gas, was unsuccessful partially because post-Maidan Ukraine had been pursuing an energy independence policy.
However, if Russia would fully halt supplies to the EU via Ukraine, Ukraine wouldn’t be able to cover the EU demand for gas using its own supply and production.
Another threat to the EU may be posed by the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, poised to connect Russia directly with Germany bypassing the Ukrainian gas transport system.
As the speakers of the parliaments of Ukraine, Moldova, Poland, Lithuania, and Latvia warn parliamentarians of the EU countries, Nord Stream 2 may only increase Europe’s energy dependence on Russia.
The speakers insist that Nord Stream 2 is, in fact, a political instrument of Russia despite the fact that it has been presented as a commercial project.
