In this issue, he pits America’s two greatest generals against each other as he recounts the men’s Welcome “Find out where your enemy is.
Strike him as hard as you can, and keep moving on” military careers in the Civil _ Ulyss es S Grant War and beyond . obert E Lee and Ulysses __ was as daring as it was genius.
Grant are perhaps It carried great risk, but meant In his continuing quest to two of the most oftenthe even greater rewards of map the entirety of Japanese compared generals in all history, gold, glory and maybe even the military history, this issue as well as the USA’s most French throne.
To learn more about the planes and the pilots of this tragic tactic, turn to page 82.
JACK GRIFFITHS To commemorate the 600th anniversary of the Battle of celebrated civil war leaders.
These West Point graduates bore the heavy responsibility of command and often took great risks with men’s lives to achieve what they saw as the greater quest to heal their nation.
Most tragic tactic FLIGHT OF HITLER’S CONDOR LEGION 50 Rediscover how Nazi Germany won the Spanish Civil War WAR IN FOCUS _ uti ttt MEET \ % Z % Z ao Z Z Z LIGHT ARTILLERY Taken 12 July 2014 26 Regiment Royal Artillery, at Camp Bastion, fires an illumination round to support nearby British troops on operation.
The regiment was formed in 1947 from the 4th Field Artillery Brigade and reunited batteries that had previously served together under other formations for several years.
FOCUS CROSSING OF THE RUSSIAN ARMY OVER THE DANUBE Painted 1883 Here, Nikolai Dmitriev-Orenburgsky depicts the dramatic scene of some 185,000 Russian troops making a river crossing to attack the Ottoman Empire in June 1877.
Seen here alongside the Red Arrows, the final airworthy Vulcan ended its flying career in 2015, as it reached the end of its operational life span.
It was . restored to working order more than 1, a decade ago with popular dj iy support.
Although this agreement was tolerated for some nine a years, when Philip VI began to interfere in Edward’s war . against Scotland, Edward reasserted his claim to the French throne.
PEASANTS’ REVOLT PANIC ON THE STREETS OF LONDON 1381 England In England, the effects of fighting a long and bitter war were beginning to show.
The country’s peasants were forced to pay high taxes to subsidise it and the 1380 poll tax pushed them to breaking point.
When a tax collector attempted to gather unpaid taxes in Essex, it led to a full-scale revolt.
However, violence continued and many rebel leaders were tracked down and killed.
There were periods of peace between the conflicts, and many historians disagree about when it truly began and ended.
SIEGE OF ORLEANS FRANCE’S HEROINE TAKES A STAND After the crushing defeat at Agincourt, France had struggled to achieve much success against the English, but this changed at Orléans.
England had held the siege on the strategic city for almost half a year, and victory seemed assured.
However, when Joan of Arc arrived, accompanied by a small army, fierce resistance spread among the French ranks and forced the English to retreat in just nine days.
J was Joan of Arc’s first major military, victory Rather than facing the French in open conflict, Edward the Black Prince preferred to lead raids known as chevauchées.
These horse charges would plunder cities, burn crops and cause as much destruction as possible.
The region was reclaimed and Henry slowly captured more and more of Gascony.
The two forces eventually met, but the English miscalculated the strength and size of the French army and were destroyed by their artillery.
The defeat led England to lose almost all its land in France, and marked the end of the long and bloody conflict.
Although Joan of Arc is commonly portrayed as a fiery tomboy, she only wore male clothes when necessary, much preferring to don a dress.
She was also known to loathe the female camp followers, and there are even accounts of her chasing some away with a sword. of Shrewsbury, an — ral, was killed Edward Ill was just 14 when he inherited the English crown in 1327, and reigned until his death in 1377.
Considering he was a Medieval king in a time of conflict, this is an impressive accolade.
Although, thanks to Shakespeare, Henry V is seen today as a paragon of English chivalry, he was actually a rather ruthless warrior and leader.
FRANCE _ Though she would go on to become a heroine and martyr of France, Joan of Arc came from humble origins.
She was born in the tiny village of Domremy, where she lived the quiet life of a farmer’s daughter.
This all changed when, at the age of 12, she began to experience religious visions of saints and angels that spoke to her.
Most significantly, she claimed to speak to the archangel Michael, one of the patron saints of the French Royal Army.
The situation in France at the time was at breaking point — the uncrowned dauphin Charles was losing territory and the English were preparing for a fresh campaign.
After struggling to persuade the garrison commander of her mission, she finally convinced Robert de Baudricourt to take her to Charles.
Joan impressed the dauphin, who was desperate for any help he could get, heavenly or otherwise.
Despite some reservations from his court, Charles granted Joan everything she asked for — armour, a horse and an army.
By the time she arrived in the besieged city of Orléans, all eyes were on Joan.
Although she never personally took part in the battle, Joan accompanied the troops, holding her banner, and was even wounded by an arrow to the neck.
When the siege was over, and the English expelled, she was declared a heroine.
Her reputation spread far and wide, and she accompanied Charles on his assaults, helping him to take any towns that resisted.
It wasn’t just the English that began to fear Joan’s influence, but Charles himself.
When she was captured by the Burgundians after defending Compiégne, the French king made no efforts to rescue her.
Joan was given to the English, put on trial and found guilty of heresy and crossdressing.
Charles eventually had her name cleared, but only once a cult had begun to arise around the girl who fought and died for France and God.
THE HUNDRED YEARS’ WAR 3 Another of du Guesclin’s nicknames was ‘The Black Dog of Brocéliande’ and du Guesclin entered the service of the French king to be.
He led Charles’s forces to victory at the battle of Cocherel by defeating Charles II of Navarre, who had his sights set on the Duchy of Burgundy.
However, at the Battle of Auray, the French were bitterly Known as ‘The Eagle of Brittany’, Bertrand du defeated and du Guesclin captured.
Guesclin served as a French military commander The price that Charles was willing to pay for his during the early part of the Hundred Years’ War.
From safe return — 100,000 francs — indicates just how a tough upbringing, du Guesclin was regarded as ugly _ highly the Eagle was regarded.
He was later made and small, so he was forced to develop tenacity and Constable of France, unusual for someone as fighting spirit that aided him well in later life. lowborn as du Guesclin.
He immediately set about Du Guesclin first made his name while fighting forcing the English back across the sea with victory in the Breton War of Succession when the French after victory.
He also helped to defend conquer most of France from the invaders, and today the city of Rennes against a siege by the English.
His he is one of the most popular figures in the history of bravery and military prowess impressed Charles V, the country.
FRANCE 1330-/8 ALLEGIANCE: FRANCE A figure surrounded by myth and legend, Owain Lawgoch was a Welsh soldier who claimed descent through an ancient line of Welsh princes.
Although he is now regarded as a Welsh hero, Lawgoch grew up in England and received military training in France.
In 1369, he was stripped of his lands in England and in retaliation proclaimed himself Prince of Gwynedd.
Ambitious and flamboyant, he assembled a team of mercenaries and the French began to take notice of him.
Not only had Lawgoch won battles in France and Spain, he also offered the losing country a chance to strike the English on their own soil.
Charles V supported Lawgoch’s claims and financed a fleet of ships the Welsh rebel planned to use to invade Wales.
However, the ships didn’t get very far before Owain Lawgoch translates to ‘Owain of the Red Hand’ Charles V called them back and ordered them to attack La Rochelle instead, which Lawgoch did successfully.
Although some historians believe that these were simply intended to distract the English, the Crown took them seriously enough to dispatch an assassin to end the Welsh nuisance once and for all.
The Scottish assassin, Jon Lamb, successfully infiltrated Lawgoch’s band of men and stabbed the would-be king to death, ending the direct line of Welsh princes.
BURGUNDY Philip inherited the dukedom of Burgundy at a time when the Burgundian dukes lived in splendour.
Philip himself had a good reputation, known as ‘the bold’ thanks to his brave actions at the battle of Poitiers when he was just 14.
He was wounded, captured, and spent most of his late youth in captivity in England, where he played chess with the Black Prince.
When Charles V, Philip’s brother, ascended the throne, Philip was confirmed as duke of Burgundy and soon became a favourite of the French people.
He was an excellent negotiator and could easily win the favour of many difficult men.
When Charles V died in 1380, Philip assisted the young Charles VI in running the country.
As his nephew grew older, however, it became obvious that something wasn’t right.
He suffered fits of murderous rage and insanity so intense that he even killed his own knights.
Far more capable than his fragile nephew, Philip used his charm and negotiation skills to make an agreement with Richard II of England, and established a truce that lasted for 28 years.
Brittany would last until 1) but in this tight skir French emerge victorious.
His Netherlands series of victories helped make Aquitaine an English powerhouse.
Taking a series of French ' | . strongholds, the invasion culminates in the Battle of Agincourt.
The English longoowman, for instance, would have been a commoner, but his importance to the army and effectiveness in battle far outweighed his lowly status back home.
He would not have the wealth to buy the best armour, or anything other than crude melee weapons, so his skill with the bow was often his sole asset.
Cannons saw their first real use on European battlefields in the Hundred Years’ War explains just what a European army would have looked like GOO years ago also a personal squire to assist him in the fray.
Regardless, in the chaos of a fight, both these men would be looking to win gold and glory by defeating a rich enemy, who they could then seize and later ransom for profit.
The Medieval battlefield, therefore, was a great social leveller in the period.
Here she takes us through each of the troop types that would have made up both English and French forces during the Hundred Years’ War and beyond.
By the late 14th century, gunpowder artillery was playing an increasing role in warfare.
Gunners were often craftsmen as well as soldiers, ee seeing to the construction and repair of their weapons too.
In the army led to France by Richard, Duke of York, in 1441, for instance, only 2. per cent of the men-atarms were knights.
Not only had the Crown become more selective in its creation of knights, but also men of potential knightly standing were less keen to follow military careers.
In France, too, the proportion of knights in royal armies fell from 15 per cent in 1340 to 9. per cent in 1392. t 4 WHO FAILED 10 PRACTISE \\\ Virtually all peers had military careers \ \ \ and provided large numbers of troops »\ for the king on all campaigns.
The i needs of war also played a role in \\ noble creations and promotions.
In the early 15th century, the number and proportion of archers increased, possibly because they were cheap (their wage was half that of the man-at-arms’) but also because they were valuable in both offensive and defensive contexts.
Armed with a chivalric code, as well as the best weapons and armour, the mounted knight was a near-unstoppable force on the Medieval battlefield TTT ing ‘ one FRENCH KNIGHT Sesion TTT ee protected by their extensive FRANCE armour, their horses became HEAVY CAVALRY targets on the field instead.
PLATE MAIL A dismounted French knight LANCE, DAGGER, SWORD was at risk, So armour was APPROX 48KM /H developed for their mounts.
The barding was extensive, TTT Eee with many different parts including the champron, criniere, croupiere, flanchard and peytral.
They were usually about three metres long and made of wood with a steel tip.
The lance wouldn't This long and thin dagger would be used be thrown, but rather the knights to exploit gaps in an enemy’s armour would place the weapon under when the opportunity arose.
It could also a their arms, then gallop forward be used to pry open a visor, then jabbed against lines of infantry.
Up to French method was to place the 38 centimetres in length, this lancers in a double line, which was triangular blade was specially designed incredibly effective, shattering to allow for maximum penetration and through lines of infantry with ease. damage when stabbing an opponent.
For most French noblemen, fighting on foot was simply unthinkable, so acquiring the fastest, strongest mount was essential.
The English exploited this belief by stealing horses and burning their stables, severely impacting French cavalry training.
Later versions, known as ‘great bascinets’, A gorget was a circular piece of steel designed to be worn were very cumbersome and impacted badly on the knight’s mobility. around the neck, under the breastplate.
Although it provided important protection for the knight’s neck, the gorget also supported the weight of the heavy armour.
There were cheaper single-plate gorgets, but knights would have worn a gorget with three or four overlapping plates for flexibility.
They were occasionally plain, but would often have the knight’s arms emblazoned upon them.
Despite the fact that the armour covered the wearer from head to toe, they would still remain surprisingly agile.
The armour provided near invulnerability to sword slashes, and also gave protection against spears and pikes.
Knights would have worn their coat of arms on their surcoat or tabard, and their shield if they had one.
This wasn’t simply for show, as with a helmet covering their face, knights were unrecognisable on the battlefield; the symbols would provide a means of recognition.
It is believed that use of these symbols in battle is what encouraged the spread of heraldry across Medieval Europe.
Although the advances in armour made swords for knights on horseback somewhat obsolete in lieu of other weapons, they would still carry a sword for close-quarters combat.
Swords could vary hugely in length and breadth, from broad single-handed swords about 0. metres in length to long and thin two-handed weapons up to 1.06 metres long.
The Art Agency Hemesh Alles iF ¥) ' J -mnecnnancmnnnnninn ET OT IE] TTC sinmsaannnygennani The English aura of invincibility was finally lost as a reckless advance saw their forces obliterated by a French and Scottish coalition early six years had passed since Agincourt and Henry V was still the master of northern France.
The dauphin, the future Charles VII, desperately appealed to the Scots for help, and soldiers arrived shortly after, ready for battle against the English.
By March 1421, Henry was back in England, so the heir to the throne, Thomas of Clarence, led the army in his stead.
Utilising chevauchée raiding tactics, Clarence swept inland, plundering his way through the countryside.
Meeting little to no resistance, it wasn’t until the end of the month that the French would finally muster a force to fight back.
FAILED RECONNAISSANCE The English army marches inland from the coast, conquering Maine and settling in the castle of Beaufort.
French scouts track the English advance but are captured and interrogated.
FRENCH AND SCOTTISH AS The Franco-Scot forces march west from Tours and cut off the English escape route north that leads to the safety of Normandy.
CLARENCE’S HURRIED MARCH Eager to engage the French, Clarence and 1,500 menat-arms dash towards the French camp after sightings are confirmed by the English forward foraging parties.
As second in command, the Earl of Salisbury Thomas Montgau is told to assemble archers and then follow his superior into battle.
CROSSING THE RIVER The French and Scottish forces congregate on the other side of the river Couesnon.
The only bridge is heavily garrisoned, so the English knights dismount and wade across the river in full armour.
ATTACK ON THE CHURCH Bursting out from the river bank, the English men-at-arms assault the church.
The river crossing leaves the English troops scattered and disorganised and very few troops are now under effective command, as many are still on the road behind.
CLARENCE PRESSES ON A lull in the fighting gives Clarence the opportunity to wait for reinforcements.
Hidden over the ridge lies the main force of Franco-Scots, who vastly outnumber the English.
THE FINAL CHARGE The Scottish and French forces are now back in line, but once again ignoring the advice of his commanders, Clarence presses on.
A charge up the hill to the waiting Franco-Scots is ordered despite Salisbury and the archers still not arriving.
MELEE AND ENGLISH DEFEAT After a desperate assault, the English are routed by the larger French and Scottish army as Clarence and all of his commanders are killed.
Without the support of the longbowmen, the English lose more than a thousand men, while the French and Scottish casualties only number in the hundreds.
SALISBURY’S LATE ARRIVAL The French and Scottish leave the battlefield, along with the mountain of English bodies behind to rot.
Salisbury arrives the next day with reinforcements but he is too late to even glimpse the opposing army, and to his horror, finds only the dead.
MOMENTUM WITH THE FRENCH Clarence’s body is recovered and shipped back to England, where an angered Henry V prepares to return to France with a new army.
After the battle, and with the confidence of their victory, the French begin planning a conquest of Normandy.
The Battle of Baugé was the zenith of Scottish support in France in the Hundred Years’ War.
The Scots had been at war on and off with the English for decades and had actively assisted the French since 1382, when they were asked to join with Charles VI in return for equipment and supplies.
The French had supported Scotland during Edward I’s invasion of the country, so both had a history of common interest.
The agreement was known as the ‘Auld Alliance’ and was a constant thorn in the side of the English, as the French and Scots tried to force a war on two fronts.
The Truce of Leulinghem was signed with the English in 1389, but it wasn’t long until the Scots were back in the fold.
After Baugé, the Scots were involved in the losses at the battles of Cravant and Herrings and their role in the war was effectively at an end after a major defeat at the battle of Verneuil.
Taking place 80 kilometres west of Paris, the Franco-Scots’ charge was decimated by the English longbowmen, who killed half of the opposing forces.
The French kingdom was the most pre-eminent realm in Europe at the time.
It controlled the largest territory, it was the wealthiest and it was also the home of chivalry.
If you compare it to the other political entities in Europe, it was in a much better position than the weak Holy Roman Empire, a divided Italy or the backwater that was Spain.
In England, the king was powerful, but in terms of size and resources, the country was far weaker.
What you have to remember is that there was a very different political culture to the ones we are familiar with today.
Nationalism was not a powerful idea at this time — political culture was dominated by a patchwork of personal relationships between king and nobility.
What the kings of France did, and had been doing over the centuries before the Hundred Years’ War, was to reinforce and tighten these relationships with the nobles that lived in the areas around Paris, before extending their web of allegiance further and further afield.
The kings of England tried to do the same to maintain their claims to territories in France, so they began to compete.
Dr Honig’s research interests include the wri strategic relationship between politics and war F pe the greater wealth and size of his realm, the king of France had a further geographical advantage over the king of England as he was much more at the centre of things in Paris.
It was far more independent than the other areas of France and the claims to the duchy were more disputed than any other part of France.
The kings of England tried to exploit this conflict between the duke of Brittany and of France, but they didn’t have any claims of their own to the duchy.
The Hundred Years’ War was a major conflict between two major kingdoms of Europe.
It created an unremitting demand for manpower and other military resources such as ships from Genoa.
To feed this demand, mercenary forces grew in popularity and Specialist forces were drawn from further afield.
Many principalities were also drawn into alliances with the antagonists, like Aragon with England and Castile with France.
When the war in France went through a quiet spell, soldiers moved from the French theatre to other wars, like in Spain.
The coat of arms for the French House of Valois, a dynasty whose history was interwoven with English monarchs when kings are at war.
It is a territory that has a long history of almost mythical proportions.
But it really came into its own as a powerful entity because of the divisions in the French royal dynasty in the latter part of the 14th century.
The French king’s weakness gave one of his uncles an opportunity to turn his Duchy of Burgundy into a powerhouse.
Typically for Medieval politics, the dukes of Burgundy shifted alliances, so they were aligned with France at some points and England at others.
During the reign of Henry V, Burgundy sided with the English, and this was critical to England maintaining and expanding its presence in France.
If you look at Henry VIII, for example, he fought to reclaim the lost possessions in France but had little success.
Invading France slowly lost its lure, and expeditions became more difficult once Calais was finally lost in 1558, but the claims persisted until the Treaty of Amiens with Napoleon in 1802.
The French kings, who relied traditionally on undependable military service given out by the nobles, now created an army that was much more under their control.
Despite the storm of the religious and civil wars of the 16th century, which almost brought the country to its knees, this structure of a standing army survives and strengthens the monarchy.
Alamy WORDS MARC G DESANTIS Americas greatest generals clash in the fierce fight for their country's soul n 12 April 1861, troops from the seceding state of South cal — Carolina opened fire on Federal | — government-held Fort Sumter, sparking z the American Civil War.
Soon, several other Southern states joined South Carolina in secession, seeking to preserve the institution of slavery by withdrawing from the Union and forming the Confederate States of America.
Abraham Lincoln, 16th president of the United States of America, was resolved to bring the wayward states back, even by force.
In the enormous struggle that ensued, the largest and deadliest ever to be waged on American soil, Union and Confederate armies would be led by two extraordinary soldiers, Ulysses S Grant and Robert E Lee, who in their origins and personalities could not have been more different from each other, except for their ferocious dedication to victory.
Born in January 1807 in Virginia, Robert E Lee was the son of Henry ‘Light Horse Harry’, a cavalry commander from the colony of Virginia who had achieved renown in the American War of Independence.
Military service was part of the heritage of the Lee family, and the young man was admitted to United States Military Academy at West Point as part of the class of 1829.
Lee seemed destined for great things, and played a role in one of the more notable episodes of the immediate pre-civil war era.
In October 1859, John Brown, a fanatical abolitionist, and 21 of his followers had seized the Federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry, Virginia.
This plot failed when a group of United States Marines, under the command of United States Army Lieutenant Colonel Lee, appeared on the scene and quashed the raiders, killing ten and capturing most of the rest, including Brown.
By contrast, Lee’s fellow West Point graduate Ulysses S Grant possessed an unexceptional everyman quality.
Born in April 1822 to a tanner in Ohio, his lowly origins and reportedly shabby dress belied a careful, analytical mind.
Very few would have predicted that the unassuming Grant, who had gone so far as to resign from the army in 1854, and then fail in his civilian business ventures, would one day become the paramount commander of the United States Army.
War comes to America Grant was eager to rejoin the regular army after the war erupted.
Already helping to raise a company of state volunteers in Illinois, he much preferred to be a part of a regular unit, and turned down command of the volunteers when it was offered to him — the low quality of the politicians who tended to grab posts in the volunteer regiments put him off.
On 24 May 1861, he penned a letter to the army requesting reinstatement.
Grant would be given a commission in the regular army as a brigadier general, and made commander of the district of south-east Missouri.
I thought so at the time... only I had not moral courage enough to resign LEE vs GRANT 30 war for the Union by capturing rebel-held Fort Donelson on the Mississippi in Tennessee.
For his part, Lee was displeased with the Southern move toward secession, which he thought disastrous.
He was forced to choose between his cherished Virginia home state and his country.
Lee had even been marked out for the command of a Federal army being formed to return the secessionist states back under US control, but he still chose Virginia.
By then he had served in the army, including his time at West Point, for some 35 years.
General Lee and the Army of Northern Virginia The South would have to fight an uphill battle, but it was not without advantages.
At the start of the war, its soldiers were more motivated and its officer corps displayed far more talent on the battlefield, especially at the First Battle of Bull Run in July 1861, which was an entirely one-sided Southern victory.
The USA’s war with Mexico, from 1846-48, had its origins in the question of the annexation of Texas.
Texas wanted to be admitted into the United States, and United States President James K Polk was a firm believer in the USA's ‘manifest destiny’ to increase its territory from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
He strongly favoured the annexation of Texas, and this was accomplished in 1845 by a resolution of Congress.
But Mexico had other ideas, and had never truly reconciled itself to the loss of what it considered rightfully to be one of its own provinces.
In April 1846, Mexico declared war on the USA after an American army commanded by General Zachary Taylor crossed the Texas border.
The United States Congress declared war on Mexico | that May, but many anti-slavery elements in the North saw it as a naked attempt —-* to win more slave territory.
In February 1847, a strong Mexican army under Santa Anna was defeated by Taylor at the Battle of Buena Vista.
Also in 1847, United States forces under General Winfield Scott captured the port of Veracruz, and marched inland to Mexico City, which they reached in August 1847.
Ulysses S Grant, in the meantime, had been a supply officer with Taylor at the war’s start, and then had accompanied Scott in his assault on Mexico City, where he fought bravely in taking enemy breastworks guarding the city.
By September 1847, Mexico City had fallen to Scott, and the war was ended by the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo in February 1848, which saw the United States take half of Mexico’s territory.
My, “iy, Wy bbe i 1b MA EEE ‘e ip we and this enabled him to obtain a commission in not on the battlefield.
After exemplary service in Mexico, which garnered —_ dust-covered Brevet Captain N & WeSN Sy hy ty WY yyy j Wifi YW Y I ERIS , him no fewer than three brevet promotions Grant went to General Winfield . ah \. “ily i) Y ff Ui, tbe Wy by, UMW MEE adlf in 1847, Lee would busy himself constructing Scott’s headquarters to make o ve ) YM iy, | thy Uy WY My, fortifications.
His appearance was “e Why nA ; Wy] Wy UY, YY ies Hy high that he was brought back by the academy in so poor that he was scolded by / yh Ve Jai) | YG hy ty | 1852 to become its superintendent.
Lee would one of Scott’s staff officers, none My, \ fe iy Vy wee bring his wife, Mary Anna Randolph Custis Lee, other than Lee.
Graduates of West ih Mj"" xy) f MY, | UNUM he gps. eyes expect,” he said.
Point, many of whom had served HD My ag eersisy adie MULT TORT ise hee g lt As a member of the class of 1843, Grant was side by side during the Mexicanit Mi Gee MAME @) TLL LL PE a ny if fy er ith FeTaMUlaLel (ia areqelccyarscem-yaele(-valemrelalem atom c-t-k-le mr me Zerele| ANealsvacer-lam Acclemucelelromilare, deal of his time reading novels instead of studying. themselves fighting against one His best subject, horsemanship, was not academic another in the civil war.
At the Battle of Chancellorsville, Confederate ” “> ) infantry of Dole’s Georgia Brigade advance on “ w pm, Union General Hooker's flank . ° , at al _ ’ #c ——~ Sadie ; : 33 A ; —— >» ey + a _ . 7 cy : \aie LEE vs GRANT Not least among these officers was Lee himself, who had been serving as Confederate President Jefferson Davis’s military adviser since early 1862.
His future opponent commanding the Army of the Potomac, Major General George B McClellan, was an able trainer of soldiers but was also extremely cautious and lacked vigour in the field.
Davis placed Lee in command of the Army of Northern Virginia on 1 June 1862, after its previous commander, General Joseph Johnston, had been wounded in battle.
Though greatly outnumbered by McClellan, Lee attacked him again and again, and in what became known as the Seven Days Battles in June-July 1862, drove the larger Army of the Potomac away from the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia.
At the Second Battle of Bull Run on 30 August, he hurled the Union Army of Virginia under General John Pope back towards Washington.
On 17 September, he fought McClellan to a standstill at Antietam, Maryland, where both sides took horrendous casualties in the civil war’s bloodiest single day.
President Lincoln became so disgusted with McClellan’s dithering failure to pursue Lee after the battle that he removed him from command in November 1862 and replaced him with Major General Ambrose Burnside.
Antietam had been a victory, at least of a sort, and Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation, which declared that all slaves in rebel territory were now free.
Though real freedom for the slaves of the South would “In Grant, Lincoln had finally found a general he could rely upo’ The generalship of Lee and Grant featured detailed planning as well as an ability to react to unforeseen opportunities on the battlefield.
Both were forceful commanders who were unafraid to take heavy casualties to win battles.
Grant was often called a ‘butcher’ because of the costly battles that he fought, but unlike many other Union generals, he was never afraid to give battle.
Whereas most Federal commanders would fight and then retire some distance to let their soldiers recover, Grant would not retreat, but keep on The Chancellorsville campaign had begun with much confidence, at least on the part of Union General Joseph Hooker.
With a vast preponderance in men and material, in late April 1863 Hooker’s Army of the Potomac moved south across the Rappahannock River.
General Jeb Stuart’s cavalry brings word to Lee that Hooker’s right-wing entrenchments are utterly exposed.
Jackson wants to swing around left and crush them by a flank attack that will shatter the vulnerable Yankee line.
Jackson’s 30,000 men meet with little Opposition as they make their way around the Union flank, and burst upon the Federal ranks like a thunderbolt.
Jackson finds Hooker’s right flank open to attack, and at 5pm, he strikes them at an angle perpendicular to the end of the Union trenches. 9 | attacking.
In battle, Grant was always able to remain calm, and this reassured his officers.
If anything, Lee was even more aggressive than Grant, perhaps because with his small army he could not afford to rely upon superior numbers or attrition to win a battle.
On 2 May, Lee gives Jackson the order to go ahead with his plan. | be a long time in coming, the president had reframed the conflict into one in which the Union now had moral superiority over the slaveholding states of the rebellious Confederacy.
He humiliated Burnside at Fredericksburg on 13 December, and then devastated Hooker’s gigantic army at Chancellorsville in May 1863.
However, his valiant soldiers of the Army of Northern Virginia were also suffering heavy casualties.
This was a consequence of Lee’s offensive spirit, always seeking to attack, but it cost his army dearly.
While it would be far wrong to call Lee a butcher, the Army of Northern Virginia took more than 10,000 casualties at Antietam, 5,300 casualties at Fredericksburg, and more than 13,000 casualties at Chancellorsville — losses it could ill afford.
Lee at Gettysburg While Lee’s tactical acumen and battlefield sangfroid have been rightly praised, his strategic vision has occasioned a more nuanced view, and even brought him criticism. years of the war, Lee had the advantage of generally more capable subordinates, especially Stonewall Jackson.
This would have meant nothing, however, had Lee been unwilling to listen to them and accept their advice.
It was Jackson who came up with a dangerous yet daring plan to strike a hammer blow against Federal troops at Chancellorsville.
But Lee’s offensive instinct could hurt his own army too, since even in victory his battles were always bloody affairs for his troops.
In quick succession, Union regiments / break and flee as the rebels charge from west to east.
First, one Federal division and then the one next to it vanish as the men run for their lives.
By 7pm, darkness is falling, and in just two hours, Jackson has vaporised the Union right and inflicted some 2,400 casualties.
Within a few days, Hooker will retreat back north across the Rappahannock.
LEE vs GRANT Lee tended to fight battles in a very aggressive manner, meaning he often incurred severe casualties even when winning.
These were losses that could not be made good with the same speed as the more populous North could with its own.
It was Lee’s decision to invade Pennsylvania, a Northern state, that led to the Battle of Gettysburg, in which the Army of Northern Virginia took on a much larger and improved Army of the Potomac.
His boldness saw him fight a three-day battle from 1-3 July 1863, in which his troops were ground down by Federal soldiers.
The action culminated on 3 July with Pickett’s Charge, which failed and resulted only in the destruction of Lee’s last fresh division, which took some 7,000 casualties.
Lee had lost one third of his army of 75,000, some 28,000 men, in just three days.
In this painting titled ‘First at Vicksburg’, the Union 1st Battalion, 13th Infantry, can be seen planting its colours on Confederate positions ir ih Bh. we ren a In the west in early 1863, Grant, commander of the Army high bluff overlooking the river.
Grant would have to get of the Tennessee, had been stymied for months in his to terrain more suited to offensive operations against the attempts to take the city of Vicksburg, Mississippi.
It was city, but these could only be found to the south and east, strongly fortified and commanded the river from atop a on the other side of the Mississippi.
Starving, Vicksburg surrenders itself to and strike at Vicksburg from the rear.
With the fall of Vicksburg, the Union now controls the length of the Mississippi, and the rebellion in the western Confederate states has been dealt a death blow.
Grant’s widely separated corps 5 under Generals William T if Sherman, John McClernand and James McPherson each cross over the river and converge upon Vicksburg.
On 22 May, Grant’s 40,000 men try to carry the city by a speedy assault, but this is repulsed with heavy Union losses, so Grant settles in for a siege.
His subordinate officers had urged him not to attack, but Lee would hear none of their caution.
Despite hurling his men at the Federal position, bluecoat losses in the battle were, uncharacteristically, lighter than Lee’s, just 25,000.
The needless invasion of Pennsylvania had accomplished nothing except the death of thousands of Lee’s and Meade’s soldiers, and victory for the South was further away than ever.
Lee may have missed the assistance of Stonewall Jackson, but had Jackson survived long enough to have taken part at Gettysburg, he was just one man, and he and Lee could not overcome the insuperable advantages held by the North in men and resources.
For Grant, this was William Tecumseh Sherman, a fellow classmate at West Point military academy.
Like Grant, Sherman had resigned from army service to pursue a Civilian career, in banking, with mixed results.
The ill-tempered Sherman's early civil war career was less than splendid.
He was aghast at the problems he encountered with inept, ill-trained volunteers and overly inquisitive reporters.
The press made him appear to be mentally deranged, and he was relieved of command.
He later found himself back in the war leading a division under the overall command of Grant at Shiloh in April 1862.
Grant and Sherman would thereafter form a partnership of war and take Vicksburg on the Mississippi the next year.
Forged in the trying times in the beginning of the war that both men experienced, they were the closest of comrades.
Lee was blessed with the aid of Thomas ‘Stonewall’ Jackson, a general whose military Grant in command In Grant, Lincoln had finally found a general he could rely upon to take the fight to the enemy.
In March 1864, Grant was promoted to the resuscitated rank of lieutenant general and made commander of all Union armies, comprising some 550,000 men.
It was now his mission to take all of the manpower and material advantages that the North had and use them to destroy the Confederacy.
He was unafraid to give battle, knowing that the key to victory was defeating Confederate armies, whose losses could not be easily SL Se See replaced. f i, ae A President Grant election campaign hat from 1872 Ea TY le acumen was unsurpassed on either side of the war.
His parents died while he was still young, and he was raised by an uncle.
The military life appealed to him, and he was admitted to West Point's class of 1846.
He saw service during the Mexican-American War as an artillery officer and his performance was so exemplary that he was rapidly promoted from brevet lieutenant to brevet major.
In 1851, he resigned from the army and took a teaching position at the Virginia Military Institute, where he taught philosophy, optics and artillery tactics.
Jackson was personally opposed to secession, and though he owned six slaves, was not pro-slavery in any meaningful sense.
Nevertheless, he followed his home state of Virginia out of the Union and into war, when it came.
Jackson and the First Virginia Brigade he commanded at First Bull Run in July 1861 both earned the moniker ‘Stonewall’ for their stalwart defence against a furious Federal assault.
Union General William Sherman succeeded Grant as the Union commander in the western theatre of the war in 1864 Right: Confederate General Stonewall Jackson was responsible for the envelopment of Union forces at the Battle of Chancellorsville So he would make the rebels bleed, even though it cost his own troops terribly too.
The Federal armies under Grant’s command took stunningly heavy casualties in the Wilderness, at Spotsylvania Court House, North Anna and Cold Harbor in May-June 1864, but so did the Army of Northern Virginia.
The defeat of the Confederacy required the death of its armies, which were still skilled and potent.
Grant’s willingness to fight helped him past what might have sunk his hopes of retaining his command early in the war.
He had a drinking problem of uncertain severity, with much depending upon the observer.
Sherman was well aware of Grant’s penchant for alcohol, as were many others, but believed that it did not hinder Grant.
President Lincoln is said to have wished to send a barrel of the same whiskey imbibed by Grant to his other generals to get them to fight as hard.
The beginning of the end of the rebellion In June 1864, Petersburg, Virginia — a vital rail junction through which the bulk of the Confederacy’s capital of Richmond’s supplies moved — was besieged by Grant.
If the city was to be captured, Lee would have to either fight Grant in open country or allow Richmond to fall to Union forces.
The Army of the Potomac The North had tremendous latent advantages over the South.
It had far more people, and thus could both put more soldiers into the field and replace losses more easily.
The Union also possessed three times as much railway track as the South.
Its industrial development far surpassed that of the South, which had retained a largely agrarian economy.
The North could make most of its own muskets and cannons, for example, and could buy arms from Europe to make up any shortfall.
The United States Navy’s naval blockade of Southern ports would choke off almost all Confederate imports except for a handful of blockade runners of negligible significance.
Diplomatically, the support and recognition that the Southern states expected from Europe, especially Britain, never materialised.
This was mainly because of the Southern over-estimation of the importance of cotton.
Many Southerners had thought that when the supply of cotton from the South was disrupted by war, the shortage would cause the British to bring about a negotiated settlement that resulted in the recognition of the Confederacy’s independence.
Instead, British importers found other sources for cotton, and the South was left without allies or significant diplomatic support.
The tactically inconclusive Battle of Spotsylvania Court House saw 32,000 Union and Confederate casualties LEE vs GRANT Below: Men collect the dead after the Battle of Gettysburg LEE vs GRANT tried and failed to take Petersburg by storm, and then settled down into a formal siege with trenches dug all around it.
Though the bloody siege would last for months, Grant had effectively pinned Lee down, and through constant attrition, the small Confederate Army of Northern Virginia was whittled away.
Meanwhile, in the west, Sherman was hard at work driving the rebel army of General Joseph Johnston out of Tennessee and into Georgia, where he took Atlanta.
The 62,000-strong Army of the Tennessee then began its great march through Georgia and the Carolinas in the middle of November 1864.
Rebel armies could always retreat away from him, and destroying them was next to impossible, so Sherman had to destroy the South’s ability, and even willingness, to make war.
Having already taken Atlanta, he forgot about his supply lines and started out into untouched Georgia countryside, where his men would live off the land.
Along a broad swathe of territory GO miles wide, bluecoats burned farms and crops, ripped up railway tracks, and caused all sorts of havoc among an outraged but impotent Southern public.
From Savannah, Sherman’s men continued on through the Carolinas, burning as they marched.
By early April 1865, Lee’s position in the city was untenable, and on 1 April, he withdrew his troops, and warned the Confederate government in Richmond that he could no longer protect the capital.
On 2 April, Grant mounted an attack on the weakened rebel defence works, and his 60,000 men rolled over the mere 20,000 left behind by Lee.
Petersburg fell that same day, and Richmond was in Grant’s hands by the next.
The matter of most importance to Grant now was defeating Lee’s Army of Northern Virginia, which was in the open and vulnerable.
Lee understood better than anyone else just how badly his ill-fed and poorly clad men had suffered, and that his army was surrounded by Union troops.
Appomattox Court House On 9 April 1865, after an exchange of messages, Grant and Lee met at the McLean house in Appomattox Court House to formalise the surrender of the Army of Northern Virginia.
In a grand irony, Major Wilmer McLean’s farm in Manassas had been fought over at the war’s beginning back in April 1861 during the First Battle of Bull Run.
The major had taken his family to Appomattox, where he thought they could avoid rest of the war.
Arriving first, Lee, perfectly attired, as was his custom, rode up on his horse, Traveller, to the McLean house where he would meet Grant.
Arriving afterwards, Grant, by contrast, was dressed very simply, and was not even wearing a sword.
Sat in the parlour, they talked a bit about their experiences in Mexico, decades before, and then at Lee’s prompting, got down to business.
Grant’s terms were that Lee’s surrendered officers and men should be released on parole, never to fight again until exchanged (which would never happen as the war was over) and that the rebels’ weapons would be turned over to Federal forces.
AS Lee departed after the proceedings were concluded, Grant and the other Union officers present raised their hats in salute.
Z (THE uistory NEVER FORGET THE SACRIFICE THE BATTLEFIELDS ‘Visit, Understand, Never Forget’ are our watchwords for why we should all go on a battlefield tour at least once.
Thanks to our expert, Specialist Guides who accompany points, and the option to upgrade to luxury SILVER SERVICE every tour, you won't be bombarded with a stream of historical coach with extra legroom and rear lounge, or for extra comfort, facts and figures.
Whatever your area of interest, our guides will make sure you get the most out of your visit.
Aquitaine and Calais were still held by the English, but the cross-channel invaders had been almost completely driven out of Normandy and Flanders.
In that time he had become intent on reclaiming vast swathes of France for himself.
Taking his claim from his greatgrandfather Edward, Henry initially offered the French 1. million Crowns to recognise English rule and ordered payment for the body of French King John Il, who was captured at the Battle of Poitiers in 1356.
Negotiations of these harsh terms predictably fell through, so Henry turned to military action.
As well as his burning desire for conquest, the warrior king had the ideal conditions for a successful invasion.
Despite a recent plot to overthrow his rule, he had noble support, broadly there importantly, unrest on the continent.
King of France Charles VI was prone to bouts of insanity, hand in 1407, his troubled reign had led to the formation of rival factions in the Valois royal family.
Louis, the duke of Orléans and brother of the king, had been murdered in Paris by the Burgundians, and civil war wasn’t far away.
France, after vanquishing the English in 1389, had descended into chaos.
He landed in Normandy on 14 August with 8,000 archers and 2,000 menat-arms, who were contracted for 12 months’ service.
On arrival, Henry stepped onto shore first and fell to his knees, praying to God to give him strength against his enemies.
The English army’s plan began with a siege of the nearby town of Harfleur, which had been an important centre of operations for raids on the English coast.
The siege took much longer than expected, and the French commune put up fierce resistance for more than a month.
When Harfleur finally surrendered on 22 September, campaigning season was almost over.
The plans to take Paris and Bordeaux were put on hold as the English sought to take refuge in Calais for the winter.
Before setting off, Henry contacted the governor of Calais, Sir William Bardolph, asking him to safeguard his chosen crossing point of the River Somme, the same point that Edward Ill had traversed in 1346.
The French had been tracking the English since the fall of Harfleur, and Charles had summoned knights from every part of his kingdom to engage Henry’s military.
Letters were sent to every noble in the realm as the king amassed a huge army to fight off the invaders.
All weapons and cannons were removed from town defence duties HENRY’S ROUTE, ee ~ewh 4 @ CHERBOURG @ Be rtiron AGINCOURT and put into the field of battle.
Although he was instrumental in assembling the soldiers, the king would not take to the battlefield, and in his absence, Marshal Boucicault and Constable d’Albret would lead the French forces.
The scene of Edward IIl’s emphatic victory at Crécy was near here, so the French were keen to get revenge on the same piece of land 69 years after their defeat.
However, this idea didn’t go to plan, and instead the French cut off the English at the Somme.
When Henry made it to the river estuary, there was no sign of Bardolph, and to his surprise, the French had barricaded the main crossing.
Henry had to divert to another bridge, stretching both his resources and the resolve of his men.
After finally crossing the river, they were met by the French 48 kilometres from Calais.
As the huge French army spilled over the horizon, there was now no way to avoid a pitched battle, and the chosen location was a forest between the villages of Tramecourt and Agincourt.
Amassing on the ridge The exhausted and disease-ridden English army had marched for 17 days and was in no condition to fight.
After having lived off nuts, raw vegetables and contaminated drinking water for days, the morale in the English camp on the eve of the battle was low.
New soldiers were arriving by the hour and they stayed up gambling and drinking, certain of victory the next day.
So confident were some of the soldiers that they had even fashioned a cart especially for Henry’s dead body to ride through the streets of Paris upon victory.
Winter was on its way and the freshly ploughed ground below the soldiers’ feet resembled a mudpit after heavy overnight rain.
The longbowmen took up their positions just before dawn on slight ridges overlooking both sides of the battlefield as well as interspersing themselves in the core of the infantry.
The longbow was first used in great numbers in Wales and some of the finest archers in the entire army came from there.
Many of them were ordinary men, not seasoned veterans of battle, and they watched on as the French amassed opposite them with about six times as many men in their ranks.
King Henry, in crown and plumed bascinet, constantly encouraged his men and would fight shoulder to shoulder with them as he took charge of the centre, with Sir Thomas Erpingham manning the right and Lord Camoys leading the left.
One was mounted and two were on foot, with d’Aloret and Boucicault leading the vanguard with the dukes of Bourbon and Orléans.
The French knew the threat the longbowmen posed and had upgraded their armour since the days of Crécy.
They now wore thick steel plates “THE LINES WERE SUCH A MESS THAT FALLEN TROOPS WERE CRUSHED DOWN INTO THE MUD, UNABLE TO RISE UP AGAIN DUE TO EXHAUSTION” recently ploughed fields.
The French attack is not ‘, ‘ at forthcoming, so Henry is forced to — aa Great Battles BATTLE OF AGINCOURT 29 OCTOBER 1419 Ol The armies assemble The two forces face each other across a narrow forest clearing.
The huge French army is organised into three divisions with both knights and menat-arms.
The English army has much fewer men, and its hopes hinge on the effectiveness of the longbowmen. ry I z a a longbowmen when they were exposed while on the move, the French finally i -'£ ak unleash their feared cavalry charge.
He orders his longbowmen _. 4 ne ~ forward and they take up a position — in range of the French lines.
Guarded \ | by wooden stakes, they begin 7 pummelling the French with arrows.
The attack focuses on the English baggage train and initially catches Henry off guard.
An angered Henry slaughters the French prisoners and the attack comes to nothing as the French begin to flee.
A . (tae AGINCOURT Ed Crooks Gi. ~—os English victory Scattered and leaderless, the French army is a spent force.
The heat of battle Henry claims a victory that reinvigorates The crazed horses unsaddle their the English cause in France.
The archers drop their bows and slash at the French with swords and axes.
They are now sitting ducks for the longbowmen, who fire rapidly at the French as the charge turns into a disorganised frenzy.
OWMAN DRAWN FROM BOTH NCQ WANIBEAN DAA VANES Made out of yew, ash, oak or birch, the longbow originated in Wales.
By the time of Agincourt, it was one of the most feared weapons on the Medieval battlefield.
The tactics of an archer were based around being nimble and light-footed.
When engaged in closequarters combat, the longbowmen would drop their bows and fight with swords, axes and clubs.
Due to their limited armour, longbowmen were often \ positioned behind barricades or interspersed among troops with superior protection The longbow would be nothing if it wasn’t in the hands of a trained archer.
All sports except archery were banned on Sundays and the most talented were drawn into the English Army.
Longbowmen were vulnerable to cavalry so would attack from range and flank the enemy.
Each knight had a coat of arms proudly emblazoned on his shield, and the French battle standard, the Oriflamme, flew on flags above them.
In response, the English soldiers carried a bow that was much more powerful than the one employed during the conquests of Edward Ill.
Two-handed swords were wielded by the higher classes of infantry on both sides, but the majority carried one-handed swords or lances and even blunt weapons like maces, hammers and clubs.
Henry makes his move Both sides spat insults at each other, as commanders became reluctant to make the first move.
The French were unwilling to advance, as Boucicault in particular knew the English would starve if they went much longer without food.
Henry was all too aware of this and finally rolled the dice as he ordered his longobowmen forward.
The French had already made their first error by not attacking the archers when they broke ranks and moved forward.
D’Albert and Boucicault were experienced soldiers but lacked the authority and respect that a king like Henry would receive from his men. i mine.
In the French ranks, nobles jostled for space so they could have their coat of arms displayed at | ttle.
The result was a chaotic mess. __ bait le Ie a & AGINCOURT “THE LONGBOWMEN IN THE CENTRE HAMMERED STAKES INTO THE GROUND, FORTIFYING THEIR POSITION IN A TACTIC LEARNED FROM PREVIOUS CONFLICTS IN THE WAR’ Unfortunately for the French, their king, Charles VI, was still in Paris, unable to lead his army due to his failing mental health.
Back at Agincourt, several units of archers had secretly tracked through the forest surrounding the battlefield and into the nearby village of Tramecourt, creating another angle of attack for the English.
Continuing undeterred, the longbowmen in the centre hammered stakes into the ground, fortifying their position in a tactic learned from previous conflicts in the war.
The longbowmen first shot galling arrows to purposely wound and disorientate the French ranks before switching to standard bodkin-point arrowheads.
The combination of the narrow, muddy battlefield and the severely undermanned charge saw the French knights slaughtered by the hail of English arrows, as their frightened and injured horses became uncontrollable.
With the battleground now even more churned up by the horses’ hooves, the foot troops moved forward painfully slowly.
The area was So narrow that the French crossbowmen and artillery could not support their now-isolated foot soldiers, as a wall of arrows struck the exhausted infantry.
The French attack had just enough momentum to reach the enemy ranks, and at first the English line began to buckle under the strain.
Knowing that leaving the narrow battlefield would result in annihilation, the English rallied as the longbowmen dropped their bows and took up swords and axes.
The lines were such a mess that fallen troops were crushed down into the mud, unable to rise up again due to exhaustion and the 50-kilogram weight of the armour.
Any Frenchman who fell drowned in the mud as his fellow soldiers trampled over him.
Within 30 minutes of fighting, two of the three French lines had been completely destroyed.
The duke of Alencon lay dead in the mud as did the French commander d’Albret.
On the English side, the dukes of York and Suffolk had been killed, but Henry was still alive and so was his brother, the Duke of Gloucester, who Henry had defended valiantly in the heat of battle.
Failed encirclement Having witnessed the carnage, the decision was made for Isambart d’Agincourt and Robert de Bournonville, men with local knowledge, to target the rear of Henry’s army.
It was here that French prisoners the English had captured during their invasion were located.
A small force of peasant fighters and knights quickly overwhelmed the limited English defenders and plundered the English camp, taking horses and even a royal crown in the process.
Enraged, and also concerned at the possibility of a mass French counterattack, Henry ordered the killing of all his prisoners except only the highest-ranking nobles.
The English men-at-arms refused, as this would clash with their chivalric code, so the archers took on the job, killing them in cold blood.
There were more prisoners than men in the whole English army, so this knee-jerk reaction was effective in nullifying any possibility of an uprising but severely lessened the opportunities for ransom after the battle.
Unlike many of their counterparts, English men-atarms and knights fought on foot Below, right: It is thought that Henry ordered a service of thanksgiving on the battlefield after the English victory “THE ENGLISH MEN-AT-ARMS REFUSED AS TT CLASHED WITH THEIR CHIVALRIC CODE SO THE ARCHERS TOOK ON THE JOB, KILLING THEM IN COLD BLOOD’ On the frontline, a G0O-man counterattack led by the Counts of Marle and Fauquemberghes had been a disaster.
This setback was the final straw, and the remaining French line withdrew.,000 French (including one third of the nobility present at the battle) had been killed while the English dead only numbered in the low hundreds.
Aftermath Ecstatic after their victory, the English broke into song, chanting early versions of the Agincourt Carol and other traditional celebratory tunes.
The series of French mistakes had proved fatal and the location of the battle had essentially forfeited their numerical advantage.
If the full strength of the French cavalry had charged at the English, even the skilled longoowmen, who could fire up to Six arrows a minute, and the courage of the menat-arms wouldn't have been able to hold them off.
Henry’s army sacked the French camp and stripped the dead of everything of worth as soldiers fled in all directions.
That night, the king held a banquet in nearby Maisoncelles, which was served by captured and now-humiliated French knights.
After the emotion of the victory had died down, the weary men were unable to march on Paris, voicing concerns over a lack of siege weapons, and they withdrew back to the safety of Calais on 29 October.
Despite the unlikely victory at Agincourt, minimal territory had been gained and Charles VI was still in power, but the French military had been broken on the field.
Harfleur was now an English-controlled town and would be an effective launching pad for Henry’s second invasion of Normandy in 1417.
Burgundy, meanwhile, still refused to strike a deal with the House of Valois, as the French kingdom’s enemies began to stack up.
Despite the gains, Henry sailed back to England after his nobles voiced fears over the possibility of a costly winter campaign.
He returned to a hero’s welcome, and after a few more years of successful campaigning, would draw up the Treaty of Troyes in 1420, recognising him as regent and heir to the French throne.
The failures of Agincourt had made the French hesitant to fight pitched battles, which contributed to English victories at the 1416 Battle of the Seine and the 1418 siege at Rouen.
Henry’s French conquests were successful, but the strain on his kingdom’s finances was beginning to tell and would eventually signal the beginning of the end for the Lancastrian monarchy in his later years.
The king died in 1422, meaning he never officially became the king of France.
Triumph Against The Odds and several specialist studies of English archery tactics used in the Hundred Years’ War.
There is no doubt that Henry was inspired by the achievements of his great-grandfather.
Edward had invaded Normandy via the Cherbourg peninsula, sacked Caen and advanced to just north of Paris, challenging the French king to battle.
He then withdrew northwards to Poitou where he was victorious at Crécy.
In contrast, Henry landed at Harfleur, in the mouth of the River Seine, capturing it after a bitter siege and then marched to Calais.
Generally, the war against France, fought in France, was desirable to the military aristocracy because it offered opportunities for glory, plunder and lands.
Richard II’s unpopular peace policy had been an important factor in Henry Bolingbroke’s 1399 usurpation.
Young Henry had proved his valour in his first battle at Shrewsbury in 1403, aged only 16, where he was wounded in the face by an arrow.
As king, Henry V won support from the nobility, but also the financiers of the City of London, and its lord mayor, Richard Whittington, who recognised a good investment.
The 12,000-strong English army landed in mid August and a month-long siege ensued.
The garrison was a bare. men, but the town of Harfleur was well fortified by walls and 24 towers, together with ditches and a moat on the seaward side.
Siege artillery, both gunpowder and traction, pounded the main gate, which was protected by a wooden bulwark.
The unsanitary conditions of the siege lines caused an epidemic of dysentery, which killed or incapacitated some 2,000 of the English, including its leaders.
When Harfleur finally surrendered on 18 September, it seemed that Henry’s plans had suffered a serious check.
The English Crown also held lands in Aquitaine, so marching south would have emphasised the link with these ancient possessions.
However, it was late in the year for campaigning and it would have required significant logistical support.
Known as a chevauchée, such expeditions could have a symbolic effect, but in the latter years of Edward Ill’s reign, there had been several disastrous attempts of this nature.
The French had learned not to confront English armies, but to harry them and deny them provisions, so the risk for Henry was too great.
They feared that the English army would be caught ‘like sheep in fold’ as French forces combined against it.
The answer must be that Henry was making a statement about his right to march wherever he wanted in a country he claimed that he had the right to rule.
He may also have contemplated winning a decisive action against the French, as Edward had done 69 years earlier.
The French, who had not attempted to relive Harfleur, merely shadowed the English line of march when the army set out.
Faced with this obstacle, Henry was forced to lead his men south east, away from the direct route to Calais, and the English supplies soon ran out.
He did manage to cross near Péronne, which was a week’s march from his destination, but the French still avoided combat.
In the light of the stunning victory at Agincourt, any dissension may have been written out of the record.
The churchman who wrote an eyewitness account of the campaign, The Deeds Of Henry V, does admit that the soldiers were often uncertain and frightened.
However, the king kept strict discipline, enforcing regulations and hanging pillagers.
Also, the risk of leaving the army and being at the mercy of the enraged French peasantry was probably greater than keeping together.
Second, they hoped to wear the English down before , challenging battle.
Her study of the-English documentary records indicates that the army may have been 9,000 strong.
In contrast, France was in the midst of a civil war, with a mad king and rival Burgundian and Armagnac factions.
Their commanders were bitterly divided and it may be that all their forces did not come up to fight.
They had a greater number of fully armoured men-at-arms, but their botched battle plan meant that they failed to utilise them effectively.
The English set out with a week’s rations, but had been on the road for 16 days.
Anne Curry points out that although no source states that they were suffering from diarrhoea, it seems likely.
They may well have been weakened, but they were both desperate and inspired by a charismatic leader, which was enough to win the day.
The ‘pronunciamiento’ quickly spread across continental Spain, with the rebels seizing Seville and several other small towns in the SYolul dare] ace male)adarnct-1emm hal icmilarelilvae)ce)palelecre meats democratically elected republican government to distribute arms to sections of its multiideological, leftist, civilian population.
The harsh polarisation of Spain between a leftist, progressive, socialist republic and a right-wing, conservative, absolutist reaction quickly became representative of European attitudes at the time.
The Europe of the 1930s, despite being exhausted by World War | and the Great Depression, was also ferociously ideological, with numerous regime changes and experimental politics shaking the continent.
Europe was under the ‘spectre of communism’, and a series of revolutions and leftist violence ida} cole yedatelunandal-mexe)pielarslaiane)ce)anlelecremaaiomalsi~ of nationalist Third-Position politics, such as fascism and Nazism, in countries including Germany, Austria, Italy and Portugal.
In light of this clash of ideologies, the geological position of Spain made it a vital decider of the European conflict in the years to come.
The Soviet Union, which had signed a treaty of mutual assistance with France in 1935, sought to establish a ‘Red Bastion’ in the far west.
The Spanish Republic had assembled a naval blockade in the Strait of Gibraltar, and it didn’t seem possible to transport such an overwhelming number of military personnel.
Nevertheless, by 26 July, just six days after General Franco’s initial request for aid in the transport of his army to the Iberian Peninsular, nine German Junkers Ju 52 transport aircraft landed in Tetouan, Morocco.
This initial package would be the beginnings of what would evolve into the infamous Condor Legion.
Its initial days would be shrouded in the mystery of Operation Magic Fire/Guido — an attempt by Hitler to secure his interests in Spain while avoiding the unnecessary antagonism of Western states.
The operation was undertaken in the utmost secrecy, with the state-run company Sociedad Hispano-Marroqut de Transportes (HISMA — Spanish Moroccan Transport Company) being established for the sole purpose of providing a civilian facade to the blatantly militaristic airlift operation.
Starting on 28 July, the nine Ju 52s conducted up to five transport flights a day between continental Spain and its Moroccan possession.
There was a sense of urgency in the operation, with German pilots transporting up to 40 fully equipped Nationalist troops per journey, a quantity well above the recommended quota of 17 persons.
Despite the operation of the Ju 52s well beyond their functional capacity, there was only one incident resulting in the loss of an aircraft.
On 15 August, a cargo-vacant Ju 52 crashed in the municipality of Jerez de la Frontera — the cause was presumed to be severe engine deterioration and failure caused by the continuous operation in the Northern African environment.
As such, extensive operation of aircraft in such harsh environments provided the Nazis with useful information that would later be employed during the North African Campaign in World War Il.
With the arrival of the Usaramo and its cargo in Cadiz on 6 August 1936, the first reformation of the Nazi operation in Spain began.
The innovative, automatic pull-up dive brakes enabled pilots to dive at targets with the confidence that the plane would recover, even if the pilot blacked out.
At the suggestion of an air technician, Wolfram von Richthofen had a propeller-powered siren added to the exterior of the craft.
The wailing siren, known as a ‘Jericho Trumpet’ was a foray into experimental psychological warfare by the Nazis, and would become the defining characteristic of the aircraft.
The Ju 87, while being introduced towards the end of the war in Spain, arrived at a crucial time, and as well being the first aircraft to be utilised in the Knickebein system, (a system of night-time bombing wherein the aircraft was blindly guided towards the target via radio communication), the Stuka would make its name in Spain.
It was an important tool of the Condor Legion in iconic clashes, such as the Battle of Bilbao and the Catalonia Offensive.
Recognisable by its low, cantilever wing, bulky fuselage and three-engine design, the Ju 52 began its life as a craft typically utilised by commercial airlines.
The 1932 Columbia-Peru War and the 1934 Chaco War saw the aircraft implemented in a supply and evacuation context.
Nevertheless, the Luftwaffe was quick to recognise the Ju 52’s potential, and in 1934, the first prototype bomber class Ju 52s were produced.
In Spain, the Ju 52 was primarily assigned to the role of skirting the Republican blockade and transporting the Nationalist army to continental Spain.
Later, many of the remaining Ju 52s would be converted to tactical bombing aircraft, and used in a ‘terror bombing’ campaign against the Republican civilian population throughout the Spanish countryside, and most notoriously in the bombing of Guernica.
FLIGHT OF HITLER’S CONDOR LEGION ""A 29-GALLON MIXTURE OF GASOLINE, GREASE AND USED ENGINE OIL WAS COMBINED WITH THE FORCE OF TWO 22-POUND EXPLOSIVES IN ORDER 10 CREATE AN ANTI-PERSONNEL WEAPON” trainees, who were severely inexperienced with aircraft and evidently prone to crashing.
The Eiserne Legion , the predecessor of the Condor Legion, claimed its first victim, a Republican reconnaissance aircraft, at the hands of future ace Johannes Trautloft, on 25 August 1936.
Despite the escalation of the role of German units in actual combat, the real change came at the beginning of September.
The situation in Spain became ‘threateningly red’ with the election of Socialist Prime Minister Francisco Largo Caballero on 4 September and the arrival of Soviet advisers and military equipment six days later.
Hitler was worried about the possibility of further Soviet intervention, but also unwilling to commit a large portion of the recovering Wehrmacht to Spain without the possibility of dividends.
Following the 1 October assertion of Franco as ‘generalissimo’, Hitler sought to trade military assistance for resources from the Jrit amen des — Deut(djen Doltes verleibe ich OF dem Oefrel fieolsus Leet fi als (nerfenmuns fiir feine ale freiwilliger tm fpanifchen Frei geleifteten treven Dienfte das Deutfehe Spanien-Krens in heitskampf Bronze mit Schwertern Berlin, den &. ani 1999.
Befehlehaber der Wehrmacht 4m Tiamen bes Fuhrets und Oberften Befehlshab der Wehrmacht perieihe icy dem der Dehrmach , vetlethe ich deen Gntersrfiaier Bt belaos Toe qreke-Eol./'e4 daa € Jmllamen Bee ae und Oberften Befehlshabets Spanish mineral sector — such resources being vital to the rearmament of the Wehrmacht and Hitler’s long-term goals.
On 2 October, the Rohstoffe-und-WarenEinkaufsgesellschaft GmbH (ROWAK — Raw Materials and Goods Purchasing Company) was established with a credit of 3 million Reichsmarks and the purpose of buying up a portion of the Spanish mining industry.
A month later, on 6 November 1936, 6,500 German volunteers and six bomber squadrons disembarked at Cadiz, and news spread of Germany’s involvement in Spain.
Such news was all but verified on 19 November, when, in a joint announcement, the Nazi and Italian fascist regimes recognised Franco’s government.
Although the official operations of the reformed Condor Legion began on 8 November with the beginnings of the Siege of Madrid, there were several sorties beforehand, most notably the experimental direct bombing of civilians in Plaza de Colon, Madrid, on 27 October.
The month-long assault on Madrid that would begin two weeks later would see the arrival of the International Brigades on the Republican side and a three-day bombing campaign against the republican civilian population by the Condor Legion.
The battle also saw the loss of air Superiority by the Condor Legion in the face of a Republican side bolstered by the arrival of squadrons of the technologically superior Soviet Plikarpov I-16 fighter class and Soviet Tupolev ANT-40 bomber class.
The siege ended less than a month after it began with the exhaustion of both sides and the establishment of a static front line.
Additionally, the arrival of new staff, such as Wolfram von Richthofen as chief of staff, prompted a revising of technology.
It was decided the Heinkel He 51 had become obsolete, and by late April a replacement was under way, with the Messerschmitt Bf109 offering a fitting replacement.
This was not an easy task, and it required a significant restructuring of the Legion itself, with fighter groups such as the Jagdgruppe 88 experiencing a partial rotation of staff.
An influx of new prototype technology was under way, with infamous names, such as the Heinkel He 111, Junkers Ju 87 and the Dornier Do 17, appearing in a military context for the first time.
The old aircraft were passed on to the Nationalist Air Force, and with a mutating air force, the Condor Legion joined the War in the North.
The German forces set a precedent of violence for the Biscay Campaign on 31 March, when, to the horror of the Republic and Basque forces, the town of Durango, a defenceless settlement of little military value, was levelled.
Less than a month later on 26 April, Guernica, a town housing 10,000 refugees of the War in the North, famously met the same fate.
In fact, the War in the North saw the introduction of many such innovations in the use of aircraft.
In addition to the realisation of carpet bombing’s effectiveness, the ‘Knickebein’ system and ‘Devil’s Egg’ improvements were also trialled.
The former was a system of bombing wherein the bombers, providing close air Support, would be guided to the target by radio, effectively creating ‘airborne artillery’, and setting the stage for the infamous Blitzkrieg tactics employed a few years later.
A 25-gallon mixture of gasoline, grease and used engine oil was combined with the force of two 22-pound explosives in order to create an anti-personnel weapon that hinged on the mixture’s ability to produce a burning, sticky substance upon detonation.
Napalm wouldn’t be properly invented and implemented in war until the bombing of Berlin by the United States Army Air Force on 6 March 1944.
Regardless, the system of bombing developed during the War in the North, as well as the experimental bombs themselves, would later be evaluated and applied to Nazi military strategy.
By the end of the Biscay Campaign, the Condor Legion had undergone a metamorphosis.
To the south, the Nationalist line was faltering in the opening stages of the Battle of Brunete, due to an unexpected ambush of the town by the Republican forces on 6 July.
The Condor Legion responded immediately with a newly equipped air force.
The Republican Air Force was now under-equipped, and the Condor Legion was quick to assert its dominance in the skies above Brunete.
FLIGHT OF HITLER’S CONDOR LEGION OF THE LEGION SOME OF GERMANY’S DEADLIEST ACES MADE THEIR NAMES IN THE BATTLE FOR SPAIN WOLFRAM VON RICHTHOFEN ‘THE TARTAR’ Born into nobility, Richthofen rejected an academic life and began his military career in the German Calvary in 1913, earning an Iron Cross.
After a brief delve into academia, Richthofen joined the Condor Legion in Spain in 1936.
He worked to expand Close Support Doctrine advocating for co-operation between an equally weighted ground force and air force.
Additionally, he pioneered the ‘Air Shuttle’ technique, in which the sorties of aircraft would be staggered in order to allow a constant air presence.
Last, upon joining the underequipped Condor Legion, he famously improvised, utilising 88mm anti-aircraft batteries in the place of artillery.
The Luftwaffe’s Special Purpose Division was constructed with Richthofen’s findings in mind.
Arriving in Spain on 7 May 1937, Galland’s first major engagement was in the Battle of Brunete.
After becoming one of the men awarded the Spanish Cross in Gold, Galland returned to Germany, where he would go on to participate in the invasion of Poland.
He became an established ace of World War Il and led the Fighter Pilots’ Revolt against Goering.
In his later life he was invited by Juan Peron to train the young Argentinean air force, leaving a tactical legacy that would become ingrained in Argentinean military aviation for years to come.
Through willpower, he overcame his ailment and applied once again for the Luftwaffe, this time being accepted and transferred to the Condor Legion, arriving to take over from Adolf Galland on 14 April 1938.
Despite his late arrival, he became the highest scoring ace of the Condor Legion, with 15 kills in the Spanish Civil War alone.
He was, like Galland, awarded a Spanish Cross in Gold in recognition of his skill, but also of his combat pioneering.
Molders introduced the ‘Schwarm’/‘Finger-Four’ formation and the ‘Cross Over Turn’ to the Luftwaffe both tactics would prove to be vital in securing Germany’s future victories.
Molders died in a civilian aircraft crash in 1941 while attending the funeral of a superior in Crimea.
He was among the initial six pilots, paired with Heinkel He 51s, to arrive in Spain on 7 August 1936.
As well as claiming the first recorded kill by the Condor Legion, Trautloft developed the theory behind the deployment of the new Bf109.
Like Galland and Molders, Trautloft was awarded the Spanish Cross in Gold with Diamonds.
He later joined the Fighter Pilots’ Revolt and, following the end of the war, served in the Bundesluftwaffe the air force of West Germany, until his death in 1995.
Alamy; Corbis; Getty 56 The 19-day battle saw an almost oversaturation of Nationalist aircraft, and it was widely believed that the Battle of Brunete decided the war — a belief that Hermann Goering would utilise in order to gain favourable concessions from the Nazi government in the future.
The protection of Nationalist Brunete was a great success, and would be repeated upon the return of the Condor Legion to the War in the North, and the decisive victory at the end of the month-long Battle of Santander.
That said, the overconfident Condor Legion — which was quickly becoming an economic burden for Nazi Germany — would face difficulty in the battles of Teruel and Belchite, but would emerge victorious.
Regardless, the issues in Spain were quickly becoming overshadowed by developments in Central Europe, the Anschluss of Austria and annexation of the Sudetenland.
The bombing of Barcelona on 16 March would again see the use of military force against civilian targets, this time with the added innovations of experimental timed explosives and the ‘Silent Approach’ method.
This technique was orchestrated by deactivating the engine in order to glide from a high altitude silently and bomb the desired target, before restarting the engine and climbing once more to a safe altitude.
The timed explosive would penetrate much deeper into the buildings or streets before detonating.
These were among the last experimental innovations to be implemented during the war, and they wouldn't be seen again until the London Blitz of 1940.
The Battle of Ebro, which began on 25 July 1938 and ran for the greater part of that year, would further transform the Condor Legion and the wider crisis in Spain into a nuisance.
The exhausting battle saw staff recalled, reshuffled and redeployed for the last time, with Richthofen once again taking up the position as chief of staff.
The last three months of deployment consisted of a first phase, wherein the Legion conducted a series of sorties against the Republicans in the Nationalist’s final offensive.
With the Munich Agreement assuring that the Republic would not receive any future aide, the e A Stuka dive bombs a Spanish city in 1938 Wehrmacht high command was satisfied by the establishment of a Spain that was friendly, or at the very least neutral, to the future actions of Nazi Germany.
The Condor Legion began its withdrawal in February 1939, with the last troops leaving the Iberian Peninsula by May.
The intervention by Nazi Germany in the Spanish Civil War did pay its dividends.
The Nazi regime was able to innovate and invent a new kind of warfare, seize industry vital to the regrowth of the German military, and train the next generation of pilots who would excel in the crucial opening months of the next great war.
THE BOMBING OF GUERNICA THE MORBIDLY ICONIC BOMBING OF THE BASQUE TOWN OF GUERNICA WOULD BE ONLY TOO TELLING OF THE CHARACTER OF THE NAZIS’ ‘TOTAL WAR’ STRATEGY 26 April 1937 opened as any other Monday would in the Basque town of Guernica.
It was market day, so the streets were packed with people from the surrounding region.
Despite the civil war that was engulfing the rest of Spain to the south, Guernica saw very little conflict itself.
Refugees had sought asylum in the ancient capital, but otherwise, the civil war seemed almost exterior to the town’s inhabitants.
What the people of Guernica couldn’t possibly anticipate was that their small settlement was positioned in such a way that was strategically important to the Nationalist forces, who were invading the northern provinces.
At 4.30pm, the first German aircraft began their descent into the town.
The carpet bombing tactics employed by the Condor Legion absolutely devastated Guernica, proving the tactic to be effective and so worthy for utilisation in the future conflicts of the German state The church bells rang and people ran for the fortifications built following the bombing of Durango.
Five minutes later, the first bomber appeared, dropped its payload and departed.
Then came a second both initial attacks aiming for the centre of the town.
Only 15 minutes later, three Junkers Ju 52s arrived and began carpet bombing the city indiscriminately.
This was repeated every 20 minutes until 7.45pm with a rotational force utilised.
This consisted of squadrons of Junkers Ju 52s for bombing and demolition purposes, and squadrons of recently introduced Bf109 fighter planes, which took up a more anti-personnel role, allegedly attacking civilians and livestock.
Additionally, as with the bombing of Durango, the Nationalist forces initially blamed communist militants for the destruction of the city a story that has not stood the test of time, with the modern government of Germany apologising for the actions of its predecessor in 1997.
What is not disputed is the fact that the Condor Legion was experimenting with psychological warfare at the time, and that the attack shattered any notion to resist the invading Nationalists, who took control of the city by the end of the month.
HMS Tenacious WAY, the SAS moun id on a Soviet.hel 58 OTTOMAN EMPIRE When Mehmet II marched on Constantinople in 1453, he brought with him some of the largest SUPERCANNONS OFTHE — bombards the world had ever seen V } Nhe siege of Constantinople marked a significant transition from the Medieval world of swords, catapults and trebuchets to the triumph of the gunpowder empire.
As the impenetrable walls of Byzantium were crushed by super-sized cannons, down with them came the might of millennia of the Roman Empire as dust under the feet of the sultans.
When Sultan Mehmet entered the city in 1453, its capture was mourned in the Latin West as a destruction.
However, the Ottomans saw themselves not only as heirs to the caliphates, but as the inheritors of Rome.
The Ottomans carried on the cultural legacy of a great empire in the Mediterranean and even continued the tradition of military pomp.
More importantly, they carried on the legacy of military might, conquest, and engineering, and nothing is more emblematic of this than Orban’s gargantuan supercannon, which helped conquer Constantinople in 1453.
The rise of the Ottomans and the wane of the Byzantine Empire The Ottoman Empire’s origins lie in the slow crumble of the Turkic Seljug Empire in Anatolia and the northern part of the Near East.
The Seljuqs had been under continuous onslaught against forces like the Persian Safavids and the Byzantine Empire from the west.
In 1299, a relief force from modern-day Turkmenistan changed the course of the conflict.
The force was led by Osman, whose rise to power had been foreshadowed by a dream in which he saw a moon rise from a holy man’s breast and sink into his own.
Then, a tree supposedly rose from the light in his belly and spread its branches across the world.
Osman arrived to a fragmented political patchwork of small, competing warlord states in Anatolia that were only nominally under the control of the central Seljug state.
The empire gradually expanded from humble beginnings under Osman’s heirs and came to encircle Constantinople, which had essentially become an ailing city-state — albeit with much more powerful foreign allies.
The Byzantines, however, were on the opposite end of their historical trajectory.
While in the 19th century the Ottoman Empire would be referred to as the ‘sick man of Europe’, in the 15th century, it was the Byzantines who filled this role.
By this time, the empire had barely recovered from a long period of civil war and assaults from external aggressors.
They became engulfed in an extremely complex civil war in the Balkans, during which the Emperor John VI Kantakouzenos hired Ottoman mercenaries to subdue his rivals.
Unfortunately, what he ended up with was the Ottomans establishing themselves in the Balkans.
As they gradually pushed south east, Byzantium found itself sandwiched between Ottoman strongholds.
Though they had been used in China for centuries, the majority of siege technology focused on rams, catapult devices and so on.
The Islamic empires of the exe) aole mV al aa Mm dal-m pales-imr-lelcelalercre| science of the day, were eager adaptors of foreign technological innovations.
As they pressed eastwards, they began adopting and expanding upon the devices they encountered through the NY Ko) aye) [are lalo Mm dalom Oval lavss-yomeemlarerlelellatcm-dulayelenucelsyg as well as incorporating European technologies they encountered.
This thalej al-sin or ‘Chinese snow’, as gunpowder was known, would be revolutionary in the history of siege warfare.
One of the most prominent early uses was during the Battle of Mohi in 1241, during the Mongol Invasion of Europe the Mamluks also used it against the Mongols at Ain Jalut in 1260.
Gunpowder ""Vole mcemtalcm a mr-Meal-llamey mii (elel(sy Eastern empires, but the evolution of massive supercannons was mostly centred around the “MANY WOULD EXPLODE AS THEIR GUNNERS PACKED THEM WITH HUGE LOADS OF GUNPOWDER” later Renaissance European micro-kingdoms, which regularly besieged one another.
At first, the goal was to create huge-calibre guns of more than 50 centimetres in diameter that fired large stone projectiles, with the goal of smashing the walls of fortresses.
Many would explode as their gunners packed them with huge loads of gunpowder, or otherwise shatter their projectiles on walls rather than penetrate.
In the Middle East, although siege weapons of this type were used, gun technology tended Ko aalon'c-m cele lcercm aretha (eler-lmarclalemere]alareyalsy relate marclalefctelalcwmaesleel-y@cer-lamaler-tom-) aoe By the Ottoman period, despite their ineffective, slow-loading handguns, the elite Janissaries were a force to be reckoned with.
Finding his services of little demand in Europe, Hungarian engineer Orban saw opportunities in south-east Europe and the Middle East.
To compensate, the gunners would have to wad the gaps with sheepskin, wood or other materials.
HEAVY FIRE The Basilica cannon measured more than 27 feet in length, with eight-inch thick walls to accommodate its enormous blast.
It had a diameter of more than 30 inches and was designed to be loaded with a stone shot weighing more than half a ton.
The Ottoman cannons were both deafening and dangerous, so their psychological effect was almost as powerful as their physical impact.
Crews were often injured and killed during the operation of guns in the siege.
Orban himself is rumoured to have later been killed by one of his own malfunctioning cannons.
The uniqueness of Orban’s gun was not in its composition, but its scale.
He intended to build the biggest, most powerful gun that had ever been created.
When he approached Mehmet ll offering his services, the sultan asked if his gun would be powerful enough to penetrate the walls of the city.
At this point, the Ottomans had made the most formidable empire in the Islamic world.
They had learned a great deal about the use of artillery during previous engagements with the Mamluks to the south and during conflicts in Hungary.
While they had developed very little of their own technology, Ottoman gun crews were extremely skilled in its use, both in portable handheld forms and larger artillery pieces.
Even Sultan Mehmet II himself was well educated in the art of ballistics and, upon seeing some of his batteries being ineffective, pioneered a new use of a long-range mortar during the siege.
Orban set to work near the capital of Edirne and Mehmet stockpiled supplies for gunpowder, copper and tin as he worked.
His crews dug enormous casting pits in the ground and melted scrap bronze in nearby furnaces, superheated by bellows to pour into the mould.
INSIDE THE SUPERCANNON The cannon designed to destroy the walls of Babylon itself was designed by Hungarian engineer, Orban, and used to a devastating effect by the Ottomans.
They besieged the city with the deafening roar of their cannons and inspired fear with their military band.
When a small group of Janissaries raised the Ottoman banner on the ramparts, Constantine XI’s men knew they were done.
The history of siege warfare came crashing down at the end of Ottoman cannoneers, who were masters of ballistics and adept adaptors of foreign technologies.
From the start, Ottoman gunners had a difficult time aiming this huge cannon, as it was positioned on a combination of removable wooden blocks, as well as earthen ramparts.
Teams also had to clear out fields of fruit trees to provide a clear line of sight.
Once fired, it took an extraordinarily long time to cool down and had to be drenched with copious amounts of oil and cleaned frequently.
The cannon was only capable of about seven shots per day, each reinforced in a triangular pattern by the smaller cannons.
In all, the 69 guns of Mehmet’s SUPERCANNONS OF THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE GETTING INTO POSITION The gun was cast of solid bronze and laboriously transported by a team of 60 oxen with an accompanying crew of up to 400.
They travelled at rate of 2. miles a day to within a mile of Constantinople’s wall.
Rebekka Hearl teat on 4 During the extremely time-consuming task of reloading the gun, it would be hidden behind a wooden flap that covered the gap in the wood and earthen ramparts in which it sat and protected its operators from defensive projectiles.
Basilica’s ammunition was mined from areas along the Black Sea and was never of an exact size, so it would be padded with sheepskin or wood.
Its production was so intensive that Ottoman gunners would often attempt to drag undamaged munitions back from the walls with large nets, to be recycled.
Despite the enormous amounts of bronze, its construction was still too weak for the enormity of its shot.
During the siege, it had to be repaired by Orban numerous times, and was reinforced by iron rings after it had cracked.
The defenders of Constantinople also responded to Ottoman attacks with their own cannons and even packed some with multiple small projectiles in a shotgunlike fashion.
However, their guns were smaller and their recoil often damaged their own walls.
SUPERCANNONS OF THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE CFALL OF CONSTANTINOPLE In the end, cunning strategy toppled the Byzantines, not the use of a sole super weapon.
Although LO} i oy-lak-w-ye] o>) cers] alale) am cc kows le) Velie) im Oxo) atcie-lardiare)e) csr-leraleve| iKolmmaatelcomearclam-Maallicclalelielaammealcmus tm alelmsyalelercdemce) conquer the city.
Sparsely populated after being sacked so many times by Crusaders, in 1453 Constantinople was only urbanised in its easternmost extremity, with the rest of the area inside the massive walls comprising village-sized settlements separated by large fields and rural segments.
Within the walls its citizens grew their own food and farmed livestock.
In theory, it could withstand extremely long sieges, as it had before including an Ummayad assault in the 7th century.
Had this happened, it is unclear what the ultimate goal could have been as a completely encircled city-state.
When the siege began, the city had only about 10,000 professional soldiers at its disposal, of which almost 3,000 were foreigners mainly from the major powers of Venice and Genoa.
Although the defenders were outnumbered, Constantinople was still arguably the best-defended city in Europe at the time.
In response, the Ottomans created a greased wooden slipway and transported their ships on land around the defences.
Also, as the walls were slow to fall, the Ottomans created a pontoon bridge across a weaker point in UayomCre) mant-mar-lal-yelelamelm-ladii(-1ay and troops, bringing them closer to the city.
As the Ottoman artillery began cracking the walls, the defenders worked endlessly and kept plugging the holes and reinforcing them with earth and wood to absorb their impact.
Inevitably, they were overwhelmed by the speed and volume of the attacks, and a group of 50 Janissaries poured into the cracks near Kerkoporta, with the prospect of an elevation of rank for the first who scaled Natoma Cell meal Mm col cxore mdalomOlace)aat-lamey-lalalslmelam tals ramparts.
Once Saint Romanus’s gate was breached, Constantine XI himself sat within sight.
With these first volleys of the sultan’s cannons forJa atom taro elsy-dialaliar-zomeymanlelerclaam-ladli(slavr-lalep likewise, the Byzantine defenders saw the entire history of siege warfare disintegrate before them.
Mehmet the Conqueror enters the defeated city of Constantinople 62 Unfortunately the Basilica gun was lost to history following the siege.
Nonetheless, Munir Ali, Orban’s Successor, carried on the tradition of casting Supercannons as well as other artillery.
Eventually, these guns were superseded by other artillery pieces with smaller bores but longer barrels, and moreefficient gunpowder.
For the next few centuries the development of weaponry trended in this direction and these super guns made only occasional appearances again.
Their use had become increasingly irrelevant as heavily fortified cities became less and less prevalent.
In 1463, Munir Ali cast a gun that would stand watch over Istanbul for the next three and a half centuries.
It would later be used by desperate Ottoman troops in 1807, to devastating effect against a British fleet that tried to force the Dardanelles.
SUPERCANNONS OF THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE Whenever heavy fortifications emerged again, the concept of the supercannon also returned as a possible solution.
During the Crimean War, the British developed ‘Mallet’s Mortar’ but never used it in combat.
In World War I, a series of extremely long railway-mounted howitzers emerged to dislodge troops from trenches.
The Nazis resurrected the idea in the 1930s with the Schwerer Gustav and Dora rail cannons, with the intent of destroying the concrete defences of the Maginot Line, and was used in the Siege of Sevastopol.
At the end of World War Il, the USA experimented with a modern bombard nicknamed ‘Little David’ in a planned siege against what they imagined was a heavily fortified Japan.
After World War II, the USSR and USA both developed field cannons capable of firing nuclear weapons — an extreme continuation of this same legacy.
For the most part, * Br) ves mechanised warfare seemed to prefer more mobile equipment.
As such, these guns, even having proved their effectiveness at specific engagements, remained largely a curiosity.
As it stands, modern militaries have shifted towards asymmetrical warfare and away from heavy fortifications of any kind.
If they ever return, the guns to breach them and the inheritors of the legacy of Orban’s gun, are sure to emerge again.
A reformed violent alcoholic and devout Christian, the Tennessee-born son of a blacksmith originally tried to avoid enlisting for military service — not because he wanted to dodge the responsibility of serving his country, but rather because he didn’t believe in taking up arms against his fellow man. “| was worried clean through. | didn’t want to go and kill,” he remarked at a lecture later in his life.
But his request for conscientious objection (a position he would later deny) was formally rejected and he was soon shipped off to fight.
The third of 11 children, Alvin C York was born on 13 December 1887 into an impoverished family living in Pall Mall, Tennessee.
The United States was only two decades removed from the onslaught of the civil war when York entered the world and the former secessionist state was still recovering from the devastating domestic conflict.
As such, York, like his seven brothers, spent only nine months in formal education before his father William brought him home to work full time on the farm.
From an early age, the young York was no stranger to the hard graft of farm work.
When his father died in November 1911, the running of the household fell to the 23-year-old (his two older brothers Henry and Joseph had already moved out of the family home) and he soon took up a number of jobs, including logging and working on the local railway.
He was devoted to WORDS DOM RESEIGH-LINCOLN his family, but was also a burgeoning alcoholic, prone to brawls and dust-ups in local bars.
He still attended church on a regular basis with his devout mother and siblings, but it wasn’t until January 1915 that York finally left the alcohol behind and embraced his faith.
While he was raised a Methodist, it was a more recent branch of the Christian faith that drew his attention.
His new congregation, the Church of Christ in Christian Union, had no official pacifist doctrines per se, but it did shun violence as much as it opposed division between the many Christian sects.
On 5 June 1917, the Selective Service Act came into effect and men aged between 21 and 30 were legally bound to enlist for military service.
York attempted to seek conscientious objection on the grounds of his stringent new spiritual beliefs, but as the Union wasn’t recognised as an official branch, his request was denied.
York became a figurehead for promoting the United States military’s successes in World War I, but he never grew comfortable with this new fame Regiment, 82nd Infantry Division at Camp Gordon, Georgia, but his new posting didn’t sway his fears.
Troubled by the war, York was granted ten days of leave; when he returned, he came with the belief that God intended him to fight, devoting himself to his new mission with all the fervour he’d given his new church.
York and his division were then posted to France to take part in the United States Army’s first offensive of World War I, the Saint Mihiel Offensive.
Up until this point, the United States had attempted to stay out of the conflict, but the unrestricted and vicious attacks from German submarines had proved an encroachment too far, with President Woodrow Wilson requesting Congress officially declare war in April that year.
When United States Army forces, including the United States Air Army Service arrived in north-east France in September 1917, they caught the Germans in a state of retreat.
The unprepared enemy scrambled to react to the new American military presence, and York (now a corporal) and his fellow compatriots helped secure an Allied victory in a matter of a few days.
The 82nd Division was then shifted further north to take part in the Meuse-Argonne Offensive, one of the final battles of World War I On 8 October, Allied forces, including the 82nd, successfully took Hill 223, located along the Decauville railway line north of ChatelChéhéry.
However, as forces swarmed down the hill on the other side, they found the triangular valley at the bottom was a death trap.
German machine-gun emplacements were encamped on ridges around the valley and they gunned down Allied soldiers in their droves.
With his unit also proving unwaveringly defiant, German First Lieutenant Paul Jurgen Vollmer orders the surrender of the emplacements.
With the gun emplacement still shredding the cover around them, York leaves the remaining eight able soldiers to guard the prisoners while he moves forward alone to silence the guns.
Hl Behind enemy lines Four noncommissioned 02 Assault under fire officers, including a recently York and the unit overrun the promoted Corporal York, and 13 headquarters of a German unit that privates are ordered to infiltrate was planning to launch a counterenemy lines.
While Early’s men are dealing of Sergeant Bernard Early, they’re with the prisoners obtained from the tasked with taking out a series of German headquarters, a nearby gun machine-gun emplacements. nest hammers the exposed American soldiers, killing six of the team and wounding three others.
Acute Graphics oO 0) it 4 Exchange of attrition ee More than 30 German machine guns are now blazing at York and his men.
While calling out continuously in an effort to convince them to surrender, York is forced to kill enemy after enemy with his rifle.
Six soldiers attempt to run him through with their bayonets, but he reluctantly dispatches them all with his pistol.
ALVIN C YORK “Fearlessly leading seven men, he charged with great daring a machine-gun nest that was pouring deadly and incessant fire upon his platoon” Official citation for Sergeant York’s Medal of Honor A unit under the command of Sergeant Bernard Early was tasked with moving behind enemy lines and overrunning the emplacements.
A total of four noncommissioned officers, including York, and 13 privates used the large amount of brush and tall bushes to flank the gun nests, moving through woodland until they were positioned at the rear of the network.
Working from such an advantageous position, Early, York and the rest of the unit were able to immediately overrun the main headquarters.
Caught completely by surprise, the HQ was taken almost entirely without bloodshed and Early and his men took a large contingent of prisoners within minutes of beginning their offensive.
Unfortunately, the covert nature of the assault was soon torn apart when one of the German soldiers manning a gun emplacement noticed the fracas and opened fire on the exposed unit.
Six Americans were killed outright, and another three were critically injured in the opening salvo, including Early.
With his senior officer incapacitated, command of the unit was passed to York.
By this stage, the gun emplacement was peppering the cover sheltering York, the wounded and those soldiers still able to fight.
It had become clear that the unit wouldn’t be able to silence the guns from their current position, so York ordered his men to stay where they were and continue exchanging fire.
With the gunners distracted by the remainder of his team, the corporal moved forward alone, manoeuvring swiftly and silently through the trenches.
The Meuse-Argonne Offensive was one of the costliest to American lives, with more than 26,000 dead Lying prone and peeking over the embankments, York began sniping at the gunners, killing enemy after enemy as the Germans struggled to locate this unexpected source of fire.
However, just because he had accepted that his life as a soldier was a calling from God didn’t mean that he’d left his ideals behind in Georgia.
He began calling out to the soldiers, imploring them to surrender and avoid further bloodshed, only returning fire when it was Clear such a course of action was not a consideration.
With his men also pressing the gun emplacement, a contingent of six German soldiers were dispatched to hunt him down.
The kill team might have been successful had York not spied them in time, switching to his pistol and dispatching each one at close range.
York continued his assault on the machinegun emplacement, picking off any soldier that was foolish enough to peer over the embankment.
As time went by, the man in charge of the gun nest, First Lieutenant Paul Jurgen Vollmer, realised his men were too exposed and proceeded to offer his and his men’s surrender to the lone sniper.
Some reports suggest York killed up to 20 German soldiers that morning, although he has always distanced himself from those claims as well as the propaganda that swirled around him upon his return.
Yet whatever that final number may have been, Corporal York put his life on the line in one of the most daring acts of valour.
He was swiftly promoted to sergeant and awarded the Distinguished Service Cross.
Following the end of the war, all commendations were reviewed and York’s medal was upgraded to the Medal of Honor in recognition of his actions in the final months of the conflict.
Offer code PS15 must be quoted to receive this special subscription price.
Imagine Publishing reserves the right to limit this type of offer to one per household.
The design put cruise efficiency ahead of handling at low speeds, so many crews initially stayed well away from the aircraft.
It was most effective in the European Theatre, operating in mediumaltitude attacks in Normandy and the invasion of Italy.
These turrets were the first of their kind and rotated on large ball bearings.
As well as the main armament, some B-26s included several smaller .30-inch machine guns, which were dotted around the fuselage.
These guns acted in a defensive capacity and would protect the aircraft from enemy fighters and anti-aircraft positions when on bombing runs.
The rear gun was invaluable as it helped take down Messerschmitts, Zeros and any other Axis planes on the bomber’s tail.
Up to 1,814 Al Koyed go] pakom C-@ 10 10m exelul ale l-) mere l0] devastating strike sorties.
It was the first Allied — KS <a) cS «) oS ww b Y ‘ aircraft built in World War Il to use four blades “ay ~~ f | AR in its propulsion system and could generate up — — 72 eS SS OEE to 1,930 horsepower.
The 18-cylinder engine was incredibly versatile and was used in planes in the Korean War as well as World War Il.
Using a tricycle shape, it incorporated a nose wheel rather than the traditional tail wheel.
It the war, an astonishing 18,400 were but not to be confused with the a giant of the sky.
The Liberator served all over Marauder, the A-26 was a versatile in the UK and deployed to Germany the first Allied attack to strike the the world utilising its range of more and long-serving aircraft.
It served to take part in relentless daylight Japanese home islands. than 2,000 miles. in the Korean and Vietnam wars. bombing raids.
B-26 MARAUDER CONSTRUCTION It may have been rushed off the production line, but the B-26 was a sophisticated war machine.
Entering, and subsequently winning, a competition for a new United States medium bomber in 1939, one of the major differences between it and its predecessors was the use of plastic.
Before the Marauder, military aircraft were made mostly out of metal, but the B-26 changed this by using cheap and readily available plastic.
The Marauder carried so much equipment that it couldn’t sustain much flak before getting in trouble.
This made it ineffective at low-level attack missions, meaning it was soon changed to a medium-level bomber to make it more durable in combat.
The original models also suffered from problems with the landing gear, but these were corrected by a heat-treatment process that improved the hydraulic system.
BEFORE THE MARAUDER, MILITARY AIRCRAFT WERE MADE MOSTLY OUT OF METAL, BUT THE B-26 CHANGED THIS BY USING CHEAP AND READILY AVAILABLE PLASTIC” Only three ME 264s were built before the German project was abandoned War in Donbass A separatist rebellion has torn apart Ukraine’s east and brought relations between Russia and the West to their lowest level since the Cold War WORDS TOM FARRELL s the capital of Ukraine’s breakaway Ace of Donbass, Donetsk has omehow avoided the completely shattered look of many cities in war time.
There are plenty of bullet and mortar-gouged buildings, but on many streets, there is a semblance of normalcy.
Even so, at least two thirds of businesses are believed to have closed and there is no banking in the city.
A curfew descends at 10pm, and in the distance, the thud of exploding mortars can be heard.
Pre-war Donetsk, a mining town whose Soviet legacy is evident in its socialistrealist buildings of state, was home to more than 1 million people; many of them have now fled.
Its pre-war population was 4. million, and most of the 2 million civilians internally displaced by the fighting in Ukraine originated from here.
Although the pro-Russian insurgents who control the city have not erected checkpoints around Donetsk, they can sometimes be seen bouncing through the streets in cars or minivans.
On occasion, they may pass the 11-storey government buildings where, on 11 May 2014, the separatist Oplot militia gathered to declare independence from Ukraine.
By the time he was appointed prime minister of the Donetsk Peoples’ Republic in August, the region was mired in bitter fighting.
In the aftermath of the populist revolt that toppled President Viktor Yanukovych, the EU and NATO-friendly posture of Ukraine’s new government had inflamed its chief patron, President Vladimir Putin.
When separatist rebellion spread through Donbass, Russia began to intervene on behalf of the insurgents.
It is uncertain how many military and civilian deaths have occurred since May 2014; estimates go up to 7,000.
AS announced by the Donetsk ‘People’s Governor’ Pavel Gubarev on 22 May 2014, it promises the nationalisation of key industries, Russian orthodoxy as the state religion and a confederation of Ukraine’s southern and eastern regions.
A key turning point in the conflict came in mid-2014, when Putin began extending ‘humanitarian’ assistance across the border.
Donbass has since come to resemble one of the proxy battlefields of the Cold War.
During this period, unwilling to risk a direct confrontation and possible escalation to a nuclear war, Moscow and Washington ‘outsourced’ conflict to various client regimes and insurgencies throughout Africa, Asia and Latin America.
Today’s conflict in the industrial east of Ukraine, however, is ethno-nationalist and territorial rather than ideological.
Officially, the Kremlin denies it has troops fighting in Ukraine even if bases are mushrooming on the Russian side of the border.
Viktor Yanukovych is declared coup in Moscow, Ukraine’s led by Viktor Yushchenko winner in the presidential ESCALATING POLITICAL TURMOIL and Yulia Tymoshenko, after election and begins to reverse reports of election rigging by : democratic reforms.
His rival the pro-Russian premier Viktor Yulia Tymoshenko will be Yanukovych.
Protests centre in _ arrested in the next year on Kiev’s Independence Square. | charges of abusing her powers. parliament declares independence fromthe — Soviet Union in a referendum endorsed by 90 percent of | the electorate.
A pro-Russian _ separatist taking gart in the capture _ of Debaltseve in February 2015 RUSSIA \ POLAND oe 9 UKRAINE TURKEY BRIEFING After the 17th century, when the Ukrainian Cossacks signed a treaty with the tsar of Moscovy, the western regions of Ukraine passed between the rule of Warsaw and Moscow.
Long after this, the glue of Soviet power held in place a fault line between the western and Slavic worlds for a long time.
That fault line is once again active, with nucleararmed players on either side.
Euromaidan For many outside observers, however, it had been a question of when, not if, this fault line would become active.
Resourcerich and nestling on Russia’s southern flank, a consultative referendum in the region in 1994 had been called concurrently with Ukraine’s first parliamentary election.
Ukraine did not federalise and Russian was not adopted as a state language.
At the behest of the World Bank, a bracing programme of privatisation was pushed through Donbass and many mines were closed.
Awash with new, and often corrupt, money, a regional elite of oligarchs became rich.
Upon taking power in February 2010, he rapidly reversed the pro-Western stance of his predecessor Viktor Yushchenko, who had been elevated to the presidency by the 2004 ‘Orange’ Revolution.
Nationalistic and authoritarian, the former KGB lieutenant colonel has sought to re-establish a Russian ‘sphere of influence’ of the type that existed in the Cold War era.
But Ukraine was ahead of the others in having already initialised a trade agreement with the European Union.
During November and December of 2013, there had been anti-government protests in Kiev.
The ‘Euromaidan’ movement sought a closer relationship with the EU and, later, changes to the Constitution that would lessen presidential power.
To Putin and his Slav-nationalist power base, this was a dangerous precedent, one that could bring NATO right up to Russia’s borders.
A critical turning point came on 17 December, when Yanukovych announced a deal struck with Putin wherein Russia agreed to buy $15 billion in Ukrainian bonds and slash the price of natural gas by one third.
Essentially, this was a rebuke to the protestors, who nonetheless were back on the streets by 24 December.
First anti-government protests begin. x 18 “Molotov cocktails, projectiles and barricades were met with tear gas and riot shields” concentrated around Maidan Nezalezhnosti . 24 years earlier, when it had been called Lenin Square, thousands of students had gathered there and called for a referendum on breaking from the Soviet Union.
A decade before, the Square had been a focal point of the Orange Revolution.
Molotov cocktails, projectiles and barricades were met with tear gas and riot shields.
Then, on 20 February, the police used live rounds, killing more than 50 civilians.
On 16 March, a referendum in the Crimean region decisively endorsed Russian rule.
By that point, Russian troops had already seized key locations in the peninsula.
Moreover, while these events unfolded, semipopulist revolts erupted in the resource-rich east.
The first phase of the ‘War in Donbass’ would last roughly from mid April to late June 2014.
Self-proclaimed militias representing the Russian-speaking minority materialised and, usually after standoffs with the authorities, seized key buildings.
Once the independence of Donetsk and Luhansk had been formally declared on 11 May, the battles grew more violent.
Video footage with the security forces shows uniformed snipers become more violent. firing on protesters.
Yulia 3 Tymoshenko is freed from prison and parliament votes to remove | the president from office.
Donetsk International Airport lies in ruins after being captured by rebels Left: In January 2014, a barricade is set alight in Kiev after antigovernment protests turned violent Below: A Russia-backed rebel takes cover in the ruins of Donetsk International Airport Below, left: A Coates fighter stands near two Ukrainian’Soldiers’ bodies on the outskirts of Debaltseve The loss of Crimea to a westernaligned regime would spell the end of Russia as a world power” WAR IN DONBASS rebels were able to source governmentowned vehicles and ,s weaponry.
But by mid \ July, most rebel-held AY towns had been retaken » by the government forces.
Following a week-long ceasefire, the breakaway region seemed poised to be retaken by the government.
This first phase of the war got under way while the dust of the Euromaidan revolution was still settling in Kiev.
A Western-friendly oligarch who had built his fortune on confectionary, his administration proved a controversial bulwark against the supposed expansionism of Putin.
Ukraine’s 150,000-man army would stand little chance should Russian forces directly intervene in the fighting.
Thus his government permitted the incorporation of several militantly nationalist groups into the recently re-established National Guard that had been tasked with counter-insurgency.
These included some decidedly unsavoury factions that had nonetheless played an important role during the Euromaidan protests.
Notable among these was Right Sector, whose ideology encompasses Christian fundamentalism, gun rights and homophobia.
Both the battalion and the Poroshenko government denied their involvement.
But the invocation of fascist or communist extremism has been an easy matter in a nation that was brutalised by both ideologies within living memory.
A referendum, not recognised by Kiev, resulted in 89 per cent of the Donetsk and 96 per cent of the Luhansk electorate voting to break from Ukraine.
By that time, fighting between government forces and separatists had convulsed Artemivsk, Sloviansk, Karamtorsk, Horlivka, Mariupol and several smaller towns.
April 2014 Protesters in the Russian-speaking east occupy government buildings in Donetsk, Luhansk and Kharkiv, calling for an independence referendum.
Acting President Olexander Turchynov announces an ‘anti-terrorist’ operation aimed at recapturing rebel-held areas.
Ukraine and vows to quell Much of the east does not 25 May 2014 The EU-friendly oligarch Petro Poroshenko is elected president of 5 July 2014 DPR fighters abandon their stronghold of Sloviansk as fighting comes close to the Russian border.
When separatists raided the armoury in Artemvisk, it housed about 30 tanks.
From early on, Donetsk International Airport was the focal point of heavy fighting between the government and the separatists.
Several dozen insurgents were killed before government forces were able to recapture the airport.
By late June, Ukrainian forces claimed to have cleared separatists from the southern and western sectors of Donetsk Oblast and northern sector of Luhansk.
By that time, Ukrainian troops, assisted by the National Guard, had retaken the key port city of Mariupol, which, with the rebels still holding Donetsk City, was designated as the capital of Donetsk Oblast.
But even as government forces bore down on Donetsk and Luhansk, the scale of the fighting was escalating.
The most obvious example had been the fighting around Yampil, a town held by several thousand rebels close to government-controlled Krasni Lyman.
Government forces intended to take Yampil and push forward to rebel-held Siversk.
On 19 June, they attacked Yampil with air and artillery strikes; although the insurgents admitted to a death toll in the hundreds, they did not withdraw for at least 24 hours and also claimed to have downed a Su-25 bomber.
As fighting raged close to the Russian border, the cause of Donbass seemed precarious — then in mid July, the conflict took a shocking new turn.
The aircraft was the same model, ironically, that had vanished over the seas of South East Asia four months earlier.
En route to Kuala Lumpur, contact was lost with the pilot at 13.20 GMT about 50 kilometres from the Russia-Ukraine border.
Footage soon emerged from rebel-controlled Donetsk showing wreckage and witnesses reported seeing bodies falling from the sky.
Weeks passed before all the wreckage and bodies were removed, the work being hampered by fighting in the region.
Eventually, a deal was done with the militias and investigating teams went in.
DPR fighters capture Donetsk International _ Airport, which is almost completely destroyed after weeks of fighting.
Just who shot down Flight MH17 has since become a matter of heated argument.
United States officials from the office of the Director of National Intelligence have concluded that the plane was “likely” downed by a Russiansupplied SA-11 missile, known as a ‘BUNK’, while Moscow has placed blame at the feet of Ukrainian forces.
The Dutch Safety Board is currently leading an international probe, having already recovered the aircraft’s flight recorder.
In July of this year, Malaysia pushed for the draft resolution of an international tribunal into the fate of the aircraft to be put before the UN Security Council.
Russian intervention The ill-fated MH17 was not the first aircraft to be blown out of the skies.
On 14 June, a Ukrainian Airforce Ilyushin IIl-76 was shot down while attempting to land troops and supplies at Luhansk Airport, killing all 49 aboard.
More and more sophisticated weapons were appearing on the battlefield, including big guns and advanced missile systems.
Although Putin denied involvement in Donbass, Russian ‘volunteers’ were increasingly appearing on the battlefield.
Don Cossack, Chechen, Ossetian and Abkhazi paramilitaries have been seen at such battle sites as Donetsk Airport.
On 27 August, after two columns of Russian tanks crossed the border, Ukraine’s Foreign Minister called the conflict an invasion by Russian forces.
But ‘voluntary’ or not, the presence of Russians in Donbass marked the beginning of a reversal of the separatists’ fortunes.
After coming close to defeat, DPR and LPR forces “Although Putin denied involvement in Donbass, Russian ‘volunteers’ were increasingly appearing on the attlefield” WAR IN DONBASS were able to recapture many of the strongholds established during April and May.
In September, following their abandonment of the town of llovaisk, Ukrainian forces were reportedly attacked by Russian forces while travelling through a ‘green corridor’ arranged for their retreat.
February) sought to implement ceasefires and demilitarisation in the region during 201415.
They were signed after extensive talks in Belarus and brokered by the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe.
By late September, a second battle broke out at Donetsk International Airport and this time the DPR were victorious.
Within a week of Minsk II, Ukrainian forces abandoned Debaltseve, an important road and rail junction on the eastern edge of Donetsk.
At present, although there are skirmishes along both sides’ lines of control, there have been no changes of territory since June.
Frozen conflict The military deadlock in Donbass may reflect a wider political impasse.
Russian troops are believed to be ready for a large-scale conflict and there are about 40,000 troops in Rostov Oblast.
A possible future target could be the port of Mariupol, which has large metallurgical plants and provides access to the Sea of Azov.
From Putin’s perspective, it makes sense to establish a land corridor to the Crimean region, which is now sunk in recession, afflicted by inflation and collapsed investment.
But according to two United States studies, Russia would need to set aside nearly 150,000 troops to do this.
Given that the Russian armed forces consist of 750,000 soldiers, this is unlikely.
Poroshenko is relying on links with the West; the IMF and EU have offered billions in aid but these are dependent on political reforms.
Politically, he will gain little at home from a conciliatory approach that tacitly concedes power to Russia in Crimea or recognises some form of limited self-rule in Donbass.
He will certainly be badly imperilled by another military defeat on the scale of Debaltseve.
Barely three Pies after the spectacular success at Pearl Harbor, the Imperial Japanese Navy was on its last legs.
From Midway to Palau, Japan suffered losses -— carriers, cruisers, Submarines, planes and men — that couldn’t be replaced even with the utmost effort to maximise industrial production.
In the last quarter of 1944, any remaining hope for victory over the Allies was brutally quashed.
The previous day’s missions had been difficult and inconclusive, but now the sun was out and the American carriers were exposed just off Tacloban, Leyte’s capital.
These were escort carriers — basically large hulls Supporting broad wooden decks loaded with fighters.
They were first used in the Atlantic to hunt U-boats; in the Pacific, they became indispensable for air cover during Aas landings.
The squadron leader, a Lieutenant Yukio Seki, was killed together with laliswaarelarcromelle\ am com i1ase However, Lieutenant Seki was skilled enough to crash his plane on the USS St Lo’s runway, his payload detonating below deck.
Its sister carriers USS Santee, Kitkun Bay and Suwannee suffered hits too.
Ko) C.comm Fl mce)aaateli hm ersxerslaasmreMalcaume)e-lacegl of the Army and Navy Air Corps in March 1945, after United States forces captured Iwo Jima.
The concept of suicide flights really began with an experimental weapon, the Ohka, but officers TL ACemYACeremANoLanliccl Mm Olalcyalm-yacey sxe m aleni'a el ts lates) excelled at the same role.
Young men, with or without flying experience, were given the choice to volunteer for the Tokko Tai if they were already enlisted.
If a mission was aborted, the Tokko WE Timaatelalerclimiatsiaaeleatsvem dar-imre i e)|(olammyalelelce, be jovial and without remorse” upon his return.
Before flying, they scribbled a haiku, sipped from a cup of alc} ACca’are lave ma (ste mrs WZ Alicomars(ealiaatelCmaelelare| their heads.
Sentimentality also mattered for Tokko Tai eo) | Co} cw Matcai am aar-lalerclmce)(omanl-laamcomc-laat-lanlel-ve their mothers as they perished.
In practice, hundreds of kamikazes were lost crashing into the water rather than their intended targets. a had Ps , By THE FATHER OF KAMIKAZE By the time he arrived in the Philippine Islands, Onishi had new orders — from exactly who is unknown to organise a Special Attack operation using the squadrons of the ‘st Air Fleet.
Takijiro Onishi was responsible for some of the technical details of the attack on Pearl Harbor 84 TAKIJIRO ONISHI WAS A VETERAN PILOT CREDITED AS THE FIRST OFFICER TO ORGANISE A SUCCESSFUL SPECIAL ATTACK ON ALLIED FORCES Born in Hyogo Prefecture on 6 June 1891, Takijiro Onishi’s life coincided with the rise of Imperial Japan.
This supposedly originated from an unconventional tactic he explained to subordinates for crippling a United States Navy aircraft carrier — by crashing a bomb-laden plane into it.
A staunch patriot, Onishi also believed that it was unsound for Japan to wage war on the United States of America.
Some kamikaze writers suggest Onishi was introduced to the concept of self-sacrifice among Japanese pilots in either 1943 or early 1944.
Like many of his peers, Onishi harboured serious doubts about the effectiveness of Special Attack tactics.
It was particularly disturbing for an officer with his background, given his expert grasp of modern air combat.
Like the rest of the IJN in 1944, he was gripped by a determination to do anything for the Japanese cause, more so with the Allies drawing near in ever greater numbers.
Onishi’s personal conduct during the campaign to reconquer the Philippine Islands is unknown.
But the Tokko Tai tactics he devised were still being carried out well into 1945 by IJN holdouts in the Philippines, with disappointing results.
Back in Tokyo, Onishi knew, at least privately, that Special Attack tactics were squandering lives.
Hearing of the emperor’s surrender message over the radio, the disheartened Onishi committed seppuku, or ritual suicide.
But in a macabre twist, he was found a day later, on 16 August, writhing in agony.
Having disembowelled himself with a knife, he was unable to slit his throat and refused a swift decapitation from a second.
During the months after Pearl Harbor, it continued winning dogfights against many Allied planes it faced in the air.
Japanese planes also had weaker engines, less armour protection, and couldn’t match the altitude of United States heavy bombers.
For the Tokko Tai, however, the type of aircraft wasn’t always important.
The plan, drawn up at Tachiarai Joint Service Flight School outside Chiran as well as in other nearby airfields, was to deploy as many Special Attack formations as possible.
In 1945, there was still enough AGM Zeros left for use in kamikaze missions.
Hundreds of the older ADM fighters were co-opted for the missions as well.
Designed by the inventor and engineer Jiro Horikoshi in the late 1930s, the Zero was a lightweight marvel with superb manoeuvrability and an excellent 14-cylinder 1,130 horsepower engine.
At the beginning of Japan’s Pacific War, the Zero proved its superiority over American rivals like the F4F Wildcat.
More than 10,000 Zeros would be built, but the gradual loss of IJN carriers in Midway, the Philippine Sea and other battles limited its effectiveness.
With insufficient armour plating, countless numbers of them were blown to bits as they approached United States warships.
The UN Air Corps officers used aircraft like ordnance and cared little for keeping their planes airworthy.
This, along with diluted aviation fuel supplies, explains the high rate of failure among Special Attack missions.
Once a Tokko Tai pilot was selected and trained, his plane was given enough fuel to reach the area of operations.
Barring a mid-air crash or an accident, the Tokko Tai pilot embraced his end as he flew to his target.
ARMAME The Zero carried two light machine guns and a pair of nastier surprises.
Based on the Swiss Oerlikon, the Allied ships also used the same gun on incoming Zeros.
Zeros prepare for takeoff to take part in the first wave of the attack on Pearl Harbor Below centre: The oneman cockpit of an AGM5 Zero Model 52 Below: A Mitsubishi AGM2b Zero from the Zuikaku Aircraft Group during the attack on Pearl Harbor A FATAL FLAW The Zero’s greatest asset was its manoeuvrability.
This was made possible by its lightweight airframe, which had little armour protection.
Surviving the experience naturally inspired a curious regard for the Japanese who seemed so eager to vanquish them.
Soon after the war’s end, a story ran in Yank, the United States Army’s Grim proof of Onishi’s handiwork.
Once Tokko Tai missions began in October 1944, any large Allied ship was fair game weekly news magazine, about the experiences of a genuine kamikaze pilot.
Before their deployment, they were allowed to write a short letter home.
But he was soon disappointed by his treatment at the hands of the Tokko Tai officers.
Not that he was abused or maligned, rather Okamoto was forced to endure lectures about the virtues of ancient samurai and sent off on “an old sea plane.” engine failure and was stranded at sea with his navigator, who perished in the shark-infested waters.
After hours afloat, he reached an island inhabited by suspicious natives deathly afraid of US air strikes.
But not all recollections were as light-hearted as Norio Okamoto’s. molam s\eclaael al mOvmirex-) amy ale)(almOlemm Ualemersl aa (sre, out the doomed Ohka programme with its Tan) elarctycmelam-Maarclalatsemelelanlommdalsm-ialotaalMey being involved in Special Attack activities was too much to bear.
A rumour spread that he crashed a plane into the sea after Japan’s surrender.
Most striking is the belief that it was embraced by the IJN as a credible strategy.
This is why personal appeals by the emperor together with rosy propaganda inspired so many volunteers.
Japanese soldiers, being patriotic to the core, weren’t obsessed with dying either.
Death in battle was a last resort and many kamikazes who survived the war admitted a reluctance to squander their lives.
When the Yasukuni shrine was erected in Tokyo in 1869, the final year of the Meiji Restoration that replaced the Tokugawa Shogunate, Japan slowly shed its feudal system and its values.
Instead, NCKSIUL cctoio1 al ecxO Mme] Oro amcomarcavaielelalemaalele(-iaalinvarelalemuatc emperor’s place in it.
Japanese servicemen began sacrificing themselves as soon as the tide began to turn against their country.
The critical moment was the arrival of American long-range bombers in 1944.
Unable to defeat American B-29s with machine guns, remote incidents of fighter pilots ramming their planes began to warrant notice.
A growing awareness of Japan’s vulnerability influenced the suicide ideal among the officer class.
With the tacit endorsement by the Japanese high command, those c¥s} ofe) etsy e) @udal-mOlal comm iNdialca exe) palom e)aeycdg-lealaal-melalemyiiiiiars officers in the IJN Air Corps soon organised a genuine suicide force despite its low chances of success.
In or before August 1944, Warrant Officer Shoichi Ota told a befuddled Lieutenant Commander Tadanao Miki that in lieu of a guidance system, his team should just install a cockpit on the MXY7 Ohka, the primitive cruise missile they referred to as cherry blossom.
The suggestion launched the Divine Thunder God Corps, the IJN’s newest elite unit and the original Tokko Tais.
The first batch of Ohkas were supposed to be deployed in the Philippine MXY-#Ohka plane Islands in 1944 but their transport, the warplanes and destroyed.
Maybe because it flight of 18 G4M medium bombers heading for The concept behind the Ohka might have was April Fool’s Day, or perhaps the idea of a Okinawa.
The formation was intercepted by United States _ been futuristic, but these cherry blossoms piloted bomb was too silly to comprehend.
Rebekka Hearl CHARGE ROCKET IGNITION SWITCH | 89 THE DIVINE WIND OF DEATH CRACKING THE AIR LIKE THUNDER * FOR ALLIED WARSHIPS AND THEIR CREWS, THE LAST AND ONLY LINE OF DEFENCE FROM FANATICAL KAMIKAZES WAS GOOD OLD-FASHIONED FLACK The Special Attack proved more ineffective the more it was used.
Since the kamikazes were only used en masse in two campaigns — Leyte Gulf and Okinawa — a specific doctrine was never developed by the United States Navy and Air Corps to counter them.
By 1945, United States warships were equipped with incredible anti-air and anti-submarine weapons.
The former included radar-assisted guns, AA gun batteries and rapid-fire cannons.
Most effective were the twin 40mm Bofors mounted in nests on United States Navy destroyers, carriers and transports.
The 40mm Bofors of Sweden was a European success before licensed production began in the United States in June 1941 would blow it to pieces.
Just as vital was United States Navy air cover for blowing up any incoming suicide planes.
By the time Okinawa was firmly under American control, it proved to be the costliest battle in the Pacific Theatre.
A total of 2,363 kamikaze attacks between October 1944 and 21 June 1945 left more than 5,000 United States and Allied dead.
A little more than a month after Okinawa, atomic bombs levelled Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
The last kamikaze squadrons were disbanded and the once-doomed pilots lived on to demobilise for peacetime.
THE 600TH ANNIVERSARY OF AGINCOURT INSPIRES YET ANOTHER BOOK, BUT THIS TIME FROM A UNIQUE ANGLE Trafalgar, Waterloo, Balaclava... these place names may have exotic origins but, because of the battles fought there, all are now quintessentially English words weighted with meaning.
Despite the relative insignificance of Henry V’s victory over the French near Azincourt castle in 1415, it is the name Agincourt that rings out loudest through history.
In Anne Curry’s wonderfully accessible book about the battle, she explores not only the truth about the clash itself using contemporary sources, but just how it has come to play such a significant role in English culture ever since.
Along the way she debunks some glorious myths — alas the origins of the classic two-fingered salute wasn’t a defiant gesture created by the English archers — while shoring up others that sounded like later embellishments from a poet’s pen.
The sky really was black with arrows that day apparently, while the king himself really could deliver a rousing team talk to his troops.
He was swift to take political advantage of his victory, sending out a loud message across Europe and at home that he wasn’t a man to be messed with and that God was on his side.
But it was undoubtedly the contribution of a certain Mr W Shakespeare that has done the most to confirm Agincourt in the English imagination as an inspiring tale of overturned odds.
Shakespeare’s Henry V was written at a time when England was involved in a protracted conflict with Spain and was steeling itself for what would be a messy conflict in Ireland.
The rousing speeches that pepper the play were intended by Shakespeare to fire up his audience’s spirits in a time of darkness.
As England is a country that’s been at almost perpetual war ever since, it is not surprising that the play’s speeches and sentiments have frequently resurfaced.
By exploring English history from a truly intriguing angle, Curry’s insightful book shows us how the myth of Agincourt, harnessed by jingoism, has been used to convince the country on repeated occasions of its own invincibility.
Karen Farrington Publisher: Aurum Press Price: £18.99 Released: Out now THE BUIZED CITY THE DESTRUCTION OF COVENTRY, 1940 A THOROUGH ACCOUNT OF HOW A PROVINCIAL BRITISH CITY BECAME THE TESTING GROUND FOR A NEW KIND OF WARFARE By the time World War II ended, it had served up innumerable atrocities on an unprecedented scale.
With its gas chambers and atomic bombs, it was the first truly total war, and one of the first indications of what that meant came in November 1940 with the bombing of Coventry.
Zeppelin raids had hit London during World War I; Guernica and Barcelona had both been struck by bombers during the Spanish Civil War; while Warsaw had been terrorised from above when Hitler ordered the invasion Poland.
What made the bombing of Coventry different, however, as Farrington points out in her hugely readable account of it, was that it marked the moment when aerial bombing became a weapon of mass destruction.
Her book begins with a brief history of Coventry, explaining how its position in the industrialised East Midlands put it at the heart of the British war effort and consequently on the front line.
The narrative then sweeps through the build up to war and its early days, switching between the fighting on the continent and the changing life of Coventry’s citizens as the storm clouds draw ever closer.
We’re fed a decent potted history of events that provide a good backdrop for what is to come — the bombing — while an impending sense of disaster brews ominously.
Throughout, Farrington has used first-hand accounts to help paint her canvas, but it’s here that those testimonies really come into their own.
She provides a real sense of the terror the raid caused, as Coventry’s citizens huddled in claustrophobic shelters or toiled in the burning streets to save lives.
There is also a real sense of the bewilderment the raid’s survivors felt when the smoke cleared and they saw that most of their “Medieval gem” of a city had vanished.
Coventry wasn’t destroyed completely, though, and the latter part of the book uses the same weave of historical master narrative and first-hand accounts to show how both Coventry recovered and Britain responded to the atrocity.
The raid was used by Churchill REVIEWS Blitzed City first for propaganda purposes, helping to propagate support in the then-neutral USA, and then as an excuse to unleash Britain’s own bombing offensive.
So they did — again and again — with appalling consequences in Berlin, Hamburg, Cologne and Dresden.
A NEW BIOGRAPHY FINALLY REVEALS THE TRUTH ABOUT HITLER'S CITY-PLANNING SIDEKICK Of all the senior Nazis, Albert Speer is largely remembered by history as his lawyer at the Nuremberg trials wanted him to be seen — a cultured technocrat with no interest in Hitler’s racist policies and no knowledge of its consequences.
Described as courageous in the court’s judgement of him, he escaped the hangman’s noose, and although he spent the next 20 years in jail for war crimes, calls for this apparently civilised man to be released early came from such notables as Charles de Gaulle and Nuremberg prosecutor Harley Shawcross.
On emerging from prison, where he’d spent much of his time composing two memoirs in which he insisted he knew nothing of the Holocaust, he gave a series of high-profile interviews.
Speer used these to broadcast his ignorance of the regime’s more heinous crimes, and to portray himself as a man who merely dreamed of creating beautiful buildings for his beloved country.
His books — along with another about the SS — went on to become international best sellers, and he died of natural causes, aged /6, a wealthy man.
Albert Speer was, however, as Martin Kitchen’s new book points out, much more complex and culpable than his legacy suggests.
Others, of course, have argued that Speer knew about Hitler’s genocide all along, and that he was more than just a man who designed pretty cities for his architecturally ooSessed Fuhrer.
Hitler’s Architect, however, is the first biography of Speer to take the evidence that he did know of the regime’s atrocities and put it into context with the rest of his life.
What emerges is a portrait of a man who was a vain, opportunistic playboy, and an intelligent, brooding loner.
What he ultimately was, though, was a cold-hearted conman whose decisions and actions resulted in the anguished deaths of countless souls.
Speer’s life as we’ve known it until now was a fiction, a piece of theatre as showy and diverting as the enormous stage sets he built for his Fuhrer to hold his rallies in, or preach hate parades from.
Kitchen’s book systematically destroys the myth that Speer was somehow a ‘good Nazi’, and in doing so rips the mask of respectability from this legacy.
BELFAST ‘69 Bringing home the real human tragedy of The Troubles, Andrew Walsh’s historical account of the Battle of Bogside is interspersed with eyewitness accounts from people at the heart of the battle.
HOW TO WINA CHARIOT RACE This collection of facts, stories and titbits of information offers a glimpse into the ancient world, and is not, in fact, a step-by-step guide about how to succeed at chariot racing.
VOICES FROM THE PAST VOICES Told by the people CHANNEL |S ANDS who were there, sree INVADED is Voices From The Past delves into the chaotic scenes on the Channel Islands as Hitler’s Blitzkrieg arrived and occupation ensued.
Rather than the usual are a few entries that seem slightly tenuous, weighty tomes that are invariably densely or retread ground already covered earlier in the packed with information, it’s a bold and book, but these are small quibbles in what is colourful publication, divided into digestible overall a strongly recommended title.
Snippets that will work for readers of all Se cael aiid seal “It's a bold and other appealing-sounding titles such as 50 colourful publication, Leaders That Changed History and How To Think Like Sherlock, has done a superb job tnt Into digestible nippets that will ae or readers of all interest levels’ condensing some of human history’s greatest strategies and tactical manoeuvres into easyto-understand chapters, most of which cover four pages that also include timelines, maps, family trees and other fun visual tools.
Smith also includes strategies that come under commerce, politics and society.
From there, he covers many of military history’s finest successes, including George Washington’s guerrilla-like strategy in the American War of Independence, Nelson’s innovative naval formation at the Battle of Trafalgar and the Allies’ intricate planning ahead of D-Day.
Smith isn’t afraid to recognise the success in all strategic areas, even when the results are horrific, such as the Nazis’ Final Solution.
THE STORY OF A BATTLE Writer: Rosemary Hawley Jarman Publisher: Amberley Price: £9.99 Released: Out now A DETAILED AND VIVID ACCOUNT OF THE ENTIRE STORY BEHIND THE FAMOUS BATTLE A prominent author of historical fiction, Rosemary Hawley Jarman turns her attention to fact in the brilliant Agincourt: The Story Of A Battle.
Detailing the whole of Henry V’s invasion, this is a thorough account of an integral part of English and French history.
Split into easily digestible chapters, the book explains how the Hundred Years’ War was a full European war and incorporates detail that is absent in similar releases.
It is clear from the outset that Jarman is a writer of fiction and the whole invasion is detailed superbly.
The residents of the “noxious graveyard of Harfleur” are described as “running around like inhabitants of a kicked antheap,” vividly illustrating the panic that was present in the seemingly impregnable walled city.
This excellent description prevents the book from ever getting bogged down in facts and Statistics, a trap that some do fall into.
One “Compact yet thorou of the most appealing aspects of the book is how Jarman delves into the mind of King Henry, explaining his desire to emulate the achievements of his great-grandfather Edward Ill and his devotion to his faith.
After some gorgeous hand-drawn illustrations, the only chapter dedicated to the battle itself arrives.
Compact yet thorough, it doesn’t hold back on description, with the “shoeless, gloveless, pale and desperate” longbowmen portrayed as the heroes of the hour.
After the catastrophic French defeat where “deep piles of corpses towered higher than a man’s head,” the book slows down and enters a reflective aftermath that focuses on the wider aspects of Henry’s reign.
Focused, as it is on photographs, the story is told in relatively broad strokes, though an in-depth introduction lays out the finer details of the war in 1943, making this a solid read for casual and expert World War Il enthusiasts.
It’s fair to say that this book offers more interesting details than previous entries into the series, largely because of the time on which it is focused, chronicling the Allies’ efforts to overcome the Axis and turn the tide of the war for good.
Events covered include the Battle of the Huon Gulf, in which the Allies destroyed three Japanese transports and 80 aircraft; Stalingrad, where the loss of the 6th Army resulted in Germany’s most humiliating defeat in the war so far; and the invasion of Sicily, a compromise before the Allies could launch a full-scale attack of France.
Overall, this is a great starting point for researching one of World War II’s most Crucial periods — and possibly the best entry into this series so far.
Head of Sales Hang Deretz 01202 586442 hang.deretz@imagine-publishing.co.uk Account Manager Lee Mussell 01202 586424 lee.mussell@imagine-publishing.co.uk International History of War is available for licensing.
Contact the International department to discuss partnership opportunities.
Nothing in this magazine may be reproduced in whole or part without the written permission of the publisher.
All copyrights are recognised and used specifically for the purpose of criticism and review.
Although the magazine has endeavoured to ensure all information is correct at time of print, prices and availability may change.
This magazine is fully independent and not affiliated in any way with the companies mentioned herein.
If you submit material to Imagine Publishing via post, email, social network or any other means, you grant Imagine Publishing an irrevocable, perpetual, royalty-free licence to use the material across its entire portfolio, in print, online and digital, and to deliver the material to existing and future clients, including but not limited to international licensees for reproduction in international, licensed editions of Imagine products.
Any material you submit is sent at your risk and, although every care is taken, neither Imagine Publishing nor its employees, agents or subcontractors shall be liable for the loss or damage.
One way of ending the tedium was with ventriloquism acts, and ‘Douglas’ was the star of one of these popular shows.
Rumoured to be named after Field Marshal Haig, Douglas was the prop of soldier-turnedventriloquist Arthur Langley Harden, who arrived in France for service in March 1917.
Initially performing in front of the 59th Divisional Ammunition Column, after a few shows Colonel K C Brazier-Creagh noticed the positive affect the dummy was having on morale.
Subsequently, Harden and Douglas were moved away from the front line to perform the act to injured soldiers.
The show was such a success that it even dissuaded Harden from pursuing an officer’s commission, a decision that he said could well have saved his life.
Ventriloquism was just one of the ways that troops were entertained on the front.
Shows were put on that included men cross-dressing, acting out folk tales such as Cinderella, and soldiers even wrote new material on the front.
The Balmorals were a theatrical troupe that performed satirical sketches, and even POWs performed when they were imprisoned to raise the morale of the others in German prison camps.
Props were created out of anything the men could find on the front line as the soldiers did their best to take themselves away from the harsh reality of war.
A party of Royal Irish Rifles resting in a communication trench early in the Battle of the Somme Left: Football was another form of entertainment.
Add to or begin your collection with these beautiful statement pieces from our Napoleonic range.
These very special Journeys of Remembrance will take you to the heart of Normandy’s rich and eventful WW2 history and the beaches immortalised by the D-Day landings.
An official Royal British Legion guide and a medic accompany the group.
Many were from the British 14th Army and were awarded more Victoria Crosses than any other Second World War campaign.
We pay tribute to troops who secured a vital foothold in the Allied invasion of Burma and the ultimate defeat of the Japanese.
We also offer the opportunity to visit Rangoon with its cemeteries to those who died in Burma, the vibrant former capital Mandalay and the Chindit area of operations in the North, only reached by special train up the historic line.
Join us to discover an unspoilt land of rugged jungle, rice fields, beautiful temples, colourful markets and charming, friendly people.
Mike Bradley Prices: £2499 per person Please contact Arena Travel on the number below for more information SOMME 2016 OVER THE CENTENARY The Battle of the Somme began on a bright July morning in 1916.
After five months of gruelling struggle this piece of French countryside was reduced to razed villages and burnt out farmland.
It is those men who we will never forget and who we honour on this tour.
We will arrange personal visits to the memorials and cemeteries in the Somme area and learn how they are maintained by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission.
This tour will take place over the International Centenary event on the weekend of 1st July.
If you would like more information please contact Arena Travel on the details below.
TBA Tour includes: 4 nights accommodation on a B&B Basis Coach travel throughout from UJC, London Return ferry crossings RBL guide Remembrance Travel is the travel arm of The Royal British Legion and has been running tours since 1927.
We now work in partnership with Arena Travel on First World War & Second World War Journeys of Remembrance and anniversary events.
Whether you are an association, a group of friends or a club, we can also create a bespoke, personalised tour, which is unique to your needs.
