On March 31, Ukrainians go to the polls to elect their sixth president.
We analyzed the most widespread Kremlin manipulations about Ukraine's presidential election on Russian state-controlled media in March.
Channel One Russia claims President Petro Poroshenko bribed the Patriarchate of Constantinople to get autocephaly for the Ukrainian Orthodox Church in order to gain some additional points in the pre-election ratings.
The channel claims that Poroshenko signed a secret agreement to transfer buildings, premises, and other objects to Istanbul.
However, the agreement between Kyiv and the Orthodox church in Constantinople says that Ukraine has no obligation to transfer any buildings.
Ukraine's independent church has been a target of Russian propaganda since it gained autocephaly.
Many Russian and pro-Russian outlets are spreading a boogeyman narrative that the Ukrainian church will fall under the control of what Russians call the ""Istanbul patriarchate,"" and in this way, it will bring Orthodox Christians under the control of a Muslim state.
The UN report on Ukraine deals mainly with the catastrophic human rights situation in the territories occupied by Russia.
In other words, Russia is responsible for the atmosphere of intimidation that prevails in the areas of Ukraine that it occupies.
State-controlled media claim that international organizations are completely dissatisfied with the pre-election environment in Ukraine.
In fact, PACE praised this campaign, pointing to some problems that still might be resolved by the election.
It was also concerned to hear allegations that some candidates were trying to establish vote-buying systems, but PACE never concluded that these allegations were true.
Kremlin media exaggerate pro-Russian Ukrainian presidential candidate Yuriy Boyko's chances of winning.
In reality, Boyko has no shot at making the second round of the presidential election.
The state-controlled channels love to repeat the idea that Ukraine's election will be falsified.
None other than Marat Bashirov, who served as chairman of Council of Ministers of the ""Luhansk People's Republic"" from July 4 to August 20, 2014.
Ukraine is waiting for the ""third Maidan"" The message of a ""third Maidan"" is constantly repeated by Kremlin media.
Medvedchuk is an odious Ukrainian businessman with a pro-Russian stance and an intimate friend of Vladimir Putin.
Kremlin media point to Kirill Vyshinsky's case as proof that freedom of speech is being squeezed during the campaign.
Vyshinsky was the former chief editor of RIA Novosti Ukraine whose case is being tried now.
The Special Service of Ukraine alleges that he helped Russia occupy Crimea and the Donbas in 2014, and that Russia gave Vyshinsky 53,000 Euros monthly.
Russia is deeply interested in Ukraine's election and attempting to shape public opinion.
Russia wants to persuade its citizens that the situation in their country is much better than in the neighborhood, and to persuade the United States and Europe that they should not support Ukraine.
