Following the Ukrainian Revolution of Dignity in 2014, Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula was occupied by unmarked Russian forces, and later annexed by Russia, while pro-Russia separatists simultaneously engaged the Ukrainian military in an armed conflict for control over eastern Ukraine; these events marked the beginning of the Russo-Ukrainian War.
In a major escalation of the conflict on 24 February 2022, Russia launched a full-scale invasion of the Ukrainian mainland across a broad front, causing Ukraine to sever all formal diplomatic ties with Russia.After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the successor states' bilateral relations have undergone periods of ties, tensions, and outright hostility.
Numerous bilateral agreements have been terminated and economic ties severed.
Throughout 2021 and 2022, a Russian military buildup on the border of Ukraine escalated tensions between the two countries and strained their bilateral relations.
Ukraine broke diplomatic relations with Moscow in response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
Streets bearing the names of Russian figures and monuments symbolising Russia and Ukraine friendship were removed from various locations across Ukraine.
Volodymyr Zelenskyy presidency 3. 2020s 4 Border 5 Armaments and aerospace industries 6 Popular opinion 6.
Both Russia and Ukraine claim their heritage from Kievan Rus', a polity that united most of the East Slavic and some Finnish tribes and adopted Byzantine Orthodoxy in the ninth to eleventh centuries.
According to old Rus chronicles, Kyiv, the capital of modern Ukraine, was proclaimed the Mother of Rus Cities, as it was the capital of the powerful late medieval state of Rus.
Little Russia Office and Collegium of Little Russia After the Mongol invasion of Kievan Rus', the histories of the people inhabiting territories of Russia and Ukraine diverged.
The Grand Duchy of Moscow united all remnants of Rus's northern provinces and evolved into the Russian state.
The Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia came under the domination of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, followed by the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.
Within the Commonwealth, the militant Zaporozhian Cossacks refused polonization, and often clashed with a Commonwealth government controlled by the Polish nobility.Unrest among the Cossacks caused them to rebel against the Commonwealth and seek union with Russia, with which they had similarities in culture, language, and religion.
Starting in the mid-17th century, much of Ukraine's territory was gradually annexed by the Russian Empire and its autonomy taken away by the time of the late 18th-century partition of Poland.
Soon after, the Cossack host was forcibly disbanded by the Russian Empire and most Cossacks were relocated to the Kuban region on the southern edge of the Russian Empire.
Until the end of World War I this view was only opposed by a small group of Ukrainian nationalists.
In 1804, the Ukrainian language was banned from schools as a subject and language of instruction.
In 1876 Alexander II's secretary Ems Ukaz prohibited the publication and importation of most Ukrainian language books, public performances and lectures in the Ukrainian language, and even the printing of Ukrainian texts accompanying musical scores.
Soviet Union Bilateral relationsRSFSR–Ukrainian SSR relationsRussian SFSR Ukrainian SSR The borders of the Ukrainian SSR within the Soviet Union between 1924 and 1939.
Ukrainian People's Republic The February Revolution saw establishment of official relations between the Russian Provisional Government and the Ukrainian Central Rada that was represented at the Russian government by its commissar Petro Stebnytsky.
At the same time Dmitry Odinets was appointed the representative of Russian Affairs in the Ukrainian government.
After the Soviet military aggression by the Soviet government at the beginning of 1918, Ukraine declared its full independence from the Russian Republic on 22 January 1918, as the Ukrainian People's Republic which existed from 1917 to 1922.
The two treaties of Brest-Litovsk that Ukraine and Russia signed separately with the Central Powers calmed the military conflict between them, and peace negotiations were initiated the same year.
After the end of World War I, Ukraine became a battleground in the Ukrainian War of Independence, linked to the Russian Civil War.
Both Russians and Ukrainians fought in nearly all armies based on personal political beliefs.In 1922, Ukraine and Russia were two of the founding members of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and were the signatories of the treaty that terminated the union in December 1991.
The end of the Russian Empire also ended the ban on the Ukrainian language.
This was followed by a period of korenizatsiya that promoted the cultures of the different Soviet Republics.
Holodomor and Soviet famine of 1932–33 In 1932–1933 Ukraine experienced the Holodomor which was a man-made famine in the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic that killed up to 7.5 million Ukrainians.
During the famine, which is also known as the ""Terror-Famine in Ukraine"" and ""Famine-Genocide in Ukraine"", millions of citizens of the Ukrainian SSR, mostly ethnic Ukrainians, died of starvation in an unprecedented peacetime catastrophe.
Scholars disagree on the relative importance of natural factors and bad economic policies as causes of the famine, and the degree to which the destruction of the Ukrainian peasantry was premeditated by Soviet leaders.The Holodomor famine extended to many Soviet republics, including Russia and Kazakhstan.
In the absence of documentary proof of intent, scholars have also argued that the Holodomor was caused by the economic problems associated with the radical changes implemented during the period of liquidation of private property and Soviet industrialization, combined with the widespread drought of the early 1930s.
However, on 13 January 2010, the Kyiv Appellate Court found Stalin, Kaganovich, Molotov, and the Ukrainian Soviet leaders Kosior and Chubar, amongst other functionaries, posthumously guilty of genocide against Ukrainians during the Holodomor famine.
Current relations 1990s The Russian Embassy in Kyiv, 2008 The Ukrainian Embassy in Moscow, 2010 Nuclear disarmament After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Ukraine gained its independence and inherited the third largest nuclear stockpile in the world, along with significant means of its design and production.
While Ukraine had physical control of the weapons, it did not have operational control, as they were dependent on Russian-controlled electronic Permissive Action Links and the Russian command and control system.
By 1996, Ukraine transferred all Soviet-era strategic warheads to Russia.
Division of the Black Sea Fleet and Sevastopol The second major dispute of early years was over the fate of the Black Sea Fleet as well as its operating bases, mainly Sevastopol on the Crimean Peninsula.
After several years of intense negotiations the whole issue was resolved in 1997.
Economics Another major dispute related to energy supplies, as several Soviet–Western Europe oil and gas pipelines ran through Ukraine.
Overall, between one third and one half of Ukraine's trade was with the Russian Federation.
Russia remained Ukraine's primary market for ferrous metals, steel plate and pipes, electric machinery, machine tools and equipment, food, and products of the chemical industry.
Russia–Ukraine gas disputes Vladimir Putin and Leonid Kuchma in December 2003.
Although disputes existed prior to the 2004 Ukrainian presidential election, including speculation about the accidental shooting down of a Russian airliner by the Ukrainian military and the controversy over Tuzla Island, relations with Russia under the latter years of Leonid Kuchma's term improved.
In 2002, the Russian Government participated in financing the construction of the Khmelnytskyi and the Rivne Nuclear Power Plants.
In 2003, Russia attempted to integrate Ukraine into a new Russian-led Single Economic Space with Russia.
The overall perception of relations with Russia in Ukraine differs largely on regional factors.
Many Russophone eastern and southern regions, which are also home to the majority of the Russian diaspora in Ukraine welcome closer relations with Russia.
This was further fuelled by the public discussion in Ukraine of whether the Russian language should be given official status and be made the second state language.
During the 2009 gas conflict the Russian media almost uniformly portrayed Ukraine as an aggressive and greedy state that wanted to ally with Russia's enemies and exploit cheap Russian gas.Further worsening of relations was provoked by belligerent statements made in 2007–2008 by both Russian and Ukrainian politicians, for example, the former Foreign Minister Borys Tarasiuk, deputy Justice Minister of Ukraine Evhen Kornichuk and then leader of parliamentary opposition Yulia Tymoshenko.The status of the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol remained a matter of disagreement and tensions.
Second Tymoshenko government Vladimir Putin and Viktor Yushchenko in February 2008 In February 2008, Russia unilaterally withdrew from the Ukrainian–Russian intergovernmental agreement on the Main Centre for Missile Attack Warning signed in 1997.
During the Russo-Georgian War, relations between Ukraine and Russia soured due to Ukraine's support for Georgia and Russian claims of Ukraine supplying arms to Georgia as well as due to new Ukrainian regulations for the Russian Black Sea Fleet, which sent vessels and marines to the war, such as the demand that Russia obtain prior permission when crossing the Ukrainian border, which Russia refused to comply with.
This rekindled controversy over the Russian military presence in Crimea.
On 2 October 2008, Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin accused Ukraine of supplying arms to Georgia during the Russo-Georgian War.
Putin also claimed that Moscow had evidence proving that Ukrainian military experts were present in the conflict zone during the war.
The head of its state arms export company, Ukrspetsexport, said no arms were sold during the war, and Defense Minister Yuriy Yekhanurov denied that Ukraine's military personnel fought on the side of Georgia.Prosecutor General of Ukraine Oleksandr Medvedko confirmed on 25 September 2009 that no personnel of the Ukrainian Armed Forces participated in the 2008 Russo-Georgian War, no weapons or military equipment of the Ukrainian Armed Forces were present at the conflict, and no help was given to the Georgian side.
He also confirmed that the international transfers of military equipment between Ukraine and Georgia from 2006 to 2008 were conducted in accordance with earlier contracts, the laws of Ukraine, and international treaties.The United States supported Ukraine's bid to join NATO launched in January 2008 as an effort to obtain aNATO Membership Action Plan.
Russia strongly opposed any prospect of Ukraine and Georgia becoming NATO members.
According to the alleged transcript of Putin's speech at the 2008 NATO–Russia Council Summit in Bucharest, Putin spoke of Russia's responsibility for ethnic Russians resident in Ukraine and urged his NATO partners to act advisedly; according to some media reports he then also privately hinted to his United States counterpart at the possibility of Ukraine losing its integrity in the event of its NATO accession.
Vladimir Putin and Yulia Tymoshenko in November 2009 During a January 2009 dispute over natural gas prices, exports of Russian natural gas through Ukraine were shut down.
During the conflict the Russian media almost uniformly portrayed Ukraine as an aggressive and greedy state that wanted to ally with Russia's enemies and exploit cheap Russian gas.
After a ""master plan"" to modernize the natural gas infrastructure of Ukraine between the EU and Ukraine was announced Russian Energy Minister Sergei Shmatko told an investment conference at which the plan was unveiled that it appeared to draw Ukraine legally closer to the European Union and might harm Moscow's interests.
Medvedev further announced that he would not send a new ambassador to Ukraine until there was an improvement in the relationship.
In response, Yushchenko wrote a letter which noted he could not agree that the Ukrainian–Russian relations had run into problems and wondered why the Russian president completely ruled out the Russian responsibility for this.Analysts said Medvedev's message was timed to influence the campaign for the 2010 Ukrainian presidential election.
On 7 October 2009, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said the Russian government wanted to see economy prevail in Russian–Ukrainian relations and that relations between the two countries would improve if the two countries set up joint ventures, especially in small and medium-sized businesses.
On 2 December 2009, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Petro Poroshenko and Lavrov agreed on gradually abandoning the compilation of lists of individuals banned from entering their countries. 2010s Viktor Yanukovych presidency Viktor Yanukovych and Russian President Dmitry Medvedev on 17 May 2010 near the Memorial to Holodomor Victims in Kyiv.
Vladimir Putin arrived at the 14th International Biker Rally in Sevastopol, Crimea, July 24, 2010 According to Taras Kuzio, Viktor Yanukovych was the most pro-Russian and neo-Soviet president to have been elected in Ukraine.
Since his election, he fulfilled all of the demands laid out by Russian President Dmitry Medvedev in his letter written to former President Viktor Yushchenko in August 2009.
On 22 April 2010 Presidents Viktor Yanukovych and Dmitry Medvedev signed an agreement leasing the Russian Naval Forces base in Sevastopol to Russia for 25 years in return for discounted natural gas deliveries which accounted for $100 per 1,000 cubic meters.
The lease extension agreement was highly controversial inside and outside of Ukraine.On 17 May 2010, the President Dmitry Medvedev arrived in Kyiv on a two-day visit.
During the visit Medvedev hoped to sign cooperation agreements in ""inter-regional and international problems"", according to RIA Novosti.
This was also mentioned on the official inquiry at the Verkhovna Rada by the First Vice Prime Minister Andriy Klyuyev.
According to some news agencies the main purpose of the visit was to resolve disagreements in the Russian–Ukrainian energy relations after Viktor Yanukovych agreed on the partial merger of Gazprom and Naftogaz.
Apart from the merger of the state gas companies there are also talks of the merger of the nuclear energy sector as well.Both Russian President Dmitry Medvedev and Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin have stated they noticed a big improvement in relations since Viktor Yanukovych presidency.
On 14 May 2013 an unknown veteran of unknown intelligence service Sergei Razumovsky, leader of the All-Ukrainian Association of Homeless Officers, who resides in Ukraine under the Ukrainian flag called for the creation of Ukrainian–Russian international volunteer brigades in support of the Bashar al-Assad government in Syria to fight rebels.
One of the reasons why Rozumovsky wanted to create such brigades was that hr felt the government of Ukraine did not support its officer corps.
Some sources claim that he was a Kremlin provocateur.On 17 July 2013 near the Russian coast of the Sea of Azov, considered internal waters of both Russia and Ukraine , a Russian coast guard patrol boat collided with a Ukrainian fishing vessel.
Four fishermen died while one was detained by Russian authorities on charges of poaching.
According to the surviving fisherman, their boat was rammed by th Russians and the fishermen were fired at as well, while Russian law enforcement agency claimed that it was the poachers who tried to ram into the patrol vessel.
The Minister of Justice of Ukraine Olena Lukash acknowledged that Russia has no jurisdiction to prosecute the detained citizen of Ukraine.According to the wife of the surviving fisherman, the Ukrainian Consul in Russia was very passive in providing any support on the matter.
The surviving fisherman was expected to be released to Ukraine before 12 August 2013, however, the Prosecutor Office of Russia chose to keep the Ukrainian detained in Russia.
Another incident took place on the border between Belgorod and Luhansk oblasts when an apparently inebriated Russian tractor driver decided to cross the border to Ukraine along with his two friends on 28 August 2013.
Unlike the Azov incident a month earlier on 17 July 2013, the State Border Service of Ukraine handed over the citizens of Russia right back to the Russian authorities.
Tractor Belarus was taken away and handed over to the Ministry of Revenues and Duties.
Euromaidan and 2014 Ukrainian revolution In 2013, Ukraine both pursued an observer status in the Russian-led Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia, and persisted with moving along with association agreement with the EU, scheduled to be signed that November.On 14 August 2013 the Russian Custom Service stopped all imports coming from Ukraine.
Some politicians saw that as start of a trade war against Ukraine to prevent Ukraine from signing a trade agreement with the European Union.
According to Pavlo Klimkin, one of the Ukrainian negotiators of the Association Agreement, initially ""the Russians simply did not believe could come true.
In September 2013, Russia warned Ukraine that if it went ahead with a planned agreement on free trade with the EU, it would face financial catastrophe and possibly the collapse of the state.Sergey Glazyev, adviser to President Vladimir Putin, said that, ""Ukrainian authorities make a huge mistake if they think that the Russian reaction will become neutral in a few years from now.
Russia had already imposed import restrictions on certain Ukrainian products and Glazyev did not rule out further sanctions if the agreement was signed.
Glazyev allowed for the possibility of separatist movements springing up in the Russian-speaking east and south of Ukraine.
March 15 protests, named the March of Peace, took place in Moscow a day before the Crimean referendum Pro-Russian protesters in Odessa, March 30, 2014 On 21 November 2013, Yanukovych suspended preparations for signing EU Association Agreement, to seek closer economic relations with Russia.
On 17 December 2013 Russian President Vladimir Putin agreed to lend Ukraine 15 billion dollars in financial aid and a 33% discount on natural gas prices.
The treaty was signed amid massive, ongoing protests in Ukraine for closer ties between Ukraine and the European Union.
Critics pointed out that in the months before the 17 December 2013 deal a change in Russian customs regulations on imports from Ukraine was a Russian attempt to prevent Ukraine from signing an Association Agreement with the European Union.
Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation, Russo-Ukrainian War, 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine, War in Donbass, and Greater Russia The 2014 Crimean crisis unfolded in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea in the aftermath of the February 2014 Ukrainian revolution, in which the government of Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych was ousted.
Protests were staged by groups of mainly ethnic Russians who opposed the events in Kyiv and wanted close ties or integration with Russia, in addition to expanded autonomy or possible independence for Crimea.
Other groups, including Crimean Tatars, protested in support of the revolution.
On 27 February, military men with no insignia wearing masks seized a number of important buildings in Crimea, including the parliament building and two airports.
Under siege, the Supreme Council of Crimea dismissed the autonomous republic's government and replaced chairman of the Council of Ministers of Crimea, Anatolii Mohyliov, with Sergey Aksyonov.Ukraine accused Russia of intervening in Ukraine's internal affairs, while the Russian side officially denied such claims.
On 1 March without declaration of war, the Russian parliament granted President Vladimir Putin the authority to use military force in Ukraine.
On the same day, the acting president of Ukraine, Oleksandr Turchynov decreed the appointment of the Prime Minister of Crimea as unconstitutional.
In mid March, after a disputed local referendum, Russia recognized Crimea as a sovereign state and proceeded to formally annex the peninsula.
The Ukrainian Ministry of Foreign Affairs summoned the Provisional Principal of Russia in Ukraine to present note verbale of protest against Russia's recognition of the Republic of Crimea and its subsequent annexation.
Ukraine responded with sanctions against Russia as well as blacklisting and freezing assets of numerous individuals and entities involved with the annexation.
Ukraine started a campaign not to buy Russian products and other countries supporting Ukraine's position followed similar measures.
Russia responded with similar measures against Ukraine and its supporters but did not publicly reveal the list of people or entities sanctioned.On 19 March 2014 all Ukrainian Armed Forces were withdrawn from Crimea.
Russia returned 35 ships that had been impounded during its annexation of Crimea but unilaterally suspended the return of Ukrainian Navy materials from Crimea to Ukraine proper because/after Ukraine did not renew its unilaterally declared ceasefire on 1 July 2014 in the War in Donbass.
On 19 March 2014 all Ukrainian Armed Forces were withdrawn from Crimea.
Throughout March and April 2014, pro-Russian unrest spread in Ukraine, with pro-Russian groups proclaiming ""People's Republics"" in the oblasts of Donetsk and Luhansk, as of 2017 both partially outside the control of the Ukrainian government.On 17 July 2014 Malaysia Airlines flight 17 was shot down by a Buk surface-to-air missile launched from pro-Russian separatist-controlled territory in Ukraine.
Military clashes between pro-Russian rebels and the Armed Forces of Ukraine began in the Donbass region in April 2014.
On 5 September 2014 the Ukrainian government and representatives of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic signed a tentative ceasefire – the agreement.
A new ceasefire agreement took effect in mid-February 2015, but also failed to stop the fighting.Russia has been accused by NATO and Ukraine of engaging in direct military operations to support the Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic.
Russia denied this, but in December 2015, Russian Federation President Vladimir Putin admitted that Russian military intelligence officers were operating in Ukraine, insisting though that they were not the same as regular troops.
Russia said that Russian ""volunteers"" were helping the separatists People's Republics.At the 26 June 2014 session of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko stated that bilateral relations with Russia could not be normalized unless Russia undid its unilateral annexation of Crimea and returned control of Crimea to Ukraine.
In February 2015, Ukraine ended a 1997 agreement that Russians could enter Ukraine with internal ID instead of a travel passport.
December 2014 performance in Kyiv in support of the Boycott Russian Films civic campaign In February 2015 the law ""On protection information television and radio space of Ukraine,"" banned the showing of ""audiovisual works"" that contain ""the popularization, agitation for, propaganda of any action of law enforcement agencies, the armed forces, other armed, military or security forces of the occupier state"" was enacted.
One year later Russian productions had decreased by three to four times.
Early in March 2014, and prior to its independence referendum, all broadcast of Ukraine-based TV channels was suspended in Crimea.
Later that month, the Ukrainian National Council for TV and Radio Broadcasting ordered measures against some Russian TV channels, which were accused of broadcasting misleading information about Ukraine.
Kerch Strait incident In May 2015, Ukraine suspended a military cooperation agreement with Russia, that had been in place since 1993.
Following a breakdown in mutual business ties, Ukraine also stopped supplying components used to produce military equipment in Russia.
In August, Russia announced that it would ban imports of Ukrainian agricultural goods starting January 2016.
In October 2015, Ukraine banned all direct flights between Ukraine and Russia.In November 2015, Ukraine closed its air space to all Russian military and civil airplanes.
In December 2015, Ukrainian lawmakers voted to place a trade embargo on Russia in retaliation for the latter's cancellation of the two countries free-trade zone and ban on food imports as the free-trade agreement between the European Union and Ukraine came into force in January 2016.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov responded by saying that ""Moscow should not be like Kyiv"" and should not impose ""blacklists"" and restrictions on the cultural figures of Ukraine.
Lavrov did add that Russian producers and the film industry should take into account ""unfriendly attacks of foreign performers in Russia"" when implementing cultural projects with them.
Russian-annexed Crimea in 2016 According to the State Border Guard Service of Ukraine the number of Russian citizens who crossed the Russia–Ukraine border dropped by almost 50% in 2015.
In February 2017, the Ukrainian government banned the commercial importation of books from Russia, which had accounted for up to 60% of all titles sold in Ukraine, following an August 2015 ban on particular titles.Ukraine's 2017 education law makes Ukrainian the only language of primary education in state schools.
The captain of the Nord, Vladimir Gorbenko, is facing up to five years in prison.In November 2018 Russia fired upon and seized three Ukrainian Navy vessels off the coast of Crimea injuring crew members.
The event prompted angry protests outside the Russian embassy in Ukraine and an embassy car was set on fire.
Martial law was introduced because Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko claimed there was a threat of ""full-scale war"" with Russia.During the martial law Ukraine banned all Russian men between 16 and 60 from entering the country for the period of the martial law with exceptions for humanitarian purposes.
Ukraine claimed this was a security measure to prevent Russia from forming units of ""private"" armies on Ukrainian soil.
On 27 December 2018 the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine announced that it had extended ""the restrictive measures of the State Border Guard Service regarding the entry of Russian men into Ukraine."" between 26 November and 26 December 2018 1,650 Russian citizens were refused entry into Ukraine.
Volodymyr Zelenskyy presidency Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and Russian President Vladimir Putin in Paris, France, December 2019 In 2019, amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine, enshrined the irreversibility of the country's strategic course towards EU and NATO membership.On 11 July 2019, recently elected Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy held a telephone conversation with Russian President Vladimir Putin following the former's appeals to the Russian leader to take part in talks with Ukraine, the United States, Germany, France, and the United Kingdom in Minsk.
The leaders also discussed the exchange of prisoners held by both sides.
War in Donbas, 2021–2022 Russo-Ukrainian crisis, and Derussification in Ukraine See also: 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine On 2 February 2021, Ukraine president Volodymyr Zelenskyy decided to shut down pro-Russian TV channels owned by the parliamentary deputy Taras Kozak, a close associate of Viktor Medvedchuk, the godfather of the daughter of Russia president Vladimir Putin.
Medvedchuk is also said to be the real owner of the pro-Russian TV channels.As part of the ongoing war in Donbas, fighting escalated in the first quarter of 2021, with 25 Ukrainian soldiers dying in the conflict, compared to the 50 that died in 2020 according to Ukrainian authorities.
In late March 2021, large movements of military equipment were reported in various areas within Russia, with the equipment headed to Crimea, and the Rostov and Voronezh oblasts.
Various intelligence in the following months, including a statement from Russian news agency TASS, put the number of troops situated in the Southern Military District which borders the Donbas conflict zone at 85,000 to 90,000.
These tensions also came in line with the election of Volodymyr Zelenskyy, who pushed back against Russian encroachment on Ukrainian sovereignty.
However, European leaders feared that this step might provoke an even harsher response from Russia.
A map showing two alleged Russian plans published separately by Bild and Center for Strategic and International Studies.
According to the FSB, the vessel did not react to a request to change course, but later headed back.
US Senator Bob Menendez, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee again proposed the idea of severe sanctions, ""at the maximum end of the spectrum"", and reiterated the possibility of cutting out Russia from SWIFT, saying that ""Putin himself, as well as his inner circle, would lose access to bank accounts in the West.
German chancellor Olaf Scholz also warned of ""consequences"" for the Nord Stream 2 pipeline, a Russian gas pipeline project operated by Gazprom under the wholly-owned subsidiary Nord Stream AG 2, which delivers natural gas to Germany.
On 21 February 2022, Russia officially recognized the Luhansk People's Republic and Donetsk People's Republic, 2 Ukrainian breakaway states.
British Prime Minister Boris Johnson warned that Russia was planning the ""biggest war in Europe since 1945"" as Putin intended to invade and encircle the capital of Kyiv.On 22 February 2022, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said he would consider the possibility of severing Ukraine's diplomatic relations with Russia.
Putin during the address ""On the conduct of a special military operation"" on 24 February 2022.
Although Russia had repeatedly denied any plans to invade Ukraine, the Russian army started an invasion on Ukraine on 24 February, with ground and air assaults across many parts of the country including on the capital, Kyiv.
On 5 March 2022, according to the Russian RIA news agency, Russia's foreign ministry urged on European Union and NATO members to ""stop supplying arms"" to Ukraine.
Moscow is particularly concerned that portable anti-aerial Stinger missiles could fall into terrorist hands, posing a threat to planes, according to the report.
Russia had previously supplied anti-aircraft missiles to pro-Russian separatists who downed Malaysia Airlines Flight 17.
On 5 April 2022, Liz Truss, the United Kingdom's foreign secretary, announced that Britain would deploy investigators to Ukraine to assist in the collection of evidence of war crimes, including sexual abuse.On 10 May 2022, it was reported that Russia was responsible for a large-scale cyberattack against Viasat's KA-SAT network immediately before the Russian incursion into Ukrainian territory, primarily targeting the Ukrainian military's digital assets.
Intelligence from the United Kingdom's National Cyber Security Centre stated that the attacks also caused disruption to wind farms and other internet users in Central Europe.
Russia–Ukraine border and Russia–Ukraine barrier Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk visits the beginning of the construction of the Russia–Ukraine barrier, 15 October 2014 Sen'kovka border crossing on the Ukraine-Russia-Belarus border at Chernihiv Oblast, 18 August 2018 Russia and Ukraine share 2,295 kilometres of border.
It was expected to cost almost $520 million, take four years to complete and has been under construction as of 2015.
In June 2020 the State Border Guard of Ukraine expected that the project would be finished by 2025.
On 1 January 2018 Ukraine introduced biometric controls for Russians entering the country.
On 22 March 2018 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko signed a decree that required Russian citizens and ""individuals without citizenship, who come from migration risk countries"" to notify the Ukrainian authorities in advance about their reason for travelling to Ukraine.Since 30 November 2018 Ukraine has banned all Russian men between 16 and 60 from entering the country with exceptions for humanitarian purposes.
The Ukrainian and Russian arms and aviation manufacturing sectors remained deeply integrated following the break-up of the Soviet Union.
Popular opinion In Russia In opinion polls, Russians generally say they have a more negative attitude towards Ukraine than vice versa.
Possible Ukrainian NATO membership Ukrainian attempts to have the Holodomor recognized as genocide against the Ukrainian nation Attempts to honor the Ukrainian Insurgent ArmyAlthough a large majority of Ukrainians voted for independence in December 1991, in the following years the Russian press portrayed Ukraine's independence as the work of ""nationalists"" who ""twisted"" the ""correct"" instincts of the masses according to a 1996 study.
The study argues that this influenced the Russian public to believe that the Ukrainian political elite is the only thing blocking the ""Ukrainians' heartfelt wish"" to reunite with Russia.
Some members of the Russian political elite continued to claim that Ukrainian is a Russian dialect and that Ukraine should become part of the Russian Federation.
Ukrainian history is not treated as a separate subject in leading Russian universities but rather incorporated into the history of Russia.According to experts, the Russian government cultivates an image of Ukraine as the enemy to cover up its own internal mistakes.
Analysts like Philip P Pan argued late 2009 that Russian media portrayed the then-Government of Ukraine as anti-Russian.
Russian attitudes towards Ukraine Opinion October 2008 April 2009 June 2009 September 2009 November 2009 September 2011 February 2012 May 2015Positive 38% 41% 34% 46% 46% 68% 64% 26% Negative 53% 49% 56% 44% 44% 25% 25% 59% 80% had a ""good or very good"" attitude towards Belarus in 2009.
During the 1990s, polls showed that a majority of people in Russia could not accept the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the independence of Ukraine.
According to a 2006 poll by VTsIOM 66% of all Russians regretted the collapse of the Soviet Union.% of respondents in Ukraine in a similar poll held in February 2005 stated they regret the disintegration of the Soviet Union.
A late 2011 poll by the Levada Center showed 53% of polled Russians preferred friendship with an independent Ukraine, 33% preferred Ukraine to be under Russia's economic and political control, and 15% were undecided.
According to Levada's 2012 poll, 60% of Russians preferred Russia and Ukraine as independent but friendly states with open borders without visas or customs; the number of unification supporters increased by 4% to 20% in Russia.
Twenty surveys conducted from January 2009 to January 2015 by the Levada Center found that less than 10% of Russians supported Russia and Ukraine becoming one state.
In February 2019, 82% of Russians had a positive attitude towards Ukrainians, but only 34% of Russians had a positive attitude towards Ukraine, and only 7% of Russians had positive attitude towards the leadership of Ukraine.Some observers noted what they described as a ""generational struggle"" among Russians, with younger Russians more likely to be against Putin and his policies and older Russians more likely to accept the narrative presented by state-controlled media in Russia.
A Levada poll released in February 2021 found that 80% of Russians supported Ukraine’s independence from Russia and only 17% of Russians wanted Ukraine to become part of Russia.
In December 2019, Ukraine and Russia agreed to implement a complete ceasefire in eastern Ukraine by the year-end.
The negotiations were brokered by France and Germany, where the countries in conflict committed an extensive prisoner swap along with withdrawal of Ukraine's military from three major regions falling on the front line.
Territorial disputes Crimea, which Russia annexed in 2014, is shown in pink.
Ukraine considers this as an annexation and as a violation of international law and agreements by Russia, including the Agreement Establishing the Commonwealth of Independent States in 1991, Helsinki Accords, Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons of 1994 and Treaty on friendship, cooperation and partnership between the Russian Federation and Ukraine.
It led to the other members of the then G8 suspending Russia from the group, then introducing the first round of sanctions against the country.
International reactions to the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation, International sanctions during the Russo-Ukrainian War Tuzla Island.
Some Russian nationalists have disputed Ukraine's independent existence, considering Ukrainians to belong to the Russian nation, and Ukraine to belong to Greater Russia.
Removal of Russian street names and monuments across Ukraine On 26 April 2022, the sculpture under the People's Friendship Arch in Kyiv, which depicted a Ukrainian worker and a Russian worker standing together, was dismantled.
The arch and the Peoples' Friendship Arch monument are also planned to be renamed and to become a new monument.
This would be one of the first steps in a plan to demolish about 60 monuments and to rename dozens of streets associated with the Soviet Union, Russia and Russian figures across Ukraine.
Days before the People's Friendship Arch statue was removed, aspects of this street renaming and monument removal plan were already being carried out across other areas in Ukraine as well.
Among other issues in the relationship, such as the Black Sea Fleet, gas disputes, Medvedev also accused Yushchenko of attempting to eliminate the Russian language from everyday life in Ukraine.
In a high-stakes video call, President Biden warned President Vladimir V Putin of Russia of ""strong economic and other measures"" from the United States and European allies if military tensions with Ukraine escalated.
Russian Foreign Policy in the Twenty-First Century and the Shadow of the Past.
Independence: More than 90% of voters approve historic break with Kremlin.
Political Culture and National Identity in Russian–Ukrainian Relations.
Retrieved 2019-02-12. ^ a b ""Russians want Sevastopol to belong to Russia, poll shows"". unian.net.
Retrieved 2 April 2018. ^ a b ""Ukraine's envoy to NATO proposes Russian counterpart to focus on his problems"". unian.net.
Permanent Mission of the Republic of Poland to the United Nations Office and International Organizations in Vienna.
