Article the International Framing the Ukraine Communication Gazette 2019, Vol.
Informed by peace journalism and constructive journalism, it investigates how Russian and German shows frame the Ukraine crisis and to what extent constructive and destructive frames are used.
Qualitative content analysis of 20 shows enables examination of frame content and their constructive or destructive character.
While constructive frames address situational causal interpretations and constructive problem treatments, destructive frames blame one party for the crisis and apply either no treatment or a destructive one.
While large parts of both strands of the debates are destructive in character, the country’s shows include more constructive frames in different periods of the crisis.
The framing of the Ukraine crisis on political talk show debates The Ukraine crisis is an ongoing conﬂict both inside the Ukraine and in international relations between Russia and the West, deﬁned as the United States , the Western European key countries, Germany, the United Kingdom and France, as well as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Union alliances, which are primarily Western but have expanded since 1999 into the former Soviet space.
As the protest escalated to serious violent clashes, Yanukovych and other government oﬃcials ﬂed to Russia in February 2014 and an interim government with both pro-EU and radical right-wing politicians was formed.
International confrontation escalated in the second period of the crisis after Russia responded to the change in power structures in Ukraine by incorporating Crimea, the population of which is 60% Russian and where the Russian Black Sea Fleet is stationed.
Together with then French president Hollande, Merkel also represented the position of the EU and the United States in peace negations in Minsk dealing with the Eastern Ukraine military conﬂict between the new Ukrainian government and pro-Russian separatist movements supported by the Russian military.
Despite the signing of two ceaseﬁre agreements in Minsk in September 2014 and February 2015, the violence in Eastern Ukraine continues.
From its beginning, the crisis has had an international dimension concerning relations between Russia on one side and Western countries and alliances on the other.
Confrontations have repeatedly manifested in mutual assignments of blame, economic sanctions imposed by the EU and the United States and travel bans.
For example, in the Ukraine crisis, compromises between the parties on the international level as well as inside the country were likely aﬀected by a constructive or destructive way of framing the crisis in the media.
As German–Russian relations proved to be of crucial importance to the crisis management , this study focuses on the framing of the crisis in both countries’ media.
To capture the story line expressed in a frame as well as its constructive or destructive character, we integrate criteria for constructive journalism into frame methodology.
The analysis looks at in-depth debates on television political talk shows that are considered to be important inter-media agenda-setters , providing frames on the crisis in their respective national media environments.
The article examines how the Ukraine crisis is framed in political talk shows in the two conﬂicting countries and how constructive or destructive the frames are, considering their consequences in terms of political crisis negotiations.
To answer these questions, a qualitative content analysis of a sample of Russian and German talk shows was performed.
Constructive media crisis communication The media’s active role in constructive crisis communication and crisis management has been acknowledged in research programs such as peace journalism, positive journalism and constructive journalism.
These approaches argue that the media should avoid cynicism and instead motivate participation in the democratic process.
Criteria developed to assign media coverage to war or peace frames (Lee and Maslog, 2005; Lynch, 2013; Lynch and McGoldrick, 2005) focus on the use or absence of emotional, victory-orientated, demonizing and victimizing language as well as on the content of media coverage.
Although Lynch and McGoldrick describe peace journalism as an accurate and conﬂict-sensitive way of framing stories, empirical studies (Ersoy, 2016; Fahmy and Eakin, 2014; Ross and Tehranian, 2009; Workneh, 2011) frequently ﬁnd that only a small share of media coverage fulﬁls peace frame criteria.
Drawing on generic instead of thematic frames , this approach fails to consider a nuanced classiﬁcation or explore the speciﬁc story lines presented by the media about crises and conﬂicts.
Diﬀerent from that, constructive journalism (Gyldensted, 2015; Haagerup, 2014; McIntyre, 2015), a ‘light’ version of peace journalism, provides a more realistic and viable approach to the analysis of media coverage in times of crises and allows for a more nuanced operationalization.
Instead of prescribing to journalists what issues they should report on, it refers to how issues should be presented.
Instead of blaming one side, it sheds light on problems and promotes a deeper understanding of the causes of the respective crisis or conﬂict.
Although criteria for constructive journalism have not yet been operationalized systematically in empirical studies, existing frame analyses on international crises give evidence of the prevalence of a destructive style in news coverage.
The Cold War frame places events within a geopolitical power struggle between Russia and Western countries and alliances.
Research questions Building on the concept of constructive journalism, this article analyses frames on the Ukraine crisis in political talk show discussions in Russia and Germany.
Therefore, we pose two research questions that address the content of frames as well as their constructive or destructive character.
According to the indexing thesis , talk show discussions are, however, supposed to follow the perspective of national political elites.
We therefore expect to ﬁnd basically destructive frames on the crisis that deal with blaming one party and highlight confrontational treatment recommendations.
Method To answer the research questions, a qualitative content analysis of German and Russian TV political talk shows is conducted.
The aim of the study is to identify frames that structure the debate on the Ukraine crisis in both countries’ talk shows during the three periods of the crisis deﬁned above.
Sample The study analyses four prominent political talk shows in Russian and ﬁve in German TV that are broadcasted on major national television channels in the evening and could been retrieved from the channels’ online archives.
The Russian shows stem from the state-owned channel Pmpph~ 1 and the channel MRC , which is owned by statecontrolled ﬁrm Gazprom.
Both are bound by principles of ideological and political pluralism according to the Constitution of the Russian Federation and the Law of the Russian Federation on Mass Media.
The shows on Russia-1 are Omjhmhi‘ , Qneuh‘j{lz— imooepnml@elm and Cmpioeplz— beveo p Cj‘@hkhomk Qmjmb{ˇbzk (Sunday Evening with Vladimir Soloviev); from NTV, the show Qnhpmi Mmoihl‘ 72 the International Communication Gazette 81 is selected.
The German shows are from public service TV that stands for information and quality, is ﬁnanced by a public broadcast fee and is controlled in its standards by the Broadcasting Board, which consists of all major political parties and societal institutions.
Article 5 of the German basic law and the Interstate Treaty on Broadcasting and Telemedia highlight the values of balanced coverage and plurality of opinions in public service broadcasting.
The moderator directs questions to guests from politics, economy, media, science and civil society but also enables an exchange of opinions and dispute between the guests.
Short ﬁlms provoke debates and provide background information; statements from the studio audience as well as comments via email or Facebook are frequently included.
Russian shows, however, are characterized by a large number of speakers and rapid turntaking during discussions.
This diﬀers from German shows, wherein about ﬁve guests participate in each episode.
The time period under study starts in November 2013, includes the three crisis phases of the Maidan protests , the Russian incorporation of Crimea and the Eastern Ukraine military conﬂict , and ends in December 2015.
The last peak was in February 2015 during peace negotiations in Minsk and the subsequent violation of the ceaseﬁre.
In comparison, the Ukraine crisis received less attention on German talk shows, featuring in only 32 broadcasts and starting later, in February 2014, at the time when the issue had gained considerable international importance.
Most shows were broadcast in February and March 2014 during the struggle for Crimea.
Further peaks, as in Russia, arose in December 2014 and in February 2015.
During period I, no German show covered the Ukraine crisis, but discussions in the later shows continuously refer to the Maidan protests and include frames on this event.
Besides the time frame of the selected shows, the framing of the crisis is inﬂuenced by the guests participating in the shows.
The dominance of politicians indicates a high presence of oﬃcial frames in shows from both countries.
While most of the guests stem from Russia in Russian shows and from Germany in German shows, foreign representatives are regularly considered.
The selection of guests might go along with predominantly national frames.
Coding procedure The analysis inductively generates thematic frames by systemizing and condensing frames uttered in the chosen content.
Therefore, criteria for constructive journalism are operationalized using Entman’s framing approach.
As problem deﬁnitions ‘often virtually predetermine the rest of the frame’ , it is considered to be the most important frame element.
Although this deﬁnition has been criticized for lacking conceptual clarity , it is an analysis framework that is used frequently in empirical 74 the International Communication Gazette 81 media and communication studies.
While constructive frames emphasize situational causal interpretation and focus on problem treatments that enable de-escalation and crisis reconciliation, destructive frames address personal causal interpretations and either provide no ideas for problem treatments or support confrontational treatments.
The guests’ statements in the shows are coded by two German and two Russian coders using the frame elements as the central categories.
After the coding of a part of the material, frames that had already emerged were grouped together and were used as new categories.
We ﬁnally structured the frames into frame groups based on their thematic content.
According to the emphasized frame elements, we ﬁnally diﬀerentiated between constructive and destructive frames.
Results In analysing the sample of 10 Russian and 10 German talk show broadcasts, we found 12 diﬀerent frames for Russia and 13 frames for Germany.
For both strands of the debate, frames are grouped by their problem deﬁnition and distinguished according to the other three frame elements – the situational causal interpretation, the personal causal interpretation and the problem treatment – and assigned to one of the three time periods of the Ukraine crisis.
Frames on the situation inside Ukraine Frames used in the discussion on the situation inside Ukraine refer to the Maidan protests and the military conﬂict in Eastern Ukraine , but they also connect diﬀerent periods of the crisis in a comprehensive story line.
Among the Russian talk shows, four frames address the political destabilization of Ukraine as a problem.
While violent reactions to the protests are criticized, Yanukovych is accused of a failed foreign policy that tried ‘to play Russia and the EU oﬀ against each other’ (Alexander Privalov, Russian journalist, Omjhmhi‘, 4 December 2013), hoping for economic support from both sides.
To avoid the immanent collapse of the country, the frame calls all conﬂicting parties to restore the country’s unity peacefully in new democratic parliamentary elections.
An opposing view is expressed by the frame Antidemocratic Movement, which is used with reference to the Maidan protests.
It accuses the Maidan protesters of an ‘anti-constitutional, anti-democratic rebellion’ (Sergey Kurginyan, Russian political activist, Qneuh‘j{lz— imooepnml@elm, 21 January 2014) against the elected president Yanukovych.
It stresses that the new Kiev government lacks legitimacy and disregards minority rights.
In the later period of the Ukraine crisis, during the military conﬂict in Eastern Ukraine, this frame is complemented by the frame Freedom Struggle against Kiev’s Hegemony that blames the new Kiev government for disregarding diversity in Ukraine and for discriminating against the population in Eastern Ukraine.
Both frames call Russia to engage as protective force for the people in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine.
This includes ideas ranging from supporting the movement in Eastern Ukraine to plans for an independent Eastern Ukrainian state.
In contrast, the frame Russia’s Sphere of Inﬂuence stresses that the destabilization of the Ukrainian political system results from Russia patronizing Ukraine.
As a problem treatment, it is claimed that Russia should respect the country as a sovereign state.
The frames Freedom Struggle against Kiev’s Hegemony and Russia’s Sphere of Inﬂuence have equivalents in German shows.
The frame Civil Uprising that has similarities to the frame Russia’s Sphere of Inﬂuence in the Russian shows takes an opposing view.
In its problem treatment, the frame calls upon the new Ukraine government to display responsible behaviour towards its citizens and to preserve the country’s unity.
However, diﬀerent from the Russian debate, the third political frame in German talk shows refers predominantly to current war events in Eastern Ukraine.
The frame Separatist Aggression engages in blaming separatists in Eastern Ukraine for violence and takes a critical stance on Russia for tolerating or even supporting separatist movements.
The frame includes warnings about supplying arms to Ukraine for selfdefence, based on the argument that this would give Russia the pretext for overt military action.
Frames that deﬁne Ukraine’s weak economy as the main problem of the crisis refer ﬁrst and foremost to the Maidan protests, but these frames are also used in later time periods of the crisis.
In Russian talk shows, two frames come to opposing conclusions regarding the question of whether and how Russia should become involved in Ukrainian economic problems.
In contrast, the frame Bottomless Pit emphasizes that the country’s economy could suﬀer from persistently accommodated incompetence and corruption.
The frame blames Ukrainian and Russian oligarchs and ‘colonial powers’ for destroying the country’s economic interests.
Further, it is stated that as long as oligarchs’ inﬂuence on politics continues, Russia should concentrate on its own economy rather than investing in Ukraine.
Further, along with the discussion on economic and political problems in Ukraine, German talk shows problematize the suﬀering of citizens due to violence in the escalation of the Maidan protests and the war in Eastern Ukraine.
As a problem explanation, the frame Human Interest points to the structural complexity within Ukraine, including diﬀerent ethnic and religious groups drifting into a spiral of aggression.
In Russian as well as in German shows, only two frames on the situation inside Ukraine can be classiﬁed as constructive.
In Russian shows, the frames Russia’s Sphere of Inﬂuence and Stabilize Ukraine avoid a personal causal interpretation and call for enabling Ukraine to gain political and economic stability.
Ukrainian dependence on Russia and the tense political situation inside the country endanger its stability and capacity to act.
This is similar to the frames Civil Uprising and Human Interest in German talk shows.
Russian shows German shows Constructive frames Russia’s Sphere of Influence Civil Uprising Stabilize Ukraine Human Interest In-between Bottomless Pit Economic Structure Destructive frames Yanukovych Lost Ukraine Separatist Aggression Antidemocratic Movement Freedom Struggle against Freedom Struggle against Kiev’s Kiev’s Hegemony Hegemony In Russian talk shows, other frames that are not classiﬁed as constructive deal with personal causal interpretations, blaming the Yanukovych government and Ukrainian oligarchs or the Maidan movement and the Kiev government.
In its treatment recommendation, the frame Bottomless Pit calls for ignoring Ukraine’s problems and falls thus as between constructive and destructive in character.
In contrast, the frames Yanukovych Lost Ukraine, Antidemocratic Movement and Freedom Struggle against Kiev’s Hegemony are destructive.
They all combine the attribution of blame with the treatment recommendation of intervention in Ukraine, which is to say, legitimizing military action in the name of human rights and political stability.
In German talk shows, frames that are not classiﬁed as constructive address blame to the new Kiev government for violating minority rights.
Even more frequently, they blame the separatist movements in Eastern Ukraine for aggression and Russia for supporting separatists and keeping Ukraine in a state of economic dependence.
However, the frame Economic Structure entails a constructive treatment recommendation that supports economic help for Ukraine.
While this frame falls between constructive and destructive, the frames Separatist Aggression and Freedom Struggle against Kiev’s Hegemony follow a clearly destructive logic.
They combine the blaming of one party with appeals to EU countries to enter confrontation.
With reference to the periods of the Ukraine crisis, Russian shows tend to frame the Maidan protests in a destructive way.
German shows frame the military conﬂict in Eastern Ukraine destructively while framing the Maidan protests in a more constructive way.
Most of the frames, however, were addressed before and after this event and provide a broader story line for interpreting confrontations between Russia and the West.
Most of the frames with a focus on international politics reﬂect on the global players’ responsibility for the crisis.
This idea is combined with blaming the EU for immoral behaviour motivated by an economic need for ‘low-cost labor’ (Afanasios Ciolas-Avgerinos, Greek journalist, Omjhmhi‘, 4 December 2013) from Ukraine.
As a problem treatment, this frame supports the idea that the new Ukrainian government should resist and re-orient its politics from the EU to a close relationship to Russia.
The frame US’s Attack against Russia focuses on the role of the United States in the crisis.
It states that United States troops in Ukraine are trying to further escalate the conﬂict.
In consequence, the frame prompts Russia to resist by unifying the Slavic states and to consider military actions.
This frame had already been used during the Maidan protests when Russian pressure on the Yanukovych government was criticized.
However, it became most prominent during and after the incorporation of Crimea.
The frame emphasizes the need to negotiate with Russia but also includes the treatment recommendation of initiating or intensifying economic sanctions against Russia.
In addition, two frames in the German shows interpret Russian behaviour during all three periods of the Ukraine crisis as a reaction to enlargement of the EU and NATO, which is perceived by Russia as a threat to its own security interests.
The frame The West Is Expanding refrains from attributing blame to individual countries or politicians.
Instead, it explains the causes of the problem in terms of a more structural Western ignorance of Russia after 1990.
The frame does not suspect the EU or the US of following an imperialistic strategy, but it insists that the West should admit to its own mistakes.
It blames the United States for prioritizing economic self-interest rather than political common sense and explains Russian actions, especially in Crimea, as a reaction to Western actions rather than as acts of aggression.
In contrast, the frame Great Power Politics has a stronger focus on changes in the international system of states.
It is expressed in Russian as well as in German talk shows during all periods of the crisis and points at pressure from global players on Russia’s neighbouring countries, leading to international crisis.
As a treatment, the establishment of a multipolar global structure with more political de-centralization is advocated.
In the case of Ukraine, the frame calls for both the West and Russia to engage in de-escalation and negotiations about the future of Ukraine.
Frames on national politics reﬂect the situation in each country with regard to readiness for confrontation on the international level and are addressed ﬁrst and foremost to the incorporation of Crimea and the military conﬂict in Eastern Ukraine.
In the German shows, two frames address options for national and Western politics towards Russia after the incorporation of Crimea.
Both problematize the insuﬃcient power of the Western alliances, NATO and the EU to deal with global problems, for example, in Syria.
The frame Realpolitik therefore highlights the need for cooperation with Russia in international politics and explicitly rejects any moral evaluation of Russian politics.
As a solution, this frame advocates a more pragmatic realpolitik to restore peace in Europe and relations with Russia.
In sharp contrast to this, the frame West Must Show Strength follows the idea that a hesitant attitude on the part of Western governments is the main cause of the crisis.
This frame calls for a show of strength, meaning sanctions against Russia as well as deterrence, such as an increased NATO presence in the Baltic and arms supplies to Ukraine.
A ﬁnal group of frames takes media and public opinion into account; it refers in Russian shows to all three crisis periods and in German shows to international conﬂicts about the incorporation of Crimea and the military conﬂict in Eastern Ukraine.
In Russia, the frame Anti-Russian Propaganda entails the idea of an information war against Russia not only inside Ukraine but also inside the United States and EU countries.
It is stated that disinformation is launched by Ukrainian elites and Western stakeholders who hold control in mass media in their respective countries.
In consequence, Russia should engage in the information war by actively communicating to the various countries’ publics.
In contrast to this, the frame Russian Propaganda rejects any ideas of conspiracy against Russia.
This frame criticizes Russian media coverage for fostering sentiments against the United States over a long 82 the International Communication Gazette 81 period, thereby creating a supportive environment for confrontation in foreign policy.
It does not assign blame for political propaganda but states that German journalists and politicians have problems obtain an overview of the situation and refer to culturally rooted stereotypes.
Moreover, in Russian shows, the frame Russian Propaganda recognizes at least partial Russian responsibility for the crisis, explained by mistakes in politics and by disinformation.
This diﬀers from the frame Russia’s Weakness, which neither addresses any Russian responsibility for the crisis nor rejects the idea of competition between Russia on one side and the United States and the EU on the other.
However, although it is motivated by pragmatism only, the frame calls for an active de-escalation and is thus classiﬁed as constructive.
Similar to the Russian debate, reﬂexive and more pragmatic constructive frames can be found in the German shows.
German Media include a critical view of the Western role in international politics and communication leading to the crisis.
Instead of attributing blame, they explain the problems via a more situational causal interpretation.
More destructive frames address personal causal interpretations that refer to only one side in the crisis.
In Russian talk shows, these frames blame Western politics and Western media for triggering the crisis.
None of the frames Pressure from the EU, US’s Attack against Russia, and Anti-Russian Propaganda support negotiations, but instead, they call Russia and politics in Ukraine to resist and thus enter confrontation with the West.
In the German shows, the frames Violation of International Law and West Must Show Strength blame Russia for the crisis and support the destructive problem treatments of imposing economic sanctions and demonstrating military strength.
It blames the United States for aggressive and illegitimate behaviour in Ukraine and thus legitimizes Russian actions in Crimea and in Eastern Ukraine.
In sum, constructive frames from shows in both countries refer basically to the escalation of international tensions during the incorporation of Crimea.
Destructive frames follow a broader story line that makes sense of all three periods of the Ukraine crisis as part of a global conﬂict between Russia and the West that is a continuation of the Cold War.
Discussion Although results from a qualitative content analysis cannot be seen as representative of all talk show debates or the Russian and German media debate in general, the identiﬁed frames highlight similarities and diﬀerences between the countries’ perspectives on the crisis that help to explain conﬂicts on the international level between Russia and the West.
Looking at the content of these frames, the ﬁndings reveal that the Maidan protests, the incorporation of Crimea and the military conﬂict in Eastern Ukraine have been discussed from multiple perspectives in both countries.
In Russian talk shows that direct much attention to the Maidan protests, the stability of Ukrainian politics and economy is highly discussed, and the shows tend to closely examine the complexities within the country, Yanukovych’s political strategy and the new government’s legal situation.
In contrast, the German debate spends less eﬀort seeking a deeper understanding of the structural problems inside Ukraine, but rather places great emphasis on international confrontation and violence in the military conﬂict in Eastern Ukraine, highlighting the responsibility of separatist movements and the new Kiev government.
While the German shows discuss diﬀerent Western political strategies in dealing with the crisis and reﬂect on Russia’s behaviour as an aggression as well as a reaction to Western politics, Russian shows are more concerned with Russia’s economic and political 84 the International Communication Gazette 81 capacity to persist in the international crisis and the need to protect Russian minorities in Ukraine.
The shows have a high share of guests from national politics and tend to reﬂect on the crisis through the glasses of national foreign policy.
As a result, some frames in Russian and German shows are similar in their main idea while diﬀering in important details; the shows thus fail to enable a deeper understanding of diﬀerent national perspectives on the crisis.
For example, while Russian talk shows suggest a political interest behind the perceived Russophobia and anti-Russian sentiments in Western media, German shows explain the sometimes one-sided coverage in German media by a lack of knowledge and old stereotypes inﬂuencing journalists’ interpretations of political actions.
Similarly, the responsibility of the EU for the crisis is discussed in German shows more in terms of a failed EU strategy, whereas the Russian debate stresses the EU’s economic interests.
Considering the constructive and destructive quality of the frames, destructive frames prevail and legitimize confrontational rhetoric and actions in politics.
In Russia, talk show discussions provide reasons for Russian intervention in Crimea and in Eastern Ukraine by blaming the Maidan protesters and the new Kiev government for anti-democratic actions and discrimination and by suspecting the West of following a geopolitical and economic strategy against Russia.
Frames in German shows, in contrast, legitimize sanctions against Russia by denouncing the country for violations of international law.
Frames that follow principals of constructive journalism by providing solutions for identiﬁed problems and addressing deeper causes of conﬂicts rather than blaming one party are, however, found in both countries’ talk shows.
With reference to the Russian incorporation of Crimea and – in the German shows – to the Maidan protests, some of the frames call for de-escalation, negotiations and conﬂict resolution.
They also include questions concerning each country’s own responsibility for the crisis and its capacity to withstand an international conﬂict.
For politicians, especially frames that explain the Ukraine crisis via great power politics and call for a multipolar global structure with more political de-centralization provide a basis to strive for peace agreements.
This is also true for frames that emphasize the need to stabilize Ukraine as the primary goal.
However, as most of the frames deal with an attribution of blame, it might become rational for politicians to choose the easier path and adapt to this part of the debate by engaging in scapegoating, thus feeding the spiral of aggression.
With regard to further research on constructive journalism, the study demonstrates the importance to analyse both, the content of frames and their constructive or destructive character which together provide a clearer picture of lines of conﬂict and of possible compromises.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests The author declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship and/or publication of this article.
Funding The author received no ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship and/or publication of this article.
Bennett WL Toward a theory of press–state relations in the United States.
Indexing and the limits of press independence in the Abu Ghraib Scandal.
Cassell C and Symon G Qualitative Methods in Organizational Research, a Practical Guide.
Solutions journalism focuses in what’s going right in the world rather than what’s going wrong.
Peace versus war journalism framing of an Israeli/Palestinian-related incident.
Groshek J Coverage of the pre-Iraq war debate as a case study of frame indexing.
Eskjaer MF, Hjarvard S and Mortensen M The Dynamics of Mediatized Conflicts.
The real media impact on conflict management is invisible and indirect.
Kohlbacher F The use of qualitative content analysis in case study research.
Principles and structural limitations in the news coverage of three conflicts.
McGoldrick A Psychological effects of war journalism and peace journalism.
The effects of positive emotions and solution information in news stories.
A Content Analysis of the Coverage in Traditional Print and Emerging Online Media.
Rosenthal U, Hart PT and Charles MT The world of crises and crisis management.
Der Einfluss des Unterhaltungserlebens auf die Informationsverarbeitung.
Tenenboim-Weinblatt K, Hanitzsch T and Nagar R Beyond peace journalism.
A Case Study of United States and British Newspapers Coverage of the Somali Conflict.
