The recent Crimean incident highlights the extent to which Ukraine is unable to control its own military whilst re-emphasising Crimea’s historical connection to Russia which the West chooses to ignore.
The 7 August skirmish on the Crimean peninsula has ratcheted tensions between Ukraine and Russia, calling into question Kyiv’s legitimacy and claims to the territory.
Acting Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko’s immediate, scripted reaction was to deny involvement.
These contradictions show that Kyiv’s authorities are simply losing control of their defence forces.
The UAF—a loose confederation of over 50 volunteer batallions—simply lack the skills and coordination to best the Russian FSB and infiltrate the Crimean peninsula.
This became evident on 8 Sept.14, at the onset of hostilities, after Amnesty International released a scathing report documenting the lawlessness of the Aidar Battalion and other Ukrainian paramilitary groups’, as they committed increasingly brutal human rights violations in the Russian speaking Donbas region in a manner which compared to those of the Islamic State.
Ironically, Marcin Mamon of The Intercept wrote a ground breaking series of articles on how the Kyiv government began overlooking Ukrainian collaborations with Islamic State.
Due to a long list of violations, Russian-Ukrainian relations remains in utter disarray and have come to a volatile showdown as the UAF advances southward to the Isthmus of Perekop, violating the Minsk agreements along with the self-determination of Crimean citizens.
Ukrainian relations with Crimeans, on the other hand, have been irrevocably changed forever.
Crimea was been a gift to Ukraine and historically sanctioned within strict guidelines.
The 1954 “Meeting of the Presidium of the Supreme Union of Soviet Socialist Republics” speech explicitly states the terms of the agreement to transfer Crimea to the Ukraine.
In history there could not be and cannot be such relations between republics under capitalism, desires for territorial seizure and the desire of strong countries to feast on the territories of weak countries formed the very basis of relations between countries.
Only in the conditions of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics was such a just solution of all territorial issues between union republics possible based on administrative and economic advisability with complete mutual friendship and the fraternal cooperation of their peoples.
Both in the distant and not-so-distant past enemies repeatedly tried to take the Crimean Peninsula from Russia and use it to pillage and ravage Russian lands, and to create a military base there to attack Russia and Ukraine.
First, the transfer is based on trust between two communist governments—guaranteed under a socialist political economy.
Now that both are independent capitalist republics, the terms and conditions no longer apply.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, it took years of painful negotiations between then-Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin and United States Presidents George Bush, Sr. and Bill Clinton to reshape the pacts under the “Treaty of friendship, cooperation and partnership between the Russian Federation and Ukraine”, which was enacted on 31 May 1997.
However, it was a fool’s errand for Yeltsin to believe that these new conditions would hold under the current global order.
Furthermore, former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych inflamed these tensions after opportunistically weighing his options between the Eurasian Union and the European Union , violating Article 13 of the 1997 Treaty of Friendship.
By the time he had rescinded Europe’s offer, he had already besmirched Ukraine’s national sovereignty as the Euromaidan coup was already underway as a contingency.
Putin keenly observed this and following the coup, simply rescinded the 1954 transfer, noting specific violations in the Friendship Treaty to validate the Crimean referendum.
With Yanukovich gone and a hostile, puppet government on its doorstep, Russia reclaimed its historical territory.
Following the US-backed Euromaidan coup, then-interim President Oleksandr Turchynov provoked Russian authorities further by temporary repealing a 2012 law protecting minority languages.
Reports of persecuted ethnic minorities finally compelled Putin to act by first speaking to United States President Barack Obama and later contacting UN Secretary General Ban-Ki Moon.
With little support from the international ‘community’, Vladimir Putin worked with Crimean authorities to establish the referendum, then signed Executive Order no. shortly afterwards.
Whilst there certainly were material concerns in Simferopol and relating to the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol which explain the Russian actions, the primary motivation was that, under Putin’s watch, he would never to allow Crimeans to fall under fascism again.
However, both the illicit Kyiv government and its Western supporters brush this aside and choose to ignore Russia’s valid concerns.
Unfortunately, in doing so, the ludicrous accusations against Vladimir Putin as a power-hungry dictator have only reinforced and increased support for his actions around the world.
