Director, Valdai Club Programs Docent, MGIMO EASI-Hurford Next Generation Fellow The Hurford Fellows Program is sponsored by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and is made possible by a generous grant from the Hurford Foundation 1 THE HURFORD FOUNDATION The Hurford Fellowships, administered by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, support the EuroAtlantic Security Initiative Next Generation Network in identifying young academics conducting innovative research on international security in the EuroAtlantic area.
Director, Valdai Club Programs Docent, MGIMO Ukraine is an especially significant country for Russia and will remain so in the foreseeable future.
Owing to the choices of the Ukrainian elites and the constant political instability that started in 2004, Russian-Ukrainian interdependence is weakening.
Russia has chosen to remove its vitally important interests the Black Sea Fleet naval base, energy transport infrastructure, defense contracts and Russian population from Ukrainian influence.
Under normal conditions, this process might have unfolded over decades, but it was accelerated in 2014 by the forcible seizure of power in Ukraine by supporters of the Maidan.
This made Moscow ‘unbracket’, in its relations with Kyiv, the issues of the Black Sea Fleet base and Crimea.
Russia also clearly stated that resolving the situation in the Donbass was possible only by political means.
Moscow assumes that an unfriendly regime will remain in power in Ukraine for an extended period, and so it will proceed with the policy of limiting its dependence on Ukraine.
It is in the interests of both countries to act in such a way that the lowering of interdependence is gradual and well prepared.
Although the collapse of the USSR in 1991 took place peacefully, it was badly prepared and proceeded in a hurried way.
Soviet citizens, often against their will, suddenly became citizens of other countries.
The collapse of the Union did not entail resolution of the problem of jurisdiction over previously common property.
Strategic assets of Russia remained on the territory of postSoviet countries; the economies of the newly formed countries continued to operate as a single organism; and problems of borders and population exchange were not resolved.
With the collapse of political unity of the post-Soviet countries, the integration of their economies was also disrupted.
A sharp drop in the populations’ standard of living inevitably followed, which most of the countries tried to cushion.
Each of them in their own way, long ago set out upon the path of extracting profits from the “Soviet inheritance” and since that time have not changed course.
In the 1990s Moscow realized that sharp reform and simple solutions to complex problems constitute a highly risky strategy.
Based on this experience, at the beginning of the 2000s Russia chose a course of slow but steady growth and avoiding involvement in expensive conflicts.
For precisely this reason Moscow never initiated a reconsideration of the status quo along its borders.
Rather, it was last to join in the destruction of this status quo, and then only when its vital interests were suffering.
It lets violations of its secondary interests (Yugoslavia, Iraq, Libya, Syria) go by without consequences.
Strong Together, Weak Apart Even if a regime remains in Kyiv that is unfriendly to Russia, the objective of progressive economic growth leads Russia to remain interested in the stability and integrity of Ukraine.
These two states are connected to one another more than any other states in the post-Soviet space.
Before the referendum in Crimea, Moscow’s vital interest lay in the basing of the Black Sea Fleet on the peninsula, and likewise in the military neutrality of Ukraine.% of Russia’s gas exports to the EU pass through Ukraine, and therefore the transit of energy resources through the latter’s territory is likewise a vital interest, at least until an alternative pipeline under the Black Sea begins to operate.
Another highly important interest is the security of over 10 million Russians living on Ukrainian territory, a significant portion of whom consider Russia the defender of their rights.
Ukraine ensures the transit of goods not only between Russia and the EU, but also with Asian countries.
Russian capital invested in Ukrainian facilities represents a double-digit share of the overall economy.
Yearly labor migration from Ukraine to Russia amounts to up to 6 million people.
The human connections between the two countries are far stronger, reinforced by mixed families and a shared culture and religion.
According to Russian figures, every year Moscow donates around $10-12 billion to the Ukrainian economy in support of these interests in discounts on gas, loans, contracts and a preferential trade regime that is to the disadvantage of Russian producers.
Without exaggeration, Russia has been and remains the chief external guarantor of Ukraine’s stability; and this is a vital interest.
Critics of Russia’s Ukraine policy believe that Moscow is trying to undermine Ukraine’s economy by plunging the latter into war.
This would curtail revenues into the budget, and Kyiv would be forced to increase expenditures on defense.
Such might be the case, if not for the fundamental economic interdependence that leads Russia to have an interest in the stability of Ukraine.
These connections are so essential that even the war in the Donbass has had only a limited effect on them.
In April 2015 the gross external debt of Ukraine amounted to $126 billion, of which about $50 billion was government debt.
Of that portfolio, $25 billion represented the investment of Russian state and private banks in Ukrainian sovereign bonds.
In addition, $4 billion represents Ukrainian state debt to Russia, of which $3 billion are in Russian bonds payable by the end of 2015.
The VS Energy International company, which represents Russian capital investment in the electricity distribution networks of Ukraine, runs 27 regional distributors of electricity.
In December 2014 Russia began to deliver coal to Ukraine, without prepayment, at the domestic Russian price, in quantities of 50,000 tons per day.
This allowed Ukraine to escape an energy crisis during the winter of 2014-15.
European Parliamentary Research Service, Members’ Research Service, June 2015.
After the beginning of Russian coal deliveries, Ukraine stopped cutting off electricity to Crimea.
In the field of atomic energy Russia and Ukraine had over decades developed a strategic partnership.
Ukraine inherited four nuclear plants for the generation of electricity with 15 reactors , fuel for which was delivered from Russia.
With the assistance of Russia Ukraine was planning to construct a fuel factory in the Kirovograd region, but after the beginning of the crisis work was never renewed.
Rather, Ukraine began to experiment with the use of American fuel in the Soviet-constructed nuclear reactors at the Ukrainian nuclear plants.
Previously in both Ukraine and the Czech Republic there had been attempts to replace Russian fuel with American, and these experiments turned out to be technologically unsafe.
This led Ukraine to seek an agreement with Russia on deliveries of nuclear fuel for 2015 and 2016.
In 2013 the share of gas from Russia used in Ukraine reached 85%; however, in 2014 Kyiv cut its share of purchases from Russia 6 and began to transition to reverse deliveries of the same Russian gas from Slovakia, Poland and Hungary.
The unresolved dispute led in mid-2015 to the cessation of deliveries of gas from Russia.
Negotiations with Russia over the price of gas for Ukraine always bore a non-market character.
Ukraine was the last republic of the former USSR with which Gazprom transitioned to market relations in the gas sphere.
In addition, until 2009 there were no separate contracts for gas transit, and Kyiv lifted from the pipeline more gas than Russia owed it for transit.
By Russian estimates, between 1991 and 2013 Ukraine saved over $82. billion owing to the reduced prices of gas.
The agreement with Ukraine on gas deliveries for the 2014 heating season was reached only thanks to direct cooperation between 5 “Potrebleniye gaza v Ukraine snizitsya do 34 kubov v etom gody – Ukrtransgaz” RIA Novosti Ukraina, 25 June 2015.
The European Union reacted constructively to the threat on the part of Ukraine to the transit of Russian gas.
In the same way, transit risk is growing in Ukraine and this affects not only pipelines.
The security of automobile and train passage and of cargo transport through Ukrainian ports has been called into question.
Russia has been forced to change the routes of the deliveries of its cargoes to Central and Southern Europe.
In 2015 construction will begin on a railroad that will obviate the need to transit Ukraine to deliver cargoes passing between Belgorod, Voronezh and Rostovon-Don.
Industrial production remained an important sphere of RussianUkrainian interdependence, especially in the military-industrial field. types of weapons and military equipment of Russian manufacture utilize components made in Ukraine.
In the circumstances of the crisis all military-industrial cooperation between the countries was halted, and Russia was forced into an unscheduled review of its rearmament program through 2020.
In 2013 Russia was Ukraine’s leading trade partner , trailing by only a few percentage points the combined trade with EU countries.
The volume of two-way external trade amounted to $26. billion, $18 billion less than in 2013.11 In contrast, Ukraine’s trade with the EU grew by 12%, which did not compensate for the losses in the Russian market.
Conditions exist for a further drop in trade between Russia and Ukraine.
Since a preferential trade regime is in force between Russia and Ukraine, the Ukrainian Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement with the EU will lead Moscow to introduce trade duties on Ukrainian goods.
This would inevitably lead to their loss in competition with the Eurasian Economic Union.
In the estimation of Russian specialists, as a result of limitations on access to the EEU market, the Ukrainian economy may lose a minimum of $33 billion annually.
To avoid these consequences, Russia proposed that the EU and Ukraine come to an agreement with Russia on the rules of economic cooperation in the current triangle.
Consultations on this began only in May 2015 and their outcome offers little hope of success.
As part of the conception of constructing a “wall” on the border with Russia, the new Ukrainian authorities proposed canceling the current visa-free regime with Russia.
This would lead to a reduction in money transfers home from Ukrainian workers in Russia and would 9 “RZhD i Minoborony podpisali dogovor o stroitel’stve dorogi v obkhod Ukrainy,” Lenta.ru, 30 June 2015.
The numbers indicated above show how deep the economic interdependence between Russia and Ukraine is.
In addition to the shared Soviet industrial inheritance and economic ties, the economy of independent Ukraine has developed from the beginning with significant Russian participation.
Consequences of the Unexpected Rupture in Relations in 2014 The close interdependence which had developed had previously forced Russia and Ukraine to “compartmentalize” politics and economics.
However, under crisis conditions the two sides fused them to the point of a rupture in mutual connections.
In the new national security strategy of Ukraine Russia is called a “long-term strategic threat,” and Ukraine is identified as a forward outpost of the West in a war with Russia.
In turn, Russia has also taken affairs to the point of a rupture in interdependence.
In the words of Russian Prime Minister D Medvedev, “Russia intends to follow strictly its own national interests.
Three strategies came into existence for Moscow in relation to Kyiv, which were applied in accordance with Ukraine’s readiness to cooperate.
In the first version of the strategy, Russia was dealing with a friendly Ukraine, which aimed at integrating into the common economic space of the CIS and jointly develop on the basis of the Soviet economic inheritance.
In the second version of the strategy – which was applied most frequently of all – Russia was dealing with a vacillating Ukraine, which was inclined towards neutrality.
In this scenario Russia aimed at the formation of a tripartite economic regime with Ukraine and the EU for the creation of a future “bridge” over the territory of Ukraine.
The goal of Russia’s policy in this case is the gradual weakening of interdependence, the removal of its interests out from under vulnerability to Kyiv, and the creation of conditions for this through support for the stability of Ukraine.
The chief interest remains likewise the preservation of the military neutrality of its western neighbor.
After the Maidan of 2004, Russia began to construct an alternate base for the Black Sea Fleet in Novorossiysk, to build the North Stream gas pipeline beneath the Baltic Sea and to transfer defense contracts from Ukrainian enterprises to Russian ones. 25 years of Russian attempts to establish friendly relations with Ukraine produced no results.
Today in Moscow it is assumed that any achievements on the basis of the Ukrainian political class that emerged in the years following independence will be transitory.
The contemporary Ukraine strategy of Russia consists of non-intervention to the extent possible and limiting the losses that Ukrainian processes might impose on Russia.
Struggle among Elites and the Involvement of External Forces As opposed to Russia, Belarus or Kazakhstan – where strong central authorities took shape, along with effective consolidation and distribution of resources by the center, a developed administrative apparatus and, most importantly, a consensus among the elites and society on the issue of national interests – the political trajectory of Ukraine led to other results.
In the years of its independence a consolidated political class never emerged in Ukraine; and politics were characterized by the priority of private over state interests.
The political structure of Ukraine presupposes that whoever wins elections will receive the entirety of power in the country – for that reason, a new elite always changed not only the staff of the upper ranks in Kyiv, but also the leaderships in all 24 regions of Ukraine in favor of loyal people.
In the majority of cases the new elite that came to power represented the interests of a specific regional group , which extended its influence to other parts of the country, displacing local ruling forces.
Since the stakes were so high, any national election turned into a crisis.
Yushchenko) was elected with the support of the “Maidan” and one was overthrown with its assistance; one prime minister was imprisoned in her country (Yu.
See Kozlov, P., “Esli eto imelo opredilennuyu rezhissuru, rezhisseru nuzhno postavit’ pyat’ s plyusom,” Vedomosti, 16 March 2015.
In addition, the political class of Ukraine actually stimulated the interference of external forces in Ukrainian affairs.
Local political actors aimed to receive dividends from the constant involvement of global power centers in Ukrainian politics.
Taken as a whole, these particularities did not permit the political class of Ukraine to achieve a consensus on identifying the national interests of the country.
In the absence of this fundamental conclusion, it proved impossible to elaborate a long-term development strategy on the basis of defense of sovereignty from external interference.
The Ukrainian elites began to feel that Ukraine would forever be a victim of the confrontations of external forces on its territory.
In time, Kyiv stopped perceiving itself as an equal participant in the situation bearing responsibility for its decisions; and began to use external interference in Ukrainian affairs to further its own interests.
Such a situation exacerbated the instability in the political system of Ukraine and led to the failure of attempts by Russia to establish a stable and close partnership with Kyiv.
The question remains open as to how durable the pro-Western course of the current leadership of Ukraine will be and whether Kyiv will be able to construct a long-term partnership with western countries.
Ukraine Caught in a Vise Convinced of the impossibility of a constructive partnership with Ukraine, the Russian leadership refused to try to integrate it into the Eurasian Economic Union, not least because for a country as fragile as Ukraine a definitive choice between Russia and the EU would have been fatal.
However, the EU never ceased its attempts to include Ukraine in its zone of influence, as it never realized the potential negative effects of such a policy.
The economic and normative eastward expansion of the EU required the countries of Eastern Europe to make a definitive choice between the West and Russia, and in recent years the Western demands that Ukraine make such a choice became more insistent.
Yanukovicha zhdala sud’ba Kaddafi,” Komsomol’skaya Pravda 5 February 2015.
Yanukovych, was overthrown, and a “government of the victors” was formed in Ukraine.
This unleashed a chain reaction in the South and East of Ukraine that took the country to the brink of civil war.
Public Opinion Disagreements on NATO Accession Western interference in the internal affairs of Ukraine during the Euromaidan forced many in Moscow to think that the goal of these actions was to strike a blow against Russian interests through the expansion of NATO to Ukraine and the removal of Russia’s fleet from Crimea.
Despite the American leadership’s declaration that the actions of Russia in Crimea and the Donbass took it by surprise, few in Moscow believed this.
In reality, the interests of Russia in Crimea and Ukraine were explicitly reiterated many times to the American and European elites.
Russia has accepted Ukraine's westward orientation, including its possible accession to the EU and closer ties with NATO, but NATO membership and the establishment of a United States or NATO base in Ukraine remain clear redlines.
The opinion in Russia, frequently expressed by the most senior figures and the president of the country,21 is that the U.S. consciously aimed at forcing Russia to defend its interests in Ukraine and thereby dragging it into an exhausting conflict.
Russia’s NATO Enlargement Redlines,” Moscow Embassy #000265, 1 February 2008.
Meanwhile, the question of NATO accession remains a subject of deep discord in Ukraine, even after the secession of Crimea and the beginning of war in the Donbass.
According to the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology, in June 2015 37% of Ukrainians expressed themselves in favor of NATO accession, and 36% against.
If a referendum were held with full turnout, these figures would result in 51% for and 49% against.
Nationalists, Russians and Étatists The current Ukrainian government threw out the strategy of balancing between Russia and the West.
In so doing it also rejected the conception of Ukraine as a fragile and diverse state, perched at the juncture of two centers of power.
The logic of the actions of the “Government of Victors” lies in utilizing a historic chance to “turn the country to the West,” despite all the likely costs, including the fracturing and collapse of the country.
One may assume that the situation as it has developed is not definitive.
The current authorities in Ukraine are trying to avoid an internal crisis as exemplified by the collapse of the “orange coalition” of 2004-2006, inasmuch as they perceive the possibility of such a scenario.
Several systemic conflicts are occurring, involving the central authorities, regional groupings, powerful oligarchs and non-systemic militarized detachments.
Among the population, massive social dissatisfaction is growing with the effectiveness of the policy of the authorities.
For now, this is reflected in extremely low poll numbers for the authorities, and in sporadic protest demonstrations.
Exacerbating the situation is that public discussion in the country flows in three basic vectors, two of which are radical.
The representatives of the mainstream – the group most numerous, best organized and best represented in the media – advocate a civil nationalist program of “Ukraine for the Ukrainians” and see Ukraine as the advance guard in a Western struggle with Russia.
Representatives of this group give highest priority to a Ukrainian identity based on a Ukrainophone civic nationalism.
At the same time, the Uniates and the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Kyiv Patriarchate played a big role in mobilizing people in Western Ukraine and in blessing the use of force on the Maidan.
The goal of this group is the creation in Ukraine of a national state composed of people of Ukrainian identity.
Thus they are prepared to sacrifice the territorial integrity of the country in order to consolidate a homogeneous society on the remaining lands.
In other words, the nationalists are prepared to keep the Donbass within Ukraine only on condition of the complete loyalty of the local population.
Ukrainians, Russians and other ethnic groups that do not share the goals and values of the Maidan and consider Russia to be an important force in Ukrainian politics.
Many of them are desperate to find a defender of their interests among the participants in Ukrainian politics and cannot quite understand why Moscow does not defend their interests as it did in Crimea; and why the Russian special services allowed the coup in Kyiv.
This group is not as numerous as the first; at least, it is much less represented in the media.
This is not surprising, as its representatives are subjected to political pressure, in some instances to persecution.
Among many of them an underground mentality is forming, and the trend might radicalize with time.
Previously, people of Russian identity were loyal to the Ukrainian project; however, that is changing – now they all the more frequently come out against it and have entirely stopped associating themselves with Ukraine.
Many people of Russian identity are adherents of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate.
The Kyiv Metropolitanate is pursuing a conciliatory course and has not taken sides in the civil opposition.
It is possible to assert that the turning point in the attitude of Russians to the situation in Ukraine was not the events of the Maidan and the overthrow of V Yanukovych, but the immolation of over 40 “anti-maidan” activists in Odessa on 2 May 2014.
Pubic pressure on the authorities of Russia in connection with this tragedy was huge – citizens demanded action in defense of those close to them in Ukraine.
The third group of the Ukrainian elite consists of supporters of an inclusive statehood as a condition for the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
The étatists consider the top priority to be the 23 “Politicheskaya situatsiya b Ukraine.
They recognize that Ukraine must choose the course of neutrality and sovereignty in order to preserve the unity of the state.
After the victory of the Euromaidan, this was the camp advocating the necessity of avoiding radicalism in order to prevent the loss of Crimea.
They are mostly to be found in the Opposition Bloc, and there are also representatives of this point of view in the Bloc of Petro Poroshenko.
The staff of the newspaper Vesti, which advocates an étatist platform, are subjected to persecution by supporters of the authorities.
Russia was last to join the disruption of the status quo, and then only when it recognized that others were not playing by the rules.
The first to intervene in Ukraine’s internal affairs were the EU and the U.S., which supported one of two political parties, one that had set as its goal regime change by force.
The coup in Kyiv fundamentally altered the status quo, and the West did not attempt to integrate the new Ukrainian opposition into the developing system or take account of the interests of Russia.
In 2014, to a degree unprecedented for Ukraine, the opposition used force, primarily anonymously.
Coming to power on a wave of violence, the new authorities continued to use violence against their opponents.
Plan dii iz vregulyubannya krymskoi krizi,” Radio Free Europe, 11 March 2014.
An attack on a bus carrying Anti-maidan protesters from Crimea, the immolation of Anti-maidan activists in Odessa on 2 May 2014,30 a series of murders and suspicious suicides of opposition politicians and journalists,31 and finally the beginning of the Anti-Terrorist Operation in the Donbass in April 2014, which the local inhabitants perceived as a punitive operation, demonstrate the readiness of the new authorities of Ukraine to eliminate their opposition physically.
It is worth noting that none of the aforementioned events called forth energetic protests from the United States or EU countries, which in practice sanctioned to the actions of the government in Kyiv.
The situation that developed in Crimea after the overthrow of Yanukovych left Moscow little room for maneuver.
The population of the peninsula had historically aimed at extracting itself from the sovereignty of Ukraine and uniting with Russia; however, throughout the 1990s and 2000s Moscow resisted this, aiming instead to establish friendly relations with Ukraine.
Simultaneously, Sevastopol was also the base of the Ukrainian Navy, which numbered up to 11,000 personnel.
The comparability of the potentials of these two groupings made the situation in Crimea especially tense.
However, it was important that both the Russian and Ukrainian fleets were staffed primarily by service personnel from Crimea, whose sympathies lay with Russia.
At the same time, this circumstance would not have prevented bloodshed, had not Moscow taken the initiative in its own hands.
In Moscow elites saw this situation as a choice of the lesser of two evils.
They thought that if Russia had not intervened, there would have been no outlet for the pro-Russian sentiment of the Crimeans.
Kyiv would not have reconciled itself to the intention of the peninsula to leave and would have utilized force, as it did in Donbass.
Since Russian service personnel were located in Crimea, they would have been subject to accusations of supporting separatism.
Ukrainian forces would have blockaded Russian bases and hindered the movement of personnel.
However, this would not have stopped those of the local Russian military personnel who wanted to defend the independence of the peninsula.
The start of resistance actions would have been unavoidable, with the participation of local militias and individual Crimeans who were Russian service personnel.
It is highly likely that Russian bases would have come under intentional or unintentional 30 P Poroshenko asserts that this act averted the destabilization of Odessa.
See “Vlast’ ne pozvolit povtorit’ 2 maya v Odesse, zayavlyayet Prezident,” Site of the President of Ukraine, 10 April 2015.
Meshkov scored a victory in parliamentary elections with a platform advocating reunion of the peninsula with Russia.
It is hard to conceive that Russia would have permitted its service personnel to become hostages.
Under these conditions Moscow would have unavoidably faced accusations of intervention in Ukraine’s affairs, followed by demands for the removal of the base and the Fleet.
In contrast to Crimea, where the direct military involvement of Russia was obvious from the beginning, in the Donbass Moscow began to support the insurgent movement only towards the end of the summer of 2014.
In Crimea Kyiv did not resort to force, as that would have led to a direct military confrontation with Russia.
The situation in the Donbass, however, was different, and President Poroshenko preferred to launch a military operation.
Three months of military clashes passed by, costing hundreds of lives and sending a flood of refugees into Russia before Moscow took the decision to support the militias.
Based on the words of the latest and independent observers, that decision was forced.
The domination of nationalists in the Ukrainian mainstream is an obstacle to the preservation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
Judging by the fact that Kyiv has no intention of implementing the political part of the Minsk Agreements of 12 February 2015, the Ukrainian authorities are prepared to sacrifice the “pro-Russian” Donbass for the sake of consolidating their rule over the remaining territories.
The main content of the Minsk Agreement consists of the re-establishment of Ukraine’s sovereignty over the Donbass through peaceful reintegration and the inclusion of its representatives in the Ukrainian elite.
Despite all suspicions, Russia actually aims at a resolution in the Donbass.
The goal of Russia is not the defeat of Ukraine and the victory of Donbass, but an equitable political settlement between them.
Russia insists on a comprehensive resolution and for that reason aims at guaranteeing in the renewed Ukrainian constitution the rights of the Donbass and potentially unstable regions of Ukraine.
The West is guarded in its perception of these initiatives, seeing in them a Russian intention to interfere in Ukraine’s affairs.
However, the West will not be interested in the 34 “Remarks with EU High Representative Lady Catherine Ashton after their Meeting,” United States Department of State, 6 May 2014.
It is a paradox that Russia, coming to the defense of the rights of the Russian community of Ukraine, is a bigger supporter of the integrity of Ukraine within its current borders than the current authorities in Kyiv.
Moscow wants in this way to balance the anti-Russian forces in the Kyiv government with more moderate ones and ensure the military neutrality of Ukraine.
The onset of reconciliation and the signing of agreements in Minsk do not signify the prospect of a quick political settlement.
But if earlier President Poroshenko planned to achieve his goals through military means, now he counts on reducing dependence on Donetsk and Luhansk.
Ukrainian politicians and experts raise the question of rejecting Donetsk and Luhansk and excluding them from Ukraine.
Kyiv is outraged by the demands of the Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic that they be allotted a special status including autonomy and the choice of economic vector of development.
Kyiv sees this condition as so unacceptable that it is prepared to put off until a more advantageous moment the question of the fate of Donetsk.
The conception is beginning to dominate Kyiv that Ukraine must first implement successful reforms and become attractive to Donbass, in order to take the latter back – but without additional conditions.
A similar thesis guided the elites of Georgia with regard to Abkhazia in the 1990s, but so far such an approach has not had positive results.
The course of reducing dependence on Donetsk and Luhansk will be expressed in their physical isolation from the rest of Ukraine.
At this stage President Poroshenko is proposing an economic blockade and surrounding the territory controlled by the militias with a line of fortified strongholds.
The execution of this plan will render impossible a political solution in the Donbass.
With the passage of time Donetsk and Luhansk will reinforce themselves as autonomous entities and de facto states.
By all indications, Kyiv is prepared to pay such a price to retain undisputed control over the rest of the territory of the country.
However, in contrast to the Donbass, the prospect of reintegrating Crimea into Ukraine is not in view, which allows Ukraine to assert that Ukraine is prepared to grant Crimea every possible preference in the event of its return.
In actuality, however, the chief interest of the authorities is the consolidation, at any price, of a nationalist state on the territory controlled by Kyiv.
A frozen conflict in the Donbass harms Russia’s interests, which aim at normalizing relations with Ukraine in the new circumstances.
The main consequence of the unresolved divergence of opinion regarding the Donbass will be the further deterioration of Russian-Ukrainian economic interdependence.
It was in the context of this policy that the North Stream gas pipeline was constructed, that a South Stream was planned, that work began on the creation of a new base for the Black Sea Fleet in Novorossiysk, and that the transfer of military contracts from Ukrainian to Russian enterprises took place.
Moscow’s aim was to prevent this exit from inflicting irreparable harm on Russia itself, but it did not veto the foreign policy choice of Kyiv – nor could it have.
The acceleration of changes resulting from the February coup in Kyiv in 2014 struck a blow against Russia’s vital interests.
The threat of the expulsion of the Russian Black Sea Fleet from Crimea and Ukraine’s accession to NATO led to the decision of Moscow to encourage the separation of Crimea and Sevastopol from Ukraine.
Thus Russia demonstrated that in defense of its vital interests it is prepared to act decisively and warned of the consequences of further attacks on them by the new authorities in Kyiv.
In addition, Moscow had tired of the constant blackmail of every new government in Kyiv on the question of Crimea.
After the latest infringement on this Russian interest Russia took the decision to remove Crimea from under the question marks hanging over relations with Kyiv.
However, in all remaining aspects Moscow remains a supporter of the preservation of the status quo in the very fullest sense of the word.
Russia does not wish to deepen the damage to its interests and proposes measures for the preservation of the integrity of Ukraine in its current borders through the decentralization of power.
The condition for Russia’s continuing its course of supporting the stability of Ukraine is reaching an understanding with the new authorities in Kyiv on the price of gas; on unhindered energy transit to the EU; on the rules of the tripartite trade regime involving Russia, Ukraine and the EU; and the inviolability of the property of Russian enterprises.
The transition from the logic of cooperation to the logic of war is undesirable for Moscow.
If adventurist and aggressive forces prevail in Kyiv, Russia will be forced to transition to the containment of the threat emanating from Ukraine.
In so doing, Russia will not embark on an open use of force to resolve its differences with Kyiv – that is too expensive and unreliable.
The search for alternate routes to deliver energy to the EU would receive an impulse; Russian investment in the Ukrainian economy would be blocked; preferential trade and visa regimes would be reconsidered; and labor migration would be restricted.
And – more importantly – Russia would cease to subsidize the price of gas to Ukraine.
In their entirety, these measures would provoke an economic crisis in Ukraine and would doubtless harm Russian interests as well, braking the annual growth of Russia’s GDP by a percentage point.
Moscow will aim to avoid such an eventuality, but would not shy away from it if Kyiv leaves it no choice.
Russia would invest in its national industry the resources it previously used to support its neighbor.
In proportion to the widening gap in the level of development, Russia will attract migrants from among the Russophone population of Ukraine.
The course of reducing the influence of Ukraine on the vital interests of Russia will be accelerated.
The goal of the new Ukraine policy of Russia will be to “normalize” ties with Kyiv through cessation of politically motivated economic aid and placing trade and industrial relations on a non-preferential basis.
After a substantial decline, bilateral relations will achieve a “new normal” on the basis of a new economic equilibrium.
The single common framework for mutual action by Russia and Ukraine will be the WTO regime.
The prospective pragmatization of ties will lead to their recovery and will open the way to a trilateral Russia-Ukraine-EU trade regime.
In the past it was Russia, not the EU, that granted the strategic conditions for the growth of the Ukrainian economy.
With the exit of Ukraine from the zone of free trade with Russia and the strain in bilateral relations, Moscow will stop guaranteeing the stability of Ukraine on its own – since Kyiv itself aims at this.
Brussels recognizes that the next stage in the Ukrainian drama might become an energy crisis in the EU, and it aims not to permit that to happen.
It is impossible to guess how the Ukrainian elites will evaluate today’s events tomorrow.
We can try to imagine an eventuality in which the 19 structural problems of Ukraine will begin to be resolved.
What is necessary for that is in the first instance the strengthening of the system of state governance and the elimination of oligarchic groups from the authorities.
In terms of geo-economics and geopolitics, Ukraine must aim to become a bridge between Russia and the EU, and not an anti-Russian outpost in Eastern Europe.
In being such a bridge, Ukraine would guarantee its neutrality and support normal trade ties in the Russia-EU-Ukraine triangle.
This would lead to the return of Russian investment and the renewal of advantageous commercial conditions, which will lead to a new industrialization of Ukraine and will create new jobs.
Finally, a neutral and stable Ukraine will recognize the political rights of the minorities living on its territory in accordance with OSCE norms.
The good intentions of both the West and Russia will not materialize into a joint assistance program for Ukraine.
In this scenario the task for external forces will be to control the damage that processes in Ukraine might inflict on Europe’s security and economy.
In the first instance the goal will be to contain the instability within Ukraine’s borders and not to allow extremism and violence to spill over to neighboring states.
The security of the nuclear plants in Ukraine will be a great priority, as will the inviolability of cargo and energy transport through Ukrainian territory.
The migration flow from Ukraine will be an added concern for neighbors.
The EU does not yet recognize the size of the yearly subsidies that the stabilization of Ukraine will require if it comes out from under Russian tutelage, and is not prepared to allocate them.
There is reason to doubt the longterm effectiveness of the actions of the Ukrainian leadership.
The internal political problems and the debt burden for 2016 and 2017 may force Kyiv to resort to a military provocation in the Donbass.
The United States for now does not play the role of stabilizing force, and Russia is hedging its risk and withdrawing vulnerable assets.
The impulse towards striking a deal will appear only when the EU perceives its own severe vulnerability in the field of energy security.
All external players in the Ukraine crisis must consider the possibility that it will take a new turn in the course of the 2018 electoral cycle.
A scenario analogous to the Euromaidan might once again occur and threaten to turn the crisis international.
It is in the common interest not to turn Ukraine into a battlefield between Russia and the West, but rather to encourage it to become a “bridge” between the two.
