Additional Details Revealed 4.75 out of 5 based on 16 ratings. user reviews.
It reveals additional details about the MH17 shot down in Ukraine in 2014.
He’s a member of the Union of Journalists of Russia, chief department editor of the Military Herald of the South of Russia newspaper, author of dozens of military history publications, and a native of Donetsk.
So in your opinion to be independent SF needs to publish “article condemning russian troops in Ukraine or the illegal annexation of Crimea.
This article presents view from other side beside and I think its pretty balanced.
Regarding MH17 my personal view is that even if rebels had shot it down , they would have considered it enemy aircraft in their territory.
This was flight carrier and air space controller fault that they did not close the air space considering Ukrainian air force was active in conflict region and was wrecking havoc on civilians areas.
Presence of Russian troops in Ukraine and Annexation of Crimea is a political opinion that anyone is entitled to have but its not the universal accepted truth.
So far nobody was able to present even the tiniest evidence about Russian troops in Ukraine.
Great many people assert that there were no Russian troops in Ukraine or the Crimea was illegally annexed by Ukraine from the 90-th or Western Ukrainian extremists had intended to cut throat and burn crimeans, like they did in Donbas and Odessa or simply Ukraine ceased to be an independent democratic country because of the external military takeover that swept the land into illegal Nazi-like hands.
He thought they made such effective use of it in WWI, in contrast to Germany, which erroneously, in his opinion, relied upon sober, factual presentations, that he thought Germany should have it’s own agency to counter it with it’s like.
The Anglophone world have been the world’s foremost propagandists since the 18th Century.
Clearly, the Netherlands, Ukraine and United States have something to hide.
The path to truth about other acts of criminality like 9/11 lies through the truth being revealed about MH17 – which was at the very least shot down by the Ukrainians – most likely with help of one sort or another.
As most of you will well know – there is a very important Dutch Election coming up in March 2017 – essentially between globalist lovechild Mark Rutte and nationalist firebrand Geert Wilders – a man prepared to speak the truth.
Trump must do whatever he can to get Wilders elected – and lucky for him, there is a very easy way to do that.
For shits and giggles – maybe do it on the 3rd Anniversary of the Maidan – about a month after Trump’s inauguration.
A side impact of this will be to destroy Rutte’s political career and get Wilders elected.
I wouldn’t be surprised if Rutte ended up rotting in jail when the truth of his treachery to his fellow citizens is fully revealed.
Perhaps most satisfyingly for all as it is still uncertain at this stage – Destroy pathetic German chancellor Angela Merkel.
Sometimes, it’s good to get an over-view of a seemingly complex event – one that backs up just enough so the whole picture becomes clear but no further.
Russia supplied it to the mercenaries who then detected an aircraft on their radar, thought it was a Ukraine aircraft and turned out it was not.
YET the Russians always changed their story from saying a Ukraine jet shot it down, that MH17 was in fact MH370, MH17 already had dead bodies in it and a bomb…etc etc.
ONLY the Russians blame the CIA NATO Ukraine fascist nazi and will NEVER believe facts only propaganda.
The propaganda is no good at all from the Dutch United States Brits and French.
There are those of us who will not forget this atrocity and will not cease to inform others of the facts.
People across the world are rejecting regimes such as the one installed in Kiev.
Once they are purged, honest people can get on with the task of a proper investigation without amateurs messing it up.
