The United States Army Special Operations Command Fort Bragg, North Carolina Reproduction in whole or in part is permitted for any purpose of the United States government.
Nonmateriel research on special warfare is performed in support of the requirements stated by the United States Army Special Operations Command, Department of the Army.
The opinions, conclusions, and recommendations expressed or implied within are those of the contributors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Department of Defense, Department of the Army, or any other government agency.
The intent is to share knowledge, generate discussion, and solicit input on the topic.
This document is a working draft that will be updated with additional information and will eventually become part of a complete case study.
United States Army Special Operations Command G-3X, Sensitive Activities 2929 Desert Storm Drive Fort Bragg, NC 28310 All ARIS products are available from USASOC at www.soc.mil under the ARIS link.
MOZSOVOY sacwtieincccaciedohicudamdtuany ce ceimiebacnenitunanantadaattate hbdnemeceaesaensenncnce 46 The role of nonmilitary methods in interstate conflict resolution..................05 50 Main phases of conflict development in Crimea...........:.ccccseeeeeeeeeeeees 51 Main phases of conflict development in eastern Ukraine................05 52 The black fur hat seemed to be just as much a part of the Serb as the thick, black beard that hung below his clavicle.
On the shoulder of his woodland camouflage uniform was a patch with a skull and crossbones depicted on it.
He stopped in front of the Orthodox Church in Sevastopol to pray for a few moments before sharing why he and his compatriots came to Crimea.
As night fell, he directed operations at the Belbek checkpoint with other Serbian War veterans.
Cossacks, motorcycle gangs, and thugs looking for work flooded into the region, providing muscle that could be controlled from Moscow.
Dressed conspicuously in fashionable dress jeans and an expensive black silk blouse, she raged at the small, docile group that had gathered around.
She spouted rhetoric about the need to “obey” the European Union and its “sponsor,” the United States.
In Sevastopol an elderly, grieving mother wailed inconsolably over her dead son—murdered by the illegitimate Kyiv regime.
The fascist monsters who invaded the city sought him out because his accent revealed Russian ancestry.
Standing atop a wall outside a chemical plant in Kharkiv, a stern, serious woman lectured the crowd on the history of Ukraine and its proud heritage of loyalty to Russia and heroic resistance against invaders.
She rattled off figures touting the strength of the Eurasian Economic Union and how it is vastly superior to the EU’s faltering, authoritarian economy.
Dressed in a worker's simple dress, she appealed to the listeners’ patriotism and selfinterest, insisting that hope lay east and tyranny west.
Journalists are not allowed here,” his stern voice said from behind the balaclava covering all but his eyes.
Not only was his face hidden, but his green and black digital patterned kit that shouted “special forces” rather than “conscript” had no insignia or markings.
In jeans and designer jacket, the bespectacled on-screen personality’s voice and posture were brazen, as if the rolling cameras behind him could trump the soldier’s Kalashnikov.
It is an unclassified expansion of an earlier classified version that drew from numerous classified and unclassified sources, including key United States Department of State diplomatic cables.
For this version, the authors drew from open source articles, journals, and books.
Because the primer examines a very recent conflict, it does not reflect a comprehensive historiography, nor does it achieve in-depth analysis.
Instead, it is intended to acquaint the reader with the essential background to and course of the Russian intervention in Ukraine from the onset of the crisis in late 2013 through the end of 2014.
Russian intervention in Ukraine has featured refined and modernized techniques evolved through observation and analysis of Western methods and Russian experiences since the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Igor Panarin and Alexandr Dugin are the primary theorists. e Russian Chief of Staff Valery Gerasimov’s model for interstate conflict reflects the growing importance of nonkinetic factors in Russian strategy.
Russian Unconventional Warfare in Ukraine, 2013-2014 e Historical Context * Ukraine’s historical, cultural, religious, and economic ties to Russia make it a vital interest to Moscow.
Capitalizing on deception, psychological manipulation, and domination of the information domain, their approach represents a notable threat to Western security.
Context and Theory of Russian Unconventional Warfare “Russia has found a recipe to counteract the color revolutions.” —Igor Panarin In his recent work entitled “The Technology of Victory,” Igor Panarin, a leading advocate for Russian information warfare, boasted about the nearly flawless Russian operation to seize and annex Crimea.
He celebrated the campaign’s success in avoiding armed violence and preempting American interference.
While pointing to neoconservative ideals of justice, spirituality, and “true” liberty, he praised the use of blackmail, intimidation, and deception in the face of international dithering in the West.
He attributed the success to the personal leadership and direct control of Vladimir Putin.
Moscow’s goals vary from outright annexation to the creation and discipline of weakened states all along its periphery.
Russia’s unconventional warfare techniques challenge the provisions of Article 5 of the NATO Charter because the treaty invokes collective defense in response to “armed attack” by another power.
Throughout the campaigns in Ukraine, Moscow denied involvement and employed proxies and deception to obviate the stigma attached to a conventional armed invasion.
These principles will be explored later in a full study to draw out more detailed observations and insights on Russian unconventional warfare operations and to help further identify phases of Russia’s nonlinear warfare approach.
The title’s reference to unconventional warfare is intended to include the full spectrum of Russian activities in the subject time frame , including diplomatic coercion, intimidation, bribery, manipulation of media, terror, subterfuge, sabotage, and a host of other kinetic and nonkinetic activities.
There are many terms and concepts that contribute to the study of modern conflict, including irregular warfare, hybrid warfare, new-generation warfare, and others.
Each term has competing definitions and nuances, and each adds value to the ongoing discussion and analysis.
Russian activities in Ukraine featured elements of many of these ideas.
But for the purpose of clarity and uniformity within this study, the authors use the term unconventional warfare to embrace the wide variety of military, informational, political, diplomatic, economic, financial, cultural, and religious activities observed and analyzed.
Samuel Huntington’s Clash of Civilizations examined the nature and course of conflicts among nations.
Huntington named eight such civilizations including Western, Islamic, Confucian, and Japanese civilizations.
With the book’s publication in 1993, readers could view the Iran-Iraq war, Operation Desert Storm, and the ongoing conflict in Israel and easily envision Huntington’s description of the conflict between Western and Islamic civilizations.
What was less obvious was the growing rift between the successor state to the Soviet Union—the rump state now called the Russian Federation—and the West.
Moscow was emerging as the leader, champion, and oftentimes tyrant of the Slavic Orthodox civilization.
Incisive observers might have remembered that Ukraine was the seam between Western and Slavic Orthodox civilizations, and that the Russian nation traces its history to the Kievan Rus’ Empire.
The division between the Latin Church and Orthodoxy was exemplified by the 1472 marriage of the Grand Prince of Moscow Rus Ivan III to Sophia Paleologue, claimant to the throne of the Byzantine Empire, at the recommendation of Pope Paul Il in an unsuccessful attempt to join the two civilizations.
Still, through this union, Russian autocrats believed themselves to be the true inheritors of civilization, with Moscow the “third Rome,” following Constantinople.
Ivan II began to refer to himself as Tsar, the Russian derivation of Caesar.
Vladimir Putin’s interest and intervention in Ukraine emanated from these deep roots and, more recently, from the dramatic experiences of the Soviet Union as it teetered toward its demise.
The world’s two largest oceans provide a formidable barrier for any would-be invader.
Having endured multiple invasions from the west, east, and south throughout history, Russian and Soviet leaders developed defensive precepts that began with a buffer zone of border states.
After their rise to superpower in World War II, the Soviets invaded Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968.
They invaded Afghanistan on Christmas Eve 1979 and became embroiled in a long war against insurgents that became known as the Soviets’ Vietnam.
Each of these interventions occurred in order to bring to heel governments that were attempting to distance themselves from Russian control.
The rise of the Polish labor union movement in August 1980 led to unconventional warfare in a Soviet client state, but the actions did not result in an invasion.
As the Soviet Army became mired in Afghanistan, a noncommunist labor movement emerged in Poland and rapidly subsumed one-third of Poland’s workforce.
Solidarnosc, or Solidarity, used nonviolent, civil disobedience to achieve its aims.
Still, the movement's rise triggered a response in Moscow that led to serious consideration for yet another eastern European invasion.
United States intelligence indications and warnings led to an assessment that Soviet military intervention was likely.
Soviet forces conducted a dress rehearsal in anticipation of a potential invasion as early as December 1980, and this rehearsal seemed to follow the pattern they employed before entering Czechoslovakia in 1968.
Soviet leaders Leonid Brezhnev (general secretary from 1966 through 1982) and Yuri Andropov elected not to respond with outright invasion.
The Polish state instead imposed martial law but was forced to reckon with Solidarity eventually.
The movement became a de facto political party and its leader, Lech Walesa, was elected president in 1990.
Some historians suggest this was a major factor in the eventual dissolution of the Soviet Union.
Despite the movement’s contribution to the Soviet dissolution, Russia’s current leadership likely considered and recognized the potential of using similar large popular movements to foment nonviolent insurrection.
Over four centuries Russian expansion eastward and southward proceeded at the remarkable average of fifty-five square miles per day.
AFGHANISTAN PAMIA Sea 3 Russian expansion in the sixteenth through nineteenth centuries By the twentieth century, tsarist Russia was in its last throes, but the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 replaced the anachronistic regime with a vigorous, ideological power.
Russia was hungry to reassert its control over what it considered its natural sphere of influence, stretching from eastern Europe to the Pacific and from the Arctic Ocean to the Caucasus and central Asia.
The trauma of World War II gave rise to the superpower conflict of the Cold War, and the Soviet government assumed its new mantle of the leader of the Second World by installing authoritarian puppet regimes throughout its periphery.
With the precipitous collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the rump state of Russia struggled to find and reclaim its place in the world order.
Reactionary elements within the government, intelligence services, and armed forces found common cause with the new economic elites and elements of the Russian Orthodox Church in desiring to recoup the loss of empire.
The government in Vilnius had declared independence in March 1990, but the ensuing months featured economic crises, rampant inflation, political upheaval, and ethnic tensions as pro-Russian populations within the country protested what they saw as discrimination.
The “Russian diaspora” problem became a common theme in this and future Russian interventions.
Protection of ethnic Russians teetered between being a genuine objective and a convenient—even artificial—contrivance by which Moscow could justify military invasion.
Russian operatives employed propaganda and organized worker protests that on the surface were aimed at overpriced consumer goods but fundamentally were vectored more at the government’s independence from the Soviet Union.
These events were followed by protesters attempting to storm government buildings—a tactic that would be repeated in future conflicts.
The Soviets deployed military forces into the country, allegedly to ensure law and order.
The forces included Spetsgruppa A —a counterterrorist unit created by the KGB in 1974 that operates under the direct supervision of the government in Moscow—along with a unit of paratroopers.
The January Events commenced with Soviet military forces seizing key government buildings and media infrastructure on January 11.
Soviet forces continued to assault and occupy government facilities while unarmed civilians mounted protests and demonstrations against the aggression.
Tanks drove through demonstrators, killing fourteen, and Soviet forces began to use live ammunition against civilians.
When an independent television broadcasting station managed to transmit desperate pleas to the world decrying the Soviet invasion, international pressure on Moscow mounted.
Gorbachev and his defense minister denied that Moscow had ordered any military action in Lithuania, claiming that the “bourgeois government” there had initiated the conflict by firing on ethnic Russians.
Nevertheless, international and domestic reaction to the aggression caused the Soviets to cease large-scale military operations and instead use small-scale raids and intimidation.
The Soviets signed a treaty with Lithuania on January 31, and subsequent elections saw massive popular support for independence.
To maintain their control over states on the periphery, they would have to employ power in a more clandestine, deniable fashion.
Intervention in Transnistria, 1990-19921 The dissolution of the Soviet Union led to ethnic tensions in Moldova as well.
The Popular Front there agitated for closer ties to Romania, the reestablishment of Moldovan as the sole official language, and a return to the Latin alphabet.
Under Gorbachev's perestroika and glasnost, anti-Soviet sympathies grew, and ethnic Slavs in Transnistria and Gagauzia, who favored ties to the Soviets, formed an ad hoc government that sought autonomy from the rest of Moldova.
War broke out in 1992 as Moldovan forces tried to suppress separatist militias in Transnistria.
For several months Transnistrian militias and Cossacks, supported by the Soviet 14th Guards Army, fought Moldovan forces, which had support from Romania.
The strategic dynamics of the small war included Moldova’s military weakness and the political and military strength of Transnistria.
The latter came about because of the strong ethnic Russian majority in the disputed territory on the east bank of the Dniester River and the remnants of the Soviet 14th Army who remained in the area.
Some of the unit’s officers who had strong local ties defected to join the separatists, and others offered their support, at times turning over weapons and ammunition and training the militias.
On July 3, 1992, the commander of the 14th Army launched a massive artillery strike against Moldovan forces, effectively destroying them and ending the military conflict.
Transnistria thus became one of the four “frozen republics’”—quasi-legal states left over from the Soviet occupation.
As in past and future conflicts, Russian operatives in Transnistria branded the opposition as fascists attempting to install an illegal government over ethnic minorities.
President Yeltsin attempted to put down the rebellion with Internal Troops, but the Russian forces were surrounded and compelled to withdraw.
In 1993 the government of Chechnya declared full independence from Russia.
The subsequent exit of Russian professionals caused a severe downturn in the economy.
In response to the independence movement, Russian forces fighting in South Ossetia were positioned on the Chechen border.
Russia began to provide funding, arms, training, and leadership to the opposition against the Chechen government, and in 1994 Russian forces joined the insurgents in two assaults on the Chechen capital of Grozny that failed catastrophically.
During the campaign, Russia repeated its unconventional warfare tactics of supplying mercenary and volunteer forces, denying involvement, and using its own forces in support of the rebels.
In December 1994 Russia launched an all-out invasion aimed at destroying the government of Dzhokhar Dudayev (who was president of the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria, a breakaway state in the North Caucasus), but many within the Russian military and government protested the war, insisting that it would lead to another stalemate as in Afghanistan.
Because of the Russian conscripts’ poor training and leadership, Russian forces inflicted horrendous casualties among the civilian population, including those who had originally supported the intervention as well as ethnic Russians.
After months of bloody fighting, the invaders finally took Grozny, but the cost in civilian life attracted universal condemnation, including from former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev.
The war grinded on as Russian forces advanced to try to take control of the entire country.
The war took on a new and dangerous dimension when the senior mufti in Chechnya declared a jihad against the Russian invaders, opening up the prospect of a wider Islamist war against Russia.
On the last day of August 1996, the Russian government signed a cease-fire agreement with Chechen leaders, ending the First Chechen War.
As in the Lithuanian conflict, Moscow learned again that the large-scale use of conventional force to impose its will on the periphery caused more problems than it solved.
The challenge of ensuring Russian control of regions and states remained, but Russian leadership began to cast about for different, more effective techniques for dealing with conflict.
Ongoing war in the Caucasus required more conventional force operations, but unconventional warfare tactics rose in prominence for Russian planners.
To that end they organized a two-thousandman brigade of jihadists and crossed the border into Dagestan to aid Islamic separatists there.
The response from the local government and its Russian support was slow, allowing the rebels to seize several villages.
But Russia eventually staged an effective counterattack using ground troops and strong air attacks.
Key to Russian success was the failure of the Islamists to gain the substantial popular support for which they had hoped.
Instead, local villagers tended to view the Chechens as invaders and religious fanatics.
The Russians expelled the invading forces, pushing them back into Chechnya, and commenced airstrikes against their strongholds there.
In the aftermath of the war in Dagestan the Russian FSB accused the oligarch billionaire Boris Berezovsky of conspiring with the Chechen Islamists to instigate the Dagestan war as a way of goading the Russians into attacking separatist Chechnya and providing access to the region’s rich mineral resources.
The case was never proven, but Berezovsky’s involvement and opposition to Vladimir Putin highlighted the growing role of Russia’s super-rich elites and the need to engender cooperation between them and the Russian government.
If Putin and his reactionary allies hoped to succeed in recapturing Russia’s status as a great power and regional hegemon, they would have to make common cause with the oligarchs.
That they were effective in doing so was critical to operations in Ukraine in 2014.
On the heels of their success against the Islamic International Brigade in Dagestan, the Russians invaded Chechnya to continue the fight and to reestablish Moscow’s control of the region.
This was Vladimir Putin’s first war as the new prime minister of the Russian Federation.
A string of bombings tied to Dagestani separatists and their Chechen allies served as a catalyst for invasion.
Allying with pro-Russian militias against the Islamists, the Russians rapidly maneuvered to the Terek River, besieged Grozny, and methodically seized the city, largely destroying it in the process.
Planners and leaders had learned hard lessons in the First Chechen War and applied them during this invasion.
Conventional attacks were more deliberate and cautious, and the Russian forces focused on securing their rear area against insurgents and terrorist attacks.
Throughout the spring of 2000 the Russian offensive moved into the mountains to destroy the remaining insurgent groups, including bands of Islamic foreign fighters.
Use of properly aligned proxies became another key feature of Russian unconventional warfare within the periphery.
The FSB and MVD (Ministry of Internal Affairs) were the agencies that directed proxy forces—an organizational technique that would continue in future wars.
From 1999 through 2009 Moscow directed a sustained campaign that effectively destroyed the Islamic insurgency in Chechnya and reasserted Russian control of the region.
Once again the political and economic situation in Chechnya was a key factor in Russian success.
The separatist government proved unable to effectively administer the economy and rapidly lost popular support.
The rift between separatist leader Aslan Maskhadov and the Islamists, and the growing strength of independent warlords, left the region’s political framework fragmented and ripe for exploitation by the Russians.
This environment allowed Russian forces to assume the mantle of liberators and protectors and furnished Moscow with an acceptable premise for invasion.
The wars in Chechnya and Dagestan, however, were characterized by allegations of excessive use of force and indiscriminate use of violence against civilians.
The charges and graphic images of the results of the Russian invasion threatened Putin’s domestic political base and attracted unwanted criticism from human rights organizations and the international community.
Because the wars were technically considered internal affairs, Moscow was able to deflect charges of aggression.
Intervention in Georgia, 2008*° In the early 1990s Georgia had fought to regain control of the two breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, but Russian support for the separatists foiled the plan and left the two regions with de facto independence.
Russian citizens with Russian passports made up the majority of the population in South Ossetia, and in the face of further attempts by Georgia to reassert control there, Putin decided to strengthen Russian control.
Georgia’s application for NATO membership and the fact that the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline runs through the country underscored Moscow’s intention to bring Georgia to heel.
In early summer 2008 Putin directed a series of intimidating moves, including overflights by Russian aircraft, the introduction of more forces (masquerading as peacekeepers or railway repair units) into Abkhazia and South Ossetia, and military training maneuvers in the region.
United States President George W Bush sent his secretary of state, Condoleezza Rice, to Tbilisi on a state visit, and American troops trained 13 with their Georgian counterparts.
Putin and his allies in Moscow viewed this as American interference on the Russian periphery.
The situation heated up in early August as South Ossetian forces began shelling Georgian villages and Georgian forces responded.
The Russians moved in more forces and began to evacuate civilians from the region.
Georgian forces launched an attack into South Ossetia, initially seizing the key city of Tskhinvali.
The Russians deployed units of the 58th Army along with paratroopers into the fight, and by August 11 the Georgian forces had been expelled from the region.
Russian forces then followed up with attacks into Georgia, seized the city of Gori, and threatened the capital of Tbilisi.
Simultaneously they opened a second front against Georgia through operations in Abkhazia and adjacent districts.
Throughout their operations, the Russians alternately denied involvement or downplayed the size and activities of their forces.
They also introduced the use of information warfare on a scale previously unseen.
Russian operatives employed cyberwarfare and strong propaganda to neutralize Georgia’s warfighting options and to vilify them in the press as aggressors, even accusing them of genocide.
The Russian military brought journalists into the theater of war to strengthen the message of Russia protecting the population from Georgian aggression.
Moscow carefully managed television broadcasts both at home and in the region, highlighting atrocities that the Georgians allegedly inflicted on the population of South Ossetia.
Russian military forces performed notably better in the Georgian war than they had in the Chechen wars, in part due to a renewed reliance on professional soldiers instead of conscripts.
However, strong Georgian air defenses were able to limit the use of Russian airpower, which complicated reconnaissance and the rapid deployment of Russian airborne forces.
In general, Russian leaders viewed the relative success of the Georgian operation as an indicator of the need to continue modernization.
All these factors would play roles in Russia’s intervention in Ukraine in 2014.
Russian Information Warfare Russian information warfare techniques are an amalgamation of methods evolved within the Soviet Union and deliberate developments in response to scrutiny of Western (especially Amer14 ican) operations in the twenty-first century.
As an academic discipline it reaches out to military personnel, intelligence operatives, journalists, and diplomats.
The doctrine specifies that an information campaign is multidisciplinary and includes politics, economics, social dynamics, military, intelligence, diplomacy, psychological operations, communications, education, and cyberwarfare.
In general, Russian information warfare has in view the broad Russian-speaking diaspora that fragmented into the various post-Soviet era According to Russian states.
It aims at affecting the consciousness doctrine, information is of the masses, both at home and abroad, and conditioning them for the civilizational struggle between Russia’s Eurasian culture and the West.
Information warfare is likewise the accessible and permeates chief tool with which the state achieves all state borders without diplomatic leverage and attains its foreign restrictions.” policy goals.
It links directly to geopolitics in service to the state and the Russian civilization.
Both men not only promulgate their doctrines, but they also have experience in prosecuting information warfare firsthand.
Igor Panarin Igor Panarin holds doctoral degrees in political science and psychology.
He is a member of the Military Academy of Science and currently serves as a professor in the Diplomatic Academy of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
He attributes the Velvet Revolution in Czechoslovakia , “color” revolutions in former Soviet states , and the Arab Spring to American conspiratorial influence.
In response to these threats Panarin advocates for a centrally controlled information warfare campaign that uses propaganda, intelligence, analysis, secret agents, media manipulation, and selected special operations to influence the masses and politicians.
He is the leading proponent for “netwar,” “net-centric warfare,” and a “Eurasian network” designed to engage the so-called Atlantic network in geopolitical battles within the former Soviet states and around the world.
Dugin, like Panarin, sees the color revolutions as engineered by the United States to keep Russia fragmented and weak.
He states that the Americans accomplished this goal through a broad application of net-centric warfare—a curious interpretation of American warfighting doctrine from the 1990s.
As originally derived, net-centric warfare was a tactical/ operational idea designed to use computer and communications networks linked with sensors to command and control widely dispersed military forces.
Dugin extrapolated from that application and conceived of the theory as a geopolitical idea—linking not just joint military forces in a theater of war but rather the entire information apparatus of a state and culture in a contest for political and social domination.
Having perceived this structure in the West, Dugin calls for a similar approach in Russia.
Dugin’s Eurasian network would include political leaders, diplomats, scientists, military organizations, intelligence, media, and communications linked together to promulgate a geopolitical campaign to counter Western influence and information.
He also insists that the creation of the network must be attended by a shift toward postmodernism, by which he seems to mean an evolution in Russian culture that can appeal to twenty-first-century masses.
Dugin’s theory and practice seem somewhat bipolar in that he pushes for a postmodern, postliberal approach but integrates it into the conservative themes of other Russian elites.
He views twentieth-century history as the titanic ideological struggle among fascism, communism, and liber16 alism, culminating in the victory of Western liberalism.
He argues, however, that liberalism, focused on individualism, technocracy, and globalism, has run its course and must be replaced with a neoconservative super-state leading a multipolar world and achieving genuine justice, dignity, and freedom.
At the same time, this ideological superpower will defend conservative values and tradition.
Dugin’s theory demonstrates the evolving nature of Russian information warfare through its incorporation of social media tools.
Russian observers noted how the color revolutions and the Arab Spring outflanked state-controlled media through the use of Facebook, Twitter, and other forms of social media.
Dugin insists, therefore, that patriotic Russians must be organized and seize the domain of social media in service of the state.
He prescribes a vigorous campaign of combating pro-Western liberalism through a set of polemics designed to vilify Russian liberals as lackeys for the Americans.
Dugin insists that Russians must sustain the social media campaign relentlessly over a prolonged period to effectively paint the opposition as corrupt.
Persistent messaging through social media not only conditions the domestic audience and targeted groups in areas of conflict, but it also gives rise to spontaneous support groups abroad—people who respond with enthusiasm to the Russian message and help to propagate it without direct control from the state.
The Gerasimov Model2° This study uses an analytical framework derived from the work of General Valery Gerasimov, chief of the general staff of the Russian Federation.
General Gerasimov’s main thesis is that modern conflict differs significantly from the paradigm of World War II and even from Cold War conflict.
In place of declared wars, strict delineation of military and nonmilitary efforts, and large conventional forces fighting climactic battles, modern conflict instead features undeclared wars, hybrid operations combining military and nonmilitary activities, and smaller precision-based forces.
Gerasimov, observing American and European experiences in the Gulf War, Operation Iraqi Freedom, and the intervention in Libya, notes that political, economic, cultural, and other nonmilitary factors play decisive roles.
Indeed, even humanitarian operations should be considered part of an unconventional warfare campaign.
In a January 2013 report entitled “The Main Trends in the Forms and Methods of the Armed Forces” Gerasimov explained that the color revolutions and the Arab Spring demonstrated that the line between war and peace has blurred.
While liberal democratic uprisings may not appear to constitute war, they often result in foreign intervention , chaos, humanitarian disaster, and civil 17 war.
These activities may become the “typical war” of the modern era, and Russian military practices must evolve to accommodate the new methods.
Modern war, Gerasimov argued, focuses on intelligence and domination of the information space.
Objectives are achieved in a remote contactless war; strategic, operational, and tactical levels, as well as offensive and defensive actions, have become less distinguishable.
His model envisions six stages of conflict development, each characterized by the primacy of nonmilitary measures but featuring increasing military involvement as the conflict approaches resolution.
Emergence of differences of interest. i Potential . military threat ‘1.
During the initial stage, which will likely be protracted, political opposition forms against the opposing regime.
This resistance takes the form of political parties, coalitions, and labor/trade unions.
Russia employs strategic deterrence measures and conducts a broad, comprehensive, and sustained information warfare campaign to shape the environment toward a successful resolution.
If the conflict escalates, Russia exerts political and diplomatic pressure on the offending regime or non-state actors.
These activities can include economic sanctions or even the suspension of diplomatic relations to isolate the opponent.
During this stage military and political leaders in the region and abroad become aware of the developing conflict and stake out their public positions.
The third stage begins as opposing forces in the conflict region commence actions against one another.
This can take the form of demonstrations, protests, subversion, sabotage, assassinations, and paramilitary engagements.
Intensification of conflict activities begin to constitute a direct military threat to Russian interests and national security.
At the commencement of this stage of conflict, Russia begins strategic deployment of its forces toward the conflict region.
As the crisis comes to a head, Russia commences military operations, accompanied by strong diplomatic and economic suasion.
The information campaign continues with a view to rendering the environment conducive to Russian intervention.
During this stage Russian leadership searches for the best paths to resolve the conflict.
The domestic economy is on a war footing, as a way to unify the nation’s efforts toward successful prosecution of the war effort.
The goal is to reset the political, military, economic, and social reality in the region in such a way as to facilitate a return to peace, order, and the resumption of routine relations.
During the final stage, which again may be protracted, Russia oversees comprehensive measures to reduce tensions and conducts peacekeeping operations.
This stage includes the diplomatic and political measures required to establish a postconflict settlement that addresses the original causes of conflict.
Gerasimov’s model for modern conflict is a theoretical adaptation of emerging ideas about warfare, but elements of these ideas clearly pertain to Russia’s unconventional warfare in Ukraine and Crimea in 2013-2014.
The Russian Unconventional Warfare Campaign in Ukraine, 2013-2014 Historical and Political Context The dominant theme of Ukraine’s history is foreign rule punctuated by movements for cultural and political independence.
Sharing ethnic and cultural roots with Ukrainian ten-hryonia note featuring Ivan Mazepa in his lot with Charles XI of Sweden against the tsar.
Russia in the Kievan Rus’, Ukraine has been dominated by Poland to the west and the Russian Empire to the east since the Middle Ages.
In 1654, Cossack hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky signed the Treaty of Pereyaslav allying the Cossack people of Ukraine and the Russian Empire against Poland.
But in 1704 another Cossack hetman, Ivan Mazepa, threw Centuries later, these two figures elicit both praise and condemnation from Ukrainian nationalists on the one hand and the pro-Russian population on the other.
Mazepa’s image decorates the Ukrainian ten-hryvnia note, but in Kyiv a street named in his honor was renamed under Viktor Yanukovych’s administration, and Mazepa remains anathematized by the Russian Orthodox Church.
Soviet efforts to impose collectivized agriculture in the late 1920s generated a famine that killed millions in Ukraine.
During Stalin’s Great Terror , Ukraine’s bid for cultural independence led to a brutal crackdown.
Bandera worked with the Nazi regime to separate Ukraine from the Soviet Union and then fought against the advancing Red Army late in the war.
KGB agents assassinated him in 1959, and he became an infamous figure in Russia’s vilification of pro-Western sentiments—a caricature of what Moscow labels fascist influence.
Black Sea Map of Ukraine Ukraine’s borders stabilized as the territory of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic was expanded at the end of World War II to encompass territories taken from Poland and Romania.
Propaganda stressed the unity of Ukraine and Russia on the basis of centuries of claimed historical precedent.
In 1954, during a celebration of the Treaty of Pereyaslav, Russian premier Nikita Khrushchev transferred the Russian-majority Crimean peninsula to the Ukrainian SSR, certain that Kyiv and Moscow would be perpetually bound together.
Anti-Soviet and Ukrainian nationalist activism continued despite repeated Russification efforts, escalating when the Chernobyl nuclear plant exploded in 1986.
The disaster killed thirty-one workers and caused widespread contamination that extended the death toll from radiation-related sickness over ensuing years.
Outrage over government duplicity in the wake of the accident, and the rapid collapse of the Soviet system as the Cold War ended, led to a vote for independence from the USSR on December 1, 1991.
Ukrainian leadership and business interests sought to maintain cordial relations with Russia while simultaneously expanding economic ties and integration with Western Europe.
Russia viewed the prospect of integration with the West as a threat to its sphere of influence and sought to compel Ukraine’s membership in the Eurasian Economic Union instead.
Moscow also pressed for continued basing rights in Sevastopol, home to the Russian Black Sea Fleet.
Government incompetence, corruption, and kowtowing to Russia stirred both Ukrainian Chernobyl reactor 4 nationalism and a growing affinity for the liberalism and capitalism of Western Europe.
The bitterly contested 2004 presidential election between former prime ministers Viktor Yanukovych and Viktor Yushchenko led to an unforeseen popular movement that became known as the Orange Revolution.
During the campaign, Yushchenko became seriously ill, leading to suspicion that he had been poisoned with dioxin at the behest of Russia.
Mass demonstrations, civil disobedience, and strikes led to a court-mandated recount and the election of pro-Western candidate Yushchenko.
The Orange Revolution 23 The new administration, led by prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko, brought hopes of political and economic reform, but political corruption and infighting led to the dissolution of the Orange coalition and the dissipation of popular idealism.
Kyiv’s attempts to move toward closer alignment with the EU, World Trade Organization , and potential NATO membership gave rise to a sustained national debate over the question of alignment with Western Europe or Russia.
Trade and gas disputes with Russia soured public opinion of the government.
The twin histories of Bohdan Khmelnytsky (the famous Cossack signer of the Treaty of Pereyaslav with Russia) and Ivan Mazepa (who joined with Sweden against the Russian tsar) can, at a superficial level, suggest this basic duality in Ukrainian politics.
But closer examination of Khmelnytsky’s life and times reveals the causes of his famed devotion to Mother Russia—specifically, his antipathy toward the Polish regime that had deprived him of his property.
His motivations and those of his followers in seeking alliance with Russia transcended merely personal considerations, but the fact remained that the Cossacks who looked to Khmelnytsky for leadership perceived that such a connection would best protect their own interests, freedoms, and prerogatives.
Indeed, before finally turning to Russia for protection, the Cossack hetman flirted with the Ottoman sultan and contemplated a union with a Muslim power.
But in the end he grudgingly looked to the Russian tsar and signed the Treaty of Pereyaslav not because ideology or religion dictated his actions but because he saw it as the best guarantor of Cossack and Ukrainian sovereignty.
Likewise, the seemingly ideological opposite pole—Ivan Mazepa—is viewed by Russians and Ukrainians alike as a symbol of Ukraine’s defiance of Moscow and dogged determination to be free of Russia’s domination.
But Russia’s struggles against the Swedish—Polish alliance left Mazepa worried that the tsar’s generals intended to employ the Cossacks as cannon fodder in far-off battles and leave his own lands vulnerable to enemy incursions from the West.
In 1708 matters came to a head, and Mazepa made the fateful decision to betray the tsar and ally with the Poles and Swedes.
The Battle of Poltava the following year doomed Mazepa’s new alliance, and he died in exile.
Khmelnytsky and Mazepa, although posthumously bearing the burden of opposite political ideologies, were very much cut from the same cloth of Cossack nationalism and self-interest.
Likewise, on the surface modern Ukrainian politics can appear to be polarized between pro-Western and pro-Russian extremes, but the panoply of factions and parties are in reality more complex in their motivations and objectives.
Like the famous Cossack leaders before them, modern Ukrainian political leaders also have in common a fundamental desire to carve out, protect, and sustain a Ukrainian identity.
The realities of the modern world force each party to look westward or eastward as they search for better ways to guarantee their hoped-for futures.
The Rada featured intense political conflict in the months leading up to Euromaidan.
In his initial foreign policy statements in 2010, the new president expressed his vision for Ukraine as a neutral state cooperating in matters of defense with both NATO and Russia.
Under Yanukovych’s leadership, the Constitutional Court of Ukraine overturned the 2004 amendments, considering them unconstitutional on October 1, 2010.
The subject amendments had significantly reduced the power of the executive branch in favor of the Rada.
Yanukovych’s move was widely perceived among the opposition as a power grab.
The UDAR party was center-right and espoused nationalism and opposition to Russian pressure and involvement in Ukraine.
UDAR tended to avoid polarizing political stances and instead focused on achieving social justice, cutting corruption, and reining in perquisites for government officials.
The Fatherland party underwent a complex series of mergers and splits after its founding in the late 1990s, but in general it inclined toward European integration and Ukrainian nationalism.
In 2013 Tymoshenko proposed a party ideological manifesto that spelled out her thinking on key political issues.
Tymoshenko went on to insist that Ukrainian should be the sole official language of the country, that the Holodomor was an act of genocide, and that any infringement of Ukraine’s territorial sovereignty be resisted immediately and with strength.
Its original power base was Lviv, and early constituents included veterans of the Soviet-Afghan War.
Its iconography and far-right policy stances led opponents to label the party as fascist.
The party established a paramilitary called Patriot of Ukraine that sought to support the country’s military forces.
By 2007 Svoboda severed official links with the paramilitary, but they remain informally connected.
Oleh Tyahnybok took over leadership of the party in 2004 and became a moderating influence.
He pushed far-right members out of the party and changed the party’s symbol to a picture of 26 a hand holding up three fingers, reminiscent of freedom movements in the 1980s.
But Tyahnybok also made public speeches in which he denigrated various groups, including Jews, calling them “scum,” which attracted a lot of criticism.
The party continued to attract followers among the Ukrainian Orthodox Church and other nationalists.
Svoboda vehemently opposed the Russian annexation of Crimea and formed a paramilitary called the Sich Battalion to fight in eastern Ukraine.
As Viktor Yanukovych sought to consolidate his power, the government brought criminal charges against Yulia Tymoshenko for abuse of power and embezzlement, eventually obtaining a conviction.
She was sentenced to seven years imprisonment, but the proceeding was widely viewed as a political ploy to rid the president of his strongest opponent.
Yanukovych sought to balance growing popularity for closer relations with the EU on the one hand with the very real pressure he felt from Moscow and his ethnic Russian constituency on the other hand.
He sought to negotiate a more advantageous natural gas deal with Russia, and to that end he signed an agreement extending Russia’s lease of Ukraine’s Black Sea port facilities, including Sevastopol, in 2010.
The deal split the nation’s political spectrum into two camps—one championing closer ties to Moscow and the other touting nationalism and independence from Russian domination.
Many in Ukraine viewed the continued presence of the Russian fleet in Sevastopol as an affront to Ukrainian sovereignty.
But Yanukovych tried to sell the deal as an essential part of his strategy to further Ukrainian integration with Europe.
He argued that to sustain loans from the International Monetary Fund and to meet EU standards, the government had to keep expenditures under control.
Measures in this direction included highly unpopular cuts in pensions and other social spending, but Yanukovych pointed to reduced natural gas prices as contributing to government savings.
One of the most poignant symbols of the struggle for a rational and effective foreign policy is the ongoing dispute regarding how to interpret the Holodomor—the 1930s famine that Stalin’s Russia inflicted on Ukraine, killing nearly ten million.
Those more inclined toward friendly relations with Russia instead seek a middle ground of condemning the forced food expropriations but blaming Stalin’s totalitarian government rather than Russia itself.
They are quick to point out that the resulting famine killed many in Russia as well.
He pointed to problems within schools, courts, and other civil institutions, and he sponsored a law that allowed for any language spoken by at least 10 percent of the population to be declared official within that local area.
The law was later repealed after Yanukovych’s ouster, because it was seen as an attempt to further Russify Ukraine.
The majority language by city, town, and village councils Results from the Ukrainian 2001 Census Ukrainian Russian Romanian/Moldovan Crimean Tatar Hungarian Bulgarian Gagauz Polish Albanian Chernobyl disaster area Languages in Ukraine In early 2013 opposition parties, including UDAR, Fatherland, and others, blocked access to the podium in an attempt to protest the direction of the government’s policies and the practice in which party deputies could vote for absent members of the parliament.
Indeed, the president proclaimed his intention to sign the Association Agreement in November and pushed parliament to join together to pass the needed legislation to make it a reality.
But in November 2013, he bowed to economic and diplomatic pressure from Moscow and shocked the West by reversing his decision and declaring his intent to instead deepen relations with Russia.
Protests were initially nonviolent, and in response to government crackdowns the protests surged to hundreds of thousands of people in Kyiv and spread throughout the country.
They signed the Ukrainian-Russian Action Plan treaty, which discounted Ukraine’s natural gas purchases by a third and provided that Russia would buy $15 billion in Ukrainian government bonds to alleviate the debt crisis.
The treaty was met with a blockade of demonstrators hoping to prevent its ratification.
The number of demonstrators dwindled after New Year’s Eve during the Orthodox Christmas season, but protests suddenly reignited on January 12 after police injured an opposition leader while he was protesting the convictions of several Ukrainian nationalists.
Court and legislative actions banning protests continued to escalate the crisis, giving rise to riots and demonstrations in the hundreds of thousands, with protesters demanding that Yanukovych resign.
The passage of a series of laws on January 16—which the opposition referred to as the Laws of Dictatorship—swelled the ranks of the protesters, including the violent Pravy Sektor.
It became a political party in March 2014. 29 and firearms to quell rioters, which caused hundreds of injuries and several deaths.
In response to the effectiveness and energy of the Automaidan movement, the government outlawed more than five cars driving together.
Population density of Ukraine The violence in Kyiv spread across the country in early February.
Protesters occupied regional government buildings and the Justice Ministry in defiance of the anti-protest laws, spurring more police actions.
President Yanukovych tried to negotiate with the opposition, offering to repeal the anti-protest laws, remove Prime Minister Azarov, grant amnesty for arrested protesters, and return to the limits on presidential power codified in the 2004 constitution.
Negotiations broke down in February, and violence erupted, resulting in at least sixty-seven deaths between February 18 and 20.
The interim authorities released Yulia Tymoshenko from prison on February 22.
Oleksandr Turchynov became interim president and Arseniy Yatsenyuk became prime minister.
The parliament set presidential elections for May 25, 2014, and the pro-Western voters chose billionaire oligarch Petro Poroshenko as the new president of Ukraine.
Reflecting the sentiments of his constituents, he signed the Association Agreement 30 with the EU on June 27, 2014.
The pro-Russian resistance opposed the new government, considered it illegal, and insisted it was a fascist regime.
The locus of conflict shifted to Crimea, where a largely Russian-speaking majority allegedly favored deeper ties with Moscow.
After the expulsion of Yanukovych, Sergei Aksyonoy, leader of a large paramilitary force in Crimea, appealed to Putin for help.
Popular support for ethnic Russians and Russian speakers in Crimea emboldened Putin to act.
Pro-Russian protesters labeled the Kyiv government as Western fascists and adopted a position that ethnic Russians in Ukraine were in danger.
Groups of unidentified armed men began appearing throughout the region, often in coordination with local pro-Russian militias.
Both the Ukrainian government and most Western intelligence sources claimed that the “little green men” were Russian operatives.
The Crimean “self-defense” militias seized government buildings, air bases, and military installations, and the Kyiv government, desiring to avoid bloodshed and further provocation, ordered its military forces not to Sergei Aksyonov resist.
On March 11, 2014, a joint resolution between Sevastopol and the Supreme Council of Crimea declared their intention to hold a referendum to join Russia.
Refat Chubarov, president of the Worldwide Congress of Crimean Tatars, announced that the new Crimean government and the proposed referendum were illegitimate and supported only by the armed forces from another country.
On March 18, 2014, a treaty was signed to incorporate all of Crimea, including Sevastopol, into the Russian Federation.
The United States and EU responded to the move with economic sanctions and small-scale military deployments to the Baltic states and Poland.
Diplomatic protests continued, but Russia’s annexation appeared to succeed as the world turned its attention to eastern Ukraine.
Demonstrators in the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts engaged in sporadic violence in the wake of Yanukovych’s ouster, but Russia’s annexation of Crimea stimulated a new wave of demonstrations in April.
The SBU had ejected demonstrators who seized the Donetsk Regional State Administration building in early March.
But in April more than a thousand demonstrators again seized the building and demanded a regional referendum similar to the one in Crimea.
When the government refused, the rebels declared the People’s Republic of Donetsk.
That month, pro-Russian militants stormed government offices in Donetsk, 31 Luhansk, and Kharkiv.
Resistance groups labeled the Kyiv government as fascist and held informal referendums on autonomy in the east.
Denis Pushilin, one of the leaders of the self-styled People’s Republic of Donetsk, stated that his forces would not consider withdrawal until the new leaders in Kyiv left power.
In mid-April the Kyiv government launched its counterattack against rebels in the east.
The offensive quickly stalled, with scattered reports of Ukrainian soldiers refusing to fire on their fellow citizens and in some cases changing sides.
Other Ukrainian forces simply lacked the combat power to overcome the Russian-backed resistance.
In late April government forces launched a second round of attacks with some success in Mariupol and to the northeast of Donetsk.
To deal with firmly entrenched rebel fighters in Slovyansk and Donetsk, government forces resorted to blockades aimed at isolating the defenders.
But with Russian troops, intelligence personnel, and equipment, the rebels continued to seize buildings and hold their positions throughout the Donbass region.
The combatants became increasingly brutal, and allegations of torture inflamed passions on both sides.
In late April, Vyacheslav Ponomaryov, the pro-Russian mayor of Slovyansk, threatened to kill hostages, including an American journalist, if his forces were attacked. . m2 ae Denis Pushilin On May 22, rebels from the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts declared the establishment of New Russia, an area including southern and eastern Ukraine.
The militants mandated that Russian Orthodoxy was the state religion and that private industries would be nationalized.
Late spring and early summer saw an increase in the pace of skirmishing, but actions remained relatively small in scale with few casualties on either side.
The presence of Russian-made antiaircraft weapons neutralized the Ukrainian government'’s air advantage and resulted in the downing of an Ilyushin [I-76 transport in mid-June, killing forty-nine troops who were aboard.
Militants continued to expand their footprint in eastern Ukraine until the government counterattack began to gain some momentum.
On July 1, after a weeklong unilateral cease-fire, the government counteroffensive resumed and rapidly recaptured several towns, including Slovyansk on July 5.
The renewed government attacks inflicted heavy losses on the pro-Russian militants, and some insurgents fled.
Fighting intensified through mid-July, with government forces capturing more towns and gradually pushing the remaining militants into their strongholds of Donetsk and 32 Luhansk.
The downing of the civilian passenger flight brought increased world attention on Russian activities, and strengthened economic sanctions may have contributed to a lessening of direct Russian support.
In any case government forces began to threaten the remaining rebel strongholds.
By early August, the government had recaptured about 75 percent of the territory once held by insurgents.
Sporadic fighting continued, but both sides claimed that the cease-fire would continue to be respected.
However, by early November there were clear indications that the fighting was heating up.
Russian tanks crossed the border, and on November 12, media outlets were reporting that the cease-fire was over and that major hostilities had resumed.
On the one hand it represents the failure of Russian information warfare in eastern Ukraine, because it implies Putin’s desperation in recouping the failures of his agents there.
On the other hand, it represents the logical, culminating sequel in the Russian information campaign, which in part is designed to set the conditions for invasion if necessary.
Poroshenko also flirted with requesting Major Non-NATO Ally status—a move sure to inflame Putin.
Russian Intervention in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine The Players According to Russian polemics championing the annexation of Crimea and Russian involvement in eastern Ukraine, the entire operation was planned, organized, and controlled under the leadership of Vladimir Putin.
It is significant that pundits in favor of Russia’s actions—and not just those opposed to Russia—point to the cult of personality that has gathered around Putin.
Indeed, it is striking that despite all the modern and postmodern features of Russian information warfare, the age-old glorification of a strongman continues to characterize Moscow’s politics.
The current generation of Russian military and civilian leadership includes a large number of siloviki—Russian leaders with backgrounds in the intelligence or military services.
The siloviki represent themselves as resolute, honest, apolitical patriots—strong 33 bulwarks against the chaos of liberalism.
Minister of Defense Sergey Shoygu was reportedly appointed to his position because he was politically neutral, and Putin wanted to avoid strengthening the “St.
Some tout their devotion to Russian Orthodoxy and by so doing attract some favorable attention from religious figures in the West.
Igor Sechin, former Soviet agent and arms smuggler and currently Rosneft CEO and adviser to Putin; 2.
Yuri Kovalchuk, “Putin's banker” and largest shareholder in Bank Rossiya; 3.
Arkady and Boris Rotenberg, co-owners of SGM who control InvestCaptital Bank and SMP Bank; 4.
Gennady Timchenko, oil trader, founder of Gunvor and Volga Group, and close associate of Putin; 5.
Konstantin Malofeev, lawyer and investment banker who backs illegal paramilitary in Ukraine; 6.
Sergei Chemezov, engineer and former KGB agent, Rosneft director, and director general of Rostec. 34 nationalists above all else.
They see the unification and success of ethnic Russians as the key to achieving Putin’s vision of a multipolar world to counterbalance America’s overweening domination.
The class of the super-rich business elites grew in the wake of the collapse of the Soviet Union and the rise of Boris Yeltsin.
In the name of privatization, Russian business interests were sold off to a new class of leaders.
These leaders in turn sought to solidify their control of Russian politics and foreign policy by cultivating a pliant politician.
They sponsored the rise of Vladimir Putin but soon discovered that the former KGB agent was anything but their puppet.
Instead, Putin jailed oligarchs that defied him and instructed the business elite that he would foster their economic and financial interests if they kept clear of political interference and remained loyal to his regime.
Within a few short Russian leadership former law professor and president, now prime minister of Russia; 3.
Sergey Shoygu, minister of defense—seen as apolitical and chosen in place of “St.
Valery Gerasimov, chief of the general staff of the Armed Forces of Russia and proponent of “new-generation warfare”; 6.
Alexandr Galkin, commander, Southern Military District. 35 years Putin consolidated his control over the key oligarchs, and they became the third pillar, along with the government and security services, of the Russian political infrastructure.
In the current environment, elites are given positions at the head of corporations or in government, which are viewed as interchangeable.
Most members of the inner circle are Leningrad men with long associations with Putin.
Tikhon Shevkunov, a Russian Orthodox priest said to be Putin’s confessor, is another close confidant.
Shevkunov directed and starred in a popular documentary on the history of the fall of the Byzantine Empire—a thinly veiled propagandist piece designed to help craft the message that a strong empire can be sapped by foreign intrigue and internal weakness.
Over the years the Orthodox Church has influenced Putin toward nationalism and conservatism with its theme of Christian order.
Putin’s chief of staff, Sergei Ivanov, is a foreign policy hawk and likewise a close adviser to the president.
Vladislav Surkov, of part Russian and part Chechen ancestry, is the chief ideologue of the Putin regime’s “sovereign democracy” theme and is one of the leaders of the national youth movement Nashi , which targets anyone deemed anti-Russian.
The Motivations Russia’s intervention into Ukraine and its annexation of Crimea in 2014 stem from a combination of motivations, fears, and interests that drew strength from the period of pozor in the early 1990s.
The historical and cultural experience of imperial Russia, with its control of massive swaths of territory across Asia and Europe, combined with the pragmatic concerns over the strategic security of the Russian Federation.
Tangential to this is the feeling of victimization associated with the radical shift in Moscow’s global influence—from feared superpower to minor regional power—highlighted by the West’s seemingly unstoppable encroachment into Russia’s historical sphere of influence.
Finally, there is the pervasive influence of domestic politics and Putin’s paranoia over maintaining his regime.
The strategic factors that led to Russian aggression in Ukraine included domestic politics, reaction to the expansion of the EU and NATO, the strategic value of the Black Sea, Russia’s need to maintain influence in peripheral states as a buffer against Western invasion, and President Putin’s desire to strengthen the new EEU in the former Soviet sphere of influence.
Each of these factors contributed to Moscow’s mandate for intervention under the umbrella imperative to reclaim Russia’s status as a superpower.
These factors underlie Russia’s foreign policy, but Moscow also touts its aim to foster and protect ethnic Russians and Russian speakers who are threatened by American-inspired fascist regimes in the former Soviet states.
The reversion to autocracy in the Russian political system has affected both domestic and foreign policies.
The inherent instability associated with strong centralized rule fosters a traditional Russian view of domestic reformers as a perpetual fifth column serving foreign interests.
This insecurity is exacerbated by President Putin’s struggle to maintain Russia as a superpower.
Russia views as threats any movements within peripheral states toward integration with Europe, and Putin continues to raise the specter of encroachment from the West as a pretext to justify a unitary, autocratic state and neoimperialist policies as a necessity for national security.
The deterioration of economic and sociopolitical life in Russia between 2009 and 2012 sparked backlash from the urban middle class.
Petersburg emerged in late 2011 and continued through 2012 with protesters demanding freedoms and decrying corruption.
Opposition leaders (e.g., Alexei Navalny) became icons, and Putin’s approval ratings began to decline.
This political threat led Putin to make a strategic shift to right-wing policies to garner support from the “other Russia,” presenting Putin as a bulwark of traditional Russian values.
Ukraine is central to the original narrative of the Russian nation and Eastern Orthodox civilization, and losing influence in Ukraine and Crimea would threaten Putin’s political appeal among the demographics of the other Russia.
The tidal shift against Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych and the Russian dominance of Kyiv’s politics expressed in Euromaidan constituted a serious blow to Putin’s image as a defender against the eastward drive of Western influence.
The annexation of Crimea and continued operations in eastern Ukraine have served to quell a potential domestic crisis of legitimacy for the Putin administration.
Russian actions in Crimea also served to warn those within Russia who may be inspired to imitate Euromaidan or start uprisings in the North Caucasus.
Counter Eastward Progression of Western Economic and Security Institutions After the collapse of the Soviet Union and the chaos of the Yeltsin era, political elites under Vladimir Putin reached a consensus to reestablish Russia as a great power.
These 37 popular movements coincided with eastward expansion by the EU and NATO, and together they were perceived as a US-led conspiracy to further the reach of Western economic and security alliances Eastward to undermine Putin’s regime and regional influence.
The Westward orientation of former Soviet republics poses economic and geopolitical risks to Russia’s drive for renewed status as a great power.
Acceptance of Western institutions and values may encourage popular movements within Russia and embolden insurgents in the North Caucasus.
Hj European Union i Member states joining the EU in 2004 1) Member states joining the EU in 2007 Member states joining the EU in 2013 ” is «& hee € —_— History of NATO enlargement Geostrategic Control of the Black Sea Region Russia’s long-standing maritime and security interests in the Black Sea highlight the importance of Crimea and the port of Sevastopol.
The peninsula served as a barrier against invasion from Western powers, including Ottoman, French, and British forces in the Crimean War , and hosted some of the bloodiest engagements on the Eastern Front during the German invasion in World War I Russian expansion into the Black Sea basin in the seventeenth century was driven by both imperial ambitions and hopes to open significant maritime trade routes.
Today, the Black Sea provides Russia with a crucial avenue to advance, demonstrate, 38 and safeguard its superpower status.
Black Sea access allows Russia to address maritime security threats to its coastal waters and energy transportation routes, as well as to project power into the Mediterranean, the Indian Ocean, and beyond.
As the largest economic player in Crimea, the Black Sea Fleet also offers nonmilitary Russian influence.
It owns more than eighteen thousand hectares of land, only three thousand of which are in Sevastopol.
The policy of maintaining a buffer zone of friendly states falling oil prices—is likely to was most explicitly expressed by Joseph be pondering further acts of Stalin after the devastation of World aggression.
War II, a policy meant to ensure that Russia could never again be invaded by a Western force.
Historically, Ukraine’s industry and agriculture were the most vital economic factors in maintaining the power and 39 influence of the Soviet Union.
Today, Putin’s failure to compel Ukrainian membership in the EEU has rendered the organization largely impotent, echoing failed Russian attempts to establish a CIS in the early 1990s.
Additionally, Ukrainian integration into the EU will restrict Russian access to Ukrainian markets and jobs, undermining Russia’s stalled economy and inflaming domestic issues that threaten the current regime.
Protection of ethnic Russians and Russian speakers is alternately a genuine motivation and an artificial contrivance for justifying intervention.
The definition of compatriot was broadened through several legal revisions to include any ethnic Russian outside of Russia who successfully applies for a Russian passport.
The stated objective of these policies is the promotion of Russian culture and Russian language.
The persistent Russian demographic crisis, characterized by a low birth rate and high death rate that continue to keep the population growth rate near zero (—0.03 percent), is a factor influencing Russian compatriot policies.
The ethnic Russian population in Russia is shrinking while Muslim populations continue to grow, suggesting the demographic landscape could change to majority Muslim by 2050.
Combined with widely held pan-Russian nationalism that decries the division of Russian populations into former Soviet republics, the prospect of reunifying Russian diaspora is popular across the Russian political spectrum.
Thus, the prospect of injecting 1.45 million ethnic Russians into the population by annexing Crimea became attractive.
Russian Order of Battle To prosecute their campaign in Ukraine, the Russians used both military and intelligence services, along with imported volunteers and paramilitaries.
Although some of the details of the actual units employed are unclear, the basic structure for supporting their unconventional warfare and the limited invasions that followed is known.
The emphasis of the new strategy was the near abroad, with emphasis on the Russian Federation’s periphery.
The consequent “new-look” reforms aimed at a more streamlined, professional, and modernized force.
Emerging challenges included international terrorism, narcotraffic, organized crime, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and regional and ethnic conflict.
In its place, Russia would seek to dominate, lead, and integrate CIS military security efforts while maintaining order along the periphery.
Using both the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, Russia sought to influence nearby states to reject NATO and the EU in favor of close relations with Moscow.
These efforts were attended by a renewed commitment from Moscow to foster and protect Russian diasporas abroad.
Putin and his associates saw NATO as the primary threat to their plans.
Outright invasion from the West was not a likely scenario, but Russia foresaw that NATO and the EU, along with Western nongovernmental organizations, would attempt to intervene within peripheral states to turn them against Moscow.
Simultaneously Putin sought ever greater cooperation with Beijing and pursued a lucrative deal to supply China with natural gas over the ensuing decades.
These changes in strategic outlook required corresponding changes in the military instrument.
The 2008 Russo—Georgian War highlighted shortcomings throughout the Ministry of Defense and the armed forces in general.
The war had been a watershed for Russia, representing, in essence, the last war of the twentieth century, fought with outdated tactics and equipment and with structures more suited to large-scale conventional war.
The military new-look reforms therefore sought a professional and modernized force capable of conducting more effective operations, especially on the periphery.
Key issues were command and control, personnel policies, training and readiness, equipment modernization, and the retention of nuclear deterrence.
Divisions and regiments were eliminated and replaced by a brigade system for the Army, while the Air Force reorganized into air bases.
Demographics indicated a drop in available recruits, and reports that the conscripts were often found unfit for duty stimulated the Russian government to press for a dramatic change in the composition of the force.
To boost recruitment the government increased pay, improved military housing, and launched a comprehensive public information campaign designed to inspire patriotism and respect for military service.
Although the costs were high, Putin’s administration saw the value of professionalizing the military and replacing conscripts with contract soldiers.
The process is ongoing, and contract soldiers proved their worth in Ukraine.
The emphasis was on command, control, information, navigation, and precision.
At the individual level, Russian soldiers equipped with the “Ratnik” Future Soldier Individual Equipment Gear have better protection against small arms and employ a variety of subsystems, including reconnaissance, navigation, night optics, and communications.
Mechanized forces benefited from procurement of lighter, more modern armored vehicles with digital communications.
In practice Russian Army Brigades do not deploy as whole organizations.
Instead, operational commanders task organize Battalion Tactical Groups capable of independent combined-arms combat missions.
This command has responsibility for the Caucasus and southern Russia, as well as the Black Sea and Caspian Fleets.
Per treaty provisions the Russians had forces positioned in Crimea, primarily used to secure the port of Sevastopol.
They are found throughout the military, intelligence, and security services.
Those in the FSB are tasked with fighting terrorism and protecting the constitution.
Alpha responds to terrorists and other extremist movements and hostage rescue.
They use their skill sets to “red team” or test Russian security infrastructure.
In Crimea and eastern Ukraine, SPETSNAZ operated in a clandestine manner, with their faces masked and wearing nondescript military clothing that bore no information identifying their unit.
These infamous little green men appeared during the decisive seizures or buildings and facilities, only to disappear when associated militias and local troops arrived to consolidate the gains.
In this way they provided a measure of deniability—however superficial or implausible—for Moscow.
The conflict in Ukraine demonstrates that Russia recruits SPETSNAZ agents from among the local populations within target countries, including pro-Russian nationalists, minorities, political dissidents, and criminals.
Russian-Backed Proxy Organizations in Ukraine Moscow is funding, training, and equipping numerous groups with Russian nationalist agendas in Ukraine.
Citing Igor Girkin as its leader, the group boasts some four thousand operatives.
They are motivated by their devotion to the Russian Orthodox Church and a strong sense of nationalistic outrage toward the encroachment of Western influence in the region.
Members of the group train for and conduct special activities, including storming buildings, sniping, reconnaissance, and defense.
They have admitted to journalists that some of their senior leaders are Russian.
It has chapters in Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Latvia, Serbia, Macedonia, Romania, Bulgaria, and Germany.
Led by Aleksander Zaldostanov “Surgeon,” the group has an estimated five thousand members, including Vladimir Putin.
The group is supported by the Russian Orthodox Church, and it often meets with domestic political and religious leaders.
During the crisis in Crimea, the group arrived in the region, with members claiming that they wanted to ensure free and fair voting in the referendum for annexation and that they wanted to assist the people in their struggle against the “fascists” in Kyiv.
Forces are drawn from some six hundred thousand officially registered Cossacks in Russia.
They are legally permitted to defend Russian borders, guard national forests, organize youth military training, fight terrorism, and protect local government facilities.
During the Winter Olympics in Sochi, they engaged in security operations and were recorded using violence against protesters.
Cossacks under Colonel Sergei Yurievich were used to defend Sevastopol and blockade and intimidate Ukrainian troops in Crimea.
On orders of the FSB, Cossack irregular troops have also operated in the Luhansk and Donetsk regions in eastern Ukraine.
Some of the Cossack groups are from Ukraine, while others came into the region from Russia.
Elements of the former group intend to apply for integration into the Russian military after the annexation of Crimea.
Chetnik soldiers typically have beards and wear a variety of camouflaged uniforms with shoulder patches including skull-and-crossbones insignia.
They also wear distinctive black fur hats with tassels and carry long knives.
The Chetniks came from Serbia, allegedly on their own initiative to assist their Slavic brothers in their fight against the West.
Previously he served in the 45th Detached Reconnaissance Regiment, the FSB, and the GRU and was involved in numerous other conflicts, including those in Bosnia, Chechnya, and Transnistria.
He has been accused of organizing civilian massacres in Bosnia and kidnappings and murders in Chechnya.
Before he entered eastern Ukraine, Girkin led paramilitary groups in Crimea and negotiated with Ukrainian military officers in attempts to induce them to defect to Russia.
Girkin organized volunteer militia forces in Crimea, drawing on Russians with military experience and pro-Russian Ukrainians.
Ukrainian intelligence Igor Girkin (also known as alleges that Strelkov) Girkin was under the direct authority of Moscow, which supplied him and other leaders with weapons, all with the approval of Putin.
Girkin has been accused of murdering a local Ukrainian politician, Volodymyr Rybak, and a nineteen-year-old college student, Yury Popravko.
In April 2014 Girkin emerged as the leader of the Donetsk People’s Republic and claimed he had command of all its forces, but he continued to deny Russian connections.
On July 5 Girkin fled from Slovyansk as Ukrainian forces moved to retake the city—a move that attracted criticism and outright condemnation from fellow insurgents and ultranationalists in Russia.
Girkin was later accused of involvement in the downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight 17.
According to some reports, he ordered the collection of valuables from the dead passengers and crew, the proceeds of which would fund the insurgency in the Donetsk People’s Republic.
He is also believed to be the author of a conspiracy theory that the aircraft was unmanned, deliberately downed, and then filled with corpses to create an international incident.
He is alleged to have been wounded in battle, but other reports suggest the FSB removed him from leadership of the insurgency because he failed to fully comply with Moscow’s directives.
Alexander Borodai is a Ukrainian with strong ties to Russia and has lived and studied in Moscow.
A close associate of Girkin and Konstantin Malofeev, Borodai was appointed the prime minister of the Donetsk People’s Republic but later resigned the office and returned to Russia.
He is alleged to have served in the FSB as a director who achieved the rank of major general, a claim he denies.
Igor Besler, a former lieutenant colonel in the Russian GRU, also led insurgent operations in Crimea and Ukraine.
Of mixed German-Ukrainian descent, he considers 45 himself Russian and studied at the Dzerzhinsky Military Academy in the mid-1990s.
According to Ukrainian intelligence, he was contacted by the GRU in February 2014 and directed to move into Crimea and help organize the uprising there.
He has been implicated in numerous murders and summary executions of captured combatants in Ukraine and was also tied to the downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight 17.
Alexey Mozgovoy is a Ukrainian insurgent leader and commander of the so-called Ghost Brigade in eastern Ukraine.
Mozgovoy claims that Russia is providing “mostly humanitarian aid” and that many of the pro-Russian fighters in Ukraine are foreigners who have come to fight against “fascism” and the Western imperialists.
Mozgovoy has been seen traveling openly in Moscow, where he enjoys celebrity status including requests for autographs.
His Ghost Brigade, according to his interview, includes Russians, local Ukrainian militiamen, and foreign fighters from Germany, Bulgaria, and Slovakia.
Alexey Mozgovoy Alexander Mozhaev is a Cossack militia leader operating in eastern Ukraine at the behest of the Putin regime.
In interviews Mozhaev boasts of the ferocity of the Cossack warbands who are fighting the Kyiv government in the interests of Russia.
He and his followers are motivated by Russian nationalism, Russian Orthodoxy, and a hatred of Western encroachment into Russia’s sphere.
Supported and authorized to act from Moscow, the Cossack leaders, including Mozhaev, maintain tenuous and deniable links to Russia to ensure they retain their freedom to act as volunteer paramilitaries.
Russian Information Warfare in Ukraine Russian information operations include the use of cyberwarfare.
Typical computer network operations feature attacks aimed at disrupting enemy infrastructure and command.
Similar to the Russian prelude to its 2008 conflict in Georgia, Crimea’s landline, Internet, and mobile services were nearly eliminated.
Hacktivists using the names Cyber Berkut and Ukraine Anonymous fought back, attacking Russian government sites and the Russia Today news agency.
In March 2014 Panarin commented on the Crimean operation and stressed that through careful preparation of the information environment, Russia was able to obviate a more violent scenario.
He contrasted this performance with operations in 2008, as well as with the poor performance of the West.
He likewise praised what he termed “the valor of Berkut”—a reference to the Ukrainian secret police organization officially disestablished by the Kyiv government in the wake of the organization’s alleged massacres of protesters.
The Crimean branch of Berkut was subsequently absorbed into the Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs.
Finally, he attributed the Crimean success to the personal leadership of Vladimir Putin, who centralized the control of all the key political, economic, financial, military, intelligence, and information tools.
On the basis of that premise, he views the conflict as a battle between the US-led coalition and Russia, rather than as a spontaneous domestic movement in western Ukraine.
He predicts the imminent collapse of the “American—British” empire that has dominated modern history and its replacement by a large coalition of powers stretching from Egypt to China and dominated by Russia.
In its new role as the leader of a multipolar world, Russia’s three pillars of power will be spirituality, state power, and cyber-sovereignty.
Alexandr Dugin acknowledges that the country contains both ethnic Russians and pro-Russian populations on the one hand and West-leaning Europeans on the other.
He regards the country as an artificial contrivance that inappropriately combined these two groups within a common border.
Washington, he claims, is intent on pushing the divide between the two groups to the east—indeed, to the very border of Russia.
Instead, Moscow must dominate that struggle through a vigorous information campaign and push the divide westward.
When necessary, Russian information warfare must include the military dimension.
In the Crimean operation, unidentified Russian military personnel entered the conflict region and preempted the adversary by rapidly occupying decisive points—airports, media outlets, and other key infrastructure.
Armed but not wearing uniforms, the Russian agents provided Moscow with deniability—if not plausible deniability.
The pro-Western press called the intruders little green men, but Dugin refers to them as “nice men”—citing their politeness and their diplomatic withdrawal once an area was secured.
The goal is the very essence of Sun Tzu’s “winning without fighting” ideal.
One pundit applauded the Russians’ use of blackmail, psychological manipulation, and threats of nuclear war.
But what makes these acts justifiable in the eyes of their champions is that they are defensive in nature.
Each of the information warfare pundits portrays Russia’s operations as reactions to American provocation.
International Information Themes Moscow combined secrecy, deception, threats, and accusations in crafting the narrative for the international community.
Throughout the campaigns in Crimea and eastern Ukraine, Putin and his agents denied Russian involvement while simultaneously touting their military capabilities if they were pushed too far.
While dismissing evidence of Russian troops in the region, they accused the West of meddling in Ukrainian affairs and warmongering.
The coordinated information warfare campaign was carefully crafted to modify the messaging to the West.
In Russian media outlets aimed at American and European audiences, the themes were changed slightly to tout the essential “democracy” of Russia’s actions in Ukraine.
Everything came about because of the “people’s choice,” and Russia simply acted in accordance with local wishes.
Other messaging targeted the pacifist sectors of the West by both threatening war and simultaneously assuring the world that Russia wanted peace.
If Moscow fell short of convincing the more cynical critical thinkers in the West, it nevertheless persisted in reiterating its themes of justifiable intervention.
Indoctrination of Ethnic Russians in Ukraine Russian information warfare likewise targeted key proxies in Crimea and eastern Ukraine, preparing them for resistance against Kyiv, a separatist insurgency, and, finally, annexation by Russia.
Their challenge was difficult because the West seemingly offered democracy—a form of government that Western culture views as the sine qua non for personal liberty, security, peace, and prosperity.
This plan for governance, which the West contemptuously dismisses as autocratic, seeks to defend tradition, conservative values, and “true” liberty.
From Moscow’s viewpoint, the West likewise seeks to bedazzle and entice former Russian clients with promises of economic prosperity and opportunity.
Conversely, align48 ment with Russia and integration into the EEU would bring immediate economic aid.
Shortly after Crimea’s annexation, Russian funds and support programs arrived in abundance.
Likewise, when Yanukovych bowed to Russian pressure, Putin immediately responded with a generous proposal to buy up Ukrainian debt and cut gas prices by a third.
They were integral parts of a broad information campaign designed to combat Western paradigms and reeducate Ukrainians along Moscow’s lines of thinking.
Within the Russian periphery, the RT television network offers the best programming available.
High standards for production attract viewers of all political persuasions who are drawn to the form, if not the content, of the television shows.
By ensuring a sustained appeal, especially to the youth, RT gives Moscow the commanding heights of the information war and a strong voice wherever its signal is broadcast and not deliberately blocked.
Domestic Messaging To garner support at home for Russian adventures in Ukraine and Crimea, the Putin administration crafted a picture of NATO encroachment toward the borders of Russia and even proposed that the West, led by the United States, intended to annex Crimea.
Related to this theme was the notion that the Russian people—with their history of religious, cultural, and military greatness—were artificially divided after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Once again the West was behind the nefarious plot to keep the Russian people from enjoying unity, peace, security, and their rightful place in the world order.
Russian Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, 2013-2014 This study uses an analytical framework derived from the work of General Valery Gerasimov, chief of the general staff of the Russian Federation.
Gerasimov, observing American and European experiences in the Gulf War, Operation Iraqi Freedom, and the intervention in Libya, notes that political, economic, AQ cultural, and other nonmilitary factors play decisive roles.
Gerasimov’s model is a useful construct for analyzing Russian actions in Crimea and Ukraine because it makes clear that political, economic, and intelligence efforts precede military action.
His explanation implies that the state prosecuting the unconventional warfare campaign must be in control of the catalysts and crises that lead to escalation and resolution, rather than simply react to events.
In the 2014 campaigns in Crimea and Ukraine, Russia in fact controlled and exercised a strong grip on the pace of many of the headline events.
Main Phases of Conflict Development Neutralization of military conflict Military Localization of military conflict conflict Crisis reactions Immediate military threat Intensifying contradictions Differences transform into conflict.
Emergence of differences of interest 1 Direct military threat Potential military threat 3.
At the start of the conflict Russia turned its focus on securing Crimea.
Later, after the annexation of Crimea, Putin’s priority turned toward securing Russian influence and control over eastern Ukraine, in part to maintain a land bridge to Crimea.
During the escalations stage Putin took actions calculated to de-escalate the situation, but they had the opposite effect.
The start of conflict activities was relatively sudden and brief, quickly transitioning to the next stage.
This suggests intensive and deliberate planning designed to preempt any embryonic resistance forming against Putin’s designs.
The crisis stage featured nearly flawless execution of Russia’s new information-based warfare, culminating in a staged referendum and political decision.
During the resolutions stage, Putin’s autocratic government rapidly sealed the annexation with a legal form.
With Russian troops firmly in control of Crimea, he was able to present the world with a fait accompli.
The restoration of peace stage was facilitated in part by the upswing of conflict in eastern Ukraine, so as to divert attention away from Crimea.
Military Immediate Direct Potential military threat military threat military threat conflict Localization of military conflict Neutralization of military conflict Crisis reactions Intensifying contradictions Differences transform into conflict.
Under Russian pressure, he abandons deal with EU in late 2013, sparking Maidan protests.
Escalations @ Feb., 2014 Protests in Kyiv against President Victor Yanukovych become violent.
Start of conflict activities @ Feb., 2014 Ukrainian naval bases in Sevastopol blockaded; proRussian gunmen seize government buildings in Simferopol.
Resolution @ Mar.-18, 2014 Referendum and subsequent treaty leads to Russian annexation of Crimea into Russian Federation.
Restoration of peace @ Late Mar.14Present United States and EU impose sanctions, but annexation remains in effect; popular approval in Crimea and Russia boosts Putin’s political fortunes.
The March 2014 annexation of Crimea led to an upswing of unrest in eastern Ukraine.
The start of conflict activities was framed by Russia’s deceptive diplomatic agreement at Geneva— setting the stage for Putin’s sustained unconventional warfare campaign in eastern Ukraine under an umbrella of persistent denial.
The crisis stage came to a head with the downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight 17, which fueled growing international condemnation of Putin’s intervention in Ukraine.
The hoped-for resolutions stage instead saw surprising political resilience from the Kyiv government and people of Ukraine against Russian aggression.
US, EU, and NATO support, along with Russia’s severe economic downturn and President Poroshenko’s sustained counteroffensive, led Russia to resort to increasingly explicit invasion.
The restoration of peace stage remains in doubt as the United States government passes a renewed sanctions law and threatens to begin giving military aid to Kyiv.
Start of conflict activities @ Mar.-Apr.14 Russian agents organize, lead, and cooperate with protesters in major cities and port of Mariupol.
Russians use bribery, intimidation, and subversion to neutralize government officials, police, and some military units.
Crisis @ May 1, 2014 Ukraine resumes conscription in face of ongoing aggression in east and south.
Oo Sep., 2014 US-led NATO peacekeeping exercises commence in western Ukraine.
Despite cease-fire, fighting continues, at times escalating to major battles.
Russian tanks enter, but Western sanctions and Russia’s economic downturn chip away at Russians’ support for war.
When the government of Ukraine made a bid for inclusion into the alliance, Russian strategists, including Putin, laid plans to ensure Moscow’s control of eastern Ukraine and especially of Crimea—home to a key naval base.
Therefore, since before the start of the new millennium the Russians had begun to exert covert pressure on Crimea and Ukraine.
It would take the catalyst of Kyiv attempting an economic union with Western Europe to push the Putin regime into a more assertive strategy.
Russia’s actions against Ukraine began most notably with its diplomatic pressure on the government of President Yanukovych, leading to his volte-face regarding integration into the EU, announced on November 21, 2013.
At this point the Russian government had not necessarily decided to make the dramatic moves it later accomplished because the Yanukovych government complied with Moscow’s desires.
Diplomatic pressure and contacts with key Ukrainian leaders also led to the parliament rejecting legislation that would have allowed former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko to leave the country.
These developments would have led Russian strategists following Gerasimov’s model to conclude that they had bypassed intermediate stages and achieved resolution and restoration of peace.
But by the end of the month, growing popular protests against the Yanukovych government led to Kyiv police using violence in an attempt to disperse the crowds.
The resulting Euromaidan movement demanded closer ties with the West, and the related Automaidan movement demanded the removal of Yanukovych.
The crisis stimulated Russia’s use of “new-generation warfare” to achieve its goals in Ukraine.
On December 16, pursuant to Yanukovych’s visit to Moscow, Putin’s government announced $15 billion in loans to Ukraine and substantial discounts on imported natural gas.
These actions targeted Ukraine’s financial vulnerability and fed one of Putin’s main information warfare themes—that alignment with Russia brings economic benefit to all Ukrainians.
By way of contrast, the EU and IMF called for Ukraine to deal with its debt problem with austerity programs that were sure to alienate the population.
Russia’s measures over the Christmas holiday appear to have been successful in lessening popular resistance to the Yanukovych government, and Putin’s agents attempted to facilitate negotiations between the president and his opponents.
Once again it may have appeared that Russia was on the verge of achieving its goals.
Over the next month violent clashes ensued, resulting in six anti-government demonstrators’ deaths and more than two hundred jailed.
Escalations Information warfare—primarily in the form of aggressive propaganda against Kyiv—along with diplomatic and political efforts, commenced in earnest in early February.
Crimean Tatars protested the region’s Rada deputies who had labeled the resistance in Kyiv as fascist—a key argument of Putin’s information campaign.
By associating the pro-Western faction in Ukraine as fascist and Nazi, the Russians aimed at preempting the battle for legitimacy.
As the crisis deepened, Moscow began to unfold a two-pronged effort—ongoing involvement in the political chaos in Kyiv and a more focused effort to use the situation to facilitate Russia’s designs for Crimea.
On the heels of Yanukovych’s setbacks in late February, the Russian GRU dispatched several hundred members of 45th SPETSNAZ Regiment to Crimea to create a “popular uprising” aimed at facilitating Russia’s annexation of the region.
Simultaneously GRU agents used bribery among the ethnic Russian population to win support for annexation.
On February 20, more than sixty people were killed in Kyiv in the bloodiest crackdown of the crisis.
Putin’s government, smarting from a significant political setback, resorted to strong diplomatic and economic pressure aimed at dividing and disrupting the political opposition in Ukraine.
But the opposition in Kyiv had been emboldened and moved on to negotiate a settlement agreement with the beleaguered Yanukovych on February 21.
Under the agreement, mediated by Russia, France, Germany, and Poland (although Russia did not sign the resulting document), Ukraine would hold presidential elections by the end of the year and a national unity government would form by early March.
The country would be returned to the 2004 constitution, with a consequent reduction in the powers of the president.
The United Nations reports that overt violence was paralleled by a wide array of human rights violations to include kidnapping, torture, and murder.
In late January two activists, Yuriy Verbytsky and Ihor Lutsenko were abducted and beaten.
Wounded and released into a wood with sub-freezing temperatures, Verbytsky died from exposure, Lutsenko made it back to safety.
MP Volodymyr Konstantinov stated that Crimea might secede from Ukraine if tensions escalated further.
This sparked a reaction from Refat Chubarov, who responded, “This is our land, our country.
As before, Russia tried to seize the moral high ground in the battle for legitimacy by characterizing the actions of the Kyiv government as fascist.
The ongoing conflict led to Russia’s commencement of activities associated with the escalations phase of conflict.
This stage is characterized mainly by a sharp increase in diplomatic and economic pressure on the subject state.
In accordance with the Gerasimov model, the third stage, start of conflict activities, began in Crimea.
Eastern Ukraine remained in the escalations stage at this point and progressed into stage three only after Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
Thus, this analysis first examines the application of Gerasimov’s stages three through six in Crimea, after which it will turn to the model’s application to eastern Ukraine.
Russian Operations in Crimea Start of Conflict Activities This phase is characterized by the mobilization of active opposition forces, including demonstrators and armed militias.
Nonkinetic factors still play the principal role in conflict resolution, but irregular forces—both domestic and those imported by the external supporter—begin to act.
In addition, Russia increased the pace and visibility of its strategic mobilization of forces to assembly areas adjacent to the troubled regions.
Instead of backing down to Russian pressure, the invigorated Rada in Kyiv voted to impeach Yanukovych.
An interim president was appointed—Oleksander Turchynov, formerly speaker of the parliament.
Opposition leaders decided to move presidential elections to the coming spring.
These developments sparked pro-Russian demonstrations in Crimea, and Russian military forces from the Southern District began to mobilize and prepare for deployment to the region.
In eastern Ukraine and Crimea, pro-Russian demonstrators labeled the new regime in Kyiv as fascist.
The vilification of the Kyiv reformers as fascists—a key theme of Putin’s information 55 campaign—suggests that Russia was working to influence, organize, and even lead the protests.
The pro-Western factions in Kyiv enjoyed a brief period of triumph, and they moved to disband the elite Berkut police unit that had been blamed for the deaths of protesters.
The Putin government responded to its setback in Kyiv by sparking a crisis in Crimea.
Crisis During the crisis phase, Russian strategy calls for the commencement of explicit military action, as well as an embargo or similar economic suasion.
Depending on which sources are consulted, Russia either supported or actively led an upsurge in pro-Russian demonstrations and violence in Crimea.
On the heels of the Ukrainian Rada passing a bill removing Russian as an official language, pro-Russian groups in Crimea began mobilizing militias.
Unidentified armed groups—most analysts concluded that they were Russian special forces and intelligence operatives—began military operations to seize airports and take control of the peninsula.
Military assets moved in from Russia, including wheeled armored personnel carriers and helicopters.
The unidentified operatives in Crimea used Russian military vehicles, but they otherwise hid their links to the Russian military, and Moscow denied any involvement.
Despite initial denials, the headquarters of the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol later admitted that its troops had moved into Crimea to secure the port.
On March 6, the Russian Black Sea Fleet blockaded Ukrainian ships in Novoozerne, Donuzlav Lake.
Russia likewise achieved an effective isolation of the region through military demonstrations along the Ukrainian border.
On March 9 the Kyiv government confirmed that it did not intend to send Ukrainian military forces into Crimea.
The following few days were marked by surrounding and isolating Ukrainian forces in their bases and mobilizing political support for regional regime change.
The mayor of Sevastopol was replaced by a Russian citizen, Alexei Chaliy.
On March 1 the Russian Federation parliament approved President Putin’s request to use armed force in Ukraine to protect Russian interests.
The newly installed pro-Russian mayor insisted to supportive crowds that Crimea would no longer accept orders from the illegal regime in Kyiv.
Soon after, MPs in the Crimean Rada announced new planned measures to achieve greater autonomy for the region.
Putin’s government chimed in, declaring to the international community that Moscow would support “greater federalism” in Ukraine.
In March the State Duma Committee on CIS Affairs announced plans for new legal procedures to annex territories into the Russian Federation.
Timed as it was with Crimea’s announcement that it wanted to be incorporated into Russia, it was a clear use of a political statement as a catalyst for separatism in the region.
But the event served only to further Moscow’s disinformation campaign against the Kyiv government, because Russian foreign minister Sergey Lavrov refused to meet with Ukrainian foreign minister Andriy Deshchytsia, alleging that he represented an illegal government.
The theme was parroted by the pro-Russian faction in Crimea on March 6, when the de facto prime minister Sergey Aksyonov refused to enter into negotiations with Kyiv on the grounds that the government there was an illegal entity.
During the crisis phase, Russian strategy calls for embargoes and other economic sanctions.
On March 7 Gazprom announced that it might suspend service unless Ukraine settled its previous debt for natural gas and finance current supplies.
This use of economic blackmail was obvious as it came on the heels of Crimea’s split from Ukraine.
In a move calculated to grab the attention of Western leaders, on March 8 Russia announced that it was considering ending START inspections in response to United States and European agitation concerning Ukraine.
The intent was to demonstrate to the West that while the matter of Ukraine may have some weight within NATO’s strategic formulation, it was no less than a vital interest to Russia.
Resolution During conflict resolution, military operations reach their zenith with decisive defeat of any armed adversaries.
Once the political objectives have been secured, leaders then transition to the next phase—restoration of peace—as a way of signaling a successful resolution.
On March 16, the interim Crimean government held a referendum concerning secession from Ukraine and annexation into Russia.
They announced that some 97 percent of the Crimean population supported such a move—a seeming impossibility, given the ethnic and language distribution on the peninsula.
Two days later, Vladimir Putin signed a bill to absorb Crimea into the Russian Federation.
In response the government of Ukraine, the EU, the G7, and the United States all stated that they would not recognize the results of the illegal referendum.
On March 19, three hundred Crimean “self-defense” troops, likely led by Russian agents, stormed the headquarters of the Ukrainian Navy in Sevastopol and briefly detained Rear Admiral Sergey Gaiduk.
Ukraine's troops departed without violence, and the Russian flag was raised over captured S7 installations.
Western powers responded with threats of further sanctions, but they simultaneously called on Russia to “pull back its troops” rather than insisting on a return to Ukrainian sovereignty over Crimea.
Even Kyiv seemed quickly distracted by events in eastern Ukraine, and the Crimean annexation seemingly became a fait accompli.
Restoration of Peace On March 31, 2014, Russian prime minister Dmitry Medvedev visited Crimea and promised substantial economic aid, marking the beginning of the restoration of peace phase in Crimea.
Tensions were quickly reduced in the region, and Russian business leaders acted quickly to help integrate the region into the Russian economy.
At the same time, leaders in Russia, Ukraine, and the West turned their attention to matters in eastern Ukraine, effectively acquiescing toward events in Crimea.
Russian Operations in Eastern Ukraine Start of Conflict Activities Ukrainian officials accused Russia of assisting separatists.
Foreign Minister Andriy Deschchytsya noted that the solider who captured government buildings carried Russian battle rifles, not Ukrainian weapons.
Throughout March and April, pro-Russian demonstrators marched in the Donbass region, seizing government buildings in Donetsk, Luhansk, Slovyansk, Kharkiv, Kramatorsk, Horlivka, and the Black Sea port of Mariupol.
Ukrainian and Western sources allege that Russian intelligence agents and special forces subordinate to the GRU led the demonstrations.
Some observers claimed that Russia sent in operatives who acted in the role of local agitators, with some even appearing in various towns throughout the crisis.
Although the demonstrators adopted the theme that they represented a large majority of separatists who desired incorporation into the Russian Federation, subsequent analysis makes clear that Russian agents staged the movement and that relatively few Ukrainians sympathized with the demonstrators.
On March 24 Russia was expelled from the G8 in a move that heralded the international community’s intent to bring diplomatic and economic pressure against Moscow’s adventuring in Ukraine.
Putin’s response was to dismiss the move publicly, but he also pursued a diplomatic strategy that gave the appearance of cooperation with Western powers.
Russia participated in four power talks in Geneva that produced a broad agreement on 58 de-escalation on April 17.
Russia’s stated intentions, however, did not match its continued intervention in the east.
A key tactic in Russian unconventional warfare is using bribery or intimidation to coerce local officials to abandon their posts.
On April 12, militants likely led by Russian agents stormed the Ministry of Internal Affairs in Donetsk and convinced the chief of office there to resign.
Facing crumbling opposition, the demonstrators seized the public administration building on April 16 and the television station on April 27.
With Russian assistance they curtailed Ukrainian broadcasts and replaced them with Russian television.
In a similar way, pro-Russian militants stormed public buildings in Slovyansk, and the mayor there, Nelya Shtepa, acquiesced in the seizures, acknowledging Russia’s control of the operation and welcoming its involvement.
When the militants went on to capture the police headquarters and seized the weapons there, government forces launched a counterattack and retook the city on July 5.
Police officials in Horlivka also defected to the attacking rebel militias, while the chief of police was captured and beaten.
A city council deputy, Volodymyr Rybak, was snatched by the militia and later killed.
Militants claimed that on several occasions convoys from the 25th Airborne Brigade were stopped by angry locals.
In one instance, the unit involved allegedly surrendered, and the militants commandeered their armored fighting vehicles.
On another occasion, a convoy was forced to unload its weapons and hand over its magazines before the crowd let it proceed.
Because of these episodes, the Ukrainian authorities disbanded the brigade.
Another characteristic of unconventional warfare is the use of proxies—local self-defense militias, mutineers from government forces, and imported militants.
In eastern Ukraine the Russians have allegedly imported foreign paramilitary groups, including the Wolves’ Head Battalion—a Cossack group known to have fought with the Russians in Georgia in 2008.
In eastern Ukraine, however, the group was not deployed as an auxiliary to the Russian main force.
Instead, it fought as a proxy in the absence of Russian conventional forces.
Members of the group claimed officially that they had come to the region on their own initiatives for ideological reasons, to defend Russian Orthodoxy and the Russian regime.
But in interviews with Time magazine journalists, they admitted that they are paid, equipped, and deployed by Vladimir Putin’s government.
As the Kyiv government began “anti-terrorist” operations in mid-April to retake seized buildings and defeat the Russian-led “separatist” forces, the SPETSNAZ and 59 associated operatives demonstrated another effective tactic.
On several occasions, as government forces with mechanized combat vehicles arrived on scene, masses of pro-Russian citizens surrounded an armored vehicle to act as human shields, immobilizing the target.
The targeted soldiers, cut off from supplies and given vague orders, refrained from shooting and complied with demands for withdrawal after disabling their weapons.
In other cases government forces successfully defended themselves and their installations from attacks.
As officials in Kyiv struggled to find a way to resist Russian aggression in the east, Yulia Tymoshenko formed a resistance movement with more than twenty thousand volunteers.
In the run-up to Ukraine’s presidential election, the Kyiv government announced the resumption of conscription in response to increased Russian aggression.
On May 2, in the deadliest day since February, some forty pro-Russian activists perished in Odessa when Kyiv loyalists set fire to a building they were sheltering in.
The Russians condemned the incident, insisting it was a deliberate act of repression by the fascists in Kyiv.
On May 11 the self-proclaimed Peoples’ Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk conducted referenda, alleging that the results showed popular support for independence from Kyiv and annexation to Russia, along the lines followed by Crimea.
Despite the distraction Ukraine went forward with the election against Russia’s wishes, and Poroshenko won handily.
Despite Putin’s statement that he would seek to work with the new leader of Ukraine, relations quickly deteriorated.
Poroshenko pursued trade agreements with the EU, and in June Russia cut off natural gas exports to the country, claiming that Ukraine would not receive further supplies until it paid for past shipments.
The aircraft was widely believed to have been hit by a surface-to-air missile fired by separatist militia forces.
The horrendous loss of life and the subsequent obstruction of investigators trying to examine the site led to increased diplomatic isolation of Russia and the strengthening of economic sanctions against Putin and his supporters.
Nonetheless, Moscow continued aggressive support to separatists, especially when their tactical situation deteriorated.
Russian armored personnel carriers, artillery, and air defense equipment permeated the theater, but Moscow continued to deny involvement, as it had in Crimea.
On August 14, two dozen armored personnel carriers and other vehicles with Russian military plates crossed into Ukraine near the insurgent-controlled Izvaryne border crossing.
NATO secretary general Anders Fogh Rasmussen confirmed that a “Russian incursion” into Ukraine had occurred.
Russia continued to deny that any of its forces were operating in eastern Ukraine, but reports from both sides confirmed that at least a thousand Russian military personnel were actively supporting the insurgents.
By late August Ukrainian civilians were reporting the appearance of Russian special forces.
Ukrainian forces captured ten Russian paratroopers, forcing Moscow to admit to the presence of Russian soldiers.
However, Moscow claimed that the soldiers had crossed the border by accident.
With the infusion of Russian forces and supplies, the insurgents began to capture towns in the southeast near the Sea of Azov.
By the end of August, Russian-led insurgent forces brought renewed pressure on the airports in Luhansk and Donetsk and were threatening Mariupol again.
It appeared that the government of Vladimir Putin refused to let the insurgents fail, and Russian forces intervened to the degree necessary to force cease-fire talks.
Resolution The OSCE coordinated peace talks in Minsk that resulted in a cease-fire on September 5.
President Poroshenko had earlier proposed a fifteen-point peace plan, and its provisions were largely accepted by all sides.
He promised greater autonomy for Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts as well as protection of the Russian language in the area.
Heavy combat equipment was to be removed from the conflict areas, and prisoners were exchanged.
Despite leaders in both Russia and Ukraine signaling their satisfaction with the cease-fire, fighting continued in the region.
The United States signaled increased support for Ukraine in September by leading a NATO peacekeeping exercise in the western part of the country.
Resolution from the West and Poroshenko’s political resilience and determination pushed Putin into a posture of reluctantly dealing with the Kyiv regime, and the two powers concluded a renewed natural gas deal in October.
But Putin’s hopes for a weakening of resolve among Ukraine’s citizens expired at the end of the month when parlia61 mentary elections returned a strong pro-Western majority in the Rada.
In response the rebels in Donetsk and Luhansk conducted their own local elections, which were condemned and dismissed by Kyiv.
By early November the cease-fire had given way to increasing violence in eastern Ukraine.
The Kyiv government continues to reach out to the West for economic and military aid, and President Poroshenko hopes to keep the issue of the Crimean annexation on the table.
Simultaneously, to prevent further bloodshed and possible Russian invasion, he has tried to walk a fine line between acquiescence to Russia’s gains and provocation that Putin could use as a pretext for further adventures.
Russia, meanwhile, considers the Crimean annexation a fait accompli and has moved forward with economic development plans.
Furthermore, Putin’s regime intends to leverage the increased autonomy in eastern and southern Ukraine to further its policy goals there, including a secure land bridge from Russia to Crimea.
In December the United States Congress passed a new sanctions bill, and President Obama signed it into law.
The new provisions included the option to sell lethal military supplies and equipment to Ukraine at the discretion of the American president— another strong diplomatic signal to both Kyiv and Moscow.
Conclusion Russian unconventional warfare and Moscow’s innovative approaches to IO largely succeeded in the recent annexation of Crimea.
Nonetheless, Russia’s intervention in eastern Ukraine experienced difficulties, leading to an extended conflict.
While 62 the current outcome for the Russians is mixed, it is clear that Russian leaders have absorbed the painful lessons of their post-Cold War setbacks, most notably those in Georgia in 2008.
Over time they have observed and adjusted to American moves during the color revolutions and the 2010 Arab Spring.
By viewing United States foreign policy initiatives through the lens of geopolitics, Russian neoconservatives have embraced an aggressive foreign policy designed to reverse the losses associated with the collapse of the Soviet Union, especially along the Russian periphery.
Driven by a desire to roll back Western encroachment into the Russian sphere of influence, the current generation of siloviki have crafted a multidisciplinary art and science of unconventional warfare.
Capitalizing on deception, psychological manipulation, and domination of the information domain, their approach represents a notable threat to Western security interests.
A critical first step toward confronting modern Russian information warfare is to develop an understanding of its character and conduct.
In conventional warfare, defenders learn to anticipate the likely “avenues of approach” that an attacking army might use.
Similarly, nations and regions, particularly those on the periphery of the Russian Federation, can learn to anticipate Moscow’s next steps in the use of unconventional warfare and its likely implications.
When Western governments are knowledgeable of the broad range of capabilities associated with this new threat— including the use of agents, imported paramilitaries, deception, intimidation, and bribery; infiltration of political groups and government services; and persistent denial—they can fortify vulnerable sectors of society, including the media, religious organizations, political parties, and government agencies.
The United States and its allies must coalesce their defense strategies into whole-of-government efforts to confront and address the new types of threats emanating from the Russian Federation.
Existing security treaties, including the NATO Charter, along with military doctrine, training, and country team practices, must evolve toward effective resistance against this form of warfare.
Implications for Latvian Defense Policy (Riga: National Defence Academy of Latvia, 2014), 8.
Mark Kramer, “The Soviet Union, the Warsaw Pact, and the Polish Crisis of 1980-81,” in The Solidarity Movement and Perspectives on the Last Decade of the Cold War, ed.
Managing Moscow After the Georgia Crisis,” Foreign Affairs, November/ December 2008.
Dale R Herspring and Roger N McDermott, “Serdyukov Promotes Systemic Russian Military Reform,” Orbis 54, no.
Simon Shuster, “Meet the Cossack ‘Wolves’ Doing Russia’s Dirty Work in Ukraine” Time, May 14, 2014.
Alexander Vasovic, “Serbian Paramilitaries Join Pro-Russian Forces in Crimea,” Reuters, March 14, 2014.
Combat Studies Institute, United States Army Command and General Staff College, 1993.
Boltenkov, Dmitry, Aleksey Gayday, Anton Karnaukhov, Anton Lavrov, and Vyacheslav Tseluiko.
By courtesy of Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc., copyright 2012; used with permission.
