For the past five years Germany and its Western partners have been trying to resolve the conflict politically, to date without success.
The Minsk ceasefire agreements of 2014 and 2015 have still not been implemented.
The separatist “People’s Republics” in Donetsk and Luhansk have established dictatorial quasistate structures but remain almost completely dependent on Moscow.
Ukraine has fulfilled some of its obligations under the Minsk Agreements, but neglected others.
Kyiv and the “People’s Republics” are drifting steadily apart, while millions living along the line of contact experience terrible humanitarian suffering.
This threatens to establish a state of permanent poverty and underdevelopment in the regions affected by the conflict.
Brussels maintains Union-wide sanctions against Russia and forges ahead with implementing the Association Agreement with Ukraine.
Germany and France conduct peace talks in the so-called Normandy Format.
Much greater attention must be directed to the local level and especially the humanitarian crisis.
Action at this level is limited in reach but imperative for progress towards peace.
Opposing Narratives and Interests, Difficult Peace Process In 2014, in response to the Ukrainian “Euromaidan”, Russia annexed Crimea and provoked a war in eastern Ukraine.
For five years Germany and its Western partners have been trying to bring about a political solution through negotiations.
The basis for their efforts is the Minsk Agreements of 2014 and 2015, which define the modalities for a permanent ceasefire and reintegration of the contested territories into Ukraine.
But the preconditions for implementing the Agreements – and thus for peace in eastern Ukraine – are steadily deteriorating, as demonstrated by the November 2018 escalation in the Kerch Strait.
The separatist “People’s Republics” in Donetsk and Luhansk have established dictatorial quasi-state structures, which in themselves contravene the Minsk Agreements.
They are politically and economically dependent on Russia and practically incapable of acting on their own.
The Minsk Agreements are highly controversial in Ukraine, where many politicians warn that their implementation would consolidate Russian influence over Ukraine’s internal affairs and foreign policy.
There is a strong tendency in Ukrainian politics towards isolating the conflict zones.
The presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled for 2019 will further sharpen the internal debate.
Although Moscow refuses to acknowledge its role as a party to the conflict, it controls the People’s Republics militarily, politically and economically in order to secure influence in Ukraine.
While the Kremlin does uphold the Minsk Agreements (and suppresses deviating initiatives in the People’s Republics and within Russia), it does little to advance their implementation.
All the conflict parties regularly violate the Minsk security provisions as they seek military gains along the line of contact.
One contributing factor is the humanitarian crisis in the conflict region, which the Ukrainian leadership has failed to address effectively.
Ukraine and Vishnevskaya-Mann for their tireless support in Russia have experienced an extremely rapid process collecting and processing the research materials. of alienation.
Kyiv regards the annexation of Crimea and the conflict in the Donbas as elements of a Russian war of aggression.
Russia and the separatists in the contested territories insist that the Donbas conflict is a civil war with an ethno-political background.
Russia’s relations with the conflict-relevant Western actors – the European Union, NATO and the United States – have deteriorated drastically, adding more obstacles to resolution.
The various dimensions of the conflict are tightly interlocked, and the impediments to peace mutually reinforcing.
The European Union and its member states pursue a division of labour on the conflict.
Berlin and Paris play a central role in the so-called Normandy Format, which remains the most important political negotiating track.
In 2014 the European Union imposed sanctions on Russia in response to the annexation of Crimea and the war in the Donbas.
Otherwise it concentrates on implementing the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement.
Berlin and Brussels possess limited influence over the aforementioned impediments to peace in the Donbas.
This applies especially to the People’s Republics, with which the European Union has no relations, and to Russia, where the relationship has broken down.
Ukraine chose association with the EU and is more open than Russia to arguments from Berlin and Brussels.
Another relevant factor for Germany and Europe is that the United States has become a less dependable partner in the peace process.
Washington does still share the central objective of Western policy, namely, to restore Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
But with Trump and Congress pulling in different directions, United States policy on Minsk and sanctions is increasingly subject to volatility.
I would like to thank my interview partners for the trust they showed in me.
For valuable and inspiring comments and feedback on previous versions of the manuscript I would like to thank Muriel Asseburg, Volker Perthes, the Eastern Europe and Eurasia Research Division and in particular Susan Stewart and Steffen Halling.
Origins, Timeline, International Responses The Donbas Conflict: Origins, Timeline, International Responses The contested territories in eastern Ukraine comprise mountain ranges.
Colloquially the region is referred Historically the region was peripheral and thinly to as “Donbas”,2 a portmanteau of “Donetskyi Basein” populated, only rising to prominence in the late ninereferring to the resource-rich catchteenth and early twentieth century, when its rich ment area of the Siverskyi Donets River, which spans resources became relevant in the course of industrialia breadth of about five hundred kilometres between sation.
Mining and associated industries, especially the basins of the rivers Dnipro and Don in Ukraine during the Soviet era, created its specific settlement and Russia respectively.
To this day the Donbas covers about 60,000 square kilometres, and accounts remains the most heavily urbanised region of Ukraine for 9 percent of the territory of Ukraine.
The border region period since Ukrainian independence in 1991, howis flat steppe without natural barriers like rivers or ever, reveal increasing identification with the Donbas region, and with the Ukrainian state too.
IncreasPeople’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic . ingly outdated plant and machinery and lack of They are legally an integral part of Ukraine, and their “independence” is not recognised internationally.
Donetsk who identified with the region rose from 55. per2 Ukrainian and Russian geographical and proper names cent in 1994 to 69. percent in 2004.
The proportion describare transliterated according to the respective rules for each ing themselves as Ukrainian was 39. percent in 1994 and language; place-names are given in the language of the 42. percent in 2004, as Russian 30. percent in 1994 and respective state.. percent in 2004.
They are used here for eds., “Studying Identity in Ukraine”, Post-Soviet Affairs 34, reasons of readability.
Origins, Timeline, International Responses Map 1 Kapiteltitel 1 Ukraine and the Donbas Source: www.humanitarianresponse.info investment in modernisation caused the region’s Ukraine, extending from Odesa through Mariupol economy to decline steadily from the 1990s, leading on the Sea of Azov to Donetsk and Luhansk.
Deaths to a net loss of working-age inhabitants. occurred, most notoriously in Odesa on 2 May 2014, when forty-two opponents of Euromaidan lost their lives in a burning building.
While the separatist militias failed to secure The Donbas was the second territorial conflict – folcontrol of major regional centres like Kharkiv, Odesa lowing the annexation of Crimea – to affect Ukraine and Mariupol, they did manage to hold other towns after the downfall of President Viktor Yanukovych on west of Donetsk and Luhansk, like Kramatorsk and 21 February 2014 in the course of the so-called EuroSloviansk, for several months. maidan.
As in Crimea, eastern regions of Ukraine saw demonstrations and violent clashes between sup8 Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for porters and opponents of the Euromaidan.
Escalation, Internationalisation, Isolation The separatists declared the People’s Republics of 2014 and 2015 saw the worst conflict-related Donetsk and Luhansk in April 2014, and held referlosses, with the United Nations reporting 9,100 deaths endums in both areas on 11 May.
According to the organisers more Despite regular extensions of the ceasefire, the situathan 90 percent of participants voted to establish the tion along the line of contact remains unstable as People’s Republics. both sides attempt to gain ground and shift the line Kyiv was completely overwhelmed in the initial in their favour.
In contrast, for example, to the conmonths of the war, and the rebels enjoyed a miliflicts in Transnistria, Abkhazia or South Ossetia, one tary advantage.
The Ukrainian interim government cannot at this stage speak of a stable military status launched an “anti-terrorism operation” against the quo. separatists in April, but initially suffered heavy losses.
That point is illustrated by the escalation in the During this period increasing numbers of fighters and Kerch Strait.
On 25 November 2018 Russian coast heavy weapons found their way across the Russianguard patrol ships fired on two Ukrainian artillery Ukrainian border into the warzone.
Over time, howboats and a tug that had attempted to pass into the ever, Ukraine succeeded in regrouping militarily and Sea of Azov en route from Odesa to Mariupol.
On 17 July ber of Ukrainian sailors were injured, some seriously. 2014 a Malaysian passenger jet was shot The crews were detained and taken to Lefortovo down by a Russian Buk anti-aircraft missile, killing Prison in Moscow.
Today the UN speaks of about 10,500 dead and almost 24,000 wounded, about 30 percent forces intervened actively in the fighting and inflicted of them civilians.
But precise figures are hard to come by. a heavy defeat on the Ukrainians at Ilovaisk.
InterWhile the Ukrainian defence ministry regularly publishes national mediation in the aftermath resulted in the data, no verifiable figures are forthcoming from the rebels first ceasefire agreement, the Minsk Protocol, signed or Russia.
In 2016 the International Crisis Group criticised on 5 September in the Belarusian capital . all sides for playing down the casualty figures.
After a renewed escalation at the beginning of 2015, a The Line, Europe/Central Asia Briefing 81 , 2ff. package of thirteen measures to implement the Minsk In April 2017 the Union of the Committees of Soldiers’ Protocol was agreed on 12 February 2015.13 Mothers of Russia estimated that 1,500 Russian soldiers and other fighters had been killed.
Russian NGO”, UNIAN, 10 OHCHR, Report on the Human Rights Situation in Ukraine, 28 April 2017.
Weapons whose presence have cut the secessionists’ last supply line from the Russian violated the Minsk Agreements were sighted in the conflict border to Donetsk.
International Crisis Group , Eastern zone 3,099 times in 2016 and 4,065 in 2017.
Origins, Timeline, International Responses Map 2 The conflict region Source: www.humanitarianresponse.info Petro Poroshenko imposed martial law for thirty orts of Mariupol and Berdyansk; as such Ukraine has days in the regions bordering Russia and Crimea and already suffered considerable economic losses.
The demanded the immediate release of the imprisoned Russian navy has continuously expanded its presence crews.
From the Ukrainian perspective the incident in the Strait since 2017, conducting increasingly inrepresented a new level of aggression, seeking to vasive inspections on vessels passing through.
In place the Sea of Azov under Russian control – in2014/2015 Donbas separatists and Russian nationalcluding if possible its northern shores to connect the ists pressed for the capture of Mariupol – which is Donbas with Crimea.
Russia for its part claimed that very close to the current line of contact – in order the Ukrainian vessels had violated its “territorial to create a land bridge to Crimea.
Kyiv imposes economic tion between annexed Crimea and the conflict zones embargo on areas outside its control. in the Donbas.
Kyiv’s imposition of an economic embargo on the The Kerch escalation was foreseeable, and in a areas outside its control (non–government-controlled sense represents a consequence of the annexation of areas, NGCAs) in spring 2017 represented an imporCrimea.
SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 10 Peace Negotiations and the Minsk Agreements wing veterans and activists in Ukraine, who protested concentrates strongly on the eastern regions.
From against the “blood trade” with the NGCAs that, they an initial strength of about one hundred, it has grown argued, kept the separatist regimes afloat.
The Ukrainto more than seven hundred observers from more than ian government initially argued against isolating the forty-four OSCE states and altogether twelve hundred breakaway areas on account of the economic and staff. humanitarian consequences, but ultimately gave in The Trilateral Contact Group , coordinated by to the pressure.
On 15 March 2017 it officially banned the OSCE and comprising representatives of Ukraine, economic exchange with the NGCAs.
At the beginRussia and the separatists, convened in June 2014, ning of that month the rulers in Donetsk and Luand has been holding fortnightly meetings in Minsk hansk had placed forty businesses hitherto registered since September 2014.
These moves forced both sides to the Swiss diplomat Heidi Tagliavini coordinated the adjust to new realities.
The economic repercussions work of the TCG as Special Representative of the for Ukraine were less severe than initially feared.
She was succeeded in But industrial production in the NGCAs collapsed summer 2015 by the Austrian diplomat Martin with grave economic consequences.
Smuggling and Sajdik. black marketeering aside, the GCAs and NGCAs are The so-called Normandy Format arose out of a June today completely isolated from one another.14 meeting of the heads of state and government of Ukraine, Russia, France and Germany marking the seventieth anniversary of the Allied D-Day landings.
Peace Negotiations and the The talks continued at various levels (foreign minisMinsk Agreements ters, state secretaries, advisors) and provided the political framework for the talks in Minsk in SepInternational efforts to prevent further escalation tember 2014 and February 2015.
In March the Permanent CounAmerican track emerged in May 2015, bringing tocil of the OSCE agreed to deploy a Special Monitoring gether United States Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland Mission to Ukraine.
The SMM is an unarmed and Russian Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs civilian mission whose mandate is to document Grigory Karasin, the latter succeeded by presidential political developments and the human rights situation in Ukraine as a whole.
Since September 2014 the SMM has also been monitoring the observance of the Donbas ceasefire.
The Mission’s work group composed of Ukrainian and Russian officers has been responsible for the Mission’s security since autumn 2014.
Moscow apparently dissuaded them conceded that there was some truth to the Russian comfrom speaking of “nationalisation” in order to avoid violatplaints, they interpreted Moscow’s decision as another ating the spirit of the Minsk Agreements. tempt to force the Ukrainians into direct contact with those 18 “The Effect of Company Seizures and Trade Suspension in power in Donetsk and Luhansk.
Operative Herausforderungen und neue Horizonte”, of investment and maintenance.
The Protocol of 5 September 2014 provided political and military measures. for an immediate ceasefire, monitored by the OSCE; decentralisation in Ukraine, including a special status The Minsk Agreements do not treat Russia as a law for the contested areas; a buffer zone along the party to the conflict, and thus place no obligations on Ukrainian-Russian border, monitored by the OSCE; Moscow.
The second Package of Measures was not implemented by the end Minsk document of 12 February 2015 (frequently also of 2015 as planned, because the parties were unable known as Minsk II) listed concrete measures and steps to agree on the sequencing of political and military designed to implement the agreements by the end of measures.
The main points of contention were the 2015.25 modalities for holding elections, the status of the conBy signing the Minsk Agreements the separatists tested areas within the Ukrainian state and the timing in effect agreed to disband their armed units and disfor returning full control of the Russian border to solve their emerging quasi-state structures, and ultiKyiv.
Ukraine argued that it could not fulfil the politimately to permit the gradual reintegration of the cal conditions until the ceasefire was permanent, People’s Republics into the Ukrainian state.
In addiwhile Russia and the separatists called for the political and security provisions to be implemented in parallel.
A ter and OSCE Chairperson-in-Office Frank-Walter Nontransparent Channel”, Eurasia Daily Monitor 13, no.3 Steinmeier circulated a proposal designed to resolve . these contradictions.
The “Steinmeier formula” de24 Protokol po itogam konsulacij Trechstoronnoj kontaktnoj grupy scribes in detail a complex sequencing of troop withotnositel’no sovmestnych shagov, napravlennych na implementaciju drawal and elections in the contested territories, Mirnogo plana Prezidenta Ukrainy P Poroshenko i itiniativ Prezidenleading to restoration of Ukrainian control.
At the ta Rossii V Putina [Protocol on the results of the consultations of the Trilateral Contact Group concerning joint steps to imsame time the TCG reached an agreement on displement the Peace Plan of Ukrainian President P Poroshenko engagement of forces.
A memorandum concretising to pull back one kilometre from the line of contact and certain points was signed on 19 September 2014. completely withdraw all heavy weaponry, initially in three 25 The package of measures of 15 February was accomdefined areas (Petrivske and Solote in the Donetsk region, panied by a political declaration by the Normandy Group.
Whereas the separatists map for implementing the Minsk Package of Measare represented in the TCG, they have no access to ures. the Normandy Format.
In line with Ukrainian and Today, more than two years later, the measures Russian wishes, political questions are negotiated in laid out in the “Steinmeier formula” remain unimthe Normandy Format without participation by the plemented, nor have the parties agreed on a roadseparatists.
The international peace efforts received their comes confirmed by the TCG, and thus also by the last boost to date in early September 2017 when separatists.
This strategy allows the Kremlin to guard Vladimir Putin proposed a UN mission to protect the its decision-making autonomy in the spheres of SMM along the line of contact.
Petro Poroshenko politics and security, while forcing the other particiwelcomed Moscow’s change of position.
The Ukrainpants – including Ukraine – to recognise the sepaian leadership had already proposed deploying a UN ratists as negotiating partners. peacekeeping force in 2015, but with access to the entire contested area and to the Russian-Ukrainian border.
At the OSCE Ministerial Council in Milan in December 2018, following the Kerch escalation, Martin Sajdik, Special Representative of the OSCE Chair-in-Office, proposed a joint OSCE/UN mission.
His discussion paper has to date been neither accepted nor rejected by the parties.
Kyiv and Moscow are still too far apart for a compromise to be possible.
The TCG concentrates on the concrete implementation of the Minsk Agreements, the situation in the conflict region and the resolution of immediate problems there.
At least in the first two years the economic and humanitarian working groups were able to achieve limited progress.
The People’s Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk question whether they could in the longer term beare very new entities, existing under conditions of come more similar to the other de facto states, which ongoing armed conflict.
This sets them apart from were themselves initially, to different degrees, charthe breakaway entities in Moldova and the South acterised by irregular forces, decentralised rule and Caucasus, which have established partially functionexcessive violence. ing de facto state structures since the mid-1990s.
The origins of the anti-Maidan protests in eastern While not internationally recognised, the latter do Ukraine remain a matter of great controversy.
Some possess a degree of legitimacy among their own argue that they were instigated by Moscow, and populations,31 from which the two Donbas People’s would never have occurred without Russian manipuRepublics are far removed.
Others attribute them to an autochthonous much more strongly on deliberate Russian intervenmovement that emerged without Russian prompting, tion than did the older de facto states.
Another People’s Republics are not only completely economischool of thought again sees Russian interference at cally dependent on Russia but also under Moscow’s work but concedes limited autonomy to local actors. direct political control.
At this juncture it is an open 33 Nina Caspersen, Unrecognized States , 76f.
Russlands Krieg in der Ukraine”, OstDonbas in March 2018, the author attempted to visit Doeuropa 64, no. : 3–16. netsk to conduct interviews but was refused permission to 35 This largely corresponds to the official Russian interenter.
The separatist forces in Donetsk and concedes that Kyiv’s neglect and the exploitative policies of Luhansk operate within a discursive framework defined by the eastern Ukrainian oligarchs gave parts of the population Moscow. genuine reason to take to the streets in spring 2014.
Wilson, SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 14 Violent Power Struggles The question of the origins, motivation and objectives People’s Republic and the Cossack leader Nikoof the insurgency is at the same time the question layi Kosyzin in the Luhansk People’s Republic . of who was to blame for the war.
The answer to that Alexander Zakharchenko , a businessman question determines which paths to conflict resolufrom Kharkiv and commander of the Oplot Brigade, tion are plausible.
The following discussion is based assumed the leadership of the Donetsk People’s Reon the assessment that sufficient political frustration public in August 2014.40 Igor Plotnitsky , was present in the Donbas to trigger protests against a former Red Army soldier who had held positions Kyiv in the heady atmosphere of spring 2014.
But in various Ukrainian enterprises, took charge in Luethnically motivated separatism could not be idenhansk.
The displacement of the first more radical tified either before or after the outbreak of fighting. generation of separatists eliminated resistance to the Ample evidence exists for early intervention by Minsk Agreements of September 2014 at a juncture Russian actors.
As well as local volunteers and memwhere Russia, facing growing international pressure, bers of local elites,38 the armed insurgents included was interested in containing the conflict.
The initial, increasing numbers of Russian nationals and persons intense phase of “purges” lasted until summer 2015 with long residence in Russia.
Many of them had in the DPR, and into 2016 in the LPR,42 with power served in the Soviet and/or Russian armed forces and struggles and assassinations continuing in both.
In intelligence services, others had close ties to extreme November 2017 Igor Plotnitsky fled to Russia after an nationalist circles in Russia.
Pasetshnik and Pushilin were both confirmed The emergence of the People’s Republics has been in office in elections held on 11 November 2018.45 characterised by numerous violent power struggles.
These most recent events in both entities, especially From summer 2014 the most radical advocates of the Zakharchenko assassination, gave rise to extenwider military expansion were forced into exile in sive speculation.
Zentrum für Osteuropa43 “Zachar, ‘Motorola’, ‘Givi’, ‘Betmen’ i drugie: Kak i za und internationale Studien , May 2017). chto kombaty gibridnoj vojny na vostoke Ukrainy pogibali 38 Eastern Ukrainian oligarchs, above all Rinat Akhmetov, v tylu” [Zachar, Morotola, Givi, Betmen and others: How exacerbated tensions by oscillating between supporting Kiyv and why the fighters in the hybrid war in Ukraine died in and the rebels.
Maksim Vichrov and Maksim Butchenko, the hinterland], Novaya Gazeta, 31 August 2018.
Russische Nationalisten und Geheimseparatists were prevented from standing.
For example in parliamentary elections on 2 November that year – July 2017 – to the surprise of both the Kremlin and in violation of the Minsk Agreements.
Like the May the LPR leadership – he announced the unification 2014 independence referendums, neither the Novemof the two People’s Republics to create “Malorossiya” ber 2014 nor the November 2018 elections satisfied .47 Moscow accused the Ukrainian leadinternational standards; they proceeded without inership and intelligence services of his murder, while ternational observers and excluded IDPs living elseKyiv insisted that Russia was behind the assassinawhere. tion.
Other possible explanations for the crime inThe political institutions in the People’s Republics cluded local rivalries or a “war of the curators” in possess staff and internet presences, and run informaMoscow.
Leonid Pasechnik is a former member of tion campaigns of varying reach.
Until November nomic conflicts are generally not conducted via these 2017 he was defence minister in the LPR and one of institutions, however, but informally and frequently Plotnitsky’s main rivals.
The two parliaments are dominated by eastern Ukrainian separatist whose political career groups supporting the respective rulers.
There is no began before 2014.50 He served briefly as head of state functioning– let alone independent – judiciary,55 of the DPR in 2014 and as Chairman of the People’s the media cannot operate freely and critical journalSoviet until August 2018.
There is represented the entity in the Trilateral Contact Group. no dependable survey data on the political opinions He did not participate actively in the fighting and is of the respective populations, but eye-witnesses regarded as a supporter of the Minsk Agreements. report apathy and withdrawal.
The military and security forces are home to many former fighters, it is reported, but also to individuals seeking income and Establishment of Quasi-state Institutions opportunities in an otherwise deteriorating economic situation.
They are reported to exercise brutal and Although both People’s Republics adopted “democratic arbitrary violence against political adversaries and the constitutions” in May 2014, the political and social wider population.
In fact dictatorial systems prisoners being held without legal process, sometimes have been created.
Interviews with victims, Kyiv, 52 Mitrochin, “Diktaturtransfer im Donbas” , 41.
SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 16 Economic Decline and Dependency on Russia Economic Decline and Dependency Kyiv tolerated trade with the People’s Republics:62 on Russia Although Ukraine was increasingly substituting anthracite from the NGCA with imports from South The war years of 2014 and 2015 caused a dramatic Africa, it initially still used supplies from the breakeconomic collapse on both sides of the line of contact. away entities for electricity generation.
The UkrainMuch of the industrial equipment and infrastructure ian-controlled areas continued to supply the (rein the areas of fighting was damaged, looted or demaining) steel industry in the NGCAs with iron ore. stroyed.
The The NGCAs also continued to receive electricity from banking system collapsed and the region was cut off the GCAs.
Other products were also traded, alongside from the international financial transaction system. significant smuggling and corruption.
This arrangeIt is estimated that the region’s economy shrank by ment ended abruptly in March 2017, when Kyiv imabout two-thirds in 2014.58 Payments of pensions and posed an economic embargo on the NGCAs.
Industrial other social benefits ceased from the end of the year, production in the People’s Republics collapsed, numerfurther exacerbating socio-economic hardship.
Only ous workers were made redundant, and (where they the surviving Ukrainian enterprises continued to were still paid at all) wages were cut by up to 50 perensure that wages were paid more or less regularly, cent.
Efforts to find new markets in Russia had at and also provided humanitarian aid. best partial success.
In the course of 2015 Russia began paying pensions, benefits and wages in both entities.
While this began hesitantly, not least on account of the economic crisis in Russia, it ultimately led to a consolidation of the new power structures – and to their absolute economic dependency on Russia.
Attempts by the People’s Republics to persuade businesses operating in their territory to pay taxes met with very modest success.
Most firms remained registered on the Ukrainian-controlled side and initially continued to operate across the line of contact.
Centre for Humanitarian Advisory Group on Ukraine attributed about half the decline Dialogue, November 2016); Natalia Mirimanova, Economic to the fighting in Donbas.
Interviews in Kyiv, March 64 Interviews with business representatives in Kyiv, March 2018.
Between Neglect and Implementation of the Minsk Agreements Ukraine: Between Neglect and Implementation of the Minsk Agreements Kyiv believes its conflict is not with the rulers in In this scheme the Donbas conflict is but one eleDonetsk and Luhansk, but with Russia.
From the Ukrainian perspectext it is easy for the populations of the contested tive there can be no separation between the events areas to be forgotten.
From that perspective a resolution military pressure, but the documents remain highly cannot be restricted to the Donbas, but instead precontested in Ukraine; implementation – especially supposes full restoration of Ukraine’s sovereignty and of the political provisions – has stalled.
In the eyes of most of my interhand, many Ukrainian actors assert that the security viewees reconciliation with Russia is neither likely situation in the NGCAs is too volatile to permit elecnor possible.
On the other, they see a danger that there can be no alternative to close political and milispecial status for the two breakaway entities might tary ties with the West, in order to offer maximum grant Moscow a permanent veto over Ukrainian’s resistance to Russia. internal and foreign policies.
Many interviewees also placed the Russian attack In Kyiv there is broad consensus that the events on Ukraine in a broader international context, dein the Donbas are part of a hybrid war conducted by scribing it as one of several dimensions of Moscow’s Russia against Ukraine.
In this predominant interwar on the liberal global order and the Western compretation Moscow is waging war to block Ukraine’s munity.
They regard Ukraine as part of the West and Euro-Atlantic integration and restore its own hegemony a vanguard for defending its values. over the entire country.
From this perspective the Kyiv’s Donbas narrative concentrates almost excluconflict in the east is part of an existential struggle sively on the geopolitical level and the relationship where only the Ukrainian or the Russian project can with Russia, with no space for a local conflict dimensurvive, but not both. sion.
In this discourse the separatist rulers in Donetsk and Luhansk are not autonomous actors but puppets controlled by Moscow.
Kyiv regards them as criminals 65 The description of the Ukrainian Donbas discourse and terrorists who must not be legitimised by treating draws heavily on the findings of twenty-five interviews them as a conflict party. with political actors, experts and representatives of civil The absence of a local dimension in Kyiv’s intersociety organisations conducted by the author in Kyiv in March 2018, as well as participation in seminars and diapretation of the conflict has grave consequences for logue processes on the conflict since 2014.
Condomoj” , Zerkalo Nedeli, 13 June 2018. sequently, there is no issue of reconciliation between SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 18 Controversy over the Minsk Agreements different ethnic or social groups, merely a need to Controversy over the Minsk Agreements establish or restore cohesion within one and the same society.
Yet the emphasis on cohesion collides with While the contextualisation of the Donbas war is Kyiv’s highly negative image of the Donbas, which uncontested in Kyiv, there are considerable differis portrayed as backward, Soviet, unproductive and ences within the Ukrainian political spectrum about authoritarian. how best to respond to the Russian aggression and how to treat the contested territories.
February 2015 Package of Measures for implementing them, as a Russian imposition that the Ukrainian This heavily geopolitical perspective also leads to a leadership was forced to accept in a moment of milirigid categorisation of the populations of the conflict tary weakness.
A blanket suspicion is directed towards those Agreements – especially formalising special status in who continue to live in the contested territories or the Ukrainian constitution – are extremely controalternate between the GCAs and the NGCAs.
As a result, the Agreements are permanently find themselves liable to accusations of sharing antiquestioned and challenged in the domestic political Ukrainian attitudes and supporting the Moscow-led process.
Under these conditions, peacesuch as decentralisation from playing a positive role building (which to the Ukrainians means the restoin the peace process.
Other issues such as language ration of social cohesion) is impossible until the sepalegislation further heighten tensions and are politiratist areas have been liberated and returned to full cally instrumentalised in the conflict. central control.
How the populations and the current The implications of the March and April 2019 rulers should be treated after the end of the conflict presidential elections for the implementation of the is a matter of great controversy.
One of the foremost Minsk Agreements and the future of the peace proissues is a “draft law prohibiting collaboration” process remain unclear.
Poroshenko focused his election posed by the People’s Front party of Arseniy Yatsencampaign on identity politics under the slogan yuk.
Some Ukrainian interviewees said that they “Army, Language, Faith” – with limited success, as could not exclude the possibility of retribution against his poor showing in the first round demonstrated.
His “collaborators” following a military victory for Kyiv. surprise contender, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, remained vague on the Donbas and future relations with Russia for most of the election campaign.
Shortly before the second round he declared his intention to continue to work for the implementation of the Minsk Agreements, but said that the Minsk Process should be overhauled.
He also called for direct talks with Russia 66 See also Katharine Quinn-Judge, “To Reunite Ukraine, since the war was between Ukraine and Russia.
Most Kyiv Must Overcome Its Own Prejudices”, Crisis Group Comimportantly, however, Ukraine should strive for an mentary . immediate ceasefire in the Donbas.
Kyiv, Zelenskiy 67 “The mainstream has no understanding for the people said, needed to take a more engaged and inclusive in the territories, that they are Ukrainians, that they must be helped.
Quote from an conflict in the East, including by paying pensions to interview conducted by the author in Kyiv, March 2018. those entitled in the conflict region.
Between Neglect and Implementation of the Minsk Agreements the treatment of the contested areas.
In sumthe Minsk Agreements militias – including Azov, mer 2015 President Poroshenko presented a proposal the Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists and for anchoring the special status in the Ukrainian conAidar – were formally integrated into the Ukrainian stitution.
The debate in the Verchovna Rada was armed forces from the end of 2014, but some conaccompanied by street protests in Kyiv, where violent tinue to exist as political organisations and are in clashes left several dead and dozens injured.
The certain cases close to Ukraine’s extreme right-wing constitutional amendment has been on ice ever since. scene.
They played a significant role in all significant In October 2018, to the surprise of most observers, protests against Kyiv’s policies towards the Donbas, the special status law was extended without public from legislative proposals in connection with the disorder.
The previous year’s extension had only been Minsk Package of Measures to the imposition of the possible because the government presented it to pareconomic embargo in 2017.
Even if right-wing and liament as part of a new law on the contested terriextreme right-wing parties have failed to achieve any tories that for the first time explicitly named Russia notable showing in elections since 2014, nationalist as aggressor and occupying power.
Nationalist actors have frequently succeeded to the Ukrainian armed forces.
It also expanded the in forcing the political leadership to modify policies. president’s powers in the event of escalation.
This legislative process was again accompanied by intense and in parts violent protests, in the course of which Implementation of the Minsk Agreements all reference to the Minsk Agreements disappeared from the draft law.
Russia immediately criticised the Since 2014 Kyiv has taken a series of steps to fulfil law as a violation of Minsk.
Once it had passed, the Ukrainian’s obligations under the Minsk Agreements.
The special status law followed in October outrage-protests-21068354af5c . 2014, granting special self-administration rights to 76 The de facto leaderships in Donetsk and Luhansk “particular areas in the regions of Donetsk and demanded participation in the constitutional debate.
The law codifies rejected this on the grounds that they had come to power the right to use the Russian language in the affected by means of terror and lacked electoral legitimation.
Instead, areas and special status in the areas of administraKyiv said, legitimate representatives from the Donetsk and tion, police/security forces, elections, and economic Luhansk regions would be included in the discussions. and cultural rights.
Interviews with deputies from the govern74 For a documentation of the law, see “Gesetz über den ing and opposition parties, Kyiv, March 2018.
Sonderstatus einzelner Bezirke der Region Donezk und 80 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Luhansk ”, Ukraine-Analysen, no.
Signing of the ‘Donbass Reintegration’ Law by the President SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 20 Implementation of the Minsk Agreements Ukrainian political leadership emphasised that it was adhering to the Agreements.
Controlled Destabilisation by Revisionist Means Russia: Controlled Destabilisation by Revisionist Means Moscow plays a central political and military role that Russia-friendly or even pro-Russian forces could in the Donbas conflict, while adhering to the Minsk return to power in Kyiv.
The Kremlin the Kremlin’s policy believed that the toppling of President Viktor Yanuin the Donbas remains orientated on the status quo. kovych had been staged by Washington to bring Formally Moscow treats the contested territories as Ukraine into NATO and further erode Russia’s inpart of the Ukrainian state. fluence in its own neighbourhood.
From the RusAt a press conference on 4 March 2014 Vladimir sian perspective the annexation of Crimea and Putin laid out the official Russian interpretive framesupport for the separatists in eastern Ukraine were work for Russian policy towards post-Maidan Ukraine, merely acts of defence against the American describing the events in Kyiv as “an anti-constitutional drive towards a unipolar world order.
As far as Mostakeover, an armed seizure of power” and denying cow was concerned, the West was instrumentalising the legitimacy of the new Ukrainian government. ideas about “freedom” and “democracy” to justify Putin expressed his understanding for Ukrainians’ interventions in the regional spheres of influence of dissatisfaction with a system that had failed to imother major powers , and to interfere in prove their lives since the country became independthe internal affairs of other states.
Corruption and inequality had, he said, been cow sees Ukraine as one of a long series of Western many times worse in Ukraine than in Russia.
While violations of international law, from the Kosovo conthe people had protested for understandable reasons, flict through the Iraq war to the intervention in Putin said, other “forces” had exploited this to carry Libya. out a coup.
Now, he said, “we see the rampage of In that context the Russian-Ukrainian antagonism reactionary forces, nationalist and anti-Semitic forces” is no isolated phenomenon, but – seen from Mosin Kyiv and other parts of the country.
From the Russian perspective Ukraine is not an us for help, … we retain the right to use all available independent actor or adversary, but is controlled by means to protect those people.
This implies that possible solutions are We believe this would be absolutely legitimate.”81 located at the European and international levels, This perspective has been maintained.
SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 22 Elements of Russia’s Donbas Policy rather than in the scope of Russian-Ukrainian relaphotographs of military equipment, other images tions.
And in the Russian narrative Crimea is exand statements posted on social networks by Russian cluded from the search for solutions.
It is regarded soldiers deployed in Ukraine; interviews with soldiers, as part of the Russian Federation, its annexation a eye-witnesses and relatives; and estimating the numchapter concluded. bers of fallen Russian soldiers returned to Russia (photographs and coffin counts).89 Reliable information about the sections of the Ukrainian-Russian border Elements of Russia’s Donbas Policy not under Kyiv’s control is scarce.
Despite its comprehensive mandate, the OSCE Mission has only restricted Russian’s policy towards its neighbours draws on access there, but it has repeatedly reported truck cona revisionist toolbox, which it also employs in the voys with undetermined cargo passing the border unresolved conflicts in the region.
It is suspected that these actions are characterised by four elements that occur vehicles transport military equipment into the conin different strengths and combinations,87 and can tested areas. also be identified in the Donbas conflict.
Moscow continues to deny both the delivery of heavy weapons and other equipment to eastern Ukraine and the deployment of regular Russian forces there.
The methods upon which these studies 2014 Artillery Strikes against Ukraine”, Bellingcat, 2014. are based include satellite imaging; geolocation using Bellingcat conducted particularly extensive research on the downing of the Malaysian passenger jet in July 2014.
It was later suspected that this could have Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Nagorno-Karabakh in Light of the Crisis been a reason for his assassination in February 2015 in Mosover Ukraine, ed.
In great contrast to the case of Russian interconvoys crossing the Russian/NGCA border in both direcvention in Crimea.
In a documentary first broadcast on tions, avoiding official crossings and travelling on dirt roads.
Russian state television in March 2015 Putin describes in The vehicles were not identified as carrying humanitarian minute detail the “necessities” and decision-making process aid.
On the same day the Mission announced it had discovthat had led to the military operations in Crimea.
Controlled Destabilisation by Revisionist Means Russian actors involved in building lics, which they exploit for local power and distribuquasi-state structures in tion conflicts. contested areas.
Moscow has been granting Russian citizenship to inhabitants of AbSupport in establishing statehood: Russia does not khazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria since the recognise the People’s Republics and maintains no 2000s.
This policy, known as pasportizatsiya, was official contacts with their rulers.
The Kremlin accordoriginally also motivated by humanitarian concerns, ingly avoided explicitly confirming the results of to help residents of those regions escape their isothe November 2018 elections in the NGCAs.
But the naturalisation policy increasingly actors are, however, involved in building quasi-state morphed into a means of exerting pressure on the structures in the contested areas.
It also encouraged the arguentities are connected by a close network of “curament that Moscow was responsible for the fate of tors” operating as advisors in Moscow and in the govRussian citizens in these regions. ernment institutions of the People’s Republics, and Russia naturalised the entire population of Crimea as such forming a bridge between the two sides.
In the two People’s Republics, on central figure in the curator system is Vladislav Surthe other hand, it has to date pursued policies predikov, an advisor to the Russian President.
While the Duma in February not only the contacts between the separatists and 2014 passed a law easing naturalisation procedures Moscow, but also the political processes in the confor Russian-speaking residents of other states, it is not tested areas.
As the Kremlin’s special representative applied in the People’s Republics.
In February 2017 he also plays an important role in the deliberations of Putin decreed that “temporarily, during the political the Trilateral Contact Group in Minsk.
Deputy Prime settlement period pursuant to the Minsk AgreeMinister Dmitry Kozak in turn heads the “Inter-minisments”, identity documents, passports, training certerial Commission for the Provision of Humanitarian tificates, birth and marriage certificates and similar Aid for the Affected Areas in the Southeast of the issued in the territories would be recognised in the Regions of Donetsk and Luhansk”, which is responRussian Federation.
Residents of the contested areas sible for humanitarian measures but also – accordwould also be able to enter the Russian Federation ing to media reports – for economic interwithout a visa.
The Kremlin emphasised that the action with the contested areas. decree served humanitarian ends and complied with It is frequently reported that the institutions inthe Minsk Agreements.
Indeed, the text cannot be volved pursue diverging interests, as witnessed in the construed as representing official recognition of the recurring power struggles in Donetsk and Luhansk. issuing institutions.
Other parliamentary initiatives Observers suspect that the Russian security services since 2014 aiming to ease naturalisation for residents back the hardliners and opponents of Minsk in both People’s Republics.
Surkov’s mission, on the other hand, is to control precisely these actors and ensure 94 ICG, Russia and the Separatists in Eastern Ukraine , that the Minsk Agreements survive.
Differences 95 For greater detail see Fischer, “Russian Policy” of position and interest in Moscow create a degree of , 20ff. political leeway for the actors in the People’s Repub96 Paul Goble, “Moscow Cannot Afford a South Ossetian Strategy in Ukraine’s Donbas”, Eurasia Daily Monitor 14, 91 See also ICG, Russia and the Separatists in Eastern Ukraine no. . , 12ff.
SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 24 Elements of Russia’s Donbas Policy of the contested areas have had no success.
To date Moscow tential importance for the contested areas in the has refrained from expanding its economic contacts Donbas.
This has applied from the outset, especially with the People’s Republics and elevating them to a to the smaller and economically weaker Luhansk more official plane.
As well as supplying humanitarian Russia’s approach in this case exhibits similarities aid, Russia also cushions the worst impacts of ecoand differences to other conflicts.
Since Ukraine’s imposition of a trade since 2014 have been considerably more planned embargo in 2017 both People’s Republics have beand directed than in the civil wars that broke out in come completely dependent on Russia for supplies of the course of the Soviet disintegration in the early raw materials and markets for their products.
In the Donbas Russian policy deliberately possibilities for commerce remain limited as long as contributed to escalating the conflict.
Fear combination of revisionist elements in the People’s of Western sanctions also leads Russian enterprises Republics is most similar to the Russian approach to to exercise caution.
In order to process payments the conflicts over Abkhazia and South Ossetia in the “legally” they are channelled via South Ossetia, the years before the Russian-Georgian War of 2008.
But only “partner country” that has to date officially this is not a static situation, and Moscow has been recognised the People’s Republics.
An incremental process with did not “nationalise” the affected Ukrainian enterdeeper Russian involvement in eastern Ukraine – prises in March 2017 but instead – in semantic comparable to the trajectory followed in Abkhazia accord with the Minsk Agreements – placed them and South Ossetia over the years – cannot be excluded.
Given that the Ukrainian constitution permits dual citizenship, it is likely that a meaningful number of Ukrainians probably received Russian passports during the period between the collapse of the Soviet Union and the tightening of Russia’s naturalisation legislation at the end of the 1990s.
European Peace Policy in the Unresolved Conflicts”, eration], Kommersant Vlast’, 6 May 2017. in Not Frozen!, ed.
SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 25 The Humanitarian Situation in the Conflict Zone The Humanitarian Situation in the Conflict Zone The humanitarian consequences of the war are overstretched, above all at the beginning of the war.6 deeply inscribed into Donbas society.
They are a Another is the problematic role played by the ambivasignificant factor in the steadily widening gulf lent stance of large parts of the political elites.
More between Kyiv and the populations in the conflict than a few politicians in Kyiv regard the Donbas as an regions, and especially in the NGCAs. unnecessary economic burden and its population as What was once a temporary emergency in eastern backward and politically untrustworthy.
Their wilUkraine threatens to turn into a situation of perlingness to engage and to alleviate the humanitarian manent poverty and underdevelopment with all the suffering in the conflict-affected areas is very limassociated negative consequences.
There is also a problem of representation. the conflict region has deteriorated continuously, Since the Maidan revolution the Ukrainian party specwith the most drastic decline seen in the past three trum has focussed strongly on the centre and west of years.
Even in the areas along the line of contact significant political force capable of effectively repthat are controlled by Kyiv the proportion is about 55 resenting the region’s interests in Kyiv.
Humanitarian organisations point to a rise this amplifies the feeling of being forgotten and nein the prevalence of typical symptoms of structural glected.
Structural asymmetries and political priorpoverty such as drug abuse, alcoholism and prostituities in Kyiv are also reflected at the level of governtion, and to limited access to healthcare and school ment.
Populations of the more densely populated tories and IDPs” established in 2016 is politically and People’s Republics are especially severely affected. financially weak and overshadowed by better-funded Here the suffering has increased in proportion to the ministries.
It is not perceived as a significant player growing isolation.5 by other state and non-state actors.9 The Ukrainian government appears unable to cope with the humanitarian disaster.
The dramatic rise is partly attributable to the eco2018. nomic embargo imposed on the NCGAs in March 2017.
SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 26 Internally Displaced Persons and Pensioners Internally Displaced Persons and this day tensions between local populations and the Pensioners IDPs are rare.
But the national political level remains ambivalent for the reasons laid out above.
Initiatives According to the Ukrainian Ministry of Social Policy to integrate IDPs are not supported by the whole govthere were almost 1. million registered internally ernment and are underfunded.4 displaced persons living in Ukrainian-controlled territory in December 2017.
The United Nations beInternal displacement has become a lieves that a considerable proportion of IDPs registered chronic structural problem. in the GCAs live for at least part of the time in the NGCAs.
The UN’s own estimates therefore put the The problem is especially clear in the case of IDPs number of IDPs living permanently in the GCAs at of pension age.
The Ukrainian government stopped about 760,000.110 As well as the IDPs in Ukraine, paying social benefits to residents of the NGCAs in another million people fled the war to Russia.
Thus December 2014, in response to the holding of elecaltogether the war in eastern Ukraine has displaced tions in contravention of the Minsk Agreements. about two and a half million people temporarily or Since 2014 pensioners living in the NGCAs have had permanently from their homes.
This exceeds the to register as IDPs in the GCAs in order to receive magnitude of flight and displacement during the their pensions.
Ukraine has the world’s sure that registered IDPs reside permanently at their tenth-largest population of IDPs.2 place of registration.
According to the UN close to The Donbas was a demographically old region even 500,000 of the almost 1. million pensioners registered before the war on account of economically driven outin the NGCAs before the war were still regularly reward migration.
Kyiv’s policy – intended affected by the events is disproportionally high.
About to prevent “pension tourism” between GCAs and 30 percent of the 3. million people requiring huNGCAs – denies a living to one of the groups most manitarian aid because of the conflict are of pension severely affected by the conflict.
International organiage – the highest proportion in any conflict worldsations see this as a human rights violation, as do cerwide.3 tain Ukrainian state and non-state actors.
They call for The Ukrainian public and local and regional adKyiv to completely uncouple the pension payments ministrations responded with great solidarity and from IDP status.
A draft law to that effect prepared engagement to the plight of the refugees.
Numerous by the Ministry of Temporarily Occupied Territories aid convoys and generous donations reached the crisis has been on ice in the Rada since summer 2017.117 area in 2014 and 2015.
The support was organised quickly and unbureaucratically at grass-roots level.
SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 27 The Humanitarian Situation in the Conflict Zone In the sixth year of the conflict internal displacepeople to cross the line elsewhere, exposing themment is no longer a temporary phenomenon, but a selves to the dangers of mines and unexploded ordchronic structural problem.
The zone along the line of contact is one lems, from securing a living to lack of political repreof the world’s most heavily mined regions.3 sentation.
A survey by the International Organisation Since 2014 tens of thousands of residential buildfor Migration in March 2018 found for the first time ings have been damaged or destroyed.
Repairs and a majority stating they no longer wished to return to reconstruction have proceeded extraordinarily slowly their original homes.8 and are impeded by ongoing fighting, especially in the NGCAs.
Fighting and shelling also regularly damage critical infrastructure and endanger the supply of Life in the “Grey Zone” and in the NGCAs electricity, water and heating on both sides of the line of contact.
Five so-called Entry-Exit Crossing Points has been repeatedly shelled by both sides.
The to be reduced or cut off altogether. latter crossing point, at Stanytsia Luhanska, is a About 200,000 people live in the immediate vicinity deteriorating provisional wooden structure built over of the line of contact on the CGA side.
Because the a heavily damaged concrete bridge and is only passseparatists deny access to the areas under their conable on foot.
The other crossing points (Maiorske, trol, reliable population figures for their side are not Marinka, Novotroitske and Hnutove) are also open for available.
To date the conflict parties have been troops operate from residential areas and civilian unable to agree to open more crossings.
The People’s facilities and even locate heavy arms in them, with Republics have little interest in encouraging traffic life-threatening consequences for the civilian popuwith the GCAs, fearing not least that more people lation.6 could move permanently to the other side.
In Kyiv efforts to more strongly isolate the NGCAs have been growing for years.
Despite these restrictions the numreport_eecp_february_2018_eng_1.pdf (accessed November ber of crossings has increased every year.
SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 28 Access to Humanitarian Aid Access to Humanitarian Aid membership.
Before the war Ukraine had little experidifficult political conditions.
International humaniflicts with local rulers by operating below the threshtarian organisations encountered numerous bureauold of formal organisation.
The growing isolation cratic, logistical and legal hindrances when they of the People’s Republics severely restricts their access began operating there in the course of 2014.127 But to humanitarian goods and services.
Ukrainian and when Rinat Akhmetov’s businesses were expropriated international organisations praise the cooperation of in spring 2017 the charity he ran was also forced out state institutions – including the Civilian-Military of Donetsk.
Until then it had played a central role in Administrations in the Donetsk and Luhansk NCGAs, supplying the population with humanitarian aid.3 but note that problems still persist.
For example a Under these conditions Russia’s role as a provider draft law on humanitarian aid in crises, which would of humanitarian aid for the NGCAs has grown.4 clarify important taxation issues and clear bureauSince summer 2014 the Russian Ministry of Emergency cratic obstacles, has been stuck in the Rada since Situations reports having sent dozens of convoys with 2015.
The fact that the law has still not come into more than 77,000 tonnes of humanitarian aid into force hampers the work of humanitarian organisathe contested territories.
The Ukrainians and intertions.9 national observers suspect that these convoys bring military as well as humanitarian support across the Red Cross is the only international border, but the charge cannot be verified because organisation operating in both Russia refuses to permit systematic cargo inspections.
The Russian public participates with donations and voluntary engagement.
Access for humanitarian organisations manitarian aid and political support for the separatto the NGCAs has deteriorated continuously since 2014. ists is fluid.
Russia also took in almost one million They must be accredited by the local regime and are war refugees from Ukraine in 2014 and 2015, a figure subject to strict monitoring and control.
Only the without precedent in Russian history.6 International Committee of the Red Cross is International donors and humanitarian organisaable to operate in both People’s Republics.
A few tions have noticeably scaled back their activities in other organisations have been granted access in the interim, but find their work permanently hampered by the caprices of the de facto authorities.
SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 29 The Humanitarian Situation in the Conflict Zone Ukraine since 2016.137 In early 2018 the United Nations noted that it had funds to cover only 45 percent of the humanitarian aid needed in the eastern Ukrainian war zone in 2017.138 Interviewees gave several reasons for this.
In the “competition of international crises” the humanitarian emergency in Ukraine has dropped down the international agenda since the advent of the European migration crisis, while the priorities of the biggest Western donors have shifted to the Middle East and North Africa.
Another factor is that restricted access, political despotism and the almost complete absence of transparency deter international donors from releasing larger sums for the Ukrainian NGCAs.
Finally the ongoing instability in the conflict area restricts the room for manoeuvre open to humanitarian organisations, as does Kyiv’s prioritisation of security over access to humanitarian aid.
In view of dwindling external engagement, representatives of international organisations speak of a forgotten humanitarian disaster in eastern Ukraine.
SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 30 Conflict Dynamics and Impediments to Peace Conflict Dynamics and Impediments to Peace Efforts to end the fighting in the Donbas have been NGCAs.
In the longer term this will impede the resstalled since autumn 2016, with the conflict parties toration of social peace. showing no willingness to compromise.
Ongoing The dependency of the two People’s Republics on Russia ceasefire violations spread fear and reflect the general has grown steadily since 2014, in a development absence of trust.
At the same time all sides profit in exponentially accelerated by the economic isolation one way or another from the current stalemate.
Disagreements between applies most strongly to the two People’s Republics, Moscow’s curators sometimes open up a degree of which would cease to exist if the Minsk Agreements independent space for local actors, but it must be were implemented.
Internal political instability in assumed that Russia exercises far-reaching control Ukraine suits Russia, and Kyiv can postpone impleover the de facto authorities and military and politimentation of what it sees as the disadvantageous pocal developments.
In the meantime impedicy in these relationships and Moscow’s refusal to ments to peace consolidate on all levels and a peracknowledge its own role in the conflict undermine manent solution becomes more unlikely by the day. the trust of the other actors and thus hamper all Kyiv and the People’s Republics are growing ever furefforts to promote peace. ther apart.
By creating quasi-state institutions and Relations between Ukraine and Russia have witnessed holding elections in 2014 and 2018 the separatists an unprecedented alienation since 2014, with the and their Russian supporters have created facts on the Euromaidan, the annexation of Crimea and the outground that mitigate against reaching an understandbreak of war in the Donbas.
Russia suspended ened the isolation of the populations of the NGCAs. the CIS Free Trade Agreement with Ukraine in early The Ukrainian political elite’s fixation on the geo2016 citing incompatibility with Ukraine’s DCFTA political conflict with Russia is understandable, but with the European Union.
Ukraine has largely ended blinds Kyiv to the political and humanitarian situaits dependency on Russian energy imports, and both tion in the region.
This contrasts with the reality sides have imposed extensive sanctions against the along the line of contact, which still sees about one other.
Today there is neither local border traffic nor million crossings monthly.
Diplomatic relations Donbas is squeezed between the opposing parties. have heavily scaled back, although not broken off Even humanitarian aid is divided along political lines. entirely.
Kyiv decided at the end of 2018 not to extend International humanitarian organisations (not to the Russian-Ukrainian Friendship Treaty, upon which speak of Ukrainian) are largely excluded from the relations between the two states have rested since NGCAs and can therefore operate only in the Ukrainian-controlled areas.
SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 31 Conflict Dynamics and Impediments to Peace 1991.141 The treaty expired in March 2019.
Perhaps in Ukraine – and made it increasingly unpredictable. the most symbolic break is the autocephaly of the Consequently the international level offers no prosUkrainian Orthodox Church carried through by pect of positive developments in the peace process President Poroshenko.2 either.
The Ukrainian public and political elites overwhelmingly regard Russia as aggressor and enemy, while the Russian mainstream sees Ukraine as a vassal of the United States.
There is virtually no common ground between the conflict narratives – nor on any other issue.
Ukraine demands the restoration of its territorial integrity and sovereignty over the contested Donbas entities and Crimea.
Moscow neatly separates the two issues and makes a resolution of the Donbas conflict contingent upon agreement with the Western powers on a reorganisation of European and international security.
The internal political trends on both sides offer no prospect of change in the foreseeable future.
In this dimension too, the scope for understanding has shrunk to a minimum.
The relationship between Russia and the conflict-relevant Western actors Germany, France, European Union, NATO and the United States has deteriorated continuously since 2014.
The rift over the annexation of Crimea and the war in eastern Ukraine led to reciprocal sanctions and a deep crisis in political relations.
Russian hopes of improving relations with Washington under President Trump have been dashed.
Instead Russian-American relations have hit their lowest point since the end of the Cold War.
Options for Germany and the European Union Conclusions and Recommendations: Options for Germany and the European Union Russia has forced Ukraine into two territorial conUkraine.
In this context Brussels is supporting largeflicts, by annexing Crimea in 2014 and fanning tenscale political and economic reform processes, in the sions in eastern Ukraine into war.
Fighting continues course of which Ukraine will adopt large parts of EU in the Donbas.
Reform programmes such as decenin the Kerch Strait demonstrated, the two conflicts – tralisation also hold potential relevance for conflict despite Moscow’s insistence to the contrary – are resolution.
Ukraine is undeniably militarily Europeanisation – in the sense of promoting democweaker than Russia.
At the same time the political racy and economic development, strengthenleadership in Kyiv has been facing intense domestic ing human and minority rights, and anchoring the pushback for their policies, including the support principles of division of powers and peaceful conflict for the Minsk Agreements.
The implications of the regulation – can supply an important contribution 2019 presidential and parliamentary elections are to societal reconciliation and conflict resolution.4 uncertain, and with them Kyiv’s future approach to Since 2014 the European Union has also significantly the conflict in the Donbas.
The People’s Republics increased its financial support for Ukraine and is one of Donetsk and Luhansk currently lack some of the of the largest funders of humanitarian aid and peacedefining characteristics of other de facto states in the building measures. regions.
They are Russian creations controlled by Unlike the cases of Transnistria, Abkhazia and Moscow.
South Ossetia, the European institutions have no imThe European Union has established a division of mediate role in conflict management.
That part fell in labour concerning the territorial conflicts in Ukraine.14 to Germany and France, which have since then The EU explicitly supports Ukraine’s territorial integconducted the most important international peace rity and sovereignty and condemns Moscow’s annexaprocess for the Donbas, the talks in the Normandy tion of Crimea and its role in the Donbas.
The European Union’s sanctions policy and successively imposed sanctions on Russia from March German and French mediation made an important 2014.
In March 2015 the European Council decided contribution to containing the fighting in 2014/2015 not to lift its sanctions until the Minsk Agreements and driving up the price of further escalation.
But have been implemented in full.3 they were not able to resolve the conflict.
The European Commission and the European ExThere is currently no alternative to the outlined ternal Action Service are working with the Ukrainian division of labour between the EU level and the ingovernment to implement the Association Agreement volved member states.
Both the situation in the conand the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreeflict region and the international context are excepment between the European Union and tionally fragile.
If existing communication channels are lost the repercussions for the conflict dynamic could be very negative.
Options for Germany and the European Union risks the strongly alienated conflict parties completely of the detained crews, and avoid further escalations rejecting any agreement.
They must continue to demand states are today far less united on what an approprithat Moscow resume direct contacts between the ate policy towards Russia and the Russian-Ukrainian Ukrainian and Russian armed forces, including in the conflict should look like than they were in 2014 and JCCC framework.
Berlin and Paris bear a great responsibility here. are based on claims stemming from the annexation They need to keep Ukraine on the political agenda, of Crimea, which are thus not internationally recogpreserve the consensus on sanctions, and further nised.
Even if Ukraine must be reminded to avoid develop their policy on the conflict in close coordinaescalation risks, the main responsibility lies with Mostion with their European partners.
The European Union should, therefore, consider embedding of their actions should be made clear to imposing additional sanctions if necessary.5 Moscow, which traditionally focuses on bilateral relaAt the level of Ukrainian-Russian relations the tions with the most important EU states and actively need is to counsel moderation on both sides.
This is seeks to exploit differences between member states easier in relation to Ukraine, but a difficult challenge in order to divide the Union. nonetheless.
Certain points need to be put to Kyiv much more assertively than hitherto.
Berlin must take provisions of the Minsk Agreements must be observed account of Ukrainian interests. by all parties.
This applies not only to Russia and the rulers in the People’s Republics, but also to Ukraine, The Nord Stream 2 pipeline needs to be discussed which must finally withdraw from Stanytsia Luhanska in this context.
Berlin was much too late in admitting in accord with the disengagement of forces agreement the scale of the geopolitical impact of the Germanof 2016.
Germany and its European partners should Russian project for eastern Europe, above all for make it clear to Kyiv that its ongoing obstruction of Ukraine.
If Nord Stream 2 is to be pursued the Gerthe ceasefire can have negative consequences for coman government must take account of Ukrainian operation.
Kyiv’s current policy towards the Donbas interests, for example concerning gas transit, and contributes to deepening the conflict by aggravating exert pressure on Moscow where these interests are the humanitarian situation.
Germany and the Euroendangered, for example by reducing the envisaged pean Union should nudge the Ukrainian leadership gas volumes to be supplied.
Both Germany and France towards a more nuanced perspective on the conflict; are currently absorbed by domestic and intra-EU one that looks beyond the geopolitical fixation on problems and crises.
Leaders in Berlin and Paris must Russia and encompasses the local level.
The Ukraininevertheless restore the foreign policy priority granted an state is responsible for its citizens on both sides of to the situation in Ukraine to the level warranted by the line of contact.
Kyiv also bears undeniable responits overall significance for Europe’s security. sibility for economic reconstruction of the areas The Minsk Agreements have often been called into under its control.
Germany and the European Union question by critics arguing that they disadvantage must continue to press for concrete steps in that Ukraine and have failed to bring about an end to the direction and consider generously supporting them. conflict.
But all relevant actors should remember The European Union’s relationship with Russia how unlikely it is that a new agreement could be is currently in tatters, possibilities for influence rare. reached – still less a better one – and how dangerThe sanctions need to be maintained.
The biggest time European actors should continue to clearly disproblem today is that the conditions for implementtance themselves from Washington’s erratic sanctions ing the Agreements are worsening rather than impolicies.
The same applies to the deployment of a European security order are too far apart for any UN-mandated peacekeeping force, which would, at timely convergence to be conceivable.
Nevertheless the same time, be a big step in the right direction. dialogue must continue, even if detached from the The Kerch escalation has further accelerated the Donbas conflict and without expectations of rapid negative trend.
Since November 2018, the parties to the conflict have blocked all efforts to investigate.
Calls to end sanctions – as heard immediAbbreviations ately after Putin’s proposal of a UN mission – are unrealistic and destabilising.
Security with Russia DCFTA Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement remains an important policy objective for Germany DFS Donetsk Filter Station DPR Donetsk People’s Republic and Europe.
But currently the positions diverge too EECP Exit-entry crossing points strongly for a solution to the Donbas conflict to be GCA Government-controlled area sought from this level.
HPG Humanitarian Policy Group In view of the blockages in the inter-governmental ICG International Crisis Group and international dimensions, special attention must ICRC International Committee of the Red Cross IDP Internally displaced person be directed to the local level.
The humanitarian sufIMEMO Institute of World Economy and International fering on both sides of the line of contact must be Relations alleviated as a matter of urgency.
Humanitarian aid JCCC Joint Centre for Control and Coordination and economic reconstruction are required, along with LPR Luhansk People’s Republic an end to the socio-economic isolation experienced by NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organisation the populations of the NGCAs.
Germany and Europe NGCA Non–government-controlled area OHCHR Office of the United Nations High Commissioner must press Kyiv to lift its economic embargo.
Berlin, for Human Rights Paris and Brussels must also raise the humanitarian OSCE Organisation for Security and Cooperation in disaster there in their dialogue with Russia.
Only MosEurope cow can persuade the rulers in Donetsk and Luhansk RUSI Royal United Services Institute for Defence and to grant greater access to humanitarian organisations.
Security Studies SMM Special Monitoring Mission Both sides should be urged to approve additional TCG Trilateral Contact Group crossing points on the line of contact to ease moveUNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ment between the GCAs and NGCAs.
Such measures UN OCHA United Nations Office for the Coordination of aim to slow or reverse the drifting apart of the afHumanitarian Affairs fected populations.
Kyiv needs to understand that ZOiS Zentrum für Osteuropaund internationale contact is an opportunity and not a threat.
The TCG Studien/Centre for East European and International Studies and the SMM must continue to work on confidencebuilding measures along the line of contact.
That could for example include restoring railway links for civilian passenger transport, medical staff cooperating across the line of contact, or better protection for maintenance work at water filter stations.
This would bring benefits for people on both sides and contribute to restoring trust.
Such an approach would imply a certain degree of engagement with functional elites in the People’s Republics, which is only possible in close dialogue with the Ukrainian side.
Germany in particular must use its political weight and its role in the peace process to reassure Kyiv that this does not mean a creeping recognition of the two entities.
Steps at the local level have very limited reach, but are vital to creating a basis for more ambitious peace solutions.
