Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said Sunday that Russia must make the first moves to rein in separatists and remove its weaponry from eastern Ukraine.
He also vowed that sanctions would remain in place until Moscow reverses its actions and respects the border between the two countries.
After an hour-long meeting with Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko, Tillerson told reporters that relations between Moscow and Washington will not improve until Ukraine gets back full control of its territory from separatists he characterized as Russia’s “proxies” in two breakaway provinces.
Tillerson was in Kiev with his new special envoy, Kurt Volker, as part of a United States push to resuscitate stalled negotiations over ending three years of war.
During his visit of barely three hours, Tillerson also squeezed in a meeting with young reformers who are pushing for the government to be more responsible and attractive to foreign investment.
Then he left for Turkey to talk with President Recep Tayyip Erdogan about the fast-moving offensive against the Islamic State militant group in Syria, before heading to the Persian Gulf for four days of shuttle diplomacy to mediate a dispute between Qatar and its neighbors.
The multipronged trip represents something of a pivot for the former Exxon Mobil chief executive, who came to the State Department job with no diplomatic experience.
After months of complaints that the department is being sidelined, Tillerson is asserting himself in a more conventional manner for the top United States diplomat by throwing himself into an intensive round of diplomatic forays abroad.
He came to Ukraine at a time when the Trump administration is trying simultaneously to improve relations with Russian President Vladi­mir Putin’s government and break the logjam in peacemaking efforts in a conflict that has brought punishing sanctions for Russia.
Many Ukrainians are encouraged by the greater United States involvement and the appointment of Volker, a seasoned diplomat who has backed sending lethal arms to Kiev to defend itself.
The Ukrainian government has been fighting separatists since 2014, when Russia annexed Crimea and began providing munitions and sending troops to fight alongside Ukrainian rebels in the breakaway provinces of Donetsk and Luhansk, known collectively as Donbas.
In 2015, Germany and France helped broker agreements that provide a road map to peace that requires Russia to withdraw its support for the separatists and Ukraine to give Donbas a measure of autonomy.
But the road map enshrined in the Minsk accords, after the city in Belarus where they were negotiated, has faltered over each side’s reluctance to compromise.
The Ukrainians insist they will amend the constitution to provide the desired autonomy only after Russia backs off.
Volker’s appointment mollifies Ukrainians who have been concerned that President Trump might make a deal with the Russians unfavorable to Ukraine.
But in the capital, Kiev, there are few signs of a nation at war, apart from the occasional military recruiting poster and young men on the streets in uniform.
Sidewalk cafes are thronged, and fountains in the heart of the city, where protesters encamped for months in 2013 to oust the Russia-friendly government, now bubble to music at night.
However, progress on reforms that can restore confidence in the government is slow.
Some improvements are notable, such as a U.S.-funded program to train, equip and adequately pay police patrol officers so they don’t take bribes from motorists.
But corruption is still so endemic that people routinely make small payoffs to university professors to pass an exam, or to doctors to get appointments.
By keeping sanctions against Russia in place and possibly adding new ones, as many in Congress want, she said, the United States can help restore Ukrainian sovereignty in the east and in Crimea.
