Abstract The Ukraine conflict is having serious consequences not only for Russia and Ukraine, but it also potentially threatens to damage the still frail economic recovery in Europe.
In Ukraine, which is the main victim of the conflict, the economy may decline by up to 8% this year.
In Russia, the costs of the conflict are estimated to be in the tune of 1% of GDP in 2014 2016, primarily on account of increased investment risks.
On the assumption of a 10% loss in exports of goods and services to Russia, the estimated GDP loss would be about 0.4% for Lithuania and Estonia, and less than 0.1% for Austria.
The estimated impact of Russia’s ban on agro-food imports from the EU imposed in August 2014 is expected to be the highest in the Baltics.
The question is whether these losses are justifiable and will achieve the desired effects – to change Russia’s behaviour in Ukraine and beyond.
Trade exposure to Russia ...............................................................................................................................5 4.
A BRIEF REVIEW OF THE CONFLICT’S HISTORY Twenty-five years after the fall of the Iron Curtain, the current grave crisis in relations between Russia and the West represents not only a major setback, but is also evolving into a dangerous geopolitical conflict.
In Russia, which was already ‘stuck in transition and stagnation’ before the current crisis erupted, the repercussions of the conflict hamper urgently needed investments and GDP growth, hindering economic restructuring and modernisation.
Needless to say, the main victim of the conflict is Ukraine where, apart from the human and material losses already incurred, a severe economic recession has set in.
Prospects of an enduring civil war, culminating in a ‘frozen conflict’ in eastern Ukraine – similar to that in Transdniestria, Abkhazia, South Ossetiya or Nagorno Karabakh – can now be hardly avoided.
The resulting de facto disintegration of Ukraine represents a serious threat with geopolitical consequences that reach far beyond the scope of the present note.
More recently, the EU’s unfortunate guided handling of the Ukrainian crisis initiative) also contributed to the present geopolitical conflict.
The tug of war between Russia and the EU over Ukraine escalated in the second half of 2013, prior to the envisaged signature of Association Agreements (which included a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area – AA/DCFTA) between the EU on the one hand and four EaP countries (Armenia, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine) on the other hand, in November 2013.
During the summer of 2013, both Russia and Ukraine were suddenly alerted by the possibly adverse economic consequences of AA/DCFTA signature after details of AA/DCFTA became public.
Russia started once more to implement and ‘test’ countermeasures , such as import restrictions from the EaP countries Ukraine and Moldova.
Armenia decided in September 2013 not to sign the AA/DCFTA with the EU and announced the accession to the Russian* This version as of 28 October 2014. – The author wishes to thank Vasily Astrov, Vladimir Gligorov, Mario Holzner and Sándor Richter for valuable comments on an earlier draft, as well as Alexandra Bykova, Beate Muck and Robert Stehrer for valuable statistical support.
Ukraine’s President V Yanukovych announced the postponement of the AA/DCFTA signature just a few days before the Vilnius EaP Summit in November 2013 – a decision that sparked the first wave of protests.
Representatives of Maidan protesters, President Yanukovych and EU mediators signed a deal in February 2014 that envisaged early elections and constitutional changes to occur in the autumn.
However, the ousting of President Yanukovych and his flight to Russia on the very next day, and the controversial establishment of the new transitory government in Kyiv (whose legitimacy was disputed in the eastern parts of Ukraine and Crimea, but supported by the West) led by Mr Yatsenyuk as acting Prime Minister and the new parliamentary speaker Mr Turchynov sparked the internal conflict in Ukraine.
The Russian annexation of Crimea triggered the first round of Western sanctions in March 2014.
In contrast to Crimea where the ‘re-unification’ proceeded peacefully, the anti-Maidan protests in the eastern parts of Ukraine turned violent as the new government in Kyiv attempted to restore control over the rebellious regions by force, involving both regular military troops and freelance fighters, mostly from western Ukraine.
On 26 May 2014, Mr Poroshenko, an oligarch with business interests in food and media industries, was elected president with a convincing majority vote; the vote was ‘respected’ by Russia though not recognised by separatists in Donbass, who do not recognise the government in Kyiv either and claim independence instead.
The situation in eastern Ukraine escalated further after the tragic downing of a Malaysian passenger plane on 17 July 2014, with the responsibility for the accident so far not fully clarified.
Despite a fragile ceasefire negotiated between representatives of Kyiv authorities, Moscow and Donbass separatists with the intermediation of OSCE and the EU in Minsk in September 2014, a lasting settlement of the conflict is not yet in sight.
Doubtlessly, though admittedly ever more difficult since now the inclusion of separatists in the process seems inevitable, only negotiations between the representatives of Ukraine, Russia and the EU along the lines proposed earlierg. by Havlik , and more recently also by Emerson and others, can help to de-escalate and potentially resolve the present conflict.
Both Ukraine and the European parliament simultaneously ratified the AA/DCFTA on 16 September 2014, although the implementation of trade-related provisions will be postponed until end2015, reflecting the trilateral agreement between the EU, Ukraine and Russia.
The latter has confirmed that the CIS free trade regime with Ukraine will continue to apply and consultations will continue.
In the meantime, AA/DCFTAs with Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine were signed on 27 June 2014.
Though the respective bill was never signed by acting President Turchynov, it sufficed to trigger mass protests in these regions.
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF THE UKRAINE CONFLICT 3 Policy Notes and Reports 14 / November 2014 Paradoxically, one year after the failed Vilnius EaP Summit, Ukraine is now facing a similar situation with the implementation of the DCFTA being delayed, this time with the consent of the EU.6 2.
EXISTING SANCTIONS IN BRIEF Western sanctions aimed at ‘stopping Russian action against Ukraine, restoring Ukraine’s sovereignty’ were initiated by the United States in March 2014 after the Russian annexation of Crimea, followed soon thereafter by the EU and other G7 countries.
Largely symbolic in character initially, the spiral of sanctions rapidly escalated in the subsequent weeks and months.
The exchange of letters between Putin and Barroso in late September/early October 2014 on the implementation of Ukraine’s AA/DCFTA and related Russian threats to abolish the CIS-FTA with respect to Ukraine illustrates grave divisions within the trilateral agreements – see Financial Times, 26 September 2014, 1 and European Commission, Statement/14/294 from 1 October 2014.
Barring other developments, the sanctions are supposed to last for one year and until July 2015 respectively.
USA imposes a ban on travel and transactions of 18 more Russian politicians, in addition to banning US dollar transactions involving Chernomorneftegaz and 15 other companies in Crimea.
USA imposes a ban on travel and transactions for an additional 7 Russian politicians and Ukrainian separatists, in addition to freezing their assets; Ukraine’s President Poroshenko imposes a ban on military and dual-use exports to Russia on 16 June 2014.
Adapted from EBRD Office of the Chief Economist ; Fact sheet on EU restrictive measures; EU Official Journal, Vol., 12 September 2014; www.government.ru ; United States Department of the Treasury , 16 July 2014.
The above asymmetries bear a number of important policy implications, not least regarding the implementation of the AA/DCFTA with the EU and Ukraine’s trade relations with the Russian-led Customs Union.
Furthermore, the Russian economy is much smaller – a mere fifth of the EU GDP, even at purchasing power parity; it urgently needs Western technology if it is to modernise.
Austria, by 10 For the sake of comparison, United States exports to Russia were just 0.7% of the total , United States imports from Russia only 1.3% of the total in 2012.
Cyprus, Greece, Great Britain, Portugal and Spain have minimal trade in goods with Russia.
Assuming constant export value added shares in GDP, the latest available WIOD data on domestic content of exports in terms of GDP for 2011 were applied to 2013 GDP data in order to estimate domestic content of exports in 2013.
In absolute terms, machinery and transport equipment are the most important export branches exposed to Russia , followed by 13 However, we get a different picture in trade with services.
Available data show that Cyprus and Lithuania, with a 25% share in total services exports, are the most exposed to Russia.
On EU average, transport, tourism and construction services exports to Russia accounted for more than 3% of the total.
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF THE UKRAINE CONFLICT 7 Policy Notes and Reports 14 / November 2014 electrical equipment.
In Austria, it is machinery and equipment and pharmaceuticals that play the key role in exports to Russia.
The bulk of these imports – 80% on EU average – consist of energy .15 4.
ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF THE CONFLICT It is not easy to quantify the economic impacts of the sanctions separately.
We, thus, consider the ‘effects of the conflict’ in more general terms.
According to the EU, ‘sanctions are one of the EU’s tools 15 Austrian imports from Russia reported by Eurostat show a gap of about EUR 2 billion in 2013 which is presumably attributable to gas imports.
Similar reporting gaps exist also in data for Germany and the Netherlands.
EU sanctions are not punitive’.16 Beyond purely economic effects, the effectiveness of Western sanctions in terms of the targeted change in Russia’s policies towards Ukraine – including a stop of intervention in eastern Ukraine and the return of Crimea – the results have so far been rather disappointing (and a revision of the annexation of Crimea is completely unrealistic).17 4.1.
RUSSIA The sanctions have undoubtedly augmented the negative economic developments in Russia resulting from the combined effect of the deteriorating investment climate, rouble depreciation, capital flight and reform setbacks – the country was ‘stuck in transition and stagnation’ already before the Ukraine crisis.
THE EUROPEAN UNION The economies of individual EU countries are affected to very differing degrees by the conflict, depending on their trade exposure to the Russian market.
The differentiation in the economic impact and other factors also explains in part certain features 16 See EC Factsheet, Press Release, Brussels, 29 April 2014.
In a pessimistic scenario, the Russian government reckons with a GDP drop by 10% in 2015.
At the same time, the Baltic States 19 have adopted a much ‘tougher’ attitude towards Russia given their historical experience, whereas Hungary, Bulgaria, Slovakia, the Czech Republic (as well as Austria, Greece and Cyprus) favour a ‘softer’ approach.
Scenario corresponds more or less to the present situation, with Russian imports from the EU dropping by 9% in nominal EUR terms in the first half of 2014.20 Scenario illustrates a more extreme escalation of the conflict with far-reaching economic and political consequences.
This scenario would most likely be associated with the interruption of Russian gas supplies to the EU, confiscation of Western assets in Russia, wholesale travel bans and similar measures.
Contrary to other studies , we take into account trade in both goods and services, but do not consider all sector-specific effects (e.g. financial flows) owing to major uncertainty and/or the lack of data.
Moreover, in the case of exports, we distinguish between gross exports and the domestic value added in exports;22 we also quantify separately the impact of the food import ban imposed by Russia on 7 August 2014.
There seems to be some indication that Russian imports started to diversify away from the EU, the Customs Union and Ukraine in 2014.
Austria would lose less than 0.1% of GDP – a fairly small amount which is comparable to the EU average.
SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS The Ukraine conflict bears serious consequences not only for Russia and Ukraine, but it also poses a potential threat to the still frail economic recovery in Europe.
Russia has retaliated with a ban on agro-food imports and restricted travel to the West.
The general climate between Russia, Ukraine and the West has been seriously damaged.
In Donbass, which used to account for 16% of Ukraine’s GDP and a quarter of its exports, the war-related damage is currently estimated at some EUR 6 billion , and industrial production has nearly come to a standstill, largely as a result of power cuts and railway disruptions.
On top of that, the enacted ban on exports of military and dual-use goods to Russia has further contributed to the export decline.
At the same time, domestic private consumption has been eroded by the spike in inflation and the IMF-imposed austerity measures.
All in all, Ukraine’s economy may contract by 8% this year, and the stabilisation prospects are unclear.
In Russia, the country which was ‘stuck in transition and stagnation’ already before the Ukraine crisis, the impact of the conflict is increasingly felt as well.
The Western sanctions and the related heightened political risks are hampering investments, economic growth and modernisation still further.
A crude estimate of economic effects – lower GDP growth by about 1 percentage point compared to the pre-conflict scenario – yields a loss of Russian GDP close to EUR 20 billion in 2014, and more than EUR 30 billion in 2015 and EUR 50 billion in 2016.
The effects on the individual EU countries differ depending on their varying exposure to the Russian markets.
Cyprus, Greece, Great Britain, Portugal and Spain have very little goods trade with Russia, though the two former have extensive exposure in tourism and finance.
In Austria it is machinery, equipment and pharmaceuticals which play the key role in exports to Russia.
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF THE UKRAINE CONFLICT 13 Policy Notes and Reports 14 / November 2014 do not feature prominently among EU exports to Russia.
In EU services exports, travel and transportation are important, and the number of Russian tourists has already suffered a blow in 2014, by 20% in some cases.
On the assumption of a 10% loss in gross exports of goods and services to Russia, the estimated GDP loss would be in the order of 0.5% for Lithuania, 0.4% for Estonia, and less than 0.1% for Austria.
The estimated impact of Russia’s ban on meat, dairy products, fruit, vegetable and fish imports from the EU imposed in August 2014 is expected to be the highest in the Baltic States.
The banned products amounted to more than EUR 5 billion of EU exports to Russia, with Lithuania, Poland, Germany and the Netherlands affected the most in absolute terms.
Furthermore, Russia might consider imposing an embargo on car imports from the EU, restrict state purchases of pharmaceuticals or even freeze some Western assets as a retaliatory measure.
Excluding round-tripping of Russian flight capital via offshore havens (e.g.
Brill, S , ‘The Russian sanctions information gap’, Blogs Reuters, 29 July.
Brzezinski, Z , ‘Russia needs a “Finland option” for Ukraine’, Financial Times, 24 February.
EBRD , ‘Russia/Ukraine crisis casts shadow over emerging economies’, London, 18 September.
EBRD , ‘The impact on the EBRD region of Russia’s food ban’, News, 9 September.
Emerson, M , ‘The EU-Ukraine-Russia Sanctions Triangle’, CEPS Commentary, Brussels, 13 October.
In Yalta about progress towards signing the Association Agreement’, Speech/13/727, 10th Yalta Annual Meeting, Yalta, Ukraine, 20 September.
Grant, Ch. , ‘Ukraine, Russia and the EU’, Centre for European Reform, London, 30 September.
Ignatieff, M , ‘The post-Ukraine world order’, 50th Annual Lecture, Ditchley, 12 July.
Inayeh, A., D Schwarzer and J Forbrig , ‘Regional Repercussions of the Ukraine Crisis.
Kholodilin, K A., U Ulbricht and G Wagner , ‘Are the Economic Sanctions against Russia Effective?’, DIW Roundup, Berlin, 8 July.
EU Economies Would Be Resilient to a Russian Recession’, Special Comment, 9 May.
The economics of sanctions between Russia and the West’, Bruegel, 17 September.
Summers, L , ‘ “Potemkin money” is the wrong way to help Ukraine’, Financial Times, 10 March, 7.
A round-up of EU foreign & neighbourhood policy’, www.hannes-swoboda.at, 27 August.
Techau, J , ‘Europe’s Five Deadly Sins on Ukraine’, Carnegie Europe, 4 March.
Trenin, D , ‘A War of Escalation’, Carnegie Moscow Center, OP-ED Foreign Policy, 19 March.
Trenin, D , ‘The Ukraine Crisis and the Resumption of Great-Power Rivalry’, Carnegie Moscow Center, 9 July.
Medieninhaber : Verein ""Wiener Institut für Internationale Wirtschaftsvergleiche"", A 1060 Wien, Rahlgasse 3.
