Lebanon, Turkey, and Jordan are not the world’s only major “refugee” hosting nations.
Ukraine too hosts enormous numbers of people who have had to leave their homes because of war.
Millions fled their homes in 2014 after Russian operatives and tanks invaded Ukraine’s eastern regions and annexed Crimea.
Instead, they are defined as “internally displaced persons,” or IDPs, and are living in hovels, on couches, in shelters, or sometimes five to a room throughout the country.
According to Ukraine’s Ministry of Social Policy, 1. million Ukrainians are officially registered as IDPs.
Approximately 50 percent of them have applied for financial help from the state, which amounts to about $34 per month for people who are able to work and $17 per month for disabled persons.
The death and destruction caused by Russia’s occupation, in human terms, is horrific.
Ukraine’s Ministry of Social Policy reported that 25,000 children live in towns and villages along the conflict line; they are still in insecure conditions.
According to a February 2016 UNICEF report, twenty-eight children have died or were wounded by mines or other explosive devices.
The conflict in the Donbas has affected the lives of more than half a million children in Ukraine.
Each third child -200,000 children -needs at least some psychological assistance.
They are certainly frustrated by the loss of their homes, as well as the broken families and social bonds,” said Durnyeva.
The exodus from the east began immediately after the Revolution of Dignity drove Ukraine’s larcenous President Viktor Yanukovych back to Russia.
Russians invaded, cities have been ransacked, and millions of dispossessed persons have been victimized.
And Russia has not abated its aggression; the only reason it is not in Kyiv now is because of the Ukrainian military’s resistance.
This is not a genuine offer to secure peace; it’s just a game,” wrote Hanna Hopko, a member of Ukraine’s parliament and chair of its foreign affairs committee.
This is a refugee catastrophe, but unlike those millions forced to flee Syria or Sudan, Ukraine’s dispossessed are invisible to the world.
If this were the case, the world would finally see -and fully condemn -Russian President Vladimir Putin’s predation and flagrant breach of international law.
Some of her relatives, who cannot travel, remain in the east near Russian-controlled areas.
A friend who returned to the non-government-controlled area to get clothes was captured.
She works as an activist and registered as an IDP for her children to enter school.
Her organization helps local communities near the conflict zone by advising people on available resources and their rights.
And Russia has yet to be brought before the United Nations for waging this terrible war against Ukraine.
