Derek Stanford Hutcheson Abstract This thesis intended to examine how the actions of Sweden, following the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea, fit within the international relations theoretical perspective of pragmatic idealism, focusing on the actions of Sweden's foreign policy that impacted its neutrality policy.
This thesis is built upon the pragmatic idealism theoretical perspective of international relations, and attempted to address how this perspective accounted for, or failed to account for the actions of Sweden in the face of the escalating Russian threat.
First, the thesis examined how Sweden-Russia relations evolved in the wake of the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
Second, the thesis examined how Sweden-NATO relations changed after the 2014-15 annexation of Crimea by Russia.
In both cases, the paper analysed how the evolution of these relationships affected Sweden's neutrality, and how the evolution was consistent or not consistent with the “pragmatic” and “idealist” dimensions of the theoretical perspective of pragmatic idealism.
The culmination of this paper drew an inference of the applicability of the perspective of pragmatic idealism to Sweden's application of neutrality to international relations.
It concluded that Sweden's neutrality both prior to and following the invasion, as well as its subsequent actions, were in line with the theoretical perspective of pragmatic idealism.
Introduction....................................................................................1 1.
Research problem...............................................................................1 1.
Research area and purpose.................................................................5 1.
Premise...............................................................................................5 1.
Thesis structure...................................................................................7 2.
Literature Review...........................................................................7 2.
Theoretical approaches to the study of neutrality...............................7 2.1.
Neutrality and realism.....................................................................7 2.1.
Neutrality and liberalism.................................................................8 2.1.
Neutrality and pragmatic idealism...................................................9 2.1.
Neutrality and Sweden..................................................................11 2.
Methodological approaches to the study of neutrality.....................12 2.2.
Comparative approach to the research on neutrality in international relations.............................................................................13 2.2.
Case study approach to the research on neutrality in international relations..................................................................................................14 2.2.
Discourse analysis in the research on neutrality in international relations..................................................................................................15 3.
Theoretical framework....................................................................17 3.
Definition of pragmatic idealism and neutrality..............................18 4.
Methodology.......................................................................................18 4.
Case study........................................................................................19 4.
Thesis model....................................................................................20 4.
Data selection, collection, and analysis............................................21 4.
Validity and limitations....................................................................22 5.
Analysis..........................................................................................23 5.
Russia's Invasion of Ukraine and its significance to Sweden...........24 5.
Sweden-Russia relations..................................................................................................25 5.3.
Swedish neutrality in the context of Sweden-Russia relations.....27 5.3.
Pragmatism in the context of Sweden-Russia relations................28 5.3.
Idealism in the context of Sweden-Russia relations......................29 5.
Sweden-NATO relations..................................................................................................29 5.4.
Pragmatism in the context of Sweden-NATO relations................33 5.4.
Idealism in the context of Sweden-NATO relationship................35 6.
Conclusion.....................................................................................36 7.
Bibliography..................................................................................39 Chapter 1.
Their implementation leads to the protection of neutral states during violent conflict as the countries engaged in combat are prohibited, at least in principle and/or legally, from violating or attacking the territory of neutral states.
Adhering to these principles protects neutral states during a war because the countries engaged in combat are prohibited from violating the territory of neutral states or attacking them.
Sweden’s neutrality has remained unchallenged for the large part since it was adopted in the 1800s, and throughout the Cold War it remained neutral as far as the US and Russia, in line with the pragmatic idealism theoretical perspective first coined by Costas Melakopides in his 1998 book Pragmatic Idealism.
Being outside of NATO, Sweden is outside this umbrella, leaving the state more vulnerable to the risk of attack by, say, Russia.
An exception to a relatively steadfast neutrality though, emerged early in the twenty-first century.
Thus, it is important to note that Russia’s actions in 2014 occurred after Swedish leadership had already begun to embrace wider views of neutrality that warmly embraced the idea of solidarity.
As a NATO-friendly non-NATO state close to Russia, Sweden is vulnerable.
Furthermore, Russia's actions before and after Crimea do not take attacking Sweden off the table.
Additionally, for the first time in over forty years, Sweden has reintroduced military conscription and in 2018 sent out leaflets telling its citizens what to do if war comes.
While Sweden has yet to join NATO, it appears to have somewhat eschewed its traditional neutrality for a closer, mutually beneficial relationship with NATO, signing in 2014 an agreement with NATO to act as a host nation, allowing for much closer cooperation, mutual access to military assets, and the stationing of NATO forces on Swedish soil.
These actions suggest that Sweden has discarded neutrality and departed from pragmatic idealism.
Pragmatic idealism often stands for neutrality, yet the actions of Sweden suggest that the state is propelling itself towards the strategy of bandwagoning.
Due to this, a problem necessitating research exists in the change of stance regarding Sweden's participation in international politics.
With the background of the recent developments in Ukraine, the thesis of this paper focuses on how Swedish neutrality has evolved in recent years.
This study will focus on how Sweden's recent actions related to Sweden-Russia relations and Sweden-NATO relations fit within the theoretical perspective of pragmatic idealism.
If they do not, this thesis will explore what other theoretical perspectives could best explain Sweden’s actions – which undoubtedly seem to test the limits of the pragmatic idealism approach.
The study will also determine what the changes in Swedish neutrality mean for pragmatic idealism philosophy as well as the strategy of neutrality in IR for small states such as Sweden in a seemingly crumbling unipolar world.
Attempting to address how pragmatic idealism accounts or fails to account for the actions of Sweden in the face of the escalating Russian threat, and the issues posed by asking these questions, will be the focus of this entire paper.
Prior to 1812, Sweden was largely engaged in conflict across Europe, and at its peak, controlled a vast expanse of land.
Sweden’s leading role in the Thirty Years War —perhaps the largest international conflict before Napoleon—was significant, as it helped determine the political and religious balance of power in Europe at the time.
Although officially neutral in 5 both of the World Wars, Sweden’s neutrality was stretched on many occasions, yet still it came out largely unscathed in each.
Sweden seemed preoccupied with self-preservation, which from the realist stance on neutrality avoids questions of morality.
The reality was more complex, and a case could be made that in the early 1940s till the end of his life, Swedish diplomat Count Folke Bernadotte acted as a representative of Sweden through the lens of pragmatic idealism; helping bring prisoners of war home, attempting to mediate a peace deal between Heinrich Himmler and the leaders of England and the US, as well as being the first United Nations mediator when he successfully achieved a truce between Israeli and Arab forces in 1948 before his assassination the same year.
This represented the birth of true pragmatic idealism as an IR theoretical foundation for Sweden’s foreign policy and international affairs.
The focus of neutrality in the evolution of pragmatic idealism as a theoretical approach to IR in Sweden points to the conclusion that the end of Swedish neutrality, or the loss of morality from the practice of neutrality, means the end of the applicability of the pragmatic idealism approach to Sweden’s way of acting on the world stage.
Due to the nature of Swedish neutrality and its pragmatic idealism approach, a departure from neutrality would signal a retreat from pragmatic idealism 6 and back to small state realism.
In the first part, the literature on the theoretical approaches to the study of neutrality will be reviewed.
The thesis will then, in parts three and four, move on to lay out the theoretical framework and present the methodology that is to be applied in the analysis of the data as well as the operationalization of the study.
The fifth part will conduct an extensive analysis of the selected case using the methodology laid out.
Finally, the sixth part as a conclusion will provide a summary of the study as well as the research implications of the findings.
Research studies on the strategy of neutrality in IR attempt to situate neutrality within one of three mainstream theoretical perspectives.
The first perspective is Realism, which considers neutrality as a strategy for selfpreservation.
The second perspective is Liberalism, which believes that the decision by states to adopt neutrality as a strategy is based on domestic factors and international normative considerations.
The final perspective is Pragmatic Idealism, which believes that neutrality is a practical strategy for IR that is moved by ethical considerations.
Therefore, realists consider any action to be justified as long as it increases the security of the state.
A realist considers neutrality as a way for the state to protect its self-interest in terms of security.
Therefore, realists view neutrality as an IR survival tactic, one with little place for morality in IR since ""moral considerations of right and wrong do not apply in this anarchic, self-help state of nature"" 2.1.
For instance, Sweden was faced with the dilemma that joining the European Economic Community would be incompatible with neutrality.
According to Tabensky, realists are pessimistic about man, whom they see as inherently extremely self-interested, while idealists are overly optimistic about man, overemphasising redemption.
This is why the pragmatic approach to IR leans more to the side of idealism than to the side of realism, which minimizes morality.
For a later example, even when the Cold War ended and Sweden joined the EU in 1995, it refrained from joining NATO in much the same way it had approached its 1972 dilemma.
Therefore, the best theoretical perspective to explain Swedish neutrality is pragmatic idealism.
Without taking into account pragmatic idealism, a number of authors contend that Sweden has departed from neutrality.
I would however claim that these views form a all too straight forward view of neutrality – one that is unable to accommodate the ideas of pragmatic idealism, as will be seen.
Methodological approaches to the study of neutrality Methodologically, there is a range of possible approaches to presenting discussions of neutrality.
One approach compares the neutrality of different states to each other.
While technically the comparative approach involves several specific case studies, a second approach can be termed the case study perspective in that it takes one state’s neutrality as case study without comparing it to other states’ neutrality.
A 12 third possible approach utilizes discourse analysis as a prism through which to analyse the language, conventions, and conceptualization of neutrality.
The scholars using this approach collect a variety of texts and communications relating to neutrality, and critically analyse their use in defining and creating the idea and practice of neutrality.
Here, the comparative approach was used to compare two neutral countries and draw out patterns about their application of neutrality in their foreign policy and IR, thus linking theory to evidence.
The comparative approach as applied by Jesse involves applying the same measures across the states being studied to reveal unique characteristics of the neutral states that are the focus of the study.
The advantage of the comparative method as used by Jesse and Eliasson is that it helps to link theory to evidence, often across multiple cases.
However, this is contingent on the researcher finding adequate data, which is not always the case.
Case study approach to the research on neutrality in international relations The case study research approach focuses on a specific case demonstrating neutrality in IR and interprets it through one or more theoretical perspectives.
A Case Study in Neutrality” to investigate neutrality in Sweden during World War II in an attempt to evaluate the viability of neutrality as a foreign policy.
In the case study, Hopper examined the background of Sweden’s neutrality, as well as the changes in the conditions of Swedish neutrality through various time periods.
Discourse analysis in the research on neutrality in international relations Discourse analysis is a common qualitative approach to research within IR to determine public opinion about neutrality, and shows how this fits within given theoretical perspectives.
Analysis of Public Discourse on Neutrality in Austria and Ireland"" by Dagmar Zakopalová 15 examines the public discourse on neutrality in two neutral states.
The study concluded that while neutrality has been reconceptualized and narrowed down throughout the past 60 years, it is still perceived as an important principle of national security policy in IR, despite being hard to follow in regards to applying it to contemporary wars.
Zakopalová comes to the conclusion that domestic factors more than international factors play a role in defining neutrality in the 21st century.
Pro-neutrality rhetoric is more often than not prevalent in relation to public opinion and voter preferences.
This is an interesting idea that should be considered when we shift our focus to public opinion in Sweden surrounding neutrality and the actions taken in the context of the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
Deconstructing Concepts of Irish Neutrality Using International Relations Theories.
In his analyses of the qualitative data collected, Kořan concludes that one limitation of the study of the development of neutrality in Austria is that those involved in the academic, as well as the political discourses were too quick to provide an ”objective account” and explanation of reality, instead of assuming that all knowledge is socially constructed.
The above are just a few examples of the different methodologies and how the research is generally approached.
In summary, it is evident that special focus needs to be placed on how we frame neutrality and more importantly, how that neutrality is perceived both domestically and internationally in the applicable context.
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK The literature on the theoretical perspectives of neutrality broadly examines neutrality in the context of realism, liberalism, and pragmatic idealism.
Therefore, the thesis of this paper is built on the assumption that Sweden’s exercise of neutrality is grounded neither in the extremes of realism nor idealism, opting instead for pragmatic idealism.
Definitions of pragmatic idealism and neutrality This paper was interested in situating Sweden’s strategy of neutrality in IR within the pragmatic idealist theoretical framework and combines the concepts of pragmatic idealism developed by Nossal , Tabensky , Melakopides , Melakopides , Baker , and Waite to establish a combined definition of the pragmatic idealism theory of IR as it was applied to the study.
Additionally, the paper combined the concepts developed by Simpson , Heywood , and Czarny to establish a definition of neutrality.
When determining the degree of Sweden’s neutrality in the Russia-Ukraine conflict, the concepts of positive neutrality and negative neutrality will be utilized.
Negative neutrality will refer to Sweden’s unwillingness or refusal to send its troops to one of the belligerent states or allowing the belligerents to use its territory for military purposes.
By using both positive and negative neutrality, the paper will capture the full scope of Sweden’s neutrality.
METHODOLOGY Among the three research approaches outlined, the case study method was the best suited to approach the research subject of Swedish neutrality in an attempt to answer the research question.
While the qualitative approach through discourse analysis would be excellent for examining the concept of neutrality, this is not what the research is intended to accomplish.
On the other hand, the comparative method was undesirable because data on this topic might have been inadequate because the Swedish response to Russia invasion of Ukraine is still a developing situation, despite the numerous military reports and Swedish rhetoric surrounding the invasion.
In addition, looking at other countries would have been a distraction from the intention 18 to focus on Sweden.
This left the use of the case study as the most promising approach, allowing for the most powerful focus in line with the research question.
The actions making up Sweden’s response in the wake of the Russian invasion of Ukraine exist in the form of events, and the data from these events can be characterized into specific cases, so the case study method was amenable to the form in which data relevant to the research question existed.
Case study The analysis was conducted on cases that were selected to establish the relationship between the level neutrality of Sweden's responses and level of threat of attack by Russia.
The meta-case was Sweden's response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine, more specifically the cases of Swedish-NATO relations after 2014 and Russo-Swedish relations after 2014.
This overarching case was selected because it was the most recent test of Sweden's claim of neutrality.
The case selected was also relevant for the study of pragmatic idealism because the 2014 invasion of Ukraine by Russia was a significant turning point in the post-cold war relationship between the United States and Russia.
The attack in 2014 represents the most recent time when the balance of power politics between the United States and Russia were significantly reinvigorated in modern times since the end of the Cold War in response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, at least until the Russian 2016 U.S. election interference.
The case of Sweden also fits the least-likely case study method, which is interested in cases that pose the most severe test of IR theory.
In the proposed research, the essential cases were the cases 19 least likely to fit the theory of pragmatic idealism because they suggested a shift in neutrality.
A change from neutrality to partiality would be revealing of the failure of the theory of pragmatic idealism to explain Swedish neutrality.
Therefore, the method of looking at the Swedish response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine was the best method to test the pragmatic idealism theory as it related to the thesis of this paper.
Thesis model The central assumption in this paper was that a shift from neutrality to alignment for a neutral state indicated a shift from the pragmatic idealism strategy in IR if the shift was not justified ethically and/or was not practical given the prevailing political reality.
Data selection, collection, and analysis The data that the paper examined came from various primary and secondary texts for the case study.
These sources include statements by government officials, policy documents, official Swedish government press statements, public records, Swedish media reports, and international media reports.
For instance, relying mainly on the data from Sweden's government or Swedish media might have provided a one-sided account of Sweden's response.
The primary and secondary texts selected were strictly focused on the topics of Swedish-Russia relations and Swedish-NATO relations prior to, and following, the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
The scope of analysis was limited to texts published within a short period of time; from 20 February 2014 to 12 August 2019.
The date 20 February 2014 was the day Russia officially occupied the territory of Crimea.
This provided data relevant to the variable of compliance to pragmatic idealism principles.
The second kind of data that was collected related to the prevailing political reality that provided the context for Sweden's response to the invasion.
This data included incidents of direct threats from Russia on Sweden, as well as any verifiable verbal threats from Russia in the texts collected.
This gave legitimacy to Sweden's responses, and allowed me to examine how and why Sweden reacted the way it did, and how it can or cannot be explained through pragmatic idealism.
The analysis of these texts started by reviewing what the Swedish response was to Russia's invasion of Ukraine by focusing on the Swedish-Russia relations and Swedish-NATO relations after the 2014 invasion.
The analysis then determined whether Sweden's responses in the wake of Russia's invasion of Ukraine were practical given the prevailing political reality.
This tested the pragmatic dimension of pragmatic idealism in the exercise of neutrality by examining if Sweden's actions were justifiably practical under the circumstances.
Furthermore, the analysis determined if Sweden's responses were justified by moral principles that are the ethical foundation of pragmatic idealism.
The analysis that was conducted within the context of a reference point was established by examining how Sweden has always practiced its neutrality in the modern era in conflicts and IR in general.
Having determined whether Sweden's response was pragmatic and idealist or not, the analysis attempted to situate Sweden's response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine within the pragmatic idealism theory.
If it would fail to do so, it would instead offer a more applicable theoretical perspective to approach how Sweden exercised its neutrality.
I have to the best of my ability laid out the reasoning behind picking the aforementioned qualitative data, as well as the methods in doing so.
The coding protocol has been laid out in section 4.3, and the conclusions to the analysis have been explained in section 5.5.
In regards to Kořans research concerning Austrian neutrality, there is a lack of what he calls “epistemological realism” namely that the concepts a researcher is employing in order to explain certain phenomenon have their tangible 22 counterpart somewhere in reality.
I have to the best of my ability taken into account historical and political factors regarding Swedish actions taken prior to and following the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
However, a limitation that is already apparent here is that while case study methodology allows us to investigate how or if Sweden's actions fall in line with pragmatic idealism, further analysis through quantitative research relating to both public and elite opinion would have perhaps allowed for a more thorough investigation.
Understanding Sweden's response to the invasion of Ukraine by Russia is contingent on first coming to terms with how Sweden has practised its neutrality since it became a neutral state.
Consequently, Sweden has been a renowned arbitrator in conflicts because all sides recognize and trust the state’s impartiality.
Therefore, the 2014 attack on Ukraine took place in this context of long-standing Swedish neutrality and diplomatic leadership.
Russia’s interests within its sphere of influence were threatened when Ukraine started leaning closer towards EU and NATO integration, and during the same time period, Russia was unsure if it could maintain control over its warm 24 water base in Tartus, Syria, which would eventually prompt direct military intervention in Syria.
The relevance of the invasion of Ukraine for Sweden is that it created a precedent that shows what would motivate Russia to invade countries in Europe.
As a neutral country, Sweden does not have to pick a side in NATORussia balance of power politics.
However, it would be unwise for Sweden to ignore the threat of Russia when it comes to both its internal affairs as well as its border security from cyber, political, and hybrid warfare in additional to merely traditional military moves.
Implied here is that Russia's expansionist ambitions may put Sweden at risk of being attacked in the same way Ukraine was invaded.
Sweden's response to the Ukrainian crisis was conducted in a way that bolstered the credibility of its neutrality, which was essential for Sweden, focusing on being involved talks in an attempt to resolve the Ukrainian crisis and a balancing act of solidarity with Ukraine, a victim of Russian violations of international law, and neutral diplomatic activity with both Russia and Ukraine that took into account those objective violations by Russia, a neutrality that sided with international law but would also stay generally neutral otherwise.
Sweden’s advocating for the idea that staying true to international law can thus be seen as a form of neutrality.
On the one side, Sweden's relationship with Russia can be characterized by a tough but respectful attitude within cordial diplomatic relations.
Sweden's status as a neutral country put it at the center of the international response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
This displayed Sweden’s interest in becoming a partner in the peace process, committing to neutrality by not isolating Russia and remaining aware of the role that Russia could play in resolving the conflict.
Sweden has also shown its solidarity with Ukraine in terms of international law.
In summation, the exercise of neutrality by Sweden has involved balancing between standing in solidarity with Ukraine and international law and using and leaving open diplomatic channels for engagement with Russia regarding the role that it can play in de-escalating the situation in Ukraine.
Swedish neutrality in the context of Sweden-Russia relations Shifts in neutrality can be positive if a country abstains from getting involved in a military conflict or allowing belligerents to use its territory for military purposes.
They can be negative if the country decides to align with one belligerent or allows the belligerents to use its territory for military purposes.
As the data suggests, Sweden’s relationship with Russia has remained diplomatic after Russia invaded Ukraine.
While Sweden has openly declared Russia’s actions as a violation of international law, it has also kept the diplomatic channels open.
The willingness of Sweden to lead a military mission in Ukraine on the condition that Russia is on-board shows its commitment to impartiality.
Sweden has not sent any of its soldiers to Ukraine or Russia, and it has not allowed its territory to be used by either Russia or Ukraine.
Therefore, Swedish neutrality after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine could be classified as being positive.
At the same time, its growing relationship with NATO signals to Russia that it is prepared to rethink neutrality if Russia continues to pursue aggressive, threatening courses of action.
Pragmatism in the context of Sweden-Russia relations As this examination has shown, the actions of Sweden in response to the annexation of Crimea were consistent with the pragmatic dimension of pragmatic idealism.
Sweden shaped its values within the broader global interests of territorial integrity and, specifically, the sovereignty of Ukraine.
Sweden's response was consistently framed within the EU response as a pragmatic calculation that would enable it to speak out against Russia as a deterrent if the same aggression was to be directed towards Sweden.
The simple political reality was that Russia was redrawing Europe's map near its borders and there was a possibility that Sweden would suffer the same fate as Ukraine.
Therefore, Sweden engaged with Russia on a diplomatic platform, knowing that its military capacity cannot help it fend off such an attack, and the practical approach for Sweden was the promotion of broader global interests that would also serve Sweden's interests for territorial integrity and sovereignty.
By defending such principles in general and specifically for Ukraine, it was making it harder for Russia to get away in the future with any similar actions directed at 28 Sweden.
Sweden's pragmatism then, facilitated the flexibility of its neutrality to advance its own interests without necessarily violating its neutrality.
Idealism in the context of Sweden-Russia relations As discussed, Sweden's response to Russia and Ukraine encompassed the majority of the ideals of pragmatic idealism.
Sweden-NATO relations The relationship between Sweden and NATO has also evolved after Russia's attack on Ukraine.
Sweden has 29 now grown to become one of NATO's most active partners in the Baltic region.
The invasion of Ukraine by Russia in 2014 brought Sweden and NATO closer in a relationship that may appear to be a departure of Sweden from its policy of military non-alliance in line with its stance of neutrality.
Rather than move aggressively to ratify it, Sweden only did so in late May 2016, another gesture of its non-eagerness to do anything to disrupt its neutral persona.
The agreement overall allows NATO to operate more freely in the Swedish territory.
Data shows that these views are not isolated to the political class; the support for Sweden joining NATO has become increasingly popular among Swedes overall.
Therefore, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has stirred up the Swedes and increased public support for joining NATO in Sweden.
The closer relationship established between NATO and Sweden through the signing of the Host Nation agreement in 2015 also created a path for NATO to participate in Sweden's military exercises.
SwedenNATO relations have evolved after the 2014 invasion of Ukraine by Russia in a way that questions the legitimacy of the Swedish claim to neutrality, at least during a conflict.
While Sweden has forged a closer relationship with NATO, it remains a partner as opposed to a member of NATO, which can at least signify an attempt to remain impartial in NATO-Russia power politics, though partnering with NATO at all makes this debatable.
According to Nilsson , the promise of the policy of neutrality to guarantee national security without a 32 military alignment is still rooted in Sweden's public consciousness.
The prospect of shifting Sweden's doctrine of defence policy was met with opposition from the leadership of Sweden's military who felt that the current neutrality-based policy was the best approach for Sweden.
Of course, the only major and, thus, most thorny issue in the credibility of Sweden’s claim to neutrality in the NATO-Russia power politics is the signing of the Host Nation Agreement in 2014.
The signing of the agreement would be considered as a positive shift in Sweden's neutrality with regard to NATO because the agreement allows NATO to use Sweden's territory during a conflict.
However, the agreement does not oblige Sweden to provide NATO with any help, and neither does it require NATO to help Sweden in a conflict as long as it remains a non-member.
Therefore, the status quo is preserved in the short-term even in the face of the Host Nation Agreement because of the lack of any binding agreements, which can only be brought forth by a commitment of Sweden to join NATO, something that Sweden has promised both Russia and its citizens it will not do.
This means that Sweden abstained from joining NATO because it recognizes that doing so would indicate that it had abandoned its neutrality.
Yet only inviting NATO troops to Sweden when NATO and Russia are clearly hostile to each other strains the degree to which Sweden can be considered pragmatically idealist, since such close ties, while falling short of an obligatory alliance, are still an act that Russia would fairly consider hostile and not neutral.
While maintaining a degree of neutrality, then, this move weakens the strength of such neutrality, and, yet, does so for entirely practical reasons.
Pragmatism in the context of Sweden-NATO relations As the data shows, the actions of Sweden were pragmatic because they were the most practical choices given the prevailing political reality.
The political reality was that Russia was redrawing Europe's map, and there was a possibility that Sweden would suffer the same fate.
Therefore, the practical thing for Sweden to do was to forge closer relationships with viable partners, ones whom Sweden can count on during a conflict.
At the same time, the decision to stay out of NATO was a pragmatic decision because it did not force Sweden to directly choose a side in a war which did not involve it, such as a conflict between NATO and Russia.
In making this justification, Göranson suggests that Sweden-NATO relations are founded on pragmatism; being closer to NATO is the most practical thing that Sweden can do in the face of Russian political and military activity in the Baltic region.
Sweden’s relationship with NATO is part of a greater pragmatic plan to guarantee its sovereignty without having to abandon its claim to neutrality in a practical sense.
Therefore, Sweden's relationship with NATO was a practical calculation meant to reinforce Sweden's capacity for receiving help from other countries in the event of a conflict, but it was not a realist attempt at picking a side in a conflict of power politics between NATO and Russia.
This provides evidence that Sweden's exercise of its neutrality in the context of how it related to NATO after the Ukraine crisis was consistent with the “pragmatic” dimension of the theoretical perspective of pragmatic idealism.
Idealism in the context of Sweden-NATO relations As the data shows, Sweden's response to Russia and Ukraine encompassed the majority of the ideals of pragmatic idealism.
First, Sweden practised moderation when relating to NATO by avoiding an escalation through NATO membership.
Second, Sweden shows commitment to the value of solidarity with countries in need by its readiness to stand with Ukraine and also its Nordic neighbours, the latter with support from NATO to maintain Nordic stability.
Therefore, Sweden cultivates its relationship with NATO within an environment framed by ideals of moderation, solidarity with countries, and cooperation in international affairs.
These three values are part of the idealistic basis of pragmatic idealism, and this provides evidence that Sweden’s exercise of its neutrality in the context of how it related with NATO after the Ukraine crisis was consistent with the “idealism” dimension of the theoretical perspective of pragmatic idealism.
CONCLUSION A study of Sweden’s response to Russia’s attack on Ukraine relating to the Swedish-Russia relations reveals that Sweden chose to remain neutral by avoiding the joining of any military alliances that would be involved in the confrontation in Ukraine.
This pragmatic calculation to remain neutral would avoid antagonizing Russia unnecessarily.
The analysis of the data also reveals that Sweden framed its response within the ideals of an authentic commitment to international law; moderation; the principles and values of the UN Charter; solidarity with countries in need; and an emphasis on diplomatic, multilateral solutions to international problems.
Therefore, Sweden's exercise of and adjustments to neutrality when dealing with Russia and Ukraine in the Russia-Ukraine conflict was consistent with the predictions of pragmatic idealism.
This finding provides support for Hypothesis 2, namely that adjustments were made both ethically and practically that kept or enhanced Sweden’s practical reality.
By standing with Ukraine against Russian violations, coupled with the Host Nation agreement allowing NATO troops to work within Swedish territory and partner with Swedish forces, while at the same time idealistically still refraining from any binding long-term military alliances with NATO, Sweden managed to balance practical and idealistic ideals in the face of the Russian threat.
The invasion of Ukraine was part of the Russian expansionist agenda bent on redrawing Europe's map, bringing to fruition Putin’s dream of reversing the events since the fall of the Soviet Union, and thwarting the perceived threat from NATO in what Russia considers as its sphere of influence.
Therefore, the conflict in Ukraine over Crimea not only involved Russia and Ukraine, but it also included NATO and its allies by extension.
This means that as a neutral country, Sweden has to remain impartial in its relations with Russia, Ukraine, and NATO in this conflict.
The central puzzle in this study was that pragmatic idealism predicts that a country loyal to pragmatic idealism would remain neutral in the conflict between the dominant NATO bloc and the contending Russia, yet the actions of the Swedish government aligning itself with the West after Ukraine’s invasion by Russia point to a possible departure from neutrality to partiality or alignment.
The most useful cases through which to consider all this were Sweden-Russia relations and Sweden-NATO relations.
With Sweden-Russia relations, Swedish neutrality was enhanced by adjustments because Sweden refused to participate in the Russia-Ukraine confrontation in Crimea except for peacekeeping purposes with a blessing from Russia.
Sweden's practice of neutrality in Sweden-Russia relations was a pragmatic calculation that involved balancing between engaging with Russia on a diplomatic platform as well as calling it out it for clear violations of international law and norms; it was able to stand for law and peace but also operate in a way that took Russia’s concerns and interests into consideration.
Sweden's practice of neutrality in SwedenRussia relations was also furthering human values such as solidarity with victim countries in need, commitment to international law, and an emphasis on diplomatic solutions to global problems.
Therefore, Sweden stood in solidarity with Ukraine without isolating Russia for both pragmatic and idealistic reasons, which shows that Sweden's practice of neutrality was consistent with pragmatic idealism.
In the end, this study concludes that pragmatic idealism allows Sweden to be flexible in its practice of neutrality in international relations.
This gives Sweden a wide range of choices when dealing with NATO, Russia, and Ukraine.
While the analysis is grounded in case study methodology, thesis word limits notwithstanding, 37 another interesting approach would have delved into discourse analysis and quantitative data to delve into how elite/international opinions shape neutrality policies as well.
Additionally, comparative studies in regards to Sweden and Finland, and say Norway and Denmark, would make for an interesting area of study as well in the context of NATO allegiances and an encroaching Russian Federation.
Herein it has been shown that the flexibility with which Sweden has applied its policy of neutrality in the wake of Russia's invasion of Ukraine is consistent with the theory of pragmatic idealism.
Sweden's application of neutrality in international relations has not only been infused with idealistic norms but also remained practical given the increasingly harsh prevailing political realities in Sweden’s neighbourhood.
The implications of these findings are that they build support for the position that pragmatic idealism is still relevant for small neutral states such as Sweden.
As a theoretical perspective in international relations, pragmatic idealism explains how these small states can practice flexible neutrality to serve their interests within broader global goals without having to be sucked into power politics or abandon morality.
Pragmatic idealism helps these nations to practice neutrality within a set of principles while allowing for flexibility to accommodate the prevailing political realities while still advancing norms that make the world safer, more humane, and more peaceful.
A great case indeed, that Sweden’s shifts fall squarely within what has been described in this thesis as pragmatic idealism.
By reframing neutrality in a combination of practical and ideal terms, it is entirely possible to see Sweden’s adjustments to its neutrality not as hypocritical or as abandoning neutrality then, but as sticking to neutrality as much as possible without setting itself up for geopolitical self-destruction.
How It Works, and How It Doesn't’, in Pikulicka-Wilczewska, Agnieszka and Sakwa, Richard.
Sauer, Tom ‘The origins of the Ukraine crisis and the need for collective security between Russia and the West.
Wood, Elizabeth and Pomeranz, William and Merry, Wayne and Trudolyubov, Maxim Roots of Russia's war in Ukraine.
