Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OM8 control number.
How the Concepts of Depth and Vulnerability Still Shape Russian Operational Approaches JUN 2016-MAY 2017 5a.
SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY NAME{S) AND ADDRESS Advanced Military Studies Program, School of Advanced Military Studies 12.
Case studies of Ukraine and Moldova, in the form of vulnerability assessments, demonstrate that specific sociopolitical vulnerabilities in those two countries allowed Russia to couple a multi-faceted infonnation campaign with an asymmetric ground-game to enable conventional militaiy operations.
Thus, specific vulnerabilities within the “depth” of Ukraine and Moldova allowed “hybrid warfare” to function effectively.
This work concludes with specific recommendations for identifying and rectifying such vulnerabilities while cautioning against preparation for “hybrid warfare” in at-risk countries with vulnerability sets conducive to alternate Russian operational approaches.
SUBJECT TERMS Russia; Ukraine; Moldova; hybrid warfare; information operations; framing; vulnerability assessment; deep operations; destabilization; psychological operations _ 16.
Prisco R Hernandez, PhD ., Director, Graduate Degree Programs The opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the student author and do not necessarily represent the views of the United States Army Command and General Staff College or any other government agency.
How the Concepts of Depth and Vulnerability Still Shape Russian Operational Approaches, by MAJ Peter C Bakke, United States Army, 45 pages.
Case studies of Ukraine and Moldova, in the form of vulnerability assessments, demonstrate that specific sociopolitical vulnerabilities in those two countries allowed Russia to couple a multi-faceted information campaign with an asymmetric ground-game to enable conventional military operations.
The Historic Deep Operation, Contemporary Approach, and Russian View of the Whole.
IV Acknowledgement I would like to thank my wife Adriane and my three children for your patience as 1 researched and wrote this paper.
Gorman for helping steer this work into a researchable direction, and for creating a research syndicate that provided me with feedback from my Moldovan and Ukrainian colleagues.
The discussions within our syndicate kept this work grounded, weeded out some personal bias, and provided me with access to subject matter experts.
COL Leyde your perspective as a German Army officer and member of NATO was extremely helpful in broadening my aperture beyond a United States centric point of view.
LTC Sergiu Cirimpei of the Moldovan Army and LTC Oleksii Tsariuk of the Ukrainian Army, thank you for the invaluable perspective you provided for the two case studies.
This work is a post-mortem of Ukrainian and Moldovan sovereignty from the viewpoint of the Russians who violated it.
Perhaps there was an interaction between conditions in those countries and Russian methods of warfare.
This paper engages the above questions and proposes that Russia’s operational employment of asymmetric warfare and information operations were particularly well matched against sociopolitical vulnerabilities in Ukraine and Moldova.
With the benefit of hindsight, the discussion throughout assumes that Russian planners understood Moldovan and Ukrainian vulnerabilities prior to the application of force.
Thus, it investigates what kind of information indicated exploitable vulnerabilities and how that information shaped Russian courses of action.
The examination continues with objective analysis of Russian actions during the Moldovan and Ukrainian conflicts.
Together, the following chapters seek to unpack a mental model underpinning the contemporary “Russian conceptualization” of warfare.
It is important to distinguish between an undergirding mental model and the variety of operational approaches that can result from its application in differing operating environments.
The Russian approach in the Chechen and Georgian conflicts, for example, manifested differently than 1 in Moldova and Ukraine despite the fact that Russia had limited aims in all four conflicts.
Further, the Moldovan and Ukrainian conflicts book-ended those in Chechnya and Georgia begging the question of whether Russian conceptualizations of warfare evolved at all.
This paper argues that the Russian mental model of warfare has remained consistently tied to the metaphor of “deep operations” and the exploitation of vulnerabilities beyond the front line.
In practical terms, this thought process includes linking adversarial vulnerability assessments with the selection of military means However, much recent writing implies that Russia’s recent action in Ukraine indicates a brand new operational approach for future operations.
With few caveats, Isserson’s historical deep operation and holistic view of warfare provide a useful mental model or contextual frame through which we can better grasp how Russian planners assess problems and develop solutions.
Such a frame is important because understanding the way Russian planners visualize warfare is critical in grasping how they select and employ means.
In this vein, contemporary Russian military writers provide direct evidence that “deep operations” serve as a mental model for shaping operational approaches and the employment of military means.
Gerasimov discusses the use of conventional, unconventional, and informational warfare as an integrated whole to attack an enemy’s vulnerabilities in depth.
Friendly capabilities and adversarial vulnerabilities are holistic systems acting against each other in entirety.
He borrows the quote from Alekandr Svechin, another proponent of the deep operation and holistic view.
The depth metaphor, as explained by Gerasimov, entails matching capabilities against a system of vulnerabilities presumed to exist throughout the depth of the enemy’s state structure.
This has real explanatory power for understanding why Russia might initially employ “hybrid warfare” against Ukraine and conventional warfare against Georgia.
Proposals of a “new operational approach” or a Russian revolution in military affairs simply do not account for the difference.
Thus, the next section will clarify the depth metaphor to establish the framework between Russian vulnerability assessments and employment of force.
These particular case studies are important because the Russian approach used in each might subvert NATO Article 5 triggers if implemented against a member state.
The driving assumption between this hypotheses is the belief that Russian information campaigns create, reinforce, and target the security concerns of ethnolinguistic outgroups.
This hypothesis and underlying assumption originate from a review of open-source material and news reporting on Russian actions in Ukraine.
The initial research suggested that wedge issues like language and cultural affiliation held the potential to aggravate regional rifts and force Ukrainian operational planners to divert resources away from conventional military threats.
Further, such actions took place amidst the backdrop of widespread pro-European sentiment among many Ukrainians, as evidenced by the 2013 Maidan Square protests.
However, Western media accounts of one particular conflict are insufficient for proving, disproving, or generalizing the above hypothesis.
The first case study examines potential sociopolitical vulnerabilities in Ukraine prior to the 2014 Russian incursions.
Next, it explores whether Russian 10 and asymmetric warfare seem specifically tailored toward those vulnerabilities.
For brevity, this case study focuses primarily on the conflict in the Donbas region.
The second case study examines Russian actions in the Trans-Dniester region Moldova in the same context.
The criteria above focus heavily on information campaign because the associated propaganda provides a written record of Russia’s desired perceptions.
Results from the two case studies will be compared to determine whether generalizable conditions existed to facilitate the use of asymmetric and informational warfare to destabilize in depth.
The metaphor employed throughout this work, like Gerasimov’s article, visualized vulnerability assessments and selection of military means as a deep operation.
Chapter one briefly traces the development and describes the concept of the historical deep operation.
It also ties historic Russian thought concepts to Gerasimov’s “depth” metaphor to demonstrate that his though pattern is a continuation of past Russian traditions.
The following two chapters will examine the Ukrainian and Moldovan conflicts as described above.
The fourth and fifth chapters will provide case study comparison and conclusions.
Unpacking this mindset is critical to understanding the metaphor employed by Russian strategic and operational thinkers as they envision the military defeat of their adversaries.
A holistic view of depth captures the lens through which Russian planners assess the vulnerabilities of their adversaries.
This is also the lens through which they select military means to exploit such vulnerabilities.
The vulnerability assessments of Ukraine and Moldova presented later follow this script.
Literature on the Russian self-concept and word-view is extensive and complex.
However, there are some consistent elements that repeatedly cut across specific historic and current ideological, political, and military discourse.
However, the holistic world view and East-West tension are most important for understanding the linkage between Russian thought, deep operations, and current operational approaches.
Russian thinkers historically compared their society with that of Western Europe and found it wanting in terms of social, economic and technological development.
As a reaction, Russian culture consistently experienced a dialectic between attempts at westernization and conservative backlash.
Put simply, the holistic view understands a complex entity not as a system of discreet sub-components, such as in the analytic western view.
Rather, the essence of an entity is found in the relationship between all of its parts, as well as the physical and spiritual components of its environment.
Surkov, in 2008, succinctly wrote, “Russian culture is the contemplation of the whole,” when advocating a more aggressive foreign policy and the integration of neighboring countries into the Russian Federation.
More to the point, the organic whole plays a clear role in the historical and contemporary military concepts of Isserson, Svechin, and Gerasimov.
Isserson’s interwar writings and criticism of Western military operational approaches were not only an indictment of static trench warfare, they were a criticism of the analytic Western worldview.
If belligerent forces are to be viewed as a whole, the friendly force must be arrayed to destroy an enemy as a whole.
The whole of an enemy is defeated by the simultaneous destruction of his fighting forces and supporting systems.
Isserson attributes this mode of thought as unique to a Marxist-Leninist form of war.
In reality, Isserson infused the traditional Russian holistic understanding of an enemy with a Marxist bent that viewed enemy social structures as the ultimate deep objective.
This is a conceptual shift away from previous linear tactical formulations of depth.
Isserson understood interwar theories of airpower, armored formations, and long range indirect fire munitions.
More importantly, he envisioned how each theory’s attributes fit together and harnessed new technology to holistically attack an adversary.
Like Isserson, Gerasimov urges the Russian General Staff to develop tailored operational approaches that harnesses new technology, information, and asymmetric advantages to holistically defeat adversaries.
Gerasimov’s own words inform the reader that ""the application of high precision weaponry is taking on a mass 10 Isserson, 4, 6.
He maintains a holistic view of Russian adversaries, employing a deep operational framework.
The nature of the adversary will determine the type of emergent technology used to disrupt in depth.
Further, based upon Gerasimov’s assessment of the contemporary operating environment, 12 Gerasimov, 25.
Just as the deep operation and holistic view guide the Russian General Staff’s attempts to develop an operational approach, they will guide analysis of the following case studies.
This work hypothesizes that that ethnolinguistically diverse former-Soviet countries engaged in nationalist discourse are at particularly high risk “hybrid” destabilization methods.
If supported, this hypothesis implies that one should not assume Russia will always apply information operations to destabilize in depth.
Recent actions in Syria and Georgia stand opposed to examples in Ukraine to show that Russia has the capability and is willing to initiate conventional operations in an enemy’s depth with a much more modest asymmetric and informational effort.
However, the task here is to identify what factors lead to asymmetric and information-related destabilization of the kind that is most likely to circumvent NATO treaty obligations.
Ukrainian history is a tricky subject because multiple versions have been written by historians with particular social and political agendas.
Although there are many facts upon which most histories agree, the following paragraphs inevitably focus on difference.
It is not a simple cliche to deduce that there are “two Ukraines” with different conceptions of their role as part of the Western European and Russian spheres of influence.
A 1999 study of Ukrainian elite opinion in the cities of L’viv and Donetsk, each considered to be at the cultural extremes of Ukrainian society, showed that elites in Donetsk perceived themselves to be more culturally similar to ethnic Russians living in Russia than to their Ukrainian compatriots living in L’viv.
The same study goes on to discuss inherent dangers in such cultural heterogeneity, especially when one group holds political power.
Such differences are based upon differing historical experiences among the Ukrainian population.
The Western Ukrainian provinces of Galicia / Volhnia were historically subservient to larger European powers such as the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, Austro-Hungarian Empire, Germany, and Poland.
Thus, its social and political fabric totals less than a half century of Russian dominance.
Donetsk, on the other hand, existed as part of the Russian Empire until it became part of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.
Less than a generation separates the average resident of Donetsk from nearly five centuries of Russian affiliation.
Thus, its people, who still self-identify as Ukrainian, have a substantially greater affinity with Russian culture and systems of governance than their western brethren.
Evidence of this divide becomes most immediately apparent when examining the distribution of Ukrainian versus Russian language throughout the country.
Ukrainian scholar Oleksandr Taranenko, writing several years before the 2013-2014 conflict, described the basic 19 Shulman, 1015.
The 2001 Ukrainian census paints a more detailed picture of the breakdown.
In Western Ukrainian provinces, approximately 95% of respondents described Ukrainian as their primary language.
In Crimea and Eastern provinces of Donetsk and Luhansk, seventy to ninety percent of respondents selected Russian as their primary language.
It’s worth noting that the geographic divide between predominantly Ukrainian and Russian speakers is rather sharp, with the three provinces mentioned above averaging a twenty to forty percent increase over neighboring provinces to speak Russian.
Soviet repression of Ukrainian language bears heavily on the collective memory of many Ukrainian citizens.
ProUkrainian language segments of the population maintain a strong political appetite for the restoration of Ukrainian language throughout all areas within Ukraine’s borders.
Further, residents of historically Russian-speaking areas view the post-Soviet language restoration efforts as an impractical political imposition, no better than the original repression of Ukrainian speakers.
Many Ukrainians speak both languages, preventing the either-or dynamic common among linguistic disputes elsewhere.
The same two randomly selected residents of Ukraine’s cultural poles would be able to converse without any trouble.
Thus, a language and experiential difference existed in in Ukraine well prior to 2013.
Unfortunately, this dynamic appears to be changing as language becomes a salient issue for identity politics in contemporary Ukraine.
Differing Ukrainian historical understandings of the period form 1932-1945 provided another dormant area of potential division.
Soviet collectivization and war between Soviet and Nazi totalitarianism ravaged Ukraine.
G Paul Holman described how “the true extent of Ukrainian suffering under Lenin and Stalin is beyond reckoning.
However, affiliations from the Soviet-German war and characterizations of the Great Famine generally coincide in strength and polarity with areas of strong language preference.
As will be discussed, historical differences underpin propaganda used to frame Western Ukrainians as fascists.
Case Study of Young Russian Speakers in Lviv,"" International Journal of the Sociology of Language 2010, no. : 35.
Language and historical cleavages happen to coincide with oppositional political affiliations.
Thus, in an adversarial atmosphere, the political power of a political party can appear to represent the power of one group over the other.
The dynamics of this division will be discussed in greater detail later.
For now, the important point is that Ukrainian society has ethnolinguistic groups that are opposed in historical understanding, language, and politics.
From 1991 to 2013, no single issue or division was important enough to destroy Ukrainian nationhood.
However, each issue held latent potential, if bundled with the others in the right political context, to create opposing identity constructs.
Such was the context when Ukrainians rejected President Yanukovych’s proposed entry into the Russian Eurasian Customs Union.
At this juncture, Russian leaders seemed to understand that highlighting threat regarding one issue (e.g. language), could potentially polarize groups into opposing camps with entirely different identity constructs.
Literature regarding ethnic conflict treats identity as an aggregate of shared physical, symbolic, linguistic, cultural, and practical behaviors that cause individuals to co-identify as members of the same group.
In this context of this vulnerability assessment, there is a rich target audience of Eastern Ukrainians who might be persuaded to reject allegiance to the Ukrainian government if a perceived threat is strong enough to make political, historical, and linguistic difference more salient than areas of Ukrainian commonality.
Resurgence of Ukrainian Nationalism The resurgence of nationalism is important in identifying countries at risk of hybrid warfare.
Rather, the discourse of nationalism in multi-ethnic or multi-lingual states opens a window for exploitation by outside groups seeking to divide the resident population.
This section demonstrates the presence of nationalist discourse in Ukraine leading up to conflict with Russia.
In 2004, two diametrically opposed candidates ran for the presidency of Ukraine.
As a result of the protests, Ukrainian authorities organized a second runoff supervised by international authorities.
Yuschenko emerged victorious with a perceived mandate to enact wide ranging social projects.
Among Yuschenko’s most significant projects were the recognition of the famine of 1932-33 as a genocide of Ukrainians, the rehabilitation of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists , the establishment of Ukrainian language in all primary schools.
The rehabilitation of Ukrainian nationalist and anti-Russian symbolic leaders sent a clear political message to Russians and Eastern Ukrainians as to the nature of Ukrainian identity under Yuschenko.
By no means is this a complete and two-sided view of Ukrainian nationalism.
Rather, it is an attempt to highlight some of the relevant historical links between the fractured Ukrainian experience from the period of 1932-45, events of the Orange revolution, and the resultant perceptions of Ukrainian nationalism by Yuschenko’s political opposition.
At worst, such events might be manipulated to create the perception of Western-backed attempts to empower an OUN-like junta in Kiev with a narrow vision of Ukrainian identity.
To create these front organizations, Russia simply needed a ground-game to balance coercion and information around specific vulnerabilities.
In this sense, the level of effort placed on Russian 10 planning and propaganda is comparable to United States military examination of host-nation infrastructure prior to forced entry and establishment of a lodgment.
Russian planners “look to gain assets in an area with the sole purpose of observing the area and identifying core ethnic groups.
The author’s research suggests that outputs of such collection efforts shape an operational approach carried out by Russian agents or “crisis managers” who specialize in “community organizing” and disruption.
COL Bircher, Director of the United States Army Information Operations Proponent offered his thoughts on Russian use of information operations pertaining to a forthcoming study he is contributing to.
Girkin, former head of the DPR, has a particularly sordid history of combining murder with “grass roots” separatism in Crimea, Bosnia, and Chechnya before entering Eastern Ukraine.
However, Russian proxy groups needed a vehicle to mask their origin and gain at least some semblance of support from among the population.
This is where the vulnerability assessment meets the information campaign.
Propaganda Origins, Target Audience, and Content This work rests on two assumptions.
First, Russian information campaigns are deliberately planned affairs based on vulnerability assessments.
Second, Russian permeation of the information environment is a comprehensive multi-level game that addresses audiences inside and outside the operating environment for varying puiposes.
This section focuses specifically on the first assumption by examining the process and content behind propaganda geared toward Donbass Ukrainians within the depth of the Ukrainian Operating environment.
Earlier sections described exploitable wedges within Ukrainian society.
Thus, one would expect to see evidence of such divides in the themes of Russian propaganda.
Since Russia does not place a watermark on their information efforts, this work uses information put forth by Russian proxy separatist organizations in Donbas.
In general, the documents on the DPR and NRU can be broken down into ideological documents and news updates that double as separatist propaganda.
This work subjectively classifies forty-five documents as ideological statements of puipose because they attempt to characterize the nature of Russian backed separatism and the Ukrainian government as a whole.
In general, as will be seen below, the ideological documents focus very heavily on socially divisive themes.
Daily updates, however, employ a wider array of topics presumed to be of interest for the target audience.
A May 2014 call for support to militias is a good start point for breaking down propaganda content because its apparent puipose was to influence the general population in Donbass to commit violence against the Ukrainian military.
The actions outlined within represent a link between the information campaign and disruption in depth of the Ukrainian military.
The document begins by stating that for “the first time since the Great Patriotic War... events occurred that not only resemble, but directly coincide with the actions of the Nazi occupiers.
The author maintained digital and paper copies all of the documents referenced throughout this section for a separate project.
However, the political cleavages of 2004 /2013 regarding the Western versus Russian orientation of Ukrainian nationhood are clearly being framed as the latest installment of Nazi collaboration versus Great Patriotic War loyalty.
In this version of events, the Ukrainian military takes the place of the Nazi’s themselves and directly threatens the existence of “loyal” Ukrainians.
The Russian affiliated Ukrainian existence is threatened with the fascist policies and violent acts of the Nazi-like machine in Kiev.
In order to survive, Donbass Ukrainians must band together with their Russian brothers to form their own state under the protective umbrella of greater Russia.
Third, it provides Russia with a cover to use non-military avenues to smuggle weaponry to irregular and proxy fighters.
In this sense, the propagandists are using the Donbas Ukrainians as props to link a destabilization in depth with conventional use of military force.
The following quote, posted by the DPR in April 2014, is lengthy but provides the overall theme for several such documents.
We don’t want to do this and we are ready to fight for our future and the future of our children.
Our land is already amassing military forces of the Ukrainian army, which put the order to act against its own people... appeal to you Vladimir Vladimirovich as a last hope... for our children’s future.
The ideological documents of the NRU and DPR conspicuously lack economic arguments, nostalgic appeals to Soviet prosperity, or a political framework for cooperation with Ukraine or Russia.
In this case, the NRU propaganda frames the current conflict in terms of the German Soviet War because the divisive identity components above generally coincided with opposing sides in that conflict.
Donbass Ukrainians are being asked to reassume their past role and identity.
Conversely, the bridging device implies that Western Ukrainians have reassumed their past roles as well.
Earlier, this paper discussed how the potentially divisive elements of Ukrainian identity might be bundled together to become salient if the element of threat is made apparent.
Ideological propaganda clearly calls upon those very divisive elements while introducing the ingredient of threat.
These conditions indicate that the ideological propaganda is engineered along the fault lines of specific identity constructs in order to illicit an Eastern identity hostile to the government in Kiev.
Further, the hostile identity serves as the bridge to motivate the hostile actions needed to destabilize in depth.
Overview of Routine Propaganda This section briefly discusses the use of day-to-day propaganda linked with asymmetric warfare in Eastern Ukraine.
These documents should be seen as part of a multi-faceted information campaign that includes Russian media and government communication.
The “news” posted by the NRU and DPR ensures that local citizens interpret events in a specific way.
If the ideological documents characterize the Ukrainian military as “SS Death squads,” the daily updates provide examples and pictures to back up that claim.
The content of the news updates is generally short, usually half a page in length, and accompanied by imagery that this author has found to be inauthentic.
Generally, the main headline of the news section incorporates a 24 story about the Ukrainian military killing civilians, as well as a story boasting about a local militia victory.
The language used in the stories is similar to the ideological documents in its World War 11 frame.
Ukrainian military forces are “Nazis,” while separatists are “patriots” depicted wearing the historical Russian military Saint George ribbon.
For example, imagery of a Ukrainian tank, taken from stock imagery, might have a swastika added.
Images claiming to show carnage caused by the Ukrainian military are generally used several times, claiming to show evidence of different atrocities.
Other imagery and stories claim a Western conspiracy to destabilize the region.
The author found one story claiming to have “proof’ of United States Special Forces involvement in Ukraine accompanied with a picture of a fighter wearing a United States Army patch.
Coincidentally, the patch was of the 1-145 th Aviation Regiment, the holding company battalion for flight students at Fort Rucker, Alabama.
Regardless of its poor quality, the daily updates still seem to have the same target audience and purpose of the ideological documents.
Taken as a whole, they continue the idea that Donbas Ukrainians are under siege from a combined Ukrainian / Western fascist threat and that Russia stands as a bulwark against an international cabal.
If the ideological documents are meant to sway the target audience opinion toward action, the “news” updates seem intended to bombard the target audience with information that maintains that opinion.
Although of poor quality, the propaganda does, in retrospect, line up correctly with military actions and indicates a link between the Russian proxy organizations, fighters, and information campaign.
The unique aspect of the routine propaganda is its specific calls to action.
Many of the documents specifically requested the assistance of metal workers, miners, and policemen for tactical engagements.
However, the routine propaganda provides details and forums for action.
It directs existing sympathizers regarding how and when to make use of their frustration.
In this sense, it mirrors the use of social media in the Arab Spring and Maidan crises.
Donbas is an industrial heartland where control of the mining and metal working population can pay dividends for Russia and severely hamper Ukraine.
It is possible that such calls to action serve the dual purpose of signaling identification with these key audiences as well as generating support for military operations.
What remains certain, however, is that the routine propaganda is written for a carefully selected target audience and based upon a vulnerability assessment of that group and Ukraine writ large.
Confronting the Ukrainian Orange Revolution,"" Demokratizatsiya 14, no. : 497.
This article describes the evolution of the political character and self-image of the Donbass region.
The article argues that depictions of Donbass Ukrainians as “Communists” or as an apathetic pro-Russian voting block are inaccurate.
As such, Kiev and other regions benefit from the work of Donbass laborers.
Without the fruits of their labor, in this view, the industrially underdeveloped and overly aggressive Western Oblasts would collapse.
However, due to underrepresentation in government, Donbass Ukrainians do not receive an adequate share of benefits.
This self image combines with a proclivity to vote only for candidates from Donbass.
Thus, his presidency was seen as a nod to industry and to Donbass itself.
The article also describes how Donbass candidates, particularly Yanukovych, tended to demonize Western Ukrainian candidates for their own political gain.
Normally, this demonization hearkens back to World War II with the implication that Westerners pose an aggressive fascistic threat.
Of note, such political jockeying might have help set conditions for Russian propaganda to the same effect.
Vulnerability Assessment Ukraine and Moldova have much in common if considering the tug-of-war between Russian and Western domination over the course of the 20 th century.
The western section of Moldova, historically called Bessarabia, lies between the Dniester and Prut Rivers.
The term Bessarabia is a loaded term but will be used here to differentiate between contemporary Moldova and the historic homeland of ethnic Moldovans not to include the Transnistria region.
Transnistria refers to the area east of the Dneister River except when called “Dniester” or “TransDniester” in media reports.
The MASSR was dissolved in 1941 when German and Romanian troops reentered the region and reunited it with Romania under the Fascist “Iron Guard” regime.
However, the Soviet Union reconquered the area in 1944 and reestablished the MASSR by truncating the northern and southern portions of Bessarabia and adding Transnistria.
The inclusion of Transnistria into the MASSR held potential to be socio-politically problematic.
As the MASSR entered into a nationalist discourse, its constituents faced a similar challenge as their Ukrainians.
Others recognized historical kinship with Romanians but asserted their own ethnic identity.
Members of both groups view their language and culture to be intrinsically linked with those of Romania.
The history of Moldovan participation in World War II carries some of the same divisive baggage examined in the Ukrainian case study.
Moldovans divided between supporters of the German-backed Romanian regime and supporters of the Red Army.
In retrospect, one can clearly identify an ethnolinguistic minority with potentially pro-Russian political sentiment.
Further, this group was separated by a physical and historical barrier from their more Romanian oriented brethren.
Thus, there are divisive identity constructs that could potentially be bundled together to create an adversarial population under the right conditions.
However, as Kaufman notes, prior to the conflict, “although ethnic fears were strong, ethnic hostility was not.
Thus, this section discusses Moldovan nationalism and the fear it seems to have created with Russified populations living in Transnistria.
The Soviet Union unwittingly played a role in the nationalist sentiment that, in some ways led to its own destruction.
This was particularly true in the case of Moldovans living in Bessarabia and Transnistria.
In order to maintain the integrity of the subordinate Soviet Socialist Republics, early Soviets often highlighted the unique ethnolinguistic aspects of groups living within those republics.
Later Soviet leadership sought to Russify parts of each republic or install Russified individuals into positions of power within the party apparatus.
In a study of Moldovan identity, Natalia Cojocaru notes that “Soviet propaganda propagated the idea of a Moldovan 53 Ibid., 264.
The Soviet system exacerbated ready-made identity conflicts by privileging Russian language and Slavic party members with higher paying management positions in business and more powerful positions in government.
The conditions were set for post-Soviet Moldovan nationalism as well as its backlash Transnistrian nationalism.
If carried out, the platform of the Popular Front threatened to make the Russian-speaking Slavs in Transnistria into a national minority.
Further, a number of language laws passed by the Moldovan Parliament (under pressure from the Popular Front) defined Moldovan as the official state language, mandated a transition from Cyrillic to Latin alphabet, and eliminated Russian from the stratum of business and government.
Although the laws accounted for the concerns of minority groups, Soviet elites in Transnistria framed them as a threat to the welfare of their constituents.
A detailed listing of Moldovan legislation and discourse indicating nationalistic tendencies is extensive.
What is important here is that nationalism was present in force, and that an ethnolinguistic out-group of Russified Moldovans perceived a threat.
The next sections examine the role of the Soviet information campaign in stoking such fears and the resultant violent destabilization within Moldova.
Examination of the Propaganda This section examines the information content available to the Russian-speaking Transnistrian population.
Firsthand examples of on-the-ground propaganda, such as that used in the Ukraine case study, are much more difficult to find in the quantities needed to draw general conclusions about their content.
Although the conflict occurred in the early 1990’s, there is no primary source trail on the internet.
However, other research avenues provide a window into proRussian themes Transnistrians were exposed to throughout the period prior to and during the 19911992 conflict.
Stuart Kaufman notes that Transnistrian media, the sole source of outside information for the Russophone population, served as an echo chamber for Moscow based Russian media organizations.
Citing the pro-separatist sentiment in Russian media, he writes, “The bias of the Moscow press was significant because it reinforced the biased messaging reaching the residents of Transnistria from their own local press.
To be clear, this section is inferring themes Transnistrians would have been exposed to, based on trends of bias evidenced in Moscow-based media services.
The following analysis draws upon daily media translations issued by the Foreign Broadcast Information Service in the 90-day period from October 1990 to January 1991.
FBIS, a forerunner of the Open Source Center, maintained over twenty international media monitoring stations for the United States government and issued daily paper and microfiche reports from 1941-1996.
First, seemingly neutral coverage of cooperation efforts tends to highlight economic benefits of Russian / Moldovan Union.
Second, discussion of the Moldovan nationalist discourse usually highlights fears of Moldovan unification with Romania.
Third, discussion of conditions on the ground highlight conditions of lawlessness and ethnic conflict.
Most of the articles reflect a bias in favor of Moldovan unity with Russia or sympathy for Russian speakers following passage of the 1989 language laws.
However, to refer to them as propaganda of the sort used by Ukrainian separatists is a stretch.
The intended message is much more subtle that those employed in Ukraine.
Most outlets mixed non-partisan coverage of more benign issues with inflammatory stories regarding the buildup to conflict.
Positive coverage of Moldovan conciliation efforts became much less common, while characterizations of Moldovan leaders bowing to the Popular Front’s pro-Romanian agenda became routine.
This turning point is apparent in the media coverage between November 8 th and November 20 th 1990.
The tone and content of the broadcast and print media illustrate a progression from themes of hope and cooperation to themes of lawlessness and Moldovan intransigence.
In November 8th, Moscow TASS and Moscow Kresnaya Zvezda, printed hopeful stories titled “Gorbachev Invited to Visit,” and “Russian Envoy Hopes Moldova Compromise Viable,” respectively.
The three Moscow TASS headlines (“State of Emergency Rejected,” “Pogroms Reported,” and “Capital Remains Tense”) show that TASS and other outlets faithfully served as an echo chamber for the CPSU’s desire to portray Moldova as chaotic and violent.
These stories mark a critical turning point in Russian media coverage of the Moldovan crisis.
The articles captured in FBIS daily reports indicate that Kauffman’s assertion of media bias is correct.
A clear narrative consisting of several themes and characterizations emerges in news pieces.
However, most contain more than one associated theme and a continuous reading of the news pieces demonstrates repetition of the above narrative among the Moscow-based outlets.
As relations between Moldovans in Bessarabia and Transnistria deteriorated beyond the ability to compromise within the communist system, the individual themes become more repetitive and coherently linked.
A piece published by Krasnaya Zvezda provides an example of several themes within the narrative.
To close the story out, the soldier describes being assaulted for asking a Moldovan for a cigarette in Russian.
An unnamed observer describes ethnic Moldovans, usually wearing military uniforms or militia insignia, assaulting innocent bystanders for speaking Russian.
The inclusion of insignia within the mobs of “hooligans” is important because it implies that the attacks are organized and nationalist in nature.
Such stories, repeatedly 70 FBIS, “Situation Remains Tense,” Moscow TASS, November 3, 1990. 35 employed by Moscow TASS and Pravda correspond with the few examples of ground-level propaganda available to the author.
Most stories in the FBIS reports characterize the Moldovan Parliament as incapable of resolving ethnic disputes.
Of course, the logical solution is military intervention and a union treaty with the Supreme Soviet.
The Moldovan case clearly illustrates that Soviet government used mainstream media as a conduit of propaganda for the purpose of influencing public opinion in Transnistria.
Thematic analysis of the actual news stories available to Moldovans in Transnistria shows that Kaufman is correct in asserting that the Moscow-based media served as an echo-chamber for Russian interest in Moldova.
Further, the media-based information campaign was tailored to exploit the vulnerabilities of an ethnolinguistic minority on the fringes of a nationalist majority.
One can see similarity between the forces at work in Ukraine and Moldova.
That is, a Russian information campaign related to the above conditions worked to facilitate separatism, and that separatism facilitated conventional military operations.
The next section compares and analyzes the results of the preceding case studies to pinpoint the vulnerability associated with common conditions in Ukraine and Moldova while continuing to employ the metaphor of depth.
Vulnerabilities in Ukraine and Moldova Previous sections showed that Ukraine and Moldova were quite similar with regard to hypothesized conditions of ethnolinguistic diversity and nationalist discourse.
However, the presence of ethnolinguistic diversity and nationalist discourse do not explain how Ukrainian and Moldovan vulnerabilities function.
This section cuts to the heart of how Ukrainian and Moldovan vulnerabilities function, and how Russian information campaigns exploited them.
A synthesis of conditional similarities in Ukraine and Moldova shows that both countries do have a similar vulnerability rooted in their geopolitical histories and resultant identity constructs.
Both countries have disparate groups with overlapping identity constructs.
Under normal conditions, there is enough overlap between group identities such that conflict does not occur.
For example, the Transnistrian would have had enough in common with other Moldovans to allow for common ground on many issues.
Indeed, research on Ukraine and Moldova shows that there is typically little animosity between Russian speaking minorities and their respective Ukrainian or Moldovan majorities.
However, when fear is introduced into the equation, minority groups are susceptible to placing more weight on identity constructs that do not overlap with the majority population.
More specifically, such groups are vulnerable to manipulation when messages of fear are tailored to resonate with identity constructs not in common with the majority.
When such identity constructs are threatened, they may become defining factors of overall identity.
To complicate matters, identity constructs like linguistic preference might closely tie with other constructs to create a Russo-centric bundle of identity 38 constructs.
Normally, an individual’s set of Moldovan / Ukrainian identity constructs might coexist with a Russo-centric set.
However, when facing an ostensible threat to the existence of one identity construct , a minority group might be goaded into prioritizing the identity constructs that do not overlap with the majority in their host country.
The Donbas identity contains overlapping elements of Ukrainian, Russian, and Donbass specific constructs.
Example of how a regionally specific construct (e.g. centered on Donbas mining concerns) can provide an inroads with a target audience employed in the Donbas mines.
Exploitation of a sensitive identity construct can strengthen the salience of and relationship between similar Russo-centric constructs to illicit a separatist identity.
Such misplaced thinking has been at the root of destructive policy, throughout history.
As the previous sections discussed, Moldovans and Ukrainians did not envision such a problem anyhow.
Ethnolinguistic difference did not lead to animosity in either country without extra help.
Thus, the vulnerability is more specific, and can minimized with some effort.
Ukrainian and Moldovan vulnerability lies in the specific wedge issues related to the reinstitution of Soviet suppressed identity constructs.
The Soviet regime marginalized and Russified Moldovan and Ukrainian language.
Thus, majority populations viewed the reinstitution of native language as part of the normalizing process without animus toward minority populations.
However, it seems to have been quite easy for Russian information campaigns to reframe nationalistic or identity related language in terms that could be perceived as threatening to heavily Russified minorities.
This type of vulnerability plays directly into Russian hands as Moldovans and Ukrainians pursue a Western vector of development because the process and language driving reassertion of identity and Westernization are intertwined.
Therefore, it is important that both governments measure their language on such issues carefully and engage with minority groups because anti-Russian language can easily be twisted to present a threat.
However, this is a two-sided dialogue and care must be taken not to minimize the concern of the majority.
The vulnerability exists precisely because the concerns of the majority are related to a real historical event.
Laws and language related to language resurgence are a rejection of Russian orientation, not a rejection of a minority population.
Russian information and asymmetric campaigns in Ukraine and Moldova specifically tai'gctcd the inherent vulnerability presented by the language of resurgent identity discourse.
Propaganda geared toward minority populations in Moldova and Ukraine injected the element of fear surrounding the language issue in order to solidify a separatist identity consisting of proRussian identity constructs.
In the Moldovan case, Moscow-based media provides a window into the information ground-game where a narrative of lawlessness and attacks on Russian language speakers dominates the information space.
In the Ukrainian case, falsified information regarding Ukrainian government and military activities creates an imagined existential threat and closer alignment with Russia.
In both cases, the information campaign reframed resurgent nationalist 40 discourse and legislation to reinstitute old divisions.
Evidence of this lies in the use of Nazi imagery in Ukraine and Romanian “Iron Guard” terminology in Moldova.
In both cases, the propaganda products of the Russian information campaign are the end-result of a vulnerability assessment.
Note the “Novorossiya” flag encompassing Donetsk /Fuhansk, the Russian flag over Crimea, and the Nazi flag over Western Ukraine.
Geographic placement of flags aligns with demographic differences discussed in previous sections.
Further, the map above does not show demographic conditions or political beliefs as they exist in Ukraine.
Rather, it illustrates a set of desired perceptions engineered by proponents of a Russian 41 information campaign.
This is a picture of a destabilized and fragmented Ukraine where Kiev is isolated from the Euro-centric vector of Western Ukrainians, unable to access or influence the industries of Donbass, and blocked from commerce and power projection associated with Black Sea ports.
This emasculated version of Ukraine, depicted by the area overlaid by the Ukrainian flag, is entirely dependent on a Russian vector of development and surrounded by destabilized areas that allow easy penetration by Russian conventional forces.
Dotted arrows suggest how destabilization might allow further penetration in depth.
The depth metaphor suggests areas for further attempted destabilization should Russia decide to attack to the west.
Transnistria, Donbass, and Crimea remain “frozen” in an internationally unrecognized autonomous condition.
From a practical standpoint, the passage of time legitimizes the status quo in Russian favor.
The answer to such questions requires a thoughtful analysis of Russian techniques and the thought process underpinning them.
This paper also suggested that “hybrid warfare” is not the correct lens for viewing the Russian operational approach.
Instead, it offers the metaphor of “depth”, whereby Russian planners visualize an adversary as a systematic whole and select varied means to conduct a multi-faceted approach that combines conventional, asymmetric, and informational warfare.
The weight placed on each type of engagement would be commensurate with the adversary’s systematic vulnerabilities.
Individual case studies of Ukraine and Moldova examined conditions in each country for evidence of ethnolinguistic out-groups, majority nationalist sentiment, and Russian propaganda intended to isolate the outgroup.
However, the conditions did not adequately explain the key vulnerability allowing Russian exploitation.
The discourse surrounding previously suppressed identity constructs in Moldova and Ukraine seem to be the active ingredient that allowed for an asymmetric campaign of destabilization to take hold in minority areas.
As depicted in the previous section, the areas where resurgent nationalist discourse resonates with a Russified 43 minority coincides with areas of Russian strategic interest.
This work does not claim to identify what those strategic interests are.
However, the map of destabilization paints a picture where Russia can politically neuter its adversaries by holding critical territory in “frozen” conflict, or provide an operational avenue to threaten future conventional actions.
There are several lessons that former Soviet states and their allies , can take away from this interpretation of events in Ukraine and Moldova.
First, the presence of nationalist discourse and a Russified minority in former Soviet states should be cause for an internal vulnerability assessment, especially if the majority element seeks a Western vector of development.
Additionally, vulnerable states should examine the physical location of Russified minority groups to determine whether Russia could use identity-based propaganda as a pretext to mobilize geographically proximate minorities for the purpose of annexing territory.
If vulnerable states and their allies determine that the above conditions exist, they should collaborate to enact a deliberate information campaign aimed at minimizing the possibility of Russian propaganda gaining a foothold.
As a critical component of this campaign, political dialogue must assuage the fears of a Russified minority while heeding the historical experience of a previously suppressed majority identity.
Second, at-risk former Soviet states should examine ways to strengthen the ties that bind identity constructs between majority and minority populations.
Minority populations with strong social, military, and economic ties to the rest of the state might be much less susceptible to manipulation of a single identity construct.
Finally, at-risk states should recognize when “hybrid warfare” of the type described here, is not a likely possibility.
Much recent discourse might lead NATO and allied former Soviet states to prepare for the wrong kind of war.
Russia's Ambiguous Warfare and Implications for the United States Marine Corps.
Speech at Expanded Meeting of the State Council on Russia’s Development Strategy Through to 2020.
Snow, David A., E Burke Rochford Jr, Steven K Worden, and Robert D Benford.
A Primer on Modern Russian Unconventional Warfare, Ukraine, Ukraine 2013-2014.
