The security concerns of NATO’s Central and Eastern European member states and non-NATO member states such as Moldova and Ukraine are of particular concern.
NATO’s member states have strongly condemned Russian actions in Ukraine and have taken steps aimed both at reassuring allies and partners in Central and Eastern Europe and at deterring further Russian aggression.
These include demonstrations of support for Ukraine and its territorial integrity; actions to demonstrate the alliance’s commitment to the defense of its Central and Eastern European member states; and measures aimed at rebuking Russia.
NATO member states have said they will continue to conduct previously planned military exercises in Ukraine and elsewhere in the region.
The United States has been a key driver behind the NATO response and has taken additional military measures intended to reassure its allies and partners in Central and Eastern Europe.
These include the deployment of United States fighter jets to Poland and the Baltic states, United States naval vessels to the Black Sea, and Marines to Romania.
The United States has supplied the Ukrainian government with some nonlethal military assistance, but has thus far ruled out providing lethal military aid.
Although these actions have been welcomed by supporters of the United States and NATO, some analysts and allied governments have called for a more concerted military response.
Among other things, critics have called for more robust forward or permanent deployment of United States and NATO forces in Central and Eastern Europe; additional military exercises in the region; and additional military assistance to the Ukrainian government, including military training and anti-tank and anti-aircraft weapons and other arms.
However, some Members of Congress have called on the Obama Administration and NATO to take additional military action to reassure allies in Central and Eastern Europe and deter Russia.
In addition, some Members have called for a more resolute demonstration of NATO’s commitment to enlargement, including to Georgia, a former republic of the Soviet Union, with which Russia had a brief military conflict in 2008.
For example, the proposed Forging Peace through Strength in Ukraine and the Transatlantic Alliance Act , introduced on April 9, 2014, calls for additional NATO and United States military assistance to Ukraine and calls for immediate NATO membership for Montenegro and the granting of a NATO Membership Action Plan to Georgia.
This report addresses the NATO and United States military response to the crisis in Ukraine.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine Congressional Research Service NATO: Response to the Crisis in Ukraine Contents Overview.
NATO and United States Military Response to Russia’s Annexation of Crimea.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine Overview The United States Congress has expressed deep concern over Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the ongoing crisis in Ukraine.
Some policy makers and commentators have called for a reassessment of the transatlantic community’s progress in realizing its goal of a Europe “whole, free, and at peace,” citing security concerns in some of NATO’s Central and Eastern European member states and ongoing territorial disputes in countries on the alliance’s borders, such as Moldova, Ukraine, and Georgia.
Questions about NATO’s commitment and capacity to defend its member states and about the nature of the alliance’s relationship with Russia have moved to the forefront of discussions about NATO’s future.
These questions are expected to feature prominently at NATO’s next summit of heads of state and government, scheduled to take place in Wales on September 45, 2014.
The crisis in Ukraine has also exposed longer-standing tensions within NATO regarding its strategic focus.
Since the end of the Cold War, NATO has evolved from an exclusive focus on territorial defense and deterrence in Europe to overseeing a range of military and crisis management operations across the globe.
This transformation was predicated largely on the perception that Russia no longer posed a security threat to NATO, and on a conviction that the primary security challenges facing the allies emanated from beyond the Euro-Atlantic region.
However, some NATO members, including many former members of the communist bloc, have consistently expressed concern that the alliance’s transformation coidd come at the expense of its capacity to uphold its commitment to collective defense, enshrined in Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty.
After more than a decade of war in Afghanistan and against the backdrop of a militarily resurgent Russia, some allies are calling for a renewed NATO focus on collective defense.
Debates about NATO’s mission come against the backdrop of continued economic stagnation in Europe and long-standing United States concerns about a downward trend in European defense spending, shortfalls in European defense capabilities, and burden sharing within the alliance.
In 2013, total defense spending by NATO European allies as a percentage of GDP was about 1.6%; and just three NATO allies exceeded the alliance’s goal of spending 2% of GDP on defense.
Analysts in the United States have long asserted that defense spending in many European countries is inefficient, with disproportionately high personnel costs coming at the expense of much-needed research, development, and procurement.
In 2013, only four allies met a NATO guideline to devote 20% of defense expenditures to the purchase of major equipment, considered a key indicator of the pace of military modernization.
See NATO, Financial and Economic Data Relating to NATO Defence, February 24, 2014.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen and others have argued that the economic constraints facing allied governments could spur much-needed defense cooperation among European allies.
At NATO’s May 2012 summit, the allies committed to a “Smart Defense” initiative that calls for cooperation, prioritization, and specialization in pursuit of needed defense capabilities.
Some critics maintain that this is just the latest in a long line of post-Cold War efforts to enhance capabilities that have had mixed success, at best.
They argue that the limited outcomes may reflect a general lack of public support for military engagement and divergent threat perceptions both across the Atlantic and within Europe.
As noted above, within Europe, some allies have emphasized the need for territorial defense capabilities, while others have stressed the importance of more flexible, rapidly deployable units and civilian-military crisis management operations.
An increasingly strained budget environment and heightened concerns about the security threat from Russia appear to be amplifying these differences.
United States officials have consistently underscored their firm commitment to the transatlantic security relationship and the collective defense of the alliance.
However, far-reaching defense budget cuts in the United States, the Obama Administration’s “rebalance” to Asia, and the withdrawal over the past two years of two of the United States Army’s four Brigade Combat Teams based in Europe have raised questions about future United States commitments to European security.
This includes providing military trainers to assist in Ukraine’s military modernization efforts and efforts to help improve the interoperability of Ukrainian and allied armed forces through exercises and joint operations.
On April 1, the Ukraine’s Foreign Minister said Ukraine has not requested and does not expect material military assistance from NATO, beyond training.
However, this may not preclude bilateral assistance from individual 3 NATO officials have announced 24 new multinational defense projects in which assets are pooled or shared, including acquisition, training, force protection, and ISR initiatives.
The United States is currently leading the Baltic Air Policing mission, with Poland due to take command on May 1, 2014.
The mission has been led by NATO allies on a rotational basis since 2004, with detachments of four fighter aircraft for four-month rotations operating from an air base in Lithuania.
In March, the United States deployed an additional six F-15 Eagle aircraft to the Air Policing mission.
The UK, Denmark, and France are among the other allies that have committed to deploying additional aircraft to the mission in the near future.
Since mid-March 2014, NATO airborne warning and control system surveillance aircraft have been conducting twice daily flights to monitor events in Ukraine, one over Poland and one over Romania.
Cooperative activities in the NATO-Russia Council that could be affected include a helicopter maintenance fund and a countemarcotics initiative in Afghanistan, and some joint counter-terrorism initiatives.
Fie indicated that these measures could include expansion of the Baltic Air Policing Mission, with a possible increase from 4 to 12 fighter jets; deployment of naval vessels to the Baltic Sea, the Eastern Mediterranean, and elsewhere; deployment of ground forces to Eastern Europe; development of updated military defense plans for Central and Eastern European allies; and additional NATO military training and exercises in the region.
However, other allies have cautioned against a “militarization” of NATO relations with Russia.
Officials in Germany, for example, have said that permanent troop deployments in member states formerly aligned with the Soviet Union could represent an unnecessary and counter-productive provocation of Russia.
NATO member states say they are moving forward with previously planned military exercises in Ukraine and other parts of Central and Eastern Europe.
In Ukraine, such exercises are not conducted under the aegis of NATO, but rather as multinational exercises that may include NATO allies.
Military exercises scheduled to take place in Ukraine in 2014 reportedly include one U.S.led ground forces exercise, one U.S.-led naval exercise, a Polish-Ukrainian air force exercise and a Polish-Ukrainian military police exercise, and three additional multinational ground exercises.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine will reportedly feature a combined U.S.-Ukrainian battalion headquarters practicing a peacekeeping operation.
Last year’s Rapid Trident exercise in Ukraine included 1,300 troops from 17 nations.
The U.S.-led annual naval exercise Sea Breeze has reportedly been the largest annual maritime exercise in the Black Sea.
The 2013 exercise, held in Odessa, involved naval, air, and land forces from 14 countries, including NATO allies and partners.
Nick Simeone, “ United States Sends More Marines to Romania, Navy Vessel to Black Sea American Forces Press Service, April 2, 2014.
Poland, the Czech Republic, and Elungary joined NATO in 1999, and Slovakia followed in 2004.
In recent years, there have been some concerns in the United States and EU about an apparent backsliding on democracy in Hungary, 14 The governments of Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia founded the Visegrad Group as a platform for regional cooperation in 1991 in the city of Visegrad, Hungary.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine with the recently reelected government of Prime Minister Viktor Orban demonstrating authoritarian tendencies and moving toward closer relations with Russia.
Geographical proximity and long-standing historical relationships, including the experience of Soviet domination during the Communist era, color attitudes toward Russia in the V4 countries.
In recent years, Russia has been actively trying to extend its influence in the region through energy deals and the acquisition of energy infrastructure.
While business usually centers on natural gas, Hungary also agreed to a deal with Russia’s state nuclear company in early 2014 for the upgrade of a Hungarian nuclear power plant, financed by a €10 billion loan from Moscow.
Despite possible reservations in those three countries about additional economic sanctions, all V4 members agreed to the limited sanctions imposed thus far by the EU in response to the annexation.
The EU’s common position is that the Crimea referendum was illegal, and no EU member states recognize its outcome.
Poland stands out among the V4 group as having the most difficult relationship with Russia.
Poland is by far the most populous country, the largest economy, and the most significant military actor of the V4.
Despite budgetary pressures, Poland is pursuing a broad equipment acquisition program linked to the need to phase out remaining Soviet-era material.
In an effort to upgrade its main battle tanks and other armored vehicles, helicopters, air defenses, drones, and individual soldier equipment, Poland has reportedly significantly increased equipment expenditures.
Poland has been a leading allied participant in NATO’s “out of area” Afghanistan mission.
At the same time, given its enduring perception of Russia as a threat, Poland has also been a leading voice in calls for NATO to focus on its traditional vocation as an alliance of territorial defense.
A Chance for a Breakthrough in Visegrad 4 Cooperation, The Polish Institute of International Affairs, April 16, 2013.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine be stationed in Poland as a security guarantee.
Aegis-ashore interceptors are scheduled to be deployed in Poland in 2018.
The area posing the most direct threat to Poland is Kaliningrad, a 5,800 square mile Russian exclave wedged between Poland and Lithuania.
Kaliningrad has a heavy Russian military presence, including the Baltic Sea Fleet and two airbases.
In addition, Russia has reportedly stationed, or at least threatened to station, Iskander short-range nuclear missiles there.
Compared to Poland, the militaries of the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Slovakia are significantly smaller and possess more modest capabilities.
Analysts observe that a low defense budget presents the Slovak military with an especially difficult challenge because it faces a need to replace a large percentage of its ageing equipment.
In recent years, the V4 countries have sought to expand their cooperation from largely political matters to include security and defense.
In 2013, the V4 countries launched plans to form an EU Battlegroup, a rapid reaction force consisting of 2,500 to 3,000 troops, to be operational by 2016.
The V4 countries have also sought to increase military and industrial cooperation in line with NATO’s Smart Defense and the EU’s Pooling and Sharing initiative.
Current or prospective areas of such cooperation include joint procurement of ammunition, armored vehicles, individual soldier equipment, and battlefield imaging systems, as well as joint logistics programs, and joint development of capabilities such as countering improvised explosive devices ; chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear defense ; joint training of helicopter pilots and air traffic controllers; and cyber defense.
From Mutual Support to Strengthening NATO and the EU, Center for European Policy Analysis, April 2, 2013.
The Baltic States The three Baltic countries, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, were formerly republics of the Soviet Union, having been absorbed into the USSR in 1940 after achieving independence between the two world wars.
They became independent again with the breakup of the USSR in 1991 and joined both NATO and the European Union in 2004.
In general terms, the view of the Baltic countries is comparable to that of Poland in perceiving Russia as an enduring threat.
Size, geographic location, and energy dependence make the Baltic countries vulnerable to Russia, and events in Ukraine have significantly increased anxiety in the Baltics.
All three Baltic countries also have minority populations of ethnic Russians, a significant element in the threat calculation given that claims of persecution against Russian communities have been a part of the pretext for Russia’s interventions in both Georgia and Ukraine.
In 2012, a referendum rejected naming Russian as Latvia’s official second language, although it is the first language for about one-third of the population.
In Estonia, plans to relocate a Soviet war memorial led to clashes between police and pro-Russian demonstrators in 2007.
Estonia subsequently found itself the target of a large-scale coordinated cyberattack thought to have originated from either pro-Russian groups or from within the Russian government itself.
The Baltic countries joined their NATO and EU partners in strongly condemning Russia’s annexation of Crimea as illegal.
All three initially called for the EU to impose harsh political and economic sanctions, but Latvia and Lithuania have since moderated their stance on sanctions considerably.
Latvian and Lithuanian government enthusiasm for sanctions has been tempered by the potential economic consequences of such measures.
Economists have suggested that severe EU sanctions against Russia, the Baltics’ largest non-EU trade partner, could push both countries • i . 94 ' into a deep recession.
The break-up of the USSR left the Baltic countries with virtually no national militaries, and their forces remain small and limited.
The defense planning of the Baltic countries consequently relies heavily on NATO membership, and they have emphasized active participation in the alliance, 24 ""Crimea crisis causes unease in the Baltics,"" Economist Intelligence Unit, April 1, 2014.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine including by having contributed troops to the Afghanistan mission.
Beyond NATO’s Baltic Air Policing mission , some Baltic officials have urged NATO to establish a permanent base in the region.
Rotating forces, increased exercises, and prepositioning of assets may be a more likely NATO response to bolster security in the region.
Lacking their own fighter aircraft, the Baltic countries rely on their NATO allies to police and defend their airspace.
NATO’s Baltic Air Policing mission was launched in 2004 and is based at an airbase in Lithuania.
About a dozen NATO members have taken part in the mission, including the United States, UK, France, Germany, Poland, Denmark, and the Czech Republic, providing four fighters at a time on rotating four-month deployment.
In 2011, the Baltic countries pledged to gradually increase their combined contribution to the mission from €2. million in 2011 to €3. million in 2015 to pay for the costs of accommodating the air policing contingents, providing ground services for their aircraft, and contributing to the cost of aviation fuel.
Compared to most other members of NATO, Estonia spends a relatively high percentage of GDP on defense.
The country is seeking to add a second infantry brigade by 2022, upgrade its air defense system, and modernize a range of ground warfare equipment.
Latvia’s forces are smaller and less well equipped, and the country’s defense spending has suffered from severe budgetary pressures.
Latvia aims to double its defense spending as a percentage of GDP by 2020 and to procure new equipment including armored vehicles, transport helicopters, and air defense radar.
Lithuania’s forces are likewise pursuing restructuring and re-equipment programs, but efforts have been similarly hindered by funding constraints.
Moldova Moldova’s pro-Western government has responded to recent events in Ukraine with great concern.
Moldova and Ukraine have stopped armed men trying to cross the border from Transnistria to Ukraine to “participate” in demonstrations against Ukraine’s government.
Richard Milne, ""Baltics Urge NATO to Base Permanent Force in Region,"" Financial Times, April 9, 2014.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine Transnistria, Moldova’s breakaway region with a strongly pro-Russian government, has redoubled its long-standing efforts to secure Russia’s recognition for its independence.
Russia has not yet done so, but may have little more to lose in doing so now, given international condemnation of its annexation of Crimea.
In March 2014, NATO’s top military commander, General Breedlove, expressed concern that Russian forces could sweep across eastern and southern Ukraine to link up with Transnistria.
Such a move, while very ambitious, would have the advantage of linking the region directly with Russia.
While Moscow has shown hostility toward the Moldovan government, especially its intention to sign an Association Agreement with the European Union in June 2014, it is unclear whether Russia would take military action against Moldova to prevent it from doing so.
Most observers believe Russia will continue to try to turn Moldova away from a pro-Western orientation by using more indirect tactics such as imposing de facto trade sanctions, increasing support for Transnistria and separatism in Moldova’s Gagauzia region, and supporting the Communist opposition to the government in the run-up to Moldova’s parliamentary elections late this year.
During a visit to Moldova on March 30, 2014, Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland confirmed United States support for Moldova’s path toward European integration and for anti-corruption efforts, strengthening border security, boosting Moldovan exports, and energy security, among other areas.
Ukraine Perhaps the most urgent challenges facing Ukraine’s government are Russia’s annexation of Crimea and attempted destabilization of Eastern Ukraine.
Over 20,000 Russian troops remain in Crimea, according to Ukraine’s government, while the Ukrainian government is also struggling to establish control over eastern and southern Ukraine, where Russian-language speakers predominate.
Thousands of pro-Russian protestors have demonstrated in the region, especially in the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk in the Donbas region, and Kharkiv.
On April 6, demonstrators in Donetsk and Luhansk stormed and occupied key government buildings.
Possibly inspired by the Crimean scenario, the demonstrators in Donetsk declared a Donetsk People’s Republic and called for Russia to send troops to protect them.
On April 13, armed men seized government and other key buildings in additional cities and towns in the Donbas region.
Ukrainian officials say they have arrested Russian intelligence operatives who they say are organizing these activities.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine armed forces have begun operations to take back control of buildings controlled by the armed groups and clear roadblocks.
Some observers believe Russia could use widespread violence in eastern Ukraine as a pretext for military intervention.
As noted earlier, NATO General Breedlove told journalists on April 2 that the approximately 40,000 Russian troops on Ukraine’s borders were capable of attacking within 12 hours and of attaining their objectives within Ukraine within three to five days.
In March 2014, Ukraine’s acting President Turchynov said that Ukraine had only 6,000 combat ready troops.
Ukraine is currently undergoing a partial mobilization to ready tens of thousands of additional troops, but the state of their training and equipment is uncertain.
Respected Russian military observer Pavel Felgenhauer has said that Putin’s military window of opportunity for an invasion of eastern and southern Ukraine is from now to about mid-May.
However, this window would soon start to close, as Russia’s spring conscript call-up started on April 1.
This will require last year’s recruits to be gradually mustered out as green replacements arrive.
Felgenhauer believes that combat readiness of Russian forces on Ukraine’s borders will soon start to decline, and recover only around August or September 2014.
Other Russian military analysts point out that even if a Russian invasion was initially successful, many more troops would be needed to occupy large stretches of eastern and southern Ukraine.
In March 2013, Ukraine requested military aid from the United States, according to several press reports.
According to these reports, the Administration has declined so far to send lethal military aid to Ukraine.
In March 2014, the United States sent 300,000 Meals Ready to Eat to Ukraine, at a cost of about $3 million.
More unspecified nonlethal aid is being considered for delivery, according to the United States European Command.
Those arguing for military aid for Ukraine say the United States needs to show resolve in the face of Russian aggression against Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.
NATO-Russia Relations Russian actions in Ukraine have prompted a reassessment of post-Cold War efforts to build a cooperative relationship with Moscow.
As noted above, NATO suspended all practical civilian and military cooperation with Russia on April 2.
In the words of NATO Deputy Secretary General Alexander Vershbow, “For 20 years, the security of the Euro-Atlantic region has been based on the premise that we do not face an adversary to our east.
On the other hand, while Russian actions have succeeded in drawing uniform condemnation from across NATO and the European Union, many in Europe and the United States emphasize that Europe’s long-term security will depend on cooperative relations with Russia.
As noted above, some NATO members in Western Europe have expressed concern that a military response to Russian actions could significantly hinder future attempts to boost cooperation with Russia.
The principal institutional mechanism for NATO-Russia cooperation has been the NATO-Russia Council , established in May 2002, five years after the 1997 NATO-Russia Founding Act provided the formal basis for bilateral cooperation.
Most observers agree that despite having advanced NATO-Russia cooperation in some areas—including in Afghanistan—the NRC has failed to live up to its potential.
These perceived shortcomings are often attributed to Russian suspicion about NATO’s long-term intentions, including with respect to countries it long considered within its sphere of influence such as Ukraine and Georgia.
NATO and European officials stress that they continue to aspire to cooperation and partnership with Russia.
Flowever, analysts expect ties to continue to be marked by contention and mistrust, at least for the time being.
Moscow has objected to NATO and the United States’ military responses to the crisis, calling into question the alliance’s commitment to a 1997 pledge— codified in the NATO-Russia Founding Act—to refrain from permanently stationing substantial combat forces in countries that joined NATO after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine As yet, NATO and EU member states have not collectively committed to ending arms sales to Russia, despite criticism from analysts and governments on both sides of the Atlantic.
Compared to other European arms sales, sales to Russia are relatively insignificant.
However, over the past several years, some critics have drawn attention to several high profile deals.
Chief among these is a 2011 French agreement to sell Russia two amphibious assault warships in a deal worth €1. billion —the first ever sale of a significant offensive military capability by a NATO member to Russia.
The first of these Mistral ships is scheduled to be delivered at the end of this year.
On March 6, French President Fran go is Hollande addressed the possibility of suspending the arms sale, saying, “we honor contracts we have signed.
Since Russia’s annexation of Crimea, Germany has cancelled the planned sale of a military training facility to Russia; the UK and United States have also halted all military cooperation.
Prospects for NATO Enlargement Russian actions in Ukraine have prompted some United States observers and Members of Congress to call for a more concerted NATO effort to enlarge the alliance, particularly to the east.
Among other things, they argue that continued enlargement would send an important signal to aspiring members that NATO’s “open door” policy will not be scaled back in the face of Russian opposition.
Some proponents of enlargement add that Russia would be less willing and less able to take the aggressive actions it has in Ukraine, Georgia, and elsewhere in its near-abroad if these countries were members of the alliance.
Despite these calls, most analysts consider NATO unlikely to make any significant progress toward expanding over the next several years.
They point to a perception in some Western European countries that NATO has enlarged too quickly and that the alliance should agree on how to resolve a complex range of issues, including managing relations with Russia, before taking in new members.
For some allied governments, ongoing territorial disputes with Russia in countries such as Georgia and Ukraine could be a strong deterrent to extending membership invitations to these countries.
He added that he hoped to make the shipyard town of Saint-Nazaire, which has faced high unemployment levels, a symbol of French industrial achievement.
European Officials, Media Concerned about French Sale to Russia , EUF2011031863900, March 18, 2011.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine Four countries are currently considered formal aspirants for NATO membership: Montenegro, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Macedonia, and Georgia.
Although it is considered the candidate with the most advanced membership prospects, NATO officials have cautioned that Montenegrin security agencies and the defense sector need to meet NATO standards and that further efforts need to be made to fight corruption and organized crime in the country.
Some have also questioned the level of public support for NATO membership in Montenegro.
Bosnia was formally invited to join the MAP in April 2010, but was told that its Annual National Program under the MAP would not be accepted until the country resolved the issue of immovable defense property (mainly former military bases and barracks) on its territory.
The country’s leaders have agreed in principle to resolve the issue, but many doubt whether Bosnia can agree on whether to join NATO, as Bosnian Serb leaders have given mixed signals on the issue and public opinion polls have shown very strong opposition to membership among the Bosnian Serb population.
NATO agreed that Macedonia met the qualifications for membership in 2008, but its candidacy has been stalled due to a protracted dispute with NATO ally Greece over the country’s official name.
The two sides have been unable to resolve the issue during talks sponsored by the United Nations.
Representatives of Ukraine’s current government have said the country is not seeking NATO membership.
This reflects long-standing indifference, if not opposition, to NATO membership in the country.
According to one March 2014 opinion poll, 34% of Ukrainians were for NATO membership, and 44% opposed, with a regional split of 74% for membership in western Ukraine and 67% opposed in the east.
Some observers assert that the Ukrainian government could be cautious about expressing ambitions to join NATO for a number of reasons, including sensitivity to public opinion and possible opposition to membership from countries within the alliance that would be reluctant to further antagonize Russia.
Since then, the two sides have deepened cooperation in a variety of areas, especially on defense and security sector reform, and Georgia has contributed to ongoing NATO operations, including by deploying the second-largest non-NATO contingent in Afghanistan.
Nonetheless, most observers believe that the unresolved situation in Georgia’s breakaway regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia could continue to pose a major obstacle to possible Georgian membership for the foreseeable future.
They contend that as long as the territorial dispute persists, some allies could oppose defining a specific timeline for membership.
Some observers have argued that recent Russian military aggression could indirectly serve to boost support for NATO membership in Sweden and Finland.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine for Peace Program in 1994, both countries have been active participants in NATO operations and have taken significant steps to modernize their militaries.
In 2013, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev said that Moscow would be forced to “respond” if Finland or Sweden joined NATO, and in the past year Russian forces have performed air and land exercises near Swedish and Finnish territory.
Some analysts assert that at the least, the two governments could continue to bolster defense spending and cooperation with other Nordic states and the Baltics.
United States Policy The crisis in Ukraine has renewed focus on the United States commitment to European security and on overall United States force posture in Europe.
Since the end of the Cold War, as NATO and the EU have enlarged eastward and as both organizations have pursued partnership with Russia, the perceived need for a robust United States military presence to defend the continent receded.
Today, about 67,000 United States forces are stationed in Europe, primarily in Germany, Italy, and the UK; this is down from a Cold War high of about 400,000.
Some allies in Central and Eastern Europe have consistently expressed concerns about the reduced United States force posture, and especially the recent withdrawal of two of the Army’s four Brigade Combat Teams.
The adjusted United States force posture has coincided with United States calls for European allies and the EU to develop enhanced military capabilities in order to boost NATO’s effectiveness and reduce Europe’s dependence on the United States security guarantee.
The Obama Administration and its supporters assert that the United States remains prepared and able to honor its commitments to the defense and security of fellow NATO member states.
In addition to the aforementioned United States military responses to the crisis in Ukraine, they note that the United States was a key proponent of NATO’s drafting of contingency plans for the defense of Poland and the Baltic States in 2009, and they draw attention to recent United States calls for a new round of NATO contingency planning.
They add that the United States agreement in 2011 to establish an Air Force Aviation detachment in Poland has paved the way for the recent deployment of 12 F-16s to the country, and point out that to compensate for the reduction of United States Brigade Combat Teams in Europe, the Department of Defense has committed a U.S.-based rapid reaction force to rotate to Europe for joint training exercises.
The United States system, designed to defend alliance territory against possible missile attacks ' 7 Alistair Scrutton and Sakari Suoninen, “As Russia growls, Swedes, Finns Eye Defence Options, NATO,” Reuters, April 1,2014.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine from Iran and other potential adversaries, serves as the foundation for a new NATO missile defense capability, based primarily on United States assets under NATO command and control.
The United States has deployed missile defense ships to the Mediterranean, ready to operate under NATO control when necessary.
A United States radar, based in Turkey, is also under NATO operational control.
Interceptor sites are to be deployed in Romania in 2015 and in Poland in 2018.
The United States and NATO have consistently emphasized, however, that the missile defense system is neither intended to nor capable of defending against a potential missile attack from Russia.
While they have welcomed these steps, critics of the Administration’s and NATO’s response to Russian actions in Ukraine have argued that more should be done to support Ukraine, reassure allies in Central and Eastern Europe, and counter Russian aggression.
Some have called for bolstered and possibly permanent NATO and/or United States troop deployments in Central and Eastern Europe, as well as more frequent military exercises, including in the Black Sea.
For example, as discussed above, the Polish government has requested the deployment of two heavy brigades of NATO troops on its territory.
The 6,000-troop exercise—the largest NATO exercise to take place in the region in over 10 years—was intended to certify command and control elements of the NATO Response Force, including in response to a possible attack on the territory of a NATO member state.
As discussed above, the United States has provided the Ukrainian government with some nonlethal military aid, including 300,000 Meals Ready to Eat , but has thus far declined to provide lethal military aid.
Some analysts, including a former NATO military commander, have argued that the United States and other allies should consider providing additional military assistance, including intelligence and surveillance capabilities and anti-aircraft and anti-tank weapons.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine Congress could continue to play an important role in shaping United States and NATO responses to Russia’s actions in Ukraine.
In terms of United States defense policy, possible congressional action could include reexamining United States force posture in Europe and assessing United States capacity and willingness to uphold its collective defense commitments in Europe.
Congress could also take an increasingly active role in determining United States policy toward NATO and in guiding broader discussions about NATO’s future, particularly ahead of the next NATO summit, scheduled to take place in Wales on September 4-5, 2014.
This could include holding hearings and/or drafting legislation on issues such as development of allied military capabilities and military burdensharing within the alliance, the allied commitment to NATO enlargement and its relations with partner countries such as Ukraine and Georgia, NATO relations with Russia, and NATO involvement in areas such as cybersecurity and energy security.
Author Contact Information Paul Belkin, Coordinator Steven Woehrel Analyst in European Affairs Specialist in European Affairs pbelkin@crs.loc.gov, 7-0220 swoehrel@crs.loc.gov, 7-2291 Derek E Mix Analyst in European Affairs dmix@crs.loc.gov, 7-9116 Acknowledgments The authors thank Calvin DeSouza, Geospatial Information Systems Analyst at CRS, for creating the map included in this report.
