However, the possibility of full-scale operations cannot be disregarded either.
Representative of the Main Intelligence Directorate of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine Vadym Skibitsky commented on it in an interview to Obozrevatel.
At the end of last year, martial law was introduced in Ukraine for the first time.
It was a shock for a lot of Ukrainians; people were unprepared, despite the annexation of Crimea, the occupation of Donbas and long-lasting hostilities.
We’d rather proceed from November 25, from the developments in the Kerch Strait.
First, Russian military buildup near our borders began from the first days of armed aggression against Ukraine in 2014.
The process of forming divisions, which now stand at a distance of 15 to 50 kilometers from our border, began.
At the beginning of the aggression against Ukraine, Russian battalion-tactical groups were deployed there.
Petersburg, Moscow region, the Central Military District, and the Eastern Military District.
And when Russia lost its strategic initiative at first stage and was stopped, then it decided to deploy new divisions, new troops near our borders on a permanent basis.
They began to redeploy brigades from the Central and Western Military Districts of the Russian Federation to our border.
Those exercises were supposed not only to demonstrate the strength and superiority of the Russian Federation in the Black Sea region to us and to the entire international community, but also to become a powerful signal for the people of their country.
And now we can no longer say that Russia needs some time to prepare large-scale operations against Ukraine.
And armed aggression against our ships demonstrated readiness of the Russian Federation.
Russia fully controls the Azov Sea and can close the Kerch Strait at any moment and allow the passage of only those ships they want.
One of Russia’s tasks is depriving Ukraine of an access to the world’s ocean, a complete blockade of our coast.
Then – the project “Novorossia”, which envisaged the seizure of the territory of Ukraine from Kharkiv to Odesa.
This is the plan that Russia is now trying to implement, but through a hybrid, “creeping” method.
Sanctions, then the second, the third … If guided by pure logic , all should have ended long ago.
The first adjustment, according to our estimates, took place in May 2014.
Initially, the Novorossia project was furthered, and then there was Odesa.
And after that the Russian intelligence services were forced to change their original plan.
There was a creeping aggression involving pro-Russian elements, the fifth column … There were events in Donetsk and Luhansk… Then and now, we do not exclude the possibility that they may correct their plans and use hybrid approaches.
For example, the economic projects promoted by the Russian Federation in the Black Sea.
Russians have been managing the three of our gas deposits captured by them after the annexation of Crimea.
Currently, at least one of the Black Sea Fleet warships is defending these drilling platforms.
Among other infrastructure projects of the Russian Federation, except for the bridge, is laying a gas pipeline.
And this can also be the reason for strengthening their presence, closing any area by Russia, and carrying out certain actions.
We will talk about the information war and the reaction of the world community a little later, and now let’s go back to the reaction of Ukrainians to the reported data on the possibility of large-scale actions.
Reported data are a realistic assessment of the existing threats rather than an intimidation.
If this strengthening takes place, accordingly, the level of threat increases.
It testifies that the Russian Federation, with the available force grouping and in its readiness, is capable of carrying out large-scale offensive operations.
Our history shows that we have always faced problems from our neighbors.
We warned about the presence of a Russian military base in Crimea, its full combat readiness and active preparation for certain actions on the Crimean peninsula.
Unfortunately, we failed to solve this problem until 2017, as planned, when the agreement on the Black Sea Fleet of the Russian Navy in Crimea expired.
However, it does not care about the problems of the rest of Crimea, population, infrastructure and agriculture.
And this “toy” has an acute problem with water, which can become a reason for more aggressive actions of the Russian Federation.
Even if the state of war with Russia is not announced, de facto armed hybrid aggression continues, and it does not stop.
Remember the combat training conducted by the Russian army in early December.
You understand that it is not difficult to fly, for example, 15 kilometers more and drop it in Kherson region.
The goal is actually one — our infrastructure and strategically important facilities.
This perspective applies, in particular, to the Kakhovka Reservoir, the energy supply system, and, in general, life support of Crimea.
These are the priority targets in case of large-scale aggressive actions of Russia.
On 3 September a bronze monument to a Romani person with a broom was installed in Mukacheve, Zakapattia region.
