He didn’t want them to be able to vote in Ukraine’s national elections.
Putin has thrown all his energy into splitting Ukraine from the inside.
First of all, the split of the Verkhovna Rada to conduct new parliamentary elections.
Due to the fact that the voters of Crimea and Donbas did not participate in last year’s parliamentary elections, the structure of government in Ukraine has changed dramatically.
But if voters in Donbass again have the opportunity to vote , it is clear that they will support pro-Russian politicians.
Therefore, once again I repeat, if Putin really feels that Ukraine could split from the inside and hold early parliamentary elections, he will do everything he can in order to restore to us Donbass.
He’s not saying that Donbass does not need to be seized and restored to be again part of Ukraine’s land; he is saying that the residents of Donbass cannot be part of Ukraine; they cannot again be Ukrainians — they cannot be people who are allowed to vote in Ukrainian national elections.
He is saying that those people must be eliminated if and when Donbass is restored to Ukraine.
A look at the electoral-voting map of Ukraine for the final Ukrainian election before the February 2014 coup, which is the last electoral map in which the entirety of Ukraine voted for President, is here, and it shows that the Donbass residents voted more than 90% for Yanukovych and less than 10% for Tymoshenko.
Donbass people were overwhelmingly the people who had prevented the far-right, pro-Western, pro-Gladio, rabidly anti-Russian, Tymoshenko, from being elected as Ukraine’s President in 2010.
Although Obama didn’t get his #1 choice elected in the 2014 vote , Poroshenko was sufficiently far-right, and sufficiently compliant, for him; and what Gerashchenko is now saying is that no leader like that would stand a chance in any Ukrainian national election in which the residents of Donbass would vote.
On September 1st, the U.S.-installed Prime Minister of Ukraine, Arseniy Yatsenyuk , delivered a speech in Odessa.
Yatsenyuk has often publicly endorsed a war by Ukraine against Russia, in order to restore both Donbass and Crimea.
However, since Donbass voted over 90% for the Ukrainian President that the Obama Administration overthrew in February 2014, and Crimea voted over 75% for that President , the residents in those two regions would need to be eliminated, if the land is restored to Ukraine, because otherwise the residents there would vote the United States regime out of office, just as Gerashchenko fears.
Yatsenyuk obviously knows this, he knows what got him into power, and he wants the weapons and financial assistance to get rid of those people, who, as voters, would remove him from power.
On the right side of America’s aristocracy, the Koch brothers established the Cato Institute, whose Andrei Illarionove has said that the residents in breakaway areas should be simply ignored, and that the land has been stolen by Russia and needs to be retaken by Ukraine.
Only this subject , and no one else, has necessary legal rights to change this territory’s jurisdiction», regardless of what the residents there think — the residents don’t have that right; they should have no say-so over who rules them.
Donbass, in general, is not simply a region in a very depressed condition, it has got a whole number of problems, the biggest of which is that it is severely overpopulated with people nobody has any use for.
If we take, for example, just the Donetsk oblast, there are approximately 4 million inhabitants, at least 1. million of which are superfluous.
I don’t claim to have a quick solution recipe, but the most important thing that must be done — no matter how cruel it may sound — is that there is a certain category of people that must be exterminated.
Putin had already figured out that, in the interests of Russia’s own national security, it would be far better for Donbass’s voters to be voting in Ukraine, not in Russia.
Putin had already arranged for the men in Donbass to be trained and armed to overcome the invasion by the Ukrainian government, so that some people would be able to survive there, but they’d need to stay in Donbass; they’d not be Russians.
Virtually all of what the Western news-media were saying about the war in Ukraine misrepresented the truth.
The United States is pushing on with its efforts to restart the war, and to eliminate the Donbass residents.
The United States had nothing to do with the Minsk II agreement; the Obama Administration shunned it and wants the war to resume.
But Putin, equally strongly, wants them to stay in Donbass, and to survive, as Ukrainians there.
