The Russians will undoubtedly interfere, and we should watch and expose their shenanigans, but the threat of a pro-Russian party coming to power in Ukraine is miniscule for two factors.
First, opinion polls show large majorities against the election rhetoric of the Opposition Bloc, which promotes the elevation of the Russian language and integration into the Eurasian Union and opposes NATO and EU membership.
Four years after Russia invaded Ukraine, only 7 percent of Ukrainians believe the war is due to the suppression of the Russian language.
Second, Russia’s occupation of Crimea and parts of the Donbas have removed sixteen percent of voters from participating in Ukrainian elections.
Paul D’Anieri’s study published by East European Politics and Societies and Cultures shows the impact of the absence of these 3.75 million voters.
Of these, 87 percent voted for Yanukovych in 2010; in other words, a quarter of Yanukovych’s voters now live under Russian occupation and cannot vote.
D’Anieri rightly concludes that a political party mobilizing only the eastern Ukrainian vote cannot win the presidency or form a parliamentary majority; in other words, Putin’s aggression prevents eastern Ukraine from controlling Ukraine.
Pro-Russian forces, on the other hand, seek to compromise with Putin because in doing so their voters would be able to participate in Ukrainian elections.
This is the reason for Opposition Bloc leader Yuriy Boyko and For Life leader Vadym Rabinovych’s anti-war election populism.
Pro-Russian populism is undermined by the fact that Vladimir Putin is the only politician who can end the fighting.
Ukrainians want the war to end, but they are not optimistic about it ending soon.
More than 70 percent believe there will be no change in the next three years, 52 percent in the next 3-5 years, and 47 percent in 5-10 years.
The latter figure is more optimistic because Ukrainian voters blame the war on Putin and 73 percent of Ukrainians see no normalisation of relations with Russia as long as he is Russian president until 2024. 72 percent believe Russia’s goal is to destroy Ukrainian independence and sovereignty.
Pro-Russian politicians should have learnt from the Orange and Euromaidan Revolutions not to ignore the wishes of their people.
With a large and growing group of veterans from the war, any attempt by pro-Russian forces to strike compromises with Putin would have serious domestic ramifications, including a possible third Maidan.
Three-quarters of Ukrainians see normalization of relations with Russia only after it ends its military aggression, withdraws from the occupied territories, pays compensation, and agrees to end interference in Ukraine’s domestic affairs.
Opinion polls show the weakness of pro-Russian candidates because Russia’s aggression has made it unlikely there will be a traditional second round of “pro-Western” versus “pro-Russian” candidates.
