Examining separatism in east Ukraine, the author suggests that the formation of community boundaries is not automatic.
Boundaries are not activated by preexisting ethnic or linguistic identities, or even by the appeals of political leaders who manipulate those identities.
Instead, analysts should focus attention on how specific political developments contribute to alienation from the central state.
Introduction Movements for self-determination occur when people seek to throw off rule by an authority that they consider to be alien.
They may desire, among other goals, escape from discrimination and oppression; increased control over economic policy; or the right of their community to cultural and political expression.
Yet as scholars and statesmen have long recognized, the nature of the community seeking self-rule is far from self-evident.
Ethnicity and culture often define community boundaries, yet their constructed and changeable nature throw into question the durability of fixed political communities based on these categories.
The appearance of a new movement for selfdetermination in east Ukraine and consequent violent conflict suggest the urgency of these questions.
Demands for separatism1 developed in spring 2014 in several cities and oblasts of east Ukraine known as the Donbass just as the Russian Federation was annexing the Ukrainian region of Crimea.
The annexation was Russia’s response to the Maidan protests that overthrew Ukraine’s centralized and pro-Russian Yanukovych government and replaced it with a reform-oriented, pro-EU government.
Initially, it looked like events in east Ukraine would replicate those in Crimea.
As a result, many observers, especially during the first few months of the conflict, discounted the agency of local Ukrainian citizens in driving events and focused instead on the role of Russia.
Journalists explained that Russia was fomenting separatism in order to promote the ‘federalization’ of Ukraine so that it could manipulate the foreign policy of part of Ukraine.
Scholars as well used polling data to make the point that there was little ‘indigenous’ support for either separation or joining Russia.
It was in these two regions that activists had seized government buildings in early April, declared a Peoples’ Republic of Donetsk and a Peoples’ Republic of Luhansk , and held referenda on state sovereignty.
It also became clearer as the weeks passed that separatist leaders and fighters in East Ukraine, despite the fact that some were Russian citizens, were not the ‘little green men’ from Crimea.
Given the highly politicized conflict between Russia on the one hand, and Ukraine, the USA, and the EU on the other, it is not surprising that western observers tended to view separatism as imposed by Moscow and lacking in local support.
Popular support among ethnic Russians for self-determination is not a pre-determined outcome.
Therefore, it is worth exploring possible reasons why support for separatism emerged among a minority of the population in Donetsk and Luhansk.
Since violence tends to harden identities and attitudes, I examine the period before armed conflict occurred between the separatists and the Ukrainian government.
Rather than focusing on static ethnic or linguistic identities, I argue, analysts should place current political developments in political and socio-economic context.
This study analyzes why the Maidan demonstrations generated a deep sense of alienation among many Ukrainian citizens in Donetsk and Luhansk.
Before elaborating these factors, I briefly outline recent events in east Ukraine.
Separatism Emerges in Eastern Ukraine The idea of self-determination was first articulated at demonstrations held in several cities of east and south Ukraine last March and April.
Despite the lack of a coherent program, leaders in Donetsk quickly adopted a declaration of sovereignty6 that was apparently based on the author’s productive use of his internet search engine.
Ukraine’s government, in response to the capture of additional government buildings by armed groups in more eastern towns and cities, initiated the Ukrainian Anti-Terrorist Operation.
The republics’ leaders claimed that nearly 100% of the populations in the two oblasts voted for independence.
With voters casting multiple ballots, an intermittent supply of polling stations, and an unobserved vote count conducted by separatist leaders themselves, the referenda were widely condemned by foreign governments.
Though the pro-independence vote was severely inflated, a significant number of local residents participated in the referendums.
Interviews at polling stations indicate a distinct level of support for autonomy, separation, or annexation to Russia.
For example, an older man told a Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty journalist, ‘We only want economic autonomy, for now.
A middle-aged woman stated, ‘We are sick and tired of our country, of our government’s policies, so we’re voting for what we’ve been offered so far.
NovoRossiya The idea of seceding from Ukraine to join Russia became more imaginable to activists following Crimea’s annexation and received a boost from President Putin who mentioned the concept of ‘NovoRossiya’ in April 2014.
The question is to ensure the rights and interests of the Russian southeast.
Then for various reasons these areas were gone, and the people stayed there—we need to encourage them to find a solution.
By the end of May, both the Donetsk and Luhansk Republics officially announced that they had formed a confederation called the Federal State of New Russia .9 Separatist ideas are not wholly new to southeastern Ukraine.
Yet these ideas and organizations remained politically marginal for years.
Though some of the current ideologues of the DNR or LNR may have emerged from these groups, the recent expansion of separatist sentiment among a broader swath of citizens there deserves explanation.
The next section considers whether Russian ethnic and linguistic identity translates into attitudes supporting separatism.
Ethnicity The rhetoric articulated by Russian leaders claims that ethno-cultural differences create a political divide between Russians and Ukrainians.
I argue that a simple correlation between ethnic demography and political mobilization provides little information about whether or how ethnicity translates into political attitudes.
Cultural differences that are often present in multi-ethnic societies and that sometimes produce inter-ethnic conflict do not apply in Ukraine.
Cultural boundaries between Russians and Ukrainians are fuzzy and faint, as indicated by the high rate of inter-ethnic marriage there.
Russians and Ukrainians share, for the most part, a common religion—Eastern Orthodoxy, or a secularism inherited from the Soviet era; a common language , very similar languages , or a mixture of the two ; and a host of social practices and cultural expectations based on their shared experience as Soviet and post-Soviet citizens.
Some people from both groups have ancestors who settled the land of present-day Ukraine as long ago as the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
The ancestors of other ethnic Russians migrated from Russia to Ukraine decades ago, lured by the prospect of good jobs in coal mining and metallurgy as part of Soviet industrialization.
Such deep roots in the region mean that Russians there do not see themselves as migrants or outsiders.
In general, the porosity of cultural boundaries suggests that ethnic identity by itself provides little information about why many people in the east feel alienated from the Ukrainian state.
Language Language has been a controversial issue in Ukraine since independence.
Ukrainian nationbuilders consider language to be a key attribute of nationhood and, as such, promote expanding the use of Ukrainian in public life.
Since ethnic Russians form 17% of the population, there are clearly many more Russian-speakers than ethnic Russians in Ukraine.
Aside from several regions in the west and the east, it does not make sense to talk about bounded language groups.
Yet even in the southeast where a majority of citizens are monolingual Russian-speakers, a generational change is occurring.
Many younger citizens whose first language is Russian are learning Ukrainian.
Second, there is no a priori reason why people’s linguistic identity trumps their other identities and interests.
In Ukraine’s regionally polarized politics, both Russophones and Ukrainophones in the southeast have shared a political orientation in the recent past.
In Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, even those people who reported that their native language is Ukrainian—which may be considered an expression of Ukrainian ethnic identity—voted together with Russophones for Yanukovych in the 2010 presidential elections.
Nevertheless, politicians and other elites have politicized language in the past and did so again following the Maidan.
One of the first acts of Ukraine’s interim government was to annul a language law that had been passed by former president Yanukovych in 2012 giving Russian the status of an official regional language.
This status meant that citizens could use Russian rather than Ukrainian in official government business within their region.
Thus, Interim Ukrainian President Oleksandr Turchynov’s elimination of the law could have been interpreted by Russophones as an attempt to ban Russian and as a signal that more anti-Russian discriminatory acts would follow.
The European Parliament criticized the law, calling on Ukraine to protect minority rights and languages.
Responding to the outcry, Turchynov quickly reversed the law and preserved the status of Russian.
Yet despite this episode, it is not clear that ordinary people maintain the same intensity of preferences about language as Ukrainian politicians and elites.
Public opinion surveys from April 2014 show that even among Russophones in southeast Ukraine, who we would expect to be the most distressed by Turchynov’s action—a very low percentage of respondents seem worried about government language policy.
Therefore, we should be cautious in assuming that politicians’ manipulation of language in Ukraine divides people into discrete political blocs favoring or opposing separation.
Understanding Separatism in East Ukraine Alienation from Kiev grew during and after the Maidan protests among Ukrainians in the southeast and especially in the Donbas.
Two other aspects of the Maidan, I argue, contributed to rising support for separatism in the Donbas.
First, the original issue that brought protesters to Maidan Square—President Yanukovych’s decision to reject economic integration with the EU and join the Eurasian Customs Union led by Russia—proved highly regionally polarizing.
Popular opposition to integration with the EU can be understood, in part, as a rational response based on material interests.
Donetsk and Luhansk are dominated by Soviet-era industry—mining, metallurgy, and machine building.
Many of these industries sell their products to Russia and are not competitive with western firms.
In the estimations of ordinary people, joining the Customs Union would maintain trade ties with Russia and other post-Soviet states and therefore preserve jobs and the status quo.
Strikingly, a founder of the DNR, Pavel Gubarev, whose rhetoric regularly glorifies the ethnic and historical elements of NovoRossiya, understands this.
When asked directly about the reasons for the ‘pro-Russian mood’, he shifts to discussing material interests.
Of course people understand that if Zaporizhia is not pro-Russian then they will be out of jobs and that’s thousands of employees.
And it’s the same thing with other enterprises in the former South-East of Ukraine— Novorossiya.
Thus, because the post-Maidan government made joining the EU a priority, many workers in the Donbas opposed what they perceived to directly threaten their livelihood and future.
Identification with the USSR is apparent in the behavior of anti-Maidan protesters across east and south Ukraine who formed human chains to prevent the new government from demolishing statues of Vladimir Lenin.
An important question to consider is whether nostalgia for the Soviet Union is a static feeling; one that originated at the moment of Soviet collapse and has not changed over time, or whether it has emerged in response to political developments.
If it is the former, if nostalgia is stronger among the older generation who grew up in the USSR, then we may expect support for separatism to wane over time.
But if Soviet nostalgia has developed in response to changing political developments, it may grow over time.
After the Orange Revolution, President Yushchenko and other Ukrainian leaders and intellectuals from western Ukraine advocated an ethnic, rather than civic, conception of the nation, emphasizing Ukrainian ethnicity and language.
In this view, Ukraine is a victim of the imperialist Soviet Union which perpetrated genocide and destroyed Ukrainian language and culture.
Advocates of these ideas identify post-Soviet Russia and ethnic Russians with the Soviet Union.
Therefore, when the Ukrainian nationalist far right, led by the parties Svoboda and Right Sector, began to exert outsize influence at the Maidan by fighting tenaciously against the Yanukovych regime , many citizens resented the negative image of the Soviet Union that they articulated.
Their ideology fit in with a strand of ultranationalist discourse that, over the years, had scapegoated ethnic Russians for the country’s problems and identified them with the Soviet Union and Russia.
After Maidan, Ukraine’s interim government did not criticize ultranationalist discourse, but instead appointed a former leader of a neo-fascist party, Andriy Parubiy, to the important post of head of Ukraine’s National Security and Defense Council.
Even though subsequent parliamentary elections showed the popularity of the far right to be quite low in Ukraine, the elections took place in fall 2014—months after the Maidan and post-Maidan developments had contributed to the political alienation of many Donbas residents.
In trying to reify ethnic boundaries by imputing negative political meanings to ethnic and linguistic identities, the Ukrainian far right—ironically—shares the same goal as the Russian government.
If Ukraine’s government fails to distance itself from such categorizations of Russians and Russian-speakers, not only will efforts to construct a national, civic Ukrainian identity fail, but it may reproduce feelings of Soviet nostalgia and exclusion that drove support for separatism in the first place.
Since one year into the armed conflict, it appears that Russia does not plan to annex parts of East Ukraine, it is critical for Kiev to figure out how to eventually re-integrate Donetsk and Luhansk into Ukraine.
Conclusion The case of Ukraine suggests that the formation of a community that supports secession is not a reflexive process.
Ethnic and linguistic identities do not translate directly into political alienation from the central state when politicians initiate campaigns for secession.
In Ukraine, before the war began in spring 2014, popular support for separatism developed in Donetsk and Luhansk but only among a minority of the population.
However, I do not stipulate that separatism must be on behalf of an ethnic group.
Separatism and secessionism are dynamic and political processes in which the goals, intentions, and actions of regional actors shift and evolve along with changing political conditions.
Motor Sich is a large manufacturer of airplane and helicopter engines that sells mainly to Russia and China.
Russian resistance to linguistic Uukrainization in central and Eastern Ukraine.
Interview with the Center for Scientific Political Thought and Ideology.
Protesters in Eastern Ukraine are changing ‘New Russia’, an old term that’s back in vogue.
Interview on the program ‘Vesti v subbotu s Sergeem Brilyovim’, Moscow.
About number and composition population of UKRAINE by data AllUkrainian population census’ 2001 data.
