After three weeks as president, Donald Trump has turned out to be “same as the old boss,” definitely when it comes to United States foreign policy.
The short explanation is every United States president merely plays a puppet figurehead role, taking his orders directly from the New World Order elite and their neocon surrogates, fast moving us towards one world government tyranny that will be the ultimate outcome of a simultaneous collapse of the global economy timed with the launch of another world war.
Just as there was no difference between the same neocon interventionist aggression displayed under Obama and the war crime-ridden Bush-Cheney administration, President Trump is now also marching quickstep down that same seamless path towards world war as did Obama.
Regardless of who or what party occupies the White House, the one constant is an aggressive foreign policy delivered by deep state neocons entrenched in Washington power for many decades now.
Trump the candidate promised a major shift in United States foreign policy towards a far more sensible, even planet-saving, non-interventionist, “America first” approach, avoiding the constant meddling entanglements in other nations’ internal affairs that only polarizes the geopolitical chessboard towards increasing global conflict.
It appeared as though the United States might finally be free of the near four decade long bipartisan neo-conned control bent on maintaining United States Empire at all cost, insisting on the status quo of unipolar sole world superpower hegemony and full frontal military dominance.
The neocons refuse to live in a world where power is shared with emerging regional players Russia and China.
Be it through escalating existing wars in Syria and Ukraine that lead to bigger wars with Iran, China and Russia, the Bush-Obama-Trump regime seems hell bent on world destruction.
Meanwhile even at home, Washington’s ever-rising authoritarian control and the violent anti-Trump mania are creating conditions ripe for even a domestic civil war to break out.
Evidence of this disastrous road we’re already traveling at breakneck speed on is overwhelming.
Just the fact that Elliot Abrams, a neocon from way back to the Reagan-Bush senior-Iran Contra days is currently up for consideration as deputy secretary of state, speaks volumes that we’re about to be pushed off the doomsday cliff.
This presentation will focus on specific actions that the Trump administration has already completed that provide more than enough proof that we’re perhaps just weeks if not months away from escalating yet more catastrophic war.
This analysis addresses the likelihood of imminent global war based on the three year old violent conflict in Ukraine ratcheting up now, and how that hotspot is being used to undermine, neutralize and effectively reverse promises that Trump the candidate made to cooperate with Putin.
The bottom line is neocon forces greater than the president still hold the agenda to continue to demonize Putin in their race to global war.
These articles emphasize that the renewed volley of Russian “aggression” came just one day after Trump and Putin’s hour long first phone conversation agreeing to work peaceably together as partners fighting the common ISIS/al Qaeda enemy as well as forging a plan to diminish hostilities in Ukraine.
As is typical of Western press to vilify Putin, Foreign Policy conspicuously plants the notion that Putin launching artillery strikes in Ukraine has already proven he is betraying Trump’s trust.
The piece goes on to report that the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe contends that Russia unilaterally stepped up its shelling against Kiev forces to the extent that after 2600 counted rounds fired on January 29th, so many came later that OSCE lost track.
As far back as a decade ago Putin exposed OSCE as a propaganda front for Western aggression in Ukraine as well as throughout Eastern Europe to further its own imperialistic and geopolitical interests to encircle, isolate and weaken Russia.
Of course that has been the United States foreign policy all along with both Russia and China.
This is all very calculated to have this open, bleeding sore on Ukraine’s body politic that will allow to manipulate the situation and the politics of the country, and thereby keep Ukraine in this post-Soviet kleptocratic orbit.
Reports from on the ground indicate that the real aggressor on January 28th was the Ukrainian army that began shelling DPR forces.
The Kiev military moved on the offensive south of Donetsk, only to encounter minefields, in large part accounting for the couple dozen fatalities.
Accusing DPR of a false flag attack was mainly to recruit Western sympathy, material support and more mercenaries for the unstable Poroshenko regime that’s steeped in political corruption and economic upheaval.
Earlier in the month the McCain-Graham envoy had promised additional support for another campaign into Donbass despite never having any legal authority, as still acting President Obama at least officially did not send them abroad.
Thus, the bobsy twins may have in effect violated the Logan Act of 1799 which prohibits Americans in foreign countries operating outside presidential authority to interfere with foreign policy as set by the president.
The fact that Trump has made statements during his campaign indicating that he would be open to normalizing relations with Moscow, lifting sanctions and advocates disbanding NATO poses a serious threat to the likes of the two treasonous senators and their nucleus of neocon policymakers who’ve been consistently aiming to provoke war against Russia for over three years now.
While Obama was still president and the chicken hawk senators snuck over to Ukraine, Kiev then waited till after Trump’s inauguration before unleashing its greenlighted invasion further into Donbass.
The Kiev military incursion has far more to do with testing what Western backed Ukraine can get away with on both Trump and Putin’s watch than any Putin testing of Trump waters.
The offensive was solely executed so Empire neocons could sabotage the Trump-Putin relationship and prevent peace from breaking out.
Only war is permitted by the Washington evildoers. may be trying to test the new administration to see if they distance themselves from Kiev, and tell Petro Poroshenko that he has to make the best deal with Russia, which of course would destroy him politically.
Last week formerly disgraced CIA director General David Petraeus testified before the House Armed Services Committee.
It’s a bad sign when Congress seeks the “expert” testimony from a top United States spy who lied to the FBI after violating the Espionage Act, breeching national security by handing over highly classified material to his mistress.
Prior to that crime, the war criminal was a military war commander on two fronts.
Petraeus was singularly the most responsible general for causing the sectarian civil war in Iraq that eventually led to the ISIS Sunni invasion as well as contributed to the United States still ongoing military defeat in Afghanistan.
Petraeus reporting that Russia, China, Iran as well as the terrorists all pose an “unprecedented threat” is part of the staged war prepping narrative.
The Washington political war machine is in full swing, ensuring that an alliance with Russia can never happen, despite whatever Trump the candidate may have uttered.
So war in Ukraine once again becomes the bogus rallying cry to ensure the US-EU-NATO glue sticks together against those “imperialistic, warring” Russians bent on splintering centuries’ old allies.
The elite and their neocons will not allow Brexit, strained Washington-Brussels relations or Trump nationalism ever get in their way.
The Russians would see that as a bonanza that they would try and exploit by convincing countries like Bulgaria and the Czech Republic that the United States couldn’t be counted on.
Another lockdown to prevent thawed Russia-US relations is the rigid adherence to extending economic sanctions against Russia over Crimea and Donbass.
GOP faithful like McCain threatened to pass laws to codify the sanctions should Trump let up.
So you can see that the anti-Putin vilification and cold war still rage on with the latest lying rhetoric and external threats brought to bear against the United States president to stay with status quo or else.
It is unfortunate because it is a replay of far too many instances over many years in which Unites States representatives have needed to do that… Unites States continues to condemn and call for an immediate end to the Russian occupation of Crimea.
Our Crimea-related sanctions will remain in place until Russia returns control over the peninsula to Ukraine.
It looks like the new United States representative at the UN came with remarks that were written by Power.
Nikki Haley obviously received her orders from above to slam Russia despite the US-Kiev collusion to recently renew aggression towards the citizens of Donbass.
She also showed ignorance in failing to know that Crimea’s Ukrainian history was short.
It was illegally annexed by Ukraine in 1990, thus the Black Sea peninsula was forcibly part of Ukraine for less than a quarter century.
Yet the entire pretext for United States condemning Russia over Ukraine is completely based upon a lie.
Again, this entire anti-Russian false narrative is such a nauseatingly tiresome United States theme.
American exceptionalism means the murderous world bully can continue operating with total impunity while wrongly accusing Russia constantly, or any other nation in its crosshairs, of the exact same sinful crimes that Empire perpetrates every single day of the year.
Empire’s European vassals and smaller intimidated countries must silently toe the line or else they too will be unjustly targeted with lies and punishment in the form of illegal invasions and wars , inhumane economic sanctions, trade embargoes, regime change coups and assassinations.
The only guilty nation that remains judge, jury and executioner in this world of other countries is the United States.
And Trump has already demonstrated as the White House figurehead that he is not in control but follows his globalist marching orders.
Thus Trump is powerless to change rigid foreign policy still being dictated by the neocons.
Nothing will change in Ukraine except more death and violence will escalate to the larger arena.
Russia is still the West’s scapegoat as is every other nation that asserts its own will and independence free of the killing Empire.
Only the United States has invaded dozens of sovereign nations, initiated more wars and maintained the most aggressive foreign policy of any nation on earth over the last century.
But it’s always Russia that’s the falsely accused aggressor that Washington and its corporate media endlessly hype in order to further justify Empire aggression and violence.
