But many residents and combatants were skeptical that the ceasefire could last long or provide the basis for a durable peace settlement.
With respect to the ceasefire agreement, obviously we are hopeful but based on past experience also skeptical that in fact the separatists will follow through and the Russians will stop violating Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We also sent a strong message to Russia that actions have consequences.
Today the United States and Europe are finalizing measures to deepen and broaden our sanctions across Russia’s financial, energy and defense sectors,” Obama added.The agreement among the European Union countries expanded the package of sanctions against Russia to measures related to access to capital markets, defense, dual-use goods and sensitive technology, an EU diplomat said.
The EU also expanded the list of people under an asset freeze to include the new leadership in Ukraine’s Donbass region, Crimea’s government and Russian decision-makers and oligarchs.Also attending the NATO summit, Poroshenko told reporters Ukraine was ready to grant a significant decentralization of power and economic freedom to the regions as well as the right to use the language of their choice and an amnesty.A senior rebel leader said separatists still want a formal split for their mainly Russian-speaking regions.
We went out for a walk after three days of hiding, and this is a huge relief,” said Lesya, 30, carrying her newborn boy in Mariupol.
ALL FOR NOTHING’Moscow denies arming the rebels or sending in Russian troops, but Poroshenko appears worried he cannot now defeat the rebels and needs time to tackle a growing economic crisis and prepare for a parliamentary election.
If he goes for a peace plan, then all these dead and wounded and exiled and all the homes burned and jobs lost and money lost, it was all for nothing,” said a Ukrainian soldier, who gave his name only as Mykola.Putin for the first time this week put his name to a concrete peace plan, proposing seven steps which would leave rebels in control of territory that is home to about one-tenth of Ukraine’s population and an even larger share of its industry.
It would also require Ukraine to remain unaligned.Although the Kremlin leader may not have secured all his goals, he had reason to secure a settlement because of the growing impact of sanctions on Russia’s stuttering economy.Public support for Putin is high because of the seizure of Crimea, a Russian territory until Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev gave it to Ukraine 70 years ago.
But this could change if the conflict drags on and many Russians are killed.Putin’s key goals appear now to be to ensure that Ukraine, a country of more than 40 million where Moscow has long had major influence, does not join NATO and that the eastern regions of Ukraine win much more autonomy.Although Poroshenko still calls for Crimea to be part of Ukraine, there is little chance of Russia giving it up.
Moscow can also hope to maintain influence in eastern Ukraine if a peace deal seals the rebels’ territorial gains, creating a “frozen conflict” that ensures Ukraine is hard to govern.
So it has to be tested,” Obama told a news conference.""},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""“We also sent a strong message to Russia that actions have consequences.
Today the United States and Europe are finalizing measures to deepen and broaden our sanctions across Russia’s financial, energy and defense sectors,” Obama added.""},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""The agreement among the European Union countries expanded the package of sanctions against Russia to measures related to access to capital markets, defense, dual-use goods and sensitive technology, an EU diplomat said.
REUTERS/Vasily Fedosenko""},""images"":}},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""Minutes after the ceasefire began, three blasts were heard north of Donetsk, followed by scattered mortar and artillery fire, but this later fell quiet.
The ceasefire allowed people to emerge from cellars where they have been taking shelter.""},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""“We went out for a walk after three days of hiding, and this is a huge relief,” said Lesya, 30, carrying her newborn boy in Mariupol.
It would also require Ukraine to remain unaligned.""},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""Although the Kremlin leader may not have secured all his goals, he had reason to secure a settlement because of the growing impact of sanctions on Russia’s stuttering economy.""},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""Public support for Putin is high because of the seizure of Crimea, a Russian territory until Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev gave it to Ukraine 70 years ago.
Rough Cut ."",""duration"":58,""usn"":""93731917"",""advert_info"":{""advert_zone"":""/4735792/video.us.reuters/world/mostpopular"",""advert_params"":},""thumbnail"":{""caption"":""Thousands of people gather to watch military aircraft from nine countries fly over Newport and Cardiff on the second day of the NATO summit.
