The Ukrainian parliament approved a new pro-Western government in February.
Armed men stormed and occupied key government buildings and broadcast facilities in the key cities of Donetsk and Luhansk, as well in Slovyansk and more than a dozen other towns in the Donbas region.
The leaders of the “Donetsk People’s Republic” and the “Luhansk People’s Republic” declared their entities to be sovereign states after the vote.
Acting President Turchynov said the real turnout for the vote was 32% in Donetsk region and 24% in Luhansk.
Poroshenko is a pro-Western billionaire whose holdings include Roshen, a leading chocolate brand in the region.
The lowest turnout was in Donetsk region and Luhansk region , where Russian-backed separatist gunmen seized polling places and used threats, kidnappings, and other forms of intimidation to stop the vote.
A preliminary statement from the mission said that the vote was “largely in line with international commitments and with a respect for fundamental freedoms in the vast majority of the country” despite the “hostile security environment” in Donetsk and Luhansk.
Perhaps in recognition of that fact, on September 4, President Poroshenko said that he was ordering his military to prepare for a cease-fire on the 5th, if a bilateral cease-fire between the two sides is agreed to at a meeting in Minsk, Belarus on that day.
At the September 2014 NATO summit in Wales, the Alliance agreed to set up four trust funds to help Ukraine’s military in such areas as logistics, command and control, military personnel issues , and cyberdefense.
NATO is leaving the issue of supplying weapons and other possible lethal and non-lethal aid to Ukraine’s armed forces to individual member countries.
Russia reacted with hostility to the emergence of a new, more pro-Western leadership in Ukraine in February 2014.
Russia’s federalization proposal appears to many analysts to be an effort to permanently cripple the central government in Kyiv, giving forces in eastern Ukraine under Moscow’s sway a veto power over important decisions, including on Ukraine’s current pro-Western orientation.
However, Russian official statements maintain that Moscow is asserting that the “people’s republics” are a legitimate expression of the public will in the Donbas and that their “leaders” are legitimate interlocutors for Kyiv in determining the future of Ukraine.
Under intense pressure from Russia, which strongly opposed Ukraine’s intention to sign the AA, the Ukrainian government announced on November 21 that it would not sign the agreement, the first in a series of events that led to the regime’s demise three months later.
The measures barred buying or selling debt, equity, or other financial instruments issued by five Russian state-owned banks with a maturity of over 90 days; banned future EU arms sales and imports from Russia; prohibited the sale of “dual-use” goods and technology to Russian military end-users; barred the sale of some oil exploration equipment and technology, for uses such as arctic, deep water or shale oil exploration.
On June 23, in a telephone conversation with President Putin, President Obama called upon Putin to “press the separatists to recognize and abide by the ceasefire and to halt the flow of weapons and materiel across its border into Ukraine.
Press reports claim that U.S. business groups with interests in Russia have lobbied heavily against unilateral sanctions, warning that European competitors could take advantage of them to squeeze out United States firms.
After the Malaysian airlines tragedy on the 17th, the EU largely matched and even in some cases went beyond these sanctions.
To improve people to people ties, the United States plans to extend the validity of visas for businesspeople and tourists to 10 years from the current 5.16 In March 2014, Ukraine requested military aid from the United States.
On June 4, the Administration announced an additional $5 million in security assistance to Ukraine.
The Administration also noted that senior United States defense officials met with their Ukrainian counterparts in April and early June to discuss United States support for Ukraine’s defense reform and military-to-military cooperation.
On June 7, the Administration announced an additional $48 million in aid for Ukraine, pending consultation with Congress.
In June, the Administration said that, added together with previously budgeted funds, the United States is providing over $184 million in aid to Ukraine this year, not including the $1 billion loan guarantee.
The FY2015 foreign operations appropriations bill , approved by the House Appropriations Committee on June 24, contains $215 million above the President’s pre-crisis request in aid for Ukraine and other former Soviet countries facing Russian aggression.
