On 13 March 2015, the Council adopted Decision 2015/432 thereby renewing the measures for a further six months.
In view of the continued undermining or threatening of the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, Decision 2014/145/CFSP should be amended and those measures renewed for a further six months.
On the basis of a review by the Council, the entries in the Annex should be amended and the entry for one deceased person should be deleted. the Annex is amended as set out in the Annex to this Decision.
Aksyonov was elected ‘Prime Minister of Crimea’ in the Crimean Verkhovna Rada on 27 February 2014 in the presence of pro-Russian gunmen.
His ‘election’ was decreed unconstitutional by Oleksandr Turchynov on 1 March 2014.
As speaker of the Supreme Council of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, Konstantinov played a relevant role in the decisions taken by the Verkhovna Rada concerning the ‘referendum’ against territorial integrity of Ukraine and called on voters to cast their votes in favour of Crimean Independence.
As former Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Crimea, Temirgaliev played a relevant role in the decisions taken by the Verkhovna Rada concerning the ‘referendum’ against territorial integrity of Ukraine.
He lobbied actively for the integration of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
He was then appointed Deputy Commander of the Black Sea Fleet of the Russian Federation.
He actively campaigned for Sevastopol to become a separate entity of the Russian Federation following a referendum on 16 March 2014.
He signed the Treaty on the adoption of the Republic of Crimea by Russia.
Zima was appointed as the new head of the Crimean Security Service on 3 March 2014 by ‘Prime Minister’ Aksyonov and accepted this appointment.
This included information on Euro-Maidan activists and human rights defenders of Crimea.
He played a relevant role in preventing Ukraine's authorities from controlling the territory of Crimea.
On 11 March 2014 the formation of an independent Security Service of Crimea was proclaimed by former SBU officers of Crimea.
Counsellor of the Speaker of the Verkhovna Rada of Crimea, one of the leading organisers of the 16 March 2014‘referendum’ against Ukraine's territorial integrity.
He drew Vladimir Konstantinov into this endeavour, threatening him with dismissal.
He publicly recognised that the MPs from Crimea were the initiators of inviting Russian soldiers to take over the Verkhovna Rada of Crimea.
He was one of the first Crimean Leaders to ask in public for the annexation of Crimea to Russia.
Chairman of the Security and Defence Committee of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation.
On 1 March 2014 Ozerov, on behalf of the Security and Defence Committee of the Federation Council, publicly supported, in the Federation Council, the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
First Deputy-Chairman of the International Affairs Committee of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation.
On 1 March 2014 Dzhabarov, on behalf of the International Affairs Committee of the Federation Council, publicly supported, in the Federation Council, the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Law of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation.
Member of the Committee for federal issues, regional politics and the North of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation.
On 1 March 2014 Ryzhkov publicly supported, in the Federation Council, the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
On 1 March 2014 Bushmin publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Member of the Committee on culture, science, and information of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation.
On 1 March 2014 Panteleev publicly supported, in the Federation Council, the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Member of the Council of the State Duma; Leader of Fair Russia faction in the Duma of the Russian Federation.
Initiator of the bill allowing Russian Federation to admit in its composition, under the pretext of protection of Russian citizens, territories of a foreign country without the consent of that country or an international treaty.
Actively supporting use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine and annexation of Crimea.
He led personally the demonstration in support of the use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine.
Actively supporting use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea.
Commander, Russia's Western Military District, units of which are deployed in Crimea.
He is responsible for part of the Russian military presence in Crimea which is undermining the sovereignty of the Ukraine and assisted the Crimean authorities in preventing public demonstrations against moves towards a referendum and incorporation into Russia.
Russia's Southern Military District, forces of which are in Crimea; the Black Sea Fleet comes under Galkin's command; much of the force movement into Crimea has come through the Southern Military District.
On 1 March 2014, publicly supported, in the Federation Council, the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Publicly supported the Russia-Crimea reunification treaty and the related federal constitutional law.
Central figure of the government propaganda supporting the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
He was an organiser of the process in Crimea by which local Crimean communities were mobilised to stage actions undermining the Ukrainian authorities in Crimea.
Originator and co-sponsor of recent legislative proposals in Russia that would have allowed regions of other countries to join Russia without their central authorities' prior agreement.
Plenipotentiary Representative of the President of the Russian Federation into the so-called ‘Crimean Federal District’, Non-permanent member of the Russian Security Council.
Responsible for the implementation of the constitutional prerogatives of the Russian Head of State on the territory of the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea.
Took part in the seizure of the building of the Lugansk regional office of the Security Service.
Former Head of the ‘Donetsk People's Republic’, active participant and organiser of separatist actions, coordinator of actions of the ‘Russian tourists’ in Donetsk.
One of the leaders of ideologically radical organisation People's Militia of Donbas.
He took active part in the seizure of a number of state buildings in Donetsk region.
He is an assistant on security issues to Sergey Aksionov, self-proclaimed prime minister of Crimea.
First Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Administration of Russia.
Responsible for overseeing the political integration of the annexed Ukrainian region of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
In his senior position, holds responsibility for the deployment of Russian airborne forces in Crimea.
Responsible for facilitating the adoption of legislation on the annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol into the Russian Federation.
Responsible for the systematic and expedited issuance of Russian passports for the residents of Crimea.
Responsible for the systematic and expedited issuance of Russian passports for the residents of Sevastopol.
Ponomariov called on Vladimir Putin to send in Russian troops to protect the city and later asked him to supply weapons.
He took control of the Security Service of Ukraine's Office in Donetsk region building and afterwards seized the Ministry of Internal Affairs' district station in the town of Horlivka.
Former Member of the Rada, as such publicly called for the creation of the so-called ‘Federal Republic of Novorossiya’, composed of south-eastern Ukrainian regions.
Former so-called ‘Prime Minister of the Council of Ministers of the Lugansk People's Republic’, confirmed on 8 July 2014.
Responsible for the statement of the Army of the Southeast that the Ukrainian presidential elections in the ‘Lugansk People's Republic’ cannot take place due to the ‘new’ status of the region.
Permanent member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation; Director of the Foreign Intelligence Service of the Russian Federation.
As a member of the Security Council, which provides advice on and coordinates national security affairs, he was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Permanent member and Secretary of the Security Council of the Russian Federation.
Permanent member and Deputy Secretary of the Security Council of the Russian Federation.
As a senior FSB officer, he heads a service responsible for overseeing intelligence operations and international activity.
On 23.5.2014 he announced the inauguration of the ‘de facto embassy’ of the unrecognised, so-called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ in Moscow, he contributes to undermining or threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Kadyrov made statements in support of the illegal annexation of Crimea and in support of the armed insurgency in Ukraine.
In that context, he was awarded the medal for ‘the liberation of Crimea’ by the Acting Head of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea for the support he provided to the unlawful annexation of Crimea.
He requested Russian intervention in eastern Ukraine, including through the deployment of Russian peacekeeping forces.
He is associated with Igor Strelkov/Girkin who is responsible for actions which undermine or threaten the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Gubarev is responsible for recruiting people for armed forces of separatists.
Despite being arrested for threatening the territorial integrity of Ukraine, and subsequently released, he has continued to play a prominent role in separatist activities, thus undermining the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
In her capacity of former so-called ‘Minister of Foreign Affairs’ she was responsible for defending the so-called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’, thus undermining the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
In addition, her bank account is used to finance illegal separatist groups.
In taking on and acting in this capacity she has therefore supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
In taking on and acting in this capacity Berezin has therefore supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
The self-described ‘president’ of the so-called ‘Republic of Novorossiya’ who has called on Russia to deploy troops to Ukraine.
In taking on and acting in this capacity he has therefore supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Senior aid to Igor Strelkov/Girkin who is responsible for actions which undermine or threaten the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
In taking on and acting in this capacity, Zdriliuk has therefore supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Former ‘Minister of State Security’ in the separatist region of Transnistria.
Former vice-prime minister of Donetsk People's Republic, responsible for security and law enforcement.
Member of the so-called ‘People's Council’ and former chairman of the so-called ‘Supreme Council’ of the so-called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ who was at the source of policies and the organisation of the illegal ‘referendum’ leading to the proclamation of the so-called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’, which constituted a breach of the territorial integrity, sovereignty and unity of Ukraine.
His level of economic success is attributable to the influence of key decision makers favouring him, notably in the award of public contracts.
He has benefited from his close personal relationship with Russian decision-makers as he was awarded important contracts by the Russian State or by State-owned enterprises.
His companies were, notably awarded several highly lucrative contracts for the preparations for the Sochi Olympic Games.
He is also the owner of the company Stroygazmontazh which has been awarded a State contract for the construction of a bridge from Russia to the illegally annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea, therefore consolidating its integration into the Russian Federation which in turn further undermines the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Address — Crimea’, a public relations campaign that was designed to persuade Crimean children that they are now Russian citizens living in Russia and thereby supporting the Russian Government's policy to integrate Crimea into Russia.
Mr Malofeev is closely linked to Ukrainian separatists in Eastern Ulkraine and Crimea.
He is a former employer of Mr Borodai, so-called Prime Minister of the so-called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ and met with Mr Aksyonov, so-called Prime Minister of the so-called ‘Republic of Crimea’, during the period of the Crimean annexation process.
The Ukrainian Government has opened a criminal investigation into his alleged material and financial support to separatists.
In addition, he gave a number of public statements supporting the annexation of Crimea and the incorporation of Ukraine into Russia and notably stated in June 2014 that ‘You can't incorporate the whole of Ukraine into Russia.
Therefore Mr Malofeev is acting in support of the destabilisation of Eastern Ukraine.
He is a co-founder of the so-called Ozero Dacha, a cooperative society bringing together an influential group of individuals around President Putin.
Furthermore, Bank Rossiya has important stakes in the National Media Group which, in turn, controls television stations which actively support the Russian government's policies of destabilisation of Ukraine.
In taking on and acting in this capacity, Zakharchenko has supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
He has reportedly commanded a division of separatist fighters in Donetsk since April and has promised to solve the strategic task of repelling Ukraine's military aggression.
Konokov has therefore supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
He has, inter alia, stated that they will continue their fighting in the rest of the country.
Rudenko has therefore supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Tsyplakov has therefore supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
He has therefore supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
In his statements he has, inter alia, talked about the militias' readiness to conduct a guerrilla war and their seizure of weapon systems from the Ukrainian armed forces.
So-called ‘Deputy Prime Minister’ of Crimea and Plenipotentiary Representative of Crimea to President Putin.
Muradov has played an important role in consolidating Russian institutional control over Crimea since the illegal annexation.
Sheremet played a key role in the organisation and implementation of the 16 March referendum in Crimea on unification with Russia.
At the time of the referendum, Sheremet reportedly commanded the pro-Moscow ‘selfdefense forces’ in Crimea.
On 1 March 2014 Vorobiov publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
He actively supported the use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine and annexation of Crimea.
Chairman of the Union of the Russian and Foreign Cossack Forces, and deputy of the State Duma.
He supported the annexation of Crimea and admitted that Russian Cossacks were actively engaged in the Ukrainian conflict on the side of the Moscow-backed separatists.
First deputy Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the State Duma.
Former First Deputy Chairman of the Committee on Relations with CIS Countries, Eurasian Integration and Links with Compatriots of the State Duma.
First Deputy Chairman of the Committee on Relations with CIS Countries, Eurasian Integration and Links with Compatriots of the State Duma.
He is the commander of the 76th airborne division which has been involved in the Russian military presence on the territory of Ukraine, notably during the illegal annexation of Crimea.
He is benefiting from his links with the Russian President by being promoted to senior positions in State-controlled firms.
He chairs the Rostec conglomerate, the leading Russian state-controlled defence and industrial manufacturing corporation.
Further to a decision of the Russian government, Technopromexport, a subsidiary of Rostec, is planning to build energy plants in Crimea thereby supporting its integration into the Russian Federation.
Furthermore, Rosoboronexport, a subsidiary of Rostec, has supported the integration of Crimean defence companies into Russia's defence industry, thereby consolidating the illegal annexation of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
State Duma Deputy, Chair of the State Duma Commission on Legislative Provisions for Development of the Military-Industrial Complex of the Russian Federation.
He is a prominent member of ‘United Russia’ and a businessman with heavy investments in Ukraine and in Crimea.
These ‘elections’ are in breach of Ukrainian law and therefore illegal.
In taking on and acting in this capacity, and in organising the illegal ‘elections’, he has therefore actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
In taking on and acting in this capacity, and in participating formally as a candidate in the illegal ‘elections’, he has therefore actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
In taking on and acting in this capacity, and in participating formally as a candidate in the illegal ‘elections’, she has therefore actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
Member of the ‘Parliament’ of the so-called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ and works in the Union of veterans of the Donbass Berkut.
In taking part and acting in this capacity, and in participating formally as a candidate in the illegal ‘elections’, he has therefore actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
Commander of the ‘First Cossack Regiment’, an armed separatist group involved in the fighting in eastern Ukraine.
In this capacity, he has actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
Commander of the ‘Somali’ battalion, an armed separatist group involved in the fighting in eastern Ukraine.
In taking on and acting in this capacity, he has therefore actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised the country.
Deputy Minister of Defence and, in that capacity, involved in supporting the deployment of Russian troops in Ukraine.
According to the present Russian Ministry of Defence structure, in that capacity he participates in shaping and implementing the policy of the Russian Government.
These policies threaten the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
First Deputy Minister of Defence and, in that capacity, involved in supporting the deployment of Russian troops in Ukraine.
Director of the Main Operations Department and deputy chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.
In both capacities he is actively involved in shaping and implementing the military campaign of the Russian forces in Ukraine.
According to the stated activities of the general staff, by exercising operational control over the armed forces, he is actively involved in shaping and implementing the Russian government policy threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
He visited the so-called Donetsk People's Republic and during his visit made statements supporting separatists.
He was also appointed Honorary Consul of the so-called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ in the Russian Federation.
He is the founder of the civil movement ‘Krassnaya Moskva — Red Moscow — Patriotic Front Aid’ which organised public demonstrations supporting separatists, thereby supporting policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Armed separatist which has actively supported actions which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
