The spark that started in this city last August, when Starbucks workers announced their intent to unionize, has turned into a wildfire of righteous working-class ambition, with new locations across the country filing for union elections.
Stores in Mesa, Arizona; Boston; Seattle; Knoxville, Tennessee; Chicago; and Bloomfield, Colorado, have joined the fight, widening the scope of the struggle across the country.
Victories in two of the first three stores that voted in Buffalo (the second is still being contested in court) demonstrated that organizing a union — even against a company with as much money and contempt for its workers as Starbucks — is a fight that can be won.
This tidal wave of new union petitions being filed comes at a time when COVID-19, especially cases caused by the omicron variant, is tearing through the United States with record-breaking infection rates.
Starbucks locations in Buffalo, and no doubt other cities, are facing a spike in infections.
Starbucks has flooded the district with new hires in an attempt to dilute a union vote that took place Dec. for three stores in Buffalo.
Now these new TEAR DOWN _\LL hires are facing the recent wave of infections head-on, with no health insurance or paid sick leave time.
Many of Starbucks’ benefits do not kick in on day one, leaving many workers without the resources and medical care they need.
In addition, workers confirmed to have been exposed to COVID-19 for extended periods of time, while vaccinated and asymptomatic, are not being offered paid isolation time to get tested.
This leaves many workers feeling unsafe on the job, having already seen baristas who are fully vaccinated test positive for COVID-19.
Starbucks management asserts that its policy is in line with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines.
However, in a country with over three-quarters of a million people already killed by the disease, it should be obvious that the CDC guidelines have been decidedly insufficient up to this point.
This public health catastrophe, combined with the deteriorating capitalist economy and rising cost of living, has left workers with little choice other than to organize for their own collective interests.
What is a nightmare scenario for workers is the perfect storm to ignite a militant revival of the labor movement, Continued on page 5 Editorial Dr.
The rally, co-organized by ALU and Workers Assembly Against Racism , completed a consequential day for both the workers’ struggle and the Amazon union fight.
That morning dozens of workers organized by Amazonians United Chicagoland walked off the job in two locations, Cicero, Illinois, and Gage Park in Chicago, citing punishing hours and unsafe COVID-19 conditions.
TONY MURPHY with the National Labor Relations Board and conducted a targeted walkout at the Staten Island warehouse.
Only hours before the Times Square rally, news broke that in late November, two workers at Amazon’s warehouse in Bessemer, Alabama, had died within six hours of each other during their shifts.
At least one of them was told to keep working or he’d lose his job, even though he said he needed to go home.
Evidently Amazon has been trying to cover up the fact that at least six workers at the Alabama warehouse have died in the last year.
Migrant abuse exposed 7 Ukraine, Russiaand NATO ss Page 2 January 6, 2022 workers.org March 30, 1952 — Dec., 2021 Chuck Kaufman: an anchor By Sara Flounders Few people have done as much as Chuck Kaufman over so many years.
In the more than 30 years that I knew Chuck, what I most valued was that he always looked for concrete ways he could help.
He fit very diverse, complicated people into tasks, where they would succeed.
Chuck excelled in projects that built revolutionary enthusiasm — like picking coffee, one bean at a time — hot, backbreaking, yet at the end of the day, measurable.
Chuck was a key part of the #SanctionsKill Campaign for the past two years; and despite traveling cross-country in his van, visiting family or in medical treatment, he was on most of the biweekly calls, even two weeks ago.
Each time he took on at least one task — helping shape a webinar, publishing a report, a book — he made good suggestions on next steps.
Chuck’s early work focused on Nicaragua under full United States attack.
But it kept expanding — to other countries targeted by United States imperialism; it included support for projects and participation in delegations to Cuba, Venezuela, El] Salvador, Haiti, Honduras, then to China.
At the same time, he was part of the militant border actions to defend migrants, always in solidarity with Palestine and in defense of the Black Lives Matter movement.
He kept Chuck Kaufman in Honduras outside of the United States Palmerola Air Base in 2011.
He and others were tear gassed on the two year anniversary of the U.S-backed coup. the big picture in the forefront, linking struggles, linking countries, linking people.
Chuck really went out of his way to help political activists whose projects and efforts were facing hard times.
Building solidarity doesn’t happen naturally in this viciously competitive capitalist country.
Capitalism and imperialism threaten the peoples of the world and the planet itself in the neverending quest for ever-greater profits.
Capitalism means war and austerity, racism and repression, attacks on im/migrants, misogyny, LGBTQ2S+ oppression and mistreatment of people with disabilities.
It means joblessness, increasing homelessness and impoverishment and lack of hope for the future.
The United States is the richest country in the world, yet no one has a guaranteed right to shelter, food, water, health care, education or anything else — unless they can pay for it.
Wages are lower than ever, and youth are saddled with seemingly insurmountable student debt, if they even make it to college.
Black, Brown and Indigenous youth and trans people are gunned down by cops and bigots on a regular basis.
The ruthless ruling class today seeks to wipe out decades of gains and benefits won by hard-fought struggles by people’s movements.
The super-rich and their political representatives have intensified their attacks on the multinational, multigender and multigenerational working class.
It is time to point the blame at — and challenge — the capitalist system.
If you’re interested in Marxism, socialism and fighting for a socialist future, please contact a WWP branch near you.
Boston, MA 02130 portland@workers.org 617.522.6626 Salt Lake City boston@workers.org 801.750.0248 Buffalo, N.Y. slc@workers.org produces all wealth in society, and this wealth should remain in their hands, not be stolen in the form of capitalist profits.
The wealth workers create should be socially owned and its distribution planned to satisfy and guarantee basic human needs.
Queer people and the United States communist movement. .11 ¢ Around the world ¢ Editorial Dr.
Verbatim copying and distribution of articles is permitted in any medium without royalty provided this notice is preserved.
By Ben Carroll The prices of all basic goods and services necessary for human survival have been going up—in some cases, way up—over the past six months or so.
The November 2021 Consumer Price Index, which tracks annual and monthly increases in prices, rose by 6.8% this year—the highest jump in nearly 40 years.
There is no major city where a person working 40 hours a week at the federal minimum wage of $7.25 can afford a one-bedroom apartment.
This comes in the midst of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, a profound crisis of public health made far worse by the for-profit health care system in this country.
It has exacerbated the deepening crisis of global capitalism, ushering in a wave of job losses, evictions and more suffering for workers and the oppressed.
The mainstream press is filled with a range of supposed explanations to diagnose why inflation has set in so rapidly in the United States and similar economies around the globe.
But the reality is that none of these explain the root causes of what is driving down the standard of living for millions of workers in this country.
Capitalist system in crisis Since the 2008 financial crisis, the global capitalist system has been on life support, propped up for the past decade by the central banks funneling unprecedented infusions of money to the commercial banks and financial institutions.
In the U.S., the Federal Reserve has pumped upwards of $10 trillion into the financial system and maintained very low interest rates throughout this past decade.
From 2008 to 2014 alone, the Federal Reserve printed $3. trillion in new money—nearly three times the amount the central bank had created since its founding 95 years earlier.
During this entire last decade, the Fed has kept interest rates near zero for a longer period of time than ever before.
When the bank in 2018 tried to begin raising interest rates and scaling back its printing of new money—known as “quantitative easing”—capital revolted.
This sent stocks sharply lower and forced the Fed to abandon its plans and return to the regime of near-zero interest rates, thus pumping trillions of dollars into the coffers of the banks and large financial institutions. (politico.com, Dec., 2021) Several phenomena happened as a result.
On the one hand, the amount of money hoarded by the banks and borrowed to speculate in financial markets is at a record high—upwards of $918 billion at the end of November 2021.
This is more than double the nearly $400 billion in so-called “margin debt” incurred prior to the financial crisis of 2008.
A report by the McKinsey Global Institute, published in 2021, found that just above two-thirds of global net worth was now stored in real estate, while only around 20% was stored in other fixed assets or means of production.
This phenomenon is driving wild speculation in real estate, raising the cost of renting or owning a home and intensifying the familiar scenes of gentrification across the United States and the globe. (tinyurl.com/ bdf24hmy) Since 2010, the stock market has doubled in value, during a period of time characterized by permanent unemployment and underemployment, the rise of the so-called gig economy, austerity measures and more suffering imposed on the working class and the oppressed.
The superrich have seen their wealth balloon during this period, intensifying the antagonisms between labor and capital and bringing the contradictions inherent in the capitalist system into sharper relief.
At the same time, the number of so-called “zombie companies”—those which hold substantial amounts of debt relative to profit and are thus barely able to pay off their debt—has continued to rise.
The proliferation of these zombie companies has been driven in large part by the Federal Reserve’s policy of making money extremely cheap for banks and large corporations to borrow.
For the owners of these companies and financial institutions—the capitalist class—some inflation is a desirable thing.
Faced with access to easy money to borrow and invest, coupled with higher costs for raw materials based on the various supply chain issues impacting the global economy, bosses are raising prices to protect and, in many cases, grow their profits.
This access to easy money has given corporations the ability to automate production to a higher degree, investing in robots and other technology that enable each worker to produce more commodities.
Indeed, the productivity of labor has increased substantially over the past several decades, while the real wages of workers have stayed relatively flat or, in many cases, fallen.
There is a general tendency, then, for the value of commodities to decline over time as the supply of those goods rises, based on less human labor being needed to produce them.
The argument by many mainstream economists and CEOs—that growing demands from workers for higher wages, especially among the lowest-paid workers, is driving or at least contributing to inflation—is categorically false.
Out-of-control inflation, however, can become undesirable for the capitalist class.
It can lead to ballooning costs of raw materials—and even more dangerous, to the tightening of monetary policy, making access to borrowed money more expensive.
If this were to happen, which is what the Federal Reserve and other central banks are currently considering, it could usher in a wave of defaults and bankruptcies, triggering another January 6, 2022 Page 3 financial crisis and an economic decline that would affect the global economy.
It would be managed by trying to extract even more concessions from the working class and the oppressed.
Class struggle decisive It is the preferred policy of the federal government and central banks to use various monetary policy tools at their disposal to control rampant inflation.
After the end of World War II, the United States experienced a similar period of high inflation.
At that time, there was a militant and growing workers’ movement in the streets, fighting for various social reforms, building unions, conducting strikes and more.
Rather than utilize monetary policy tools to deal with inflation, the federal government enacted price controls.
In the early 1970s, similar measures were again implemented to deal with rising inflation.
But starting in the late 1970s, roughly coinciding with capital’s renewed offensive against labor, there was a shift toward the monetary policy route as the ruling class’s preferred method to deal with inflation, and that has been the case ever since.
The Federal Reserve at that time raised interest rates through the roof, exacerbating a punishing recession in the economy.
Things are different now, both in terms of subjective factors like the level of worker organization and consciousness, as well as objective factors regarding development in the global capitalist economy.
It’s too early to say where inflationary trends will head and with what method the federal government and central banks will choose to respond.
The newly combative attitude of workers, forced to stay on the job throughout the pandemic, exposing themselves and their families to the risk of COVID-19 while earning small change compared to the billions raked in by the companies they work for, will play a decisive role going forward.
This growing workers’ movement could raise demands for a price freeze, higher wages, an end to evictions, free health care, an end to the war on migrant workers, and other pro-worker initiatives to address the increasingly dire conditions facing our class and the most oppressed.
The Federal Reserve and the federal government have bent over backwards to hand out tens of trillions of dollars to the banks and large corporations.
Each year, they spend upwards of $1 trillion on the Pentagon, funding United States wars abroad in the interests of capital.
During the pandemic, the federal government imposed pauses on, or altogether forgave, various debts held by workers, implemented an eviction moratorium, gave stimulus payments directly to workers and took other measures to alleviate the public health crisis.
Altogether, this demonstrates that the money is there to implement programs and policies that benefit the vast majority of society versus the interests of the rich.
What’s missing is a mobilized and militant workers’ movement to fight for it.
Page 4 January 6, 2022 workers.org Amazon union drive NLRB ruling an organizing tool By Martha Grevatt Amazon’s vicious union busting has come under widespread scrutiny by the world’s working class — and even by some elements of the ruling class.
The National Labor Relations Board, created in 1935 to regulate the sharp battles between labor and capital, has ordered a new election at the Bessemer, Alabama, Amazon warehouse.
In April the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union lost a representation election there by a wide margin; dozens of courageous Bessemer workers came forth and testified before the NLRB about Amazon’s campaign of fear, lies and intimidation.
The latest NLRB ruling against Amazon, issued Dec., 2021, will have a more far-reaching impact than the order specific to Bessemer.
The company must notify every one of the 750,000 Amazon workers in the United States — by email, on its A to Z employee app and with posters at every job site — that a rule used to limit union organizing on its premises is no longer in effect.
The pandemic has killed hundreds of thousands of United States workers so far and left many more in a very precarious financial predicament, like the 12 million workers who fell behind on their rent in 2021.
The response of the ruling class to the plight of the worker during the pandemic has ranged from ineptitude to callous disregard.
Shareholders and CEOs protected their profit margins rather than the workers who risked their lives to keep the capitalist machine running.
If you were paying attention, you saw workers reach a breaking point and demand their labor leaders be more militant during contract negotiations and push for better pay and benefits.
Nurses and other essential hospital personnel walked off the job because of poor staffing that increased the risk of harm to patients.
Major manufacturing strikes happened at Kellogg’s, John Deere, Nabisco and Frito-Lay, where workers won better contracts, although advances against union-busting twotier systems did not go far enough.
Teamster truckers walked off the job and demonstrated the fragility of the just-in-time supply chain model.
Gig workers from GoPuff, Uber and Lyft flexed their muscles—as workers who provide essential services—to win concessions regarding safety and wages.
Starbucks workers won a historic union election, and grassroots efforts to unionize the coffee chain are spreading.
That was one of the few times they could talk to workers in the break areas.
Unions and class-conscious organizers could organize around enforcing the ruling.
Many forces are in the mix — ALU, Amazonians United Chicagoland, the Teamsters, RWDSU and iD Oe AT WARRIOR MET COAL Voss.
In Brookwood, Alabama, United Mine Workers coal miners “hold the line” and continue the strike they began in April 2021. won safety concessions and their largest pay raise in decades.
New year, new struggles The new year begins with a pandemic surge sweeping across the United States and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention downgrading safety protocols, forcing more workers to stay on the job, despite the risk of spreading disease and becoming gravely ill.
For United States government leaders, the capitalist economy and corporate profits are the top priority, and workers are disposable in the effort to keep business in business.
There is the coming battle at Amazon, after a National Labor Relations Board ruling mandated Amazon must inform its 750,000 United States employees that they have a right to organize.
The International Longshore and Warehouse Union represents 20,000 dock workers at 29 ports on the West Coast, and its contract with Pacific Maritime Association expires in July.
The Teamsters’ Carhaul Division, representing 4,000 car haulers, will negotiate a new contract in May.
The United Steelworkers will be in negotiations representing 30,000 Marathon Petroleum workers and 5,700 workers at Goodyear Tires.
The more they get to know each other and build a united front of solidarity against the epitome of capitalist exploitation — Amazon — the greater the likelihood of the first union victory against this megamonopoly and the centibillionaire at its helm.
Organize a demonstration in your area to wish Jeff Bezos an “unhappy birthday” Jan. and/or honor the pro-labor legacy of Rev.
For more information, to find an event in your area or to post your event go to supportamazonworkers.org.
The institution made a profit in 2021, following two rounds of layoffs, which left hospital wards dangerously understaffed.
Safe staffing-to-patient ratios will surely be on the table when the nurses’ contract expires in June.
PASNAP President and Temple Hospital RN Maureen May recently told Fox29 News, “We are in crisis,” with hospitals near capacity due to the pandemic surge.
If the pandemic has one lesson, it is that the worker, not the CEO, is essential.
That has been demonstrated time and time again in industry after industry.
Let’s resolve that 2022 will be the year we build a workers’ world. workers.org January 6, 2022 Page 5 Starbucks organizing drive erupts Continued from page 1 with youth at the forefront of the fight.
Despite these desperate circumstances for many, Starbucks workers are unionizing and not simply as a result of the failure of the company to address any particular problem.
Class-conscious workers push for real change Workers across the board are no longer content with acting as passive observers to their own exploitation.
We are tion not simply in terms at Starbucks but are seeing workers become of their own locality or actually part of a larger vision to make their More collectively aware of our world-historic role as agents of change worksites and communities a better place.
This shows that workers are beginning to country, but as part of an international working class.
Companies like Starbucks, Amazon, Walmart and others are global imperialist see unions not just as IN SOCI ely, the on ly behemoths that exploit a tool to react against force that can bring workers at home and bad treatment but as a ; abroad, whether barisproactive tool they can about a revolution Cry tas, farmers or delivery wield to take a more break from capitalist drivers.
We are seeing workers become more collectively aware of our world-historic role as agents of change in society, the only force that can bring about a revolutionary break from capitalist exploitation. on one particular workplace in the United States, we see that the conditions of the workers are tied intrinsically to the conditions of workers in other countries.
A Marxist Analysis of the Changing Character of the Working Class,” because of the global nature of the capitalist economy, workers within the United States are directly competing for jobs with workers of other countries.
An unprecedented advance in technology has made it easier than ever to send jobs overseas, to countries where huge corporations pay only a fraction of what it costs in the United States to pay union workers with full benefits to do the same job.
This direct competition with low-wage jobs around the world in turn drives down wages for workers in the United States, limiting how much can be won strictly through bargaining with union contracts.
In other words, a labor movement in the United States that does not take on an internationalist perspective to match the international nature of the working class will, in the long run, shoot itself in the foot.
Just as workers are always more powerful in the workplace when they unite together against their boss, the working class of one country is more powerful when it unites with other workers across national boundaries against their shared capitalist exploiters.
Developments within the labor movement in the United States open up new possibilities for workers on a global scale.
After decades of the labor movement being gutted, workers are making a comeback.
The victory in Buffalo is the first of many to come, for baristas as well as the whole working class.
The author ts a contributor to Workers World newspaper and a union committee organizer with Starbucks Workers United in Buffalo.
ALU leader Brett Daniels spoke at the rally about being handcuffed of Amazon workers in Edwardsville, Illinois, where six were killed when the Dec. tornado demolished the warehouse — after management would not allow workers to keep their phones for emergency weather alerts nor allow them to leave in the face of the danger.
Since the tornado, The Intercept revealed that Amazon’s profit-before-people mission means lifesaving emergency drills are frequently sacrificed for production — even though the company has plenty of time for anti-union captive-audience meetings.
Many in the corporate media have falsely pronounced the Staten Island union campaign dead, because the workers had withdrawn their NLRB petition in mid-November to get more challenge-proof signatures.
The Dec. rally showed the Staten Island campaign is alive and kicking and the ALU is solidifying its leadership of workers in the warehouse.
This undoubtedly explains why ALU organizers have been subject to Only hours before the Times Square rally, news broke that in late November, two workers at Amazon's warehouse in Bessemer, Alabama, had died within six hours of each other during their shifts.
At least one of them was told to keep working or he‘d lose his job, even though he said he needed to go home. along with Smalls on trumped-up charges from the NYPD, which were later dropped.
The ALU’s growing base in the Staten Island warehouse was dramatized by the union’s intervention in a sexual harassment case there.
Amazon bosses had been protecting a serial abuser but were forced to take action after the union held a series of protests demanding he be removed.
Maddy, the target of the abuse, spoke at the rally and later told Workers World that while much firmer action is still needed by management, absolutely nothing would have been done without the union.
WAAR leader Larry Holmes addressed the de facto union leadership at the rally and celebrated the fact that the ALU had filed its petition for a union vote.
You’re a union because you're fighting the sexism that the women workers are subjected to.
You're a union because you organize to be a voice for the workers, to fight for better conditions.
Holmes’ remarks captured the spirit of the action’s main demand that Amazon recognize the union now and negotiate directly with the workers.
This would bypass the long NLRB-supervised process which bosses use to lie to and intimidate workers.
And following the Starbucks Workers United victory in winning union elections in Buffalo, new worker campaigns at the coffee giant have been announced in Boston and Seattle.
Page 6 January 6, 2022 workers.org Unvaccinated staff spread COVID-19 in California prisons By Judy Greenspan Oakland, California California state prisoners are experiencing a dangerous surge of COVID-19 infections, fueled by the omicron variant and the refusal of prison guards and contracted staff to be vaccinated, according to family members and prisoners’ rights attorneys.
Gavin Newsom, who refused to order mass releases during the first surge of COVID-19 in the state prisons, has taken a position against ordering mandatory vaccinations for prison staff.
Workers World was recently contacted by family members concerned about the rising COVID-19 infections at the California Medical Facility at Vacaville, which incarcerates perhaps the largest elderly and medically at-risk population of men, transgender and gender-nonconforming prisoners in the state.
Approximately one-quarter of CMF prison staff, including many medical providers, are private contractors, and only 37% have been vaccinated.
Times, Dec., 2021) A recent legal brief filed by the Prison Law Office and other attorneys in the class action lawsuit, Plata Newsom, WW COMMENTARY By Mirinda Crissman Nearly 2. million people, who are incarcerated every day in prisons, jails and detention centers in the United States, face possible death sentences while locked up during a deadly respiratory pandemic.
Despite facing inhumane and unsanitary conditions, they have shown great solidarity with one another and resistance to their brutal oppression.
Since the start of the pandemic, prisons and ICE detention centers across the United States have reported at least 460,918 total cumulative cases among incarcerated people and 2,933 total cumulative deaths, according to the UCLA Law COVID Behind Bars Data Project.
This project is sure to note that true case and mortality counts are likely higher, and may be significantly higher, than reported.
This undercount is due to the data available being self-reported by carceral agencies, which may be concealing reported cases due to poor testing practices by many agencies, but the undercount is also due to the fact that many carceral agencies have stopped reporting COVID-19 data.
Some of the most heartening data collected on the members of our class behind bars come from projects like Perilous Chronicle, which has kept a running list with news sources detailing the uprisings, hunger strikes, escapes and other various acts of resistance available to the public.
PC has been tracking these acts of resistance by incarcerated people in the United States and Canada since the end of 2010.
JUDY GREENSPAN Prisoners’ rights activists demonstrate in front of the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, Sacramento. documents the disparity between the vaccination rates of prisoners, guards and contracted prison staff especially at CMF and the California Health Care Facility in Stockton.
Not surprisingly, the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation has not been forthcoming with accurate information about the pandemic has exacerbated already dire conditions inside, the number of recorded acts of resistance has increased.
Pandemic exacerbates suffering The COVID-19 crisis behind bars has elicited a number of lackluster and dangerous responses from the various carceral agencies at the federal, state and local levels.
Isolation, already extreme while incarcerated, is made worse when the response to the rapid spread of the virus is lockdown of imprisoned people to their cells — with minimal if any access to basic hygiene like daily showers let alone basic recreation levels needed to sustain bodily health.
Many facilities suspended in-person visits with loved ones, which for many are one of the few places for human connection with their larger communities they were kidnapped from.
Quality physical health care behind bars is already hard to come by, if imprisoned people can even gain access to it.
Mental health care is largely nonexistent in a setting that has often driven people to take their own lives because conditions are so brutal.
Suicides in United States jails and prisons rose sharply from 2000 to 2019, according to staff vaccinations or testing.
In fact, nearly one-third of prison staff has not been complying with court-ordered, twice weekly testing requirements.
Meanwhile, CDCR has reported AOO new infections, a number that has doubled over the last week.
Attorneys, family members and prisoner advocates are deeply concerned that low vaccination rates among CDCR employees are causing this new wave of dangerous COVID-19 infections in California prisons.
Campbell has been trying to alert state legislators and others about this crisis.
Campbell is particularly concerned about the outbreak of COVID-19 in the prison hospitals.
CMF just announced that it was canceling all visiting due to the spread of the highly contagious omicron variant.
Several of the housing units are on lockdown; concern for the safety of these highly vulnerable prisoners is mounting. a study released in October 2021 by the Bureau of Justice Statistics.
One thing many of those systems have in common is the spread of the virus through transfers of incarcerated people, from processing facilities and other units, made during a highly contagious pandemic, without testing and/or quarantine protocols.
Build toward abolition Even prior to the pandemic, prisons, jails and detention centers were a public health crisis.
To imprison this many people — most of whom are historically and disproportionately oppressed in this country on the basis of race, gender, disability and class among others — is to make them vulnerable to premature death, because of the organized violence and organized abandonment by the capitalist state.
The organized violence of cops, courts and cages — on stolen Indigenous lands — and systemic hospital closures, mass houselessness and environmental racism are a handful of examples that exemplify inequality.
And such structural conditions are the cause of long-term inequality on this continent since the colonizers first arrived.
Colonizers have imposed class war from their ruling positions since landing from across the Atlantic Ocean, with various means of forced and otherwise exploited labor for the profit of a few, TEAR DOWN THE WALLS SSS EL ever eeeeee bh.
CMF has a long history of activism and involvement stemming back from the early days of the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
This prison had a segregated unit housing prisoners with HIV/AIDS and transgender prisoners.
While the unit no longer exists, CMF now has the only prison hospice in the state.
Last year before there was a vaccine, frequent transfers of prisoners fueled the spread of COVID-19 in California prisons.
Prison abolition groups organized frequent large and militant demonstrations and other actions outside the prison, demanding the immediate release of thousands of elderly and immunocompromised prisoners.
There were no mass releases, but due to prisoner access to vaccines, the pandemic slowed down for a bit in the prisons.
The biggest outbreak now is at Wasco State Prison, one of the state’s reception centers.
Due to the rising infection rate there, Wasco has been closed to new prison admissions.
The second surge of COVID-19 in the prisons will need a new resurgence of activism by outside organizations.
Campbell is hoping that the movement to support the lives of people inside the walls will return.
Prisons, jails and detention centers are one of the most effective tools the ruling class has to impose social control and drive wages down for the entire working class.
From an always-present and ever-growing movement of abolitionists in Texas, rejecting the war on migrants through Governor Greg Abbott’s Operation Lonestar, to each and every one of the 38 countries where the repressive United States model of prisons and policing has been exported, we are fighting for abolition like our lives depend on it.
The United States empire has a violent history of institutionalizing and codifying white supremacy.
They are concentration camps for the poor, oppressed nationalities and dissenters.
Continued on page 7 Charges army with killing migrants Polish soldier deserts By John Catalinotto Polish soldier Emil Czeczko, who was serving on the border under orders to prevent migrants from crossing from Belarus into Poland, fled through a barbed wire fence on Dec. and appealed for asylum in Belarus.
In a television interview, Czeczko said he fled because Polish troops had shot and killed some of the migrants.
Czeczko said that special border troops forced him and other regular Polish soldiers to take part in the executions.
He also told BelTa TV that two Polish volunteers, civilians who had come to aid the migrants, were killed when they tried to intervene.
The migrants fly to Minsk, Belarus, mainly from Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq and Yemen, in an attempt to migrate to the European Union because their families cannot survive at home.
Scenes of Polish troops setting up barbed wire and firing water cannons to stop them were broadcast on television worldwide starting in mid-November.
Czeczko’s accusation that Polish forces used lethal force against the migrants sparked demands from Belarusian and Russian government representatives for an international investigation by the United Nations or human rights organizations related to his charges.
They accused the Polish government of refusing to answer questions about the border incidents.
U.S.and NATO-led or supported wars in the migrants’ origin countries have created an unlivable situation for millions of people.
U.S.-imposed sanctions continue to squeeze the economies of these countries.
For one, she was one of the first women who starred in her own sitcom TV show, “Life With Elizabeth” from 1953-1955.
She was so popular that she produced and starred in her own variety show at the same time.
Little known until now was the fact that she promoted, on her variety show, a 21-year-old Black dancer, Arthur Duncan, not just once but several times.
Not only did he dance but was also interviewed by White before and after his performances.
This was an unprecedented action since Black performers were rarely seen on TV, unless in racist stereotypical and We need prison abolition, not reform Continued from page 6 This is exemplified in this moment of global pandemic, where the rapidly accelerating and completely preventable deaths of people inside and outside prisons are an act of genocide.
We're not building toward reform of The EU has erected barriers to migrants trying to survive.
Hundreds of migrants die each year attempting to cross the Mediterranean Sea when their overloaded boats sink.
Poland is a NATO member, beholden to United States and EU imperialism, and serving them by obstructing migration and providing military bases that threaten Belarus and_ Russia.
Poland’s reactionary government represses opponents and persecutes anyone who defends communism.
Czeczko speaks out The following quote is of excerpts from a report of Czeczko’s interview on BelTa TV, published Dec. in the English section of the Belarus news agency eng.belta. by.
During the interview, Emil Czeczko was asked how those people behaved before the execution, whether they said anything at that moment.
Another question related to whether they had to “finish off” the wounded.
Emil Czeczko said, “I heard that there were people who had to be finished off.
White’s variety show appeared in 1954, an historic year for the pre-Civil Rights Movement, when the United States Supreme Court ruled on the Brown Board of Education case, outlawing segregated schools.
Two years later in 1956, the legendary jazz pianist and singer, Nat King Cole, became the first Black man in history to host a nationally televised variety show.
First Lady of Television” recounts a time when a number of CBS affiliates in the Deep South threatened to ban the showing of White’s show if Duncan continued to be featured on it.
Not only did she refuse to take him off her show, but any of these institutions.
As I have said, soldiers were given a huge amount of alcohol every time they were forced to take part in it.
U.S.-led sanctions continue to squeeze the economies of these countries. y Arthur Duncan, in 1954, and holding hands with Betty White in 2017. she actually gave him even more airtime.
She stated, “They were going to take our show off the air if we didn’t get rid of Arthur, because he was Black.
We support diversity of tactics and the right of the oppressed to self-defense and self-determination by any means.
We are fighting to redirect stolen resources toward human needs like health care, housing, safe water and food and to transform the root causes of January 6, 2022 Page 7 As BelTA reported, the Polish serviceman said during the interview that at some point, cars with border guards began to arrive at his place of service and take his fellow soldiers with them.
And when we asked what for, they told us to reload our weapons and pointed their guns at our heads to force us to shoot.
We caught some man who was by himself, took him to the forest, dug a hole and right in front of our eyes, the border guards shot him in the head,” Czeczko said.
According to Emil Czeczko, volunteers and migrants were among those who were killed by Polish border guards.
He said he witnessed at least two situations when Polish border guards shot a volunteer for asking them where they were taking refugees to.
Mutinies, Soldier Revolts and Revolutions” about rank-and-file GI opposition to the United States role in Vietnam.
We do not know at present if there is widespread opposition among Polish soldiers in carrying out punitive duties against civilians. just 14 episodes.
Not known for being a Civil Rights activist, White’s personal anti-racist stance — before the 1955 horrific lynching of Emmett Till and the heroic Montgomery Bus Boycott took place — should be admired and appreciated along with her unique, comedic genius, now and by future generations to come.
This is another reason why Betty White will always remain a beloved “Golden Girl.” 0 suffering and violence.
What we build together, in the wake of tearing down the walls of capitalist cages, to protect vulnerable members of our class as well as ourselves, will make all the difference.
It is the United States that has come to our home with its missiles and is already standing at our doorstep.
This statement makes it clear who the aggressor is in the latest and continuing confrontation between Russia and United States imperialism.
Yet the United States corporate media reported it as bellicose, threatening, unreasonable, an ominous warning of a Russian invasion of Ukraine.
As United States policy grows more reckless, the corporate media perceives threats everywhere.
United States Secretary of State James Baker in 1990 pledged this to former president of the USSR Mikhail Gorbachev, promising that a reunified German state in the heart of Europe would present no threat to the Soviet Union.
Meanwhile, the United States corporate media reports Russia’s troops within Russia as a buildup on the border with Ukraine.
What President Putin is addressing is the further expansion of NATO through Ukraine’s absorption into an aggressive, U.S.-dominated military alliance.
They aimed to consolidate capitalist property relations under Western economic domination.
For this to succeed they began organizing the state itself, its police and military, under United States military command.
To lock in place this transfer of property, they insisted on NATO membership for each country.
Beyond the imperialist reconquest of Eastern Europe was the effort to totally dominate and loot Russia.
The collapse of the Soviet Union and the separation of former Soviet republics into small, dysfunctional “independent” countries whetted United States imperialist appetites.
During the years Boris Yeltsin was president of Russia, 1991-99, the corrupt bureaucrats and criminals who had seized control of the formerly nationalized industries became oligarchs.
These new rulers sold entire industries for scrap metal to curry favor in the West and enrich themselves.
What Putin has attempted, especially in the past decade, is to stabilize and NATO ACCESSION YEAR Hi Founding NATO Member MB 1952 MB 1955 M1982 M1999 (Czech Republic, Poland & Hungary) 2004 (Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia & Slovenia) 2009 2017 2020 United States and Canada (not shown) are also founding members of NATO. consolidate capitalist property relations in Russia, ending the wild looting and economic chaos of the Yeltsin years.
He has not sought to reestablish socialist property relations but to defend Russian nationalist interests.
Putin blocks looting Outside Russia, the Putin government provided air cover and vital military aid to Syria that halted the imperialist attempt to overthrow the Syrian government.
Russian missiles shipped to Venezuela have provided that government with some needed air cover.
These steps outraged imperialist forces determined to reassert their domination of oil-rich Western Asia and to control all of South America.
What is barely mentioned in all the current reporting of a Russian threat is that the United States is supplying $450 million additional funding in weapons to Ukraine.
Together with United States aid to bring about the reactionary February 2014 coup in Kiev, Ukraine’s capital, that adds up to $2. billion.
Britain, NATO member and United States junior partner, is constructing two naval ports for the pro-imperialist Ukraine regime on that country’s Black Sea shoreline.
One is in the Sea of Azov, that is, between the Russian naval base on the Crimean Peninsula and the rest of Russia.
London is also lending the U.S.-installed government in Kiev $1. billion to pay for an assortment of British-made naval vessels.
Western military officials are discussing deploying new technology, including nuclear-capable missiles, in Poland and Latvia and along Ukraine’s Russia-facing eastern front.
Seeking a deal with imperialism, Gorbachev allowed the annexation of the German Democratic Republic— which the Soviet Union had a legal right to veto.
Gorbachev had received assurances that NATO would not expand after he withdrew all Soviet forces from Eastern Europe, and not just from Baker.
The absorption of the German Democratic Republic into the imperialist bloc, the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 and the dissolution of the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact left NATO as a totally unopposed, aggressive military alliance.
NATO first asserted its military capacity through bombing campaigns and troop deployments to carry out the breakup of the Yugoslav Socialist Federation through the 1990s.
Since then, the United States military has led the NATO military alliance in a series of wars, invasions, bombing campaigns and occupations, including in Iraq, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Libya and Syria and in subversive regime-change operations throughout Eastern Europe, Western Asia and Africa.
In every former socialist country in Eastern Europe, regime changes reinstated capitalism.
With Washington’s assistance, reactionary monarchists, religious clerics, former Nazi collaborators and Wall Street economists flooded into the entire region.
Hundreds of social organizations, NGOs, schools and publications received billions of dollars in United States funding, through USAID programs, to reorganize society on a capitalist basis.
They aggressively rewrote constitutions along with banking and new ownership laws, privatized and sold off major industries, dismembered social services and looted pensions.
To consolidate and protect these brutal thefts of socialized property from potential popular resistance, the imperialists turned to the NATO military alliance.
The collaborators in each capitalist-reorganized country had to join NATO, in the process borrowing to pay for U.S.-made military equipment and pledging thousands of their soldiers to fight in United States wars.
New right-wing governments in Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic applied for and were quickly accepted into the NATO alliance in 1999.
The former Soviet Republics of Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, all bordering Russia, were admitted to NATO in 2004, as were the right-wing governments in Bulgaria, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia.
Albania and Croatia were admitted into the military alliance in 2009, Montenegro in 2017 and North Macedonia in 2020.
United States coup in Ukraine It was the fierce political struggle over Ukraine joining NATO that led to the aggressive U.S.-orchestrated coup in 2014.
The United States government pumped $5. billion into the country to carry out an enormous social engineering campaign and regime-change operation against the elected government.
A Dec., 2013, speech by Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs Victoria Nuland to the U.S.-Ukraine Foundation, a U.S.-funded nongovernmental agency, revealed the price tag for this Ukrainian operation.
But the EuroMaidan Uprising, in Kiev, was led by Right Sektor and neo-Nazi militias.
After months of street protests, these forces literally overran government buildings on Feb., 2014, forcing elected President Viktor Yanukovych and many of his officials to flee for their lives.
Protesting the illegitimate overthrow of their elected president, mass movements in the more industrialized Donbass in Eastern Ukraine and in Crimea held referendums, seeking separation from this right-wing seizure of power in western Ukraine.
Russian forces moved into Crimea to secure Russia’s only warm water port on the Black Sea.
The United States and European Union imposed harsh sanctions on Russia for resisting NATO’s military expansion.
The economic sanctions are especially focused on rupturing Russia’s ability to sell oil and gas to Germany by blocking the Nord Stream 2 natural gas pipeline.
Tying Europe’s energy needs to fracked natural gas from the United States increases United States imperialist leverage against its EU allies, which are also capitalist competitors.
United States always violates agreements The United States government violates treaties at will.
This is imperialist diplomacy, confirmed by hundreds of broken treaties with Indigenous nations within the United States Along with violating its promises regarding NATO expansion, Washington violated two publicly signed international agreements of great importance.
The United States broke the nuclear agreement signed in 2015 along with Iran and Britain, France, Germany, China and Russia and the United Nations Security Council.
Washington is now flagrantly violating the 1979 agreement recognizing the People’s Republic of China as the sole legitimate government of all China including Taiwan.
Breaking these treaties may have unforeseen consequences, causing United States targets to forge alliances.
American Primacy and Its Geostrategic Imperatives,” imperialist strategist Zbigniew Brzezinski warned: “Potentially, the most dangerous scenario would be a grand coalition of China, Russia, and perhaps Iran, an ‘antihegemonic’ coalition united not by ideology but by complementary grievances.” 0 workers.org January 6, 2022 Page 9 Airline CEOs dictate COVID-19 policy By Betsey Piette On Dec., the United States reported a record-breaking number of new COVID19 cases, with 441,278 infections.
As the winter surge in new cases exploded across the country, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration announced it was rescinding an emergency standard adopted in June that had mandated protections for health care workers.
And the new CDC guidelines lack a provision for testing at the end of the isolation period.
While the CDC claims the change “is motivated by science,” many workers, especially in health care and the airline industry, are calling the changes reckless and a further risk to public health.
NNU is calling a National Day of Action Jan. to demand more protection for workers.
HEA | Pw NS hat) A Yiestic ea ce Airline CEOs requested guideline change CDC officials claim that the change was primarily driven by worries that the increasing volume of omicron infections would sideline thousands of police officers, firefighters and other essential workers needed to keep the system functioning.
This hasn’t reached the level of economic catastrophe it did in 2020, but it is still very serious.
Especially serious because hospitals, ambulance and EMT services and fire departments in various parts of the country don’t have enough workers.
Despite daily reports of college and professional athletes sidelined by COVID-19, causing some games to be rescheduled, the CDC has never suggested that fan attendance at these events be limited, as it did in 2020 when the number of daily cases was considerably lower.
Confirming that the guideline change was implemented to serve the bosses’ goal to force workers back to hazardous jobs, several news outlets reported Dec. that Delta Airlines CEO Ed Bastian and other company officials sent a Dec. letter to the director of the CDC requesting the change.
And Airlines for America, a trade group representing Delta, Southwest and United Airlines, wrote to the CDC Dec. arguing in favor of the new guidelines.
Airline officials and bosses from other industries are concerned that the high rate of transmission of the omicron variant would make it impossible to keep businesses running, if guidelines for longer isolation remained in place.
Three subway lines in the city suspended services due to worker shortage.
In 2020, the airlines were given $54 million in federal aid to keep employees on their payroll during the pandemic.
But those company bosses laid off hundreds of thousands of workers, creating a labor shortage in the industry.
Access to testing has been limited from Day One of the pandemic in the U.S., along with failure to provide adequate personal protective equipment for staff and patients.
A corporate-controlled media that hides and distorts facts about the coronavirus has made matters worse.
Gothamist, 70% of the school was in partial quarantine, and there were nine confirmed cases.
When the administration found out that the teachers were planning a sick-out day, they put the school on remote.
Some teachers believed that students should only be allowed to return in person with a negative PCR test.
Only 180,000 students out of 1 mildeaths and long-term impairment of the workers involved are generally disregarded.
The bourgeois politicians and their public health advisers, in managing the response to these problems, firmly insist that the generally available vaccines along with widespread testing will control this pandemic and allow the economy to recover and overcome the labor shortages that afflict their profit-driven system.
President Joe Biden’s speech Dec. reflected his administration’s belief that COVID-19 is here to stay; it can be managed by “patriotically” getting vaccines, and the disruptions caused by social distancing and shutdowns aren’t necessary.
Biden's ‘test-to-stay’ for schools According to the CDC, as of Dec. more than 7. million COVID-19 infections of children have been reported.
One major issue Biden raised was his administration’s adoption of “test-tostay,” which would allow kids who have been exposed to COVID-19 to come back to school, as long as they test negative.
So there was some amount of testing of all students Continued on page 11 Page 10 January 6, 2022 workers.org Dr.
The third Monday in January has been the official King holiday for many workers since January 1986, after many years of mass pressure put on the United States government.
King’s historic role, mainly as the leading nonviolent symbol of the massive Civil Rights Movement, which certainly does have a ring of truth.
His legacy, however, was so much more, especially where workers’ rights are concerned.
His message should not be confined to his famous “I Have a Dream” speech, made at the Lincoln Memorial following the 1963 March on Washington of 250,000 people.
Many signs were carried on that march by workers representing international unions, state federations and central labor councils, the most prominent being the United Auto Workers, a major financial backer of the march, and the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, led by A Philip Randolph.
Five years later, just a few months before his assassination April 4, 1968, Dr.
King came out in support of the 1,300-strong sanitation workers’ strike in Memphis, A tribute to Archbishop Desmond Tutu, friend of Palestine By Susan Abulhawa Our beloved global elder, Archbishop Desmond Tutu, became an ancestor on December 26, passing peacefully amongst his family the day after Christmas at the age of 90.
A Nobel Laureate, moral giant and practitioner of radical love, Tutu was integral to the liberation of South Africa from the racist clutches of the minority white apartheid rule.
And his moral authority has been foundational to international solidarity with the Palestinian struggle.
Baba Desmond Tutu is one of the last of that generation of South African warriors who bequeathed to their people a new nation without a “color bar,” passbooks and other trinkets of apartheid’s systematic racism.
When Nelson Mandela became the first elected Black president of South Africa in 1994, he selected Desmond Tutu to lead the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, a novel national program that attempted to heal the deep trauma that had been inflicted on nonwhite South Africans.
He traveled from one town to the next, WORKERS WORLD “> editorial Desmond Tutu in the town of Beit Hanun in northern Gaza Strip, May 28, 2008.
Tennessee, sparked by the deaths of two Black city workers, Echol Cole and Robert Walker, who had been crushed on the job by a malfunctioning truck.
The city of Memphis — which paid these workers slave wages of 65 cents an hour! — refused to pay any compensation to their families.
In a speech given at a rally of 25,000 sanitation workers, their families and supporters on March 18, 1968, in Memphis, Dr.
You are demonstrating that we can stick together, and you are demonstrating that we are all tied in a single garment of destiny; and that if one Black person suffers, if one Black person is down, we are all down.
But let me say to you tonight, that whenever you are engaged in work that serves humanity and is for the building of humanity, it has dignity, and it has worth.
All labor has dignity.” listening day in and day out to gut-wrenching testimonies from survivors as well as perpetrators.
At times, Tutu himself crumbled into tears under the weight of stories of such inhumanity.
He hoped the TRC would be the requisite catharsis before forgiveness, but instead it was criticized ferociously from all sides.
Survivors relived their pain without restorative justice, while perpetrators were pardoned; and the real masterminds of apartheid were never confronted.
Nonetheless, the TRC was the first of its kind in the world, a way — imperfect though it was — to address the grave injustices without further bloodshed.
He refused to look away from or deny oppression, and he never shied away from confronting oppressors.
But he sought to arrive at justice without further sacrifice from the oppressed.
Archbishop Tutu visited Mumia AbuJamal in 2007, when he was still on death row.
Almost a century ago, a little African boy was born to a small family in a small town where gold mining was the chief industry.
Father was a teacher, and a young boy wanted to follow in his father’s footsteps.
But the politics of white supremacy, known by the term “apartheid,” prevented him from making that choice.
That state decision His spirit reflected a giant forced Desmond Mpilo Tutu to change from teacher to preacher.
Desmond Tutu studied, graduated and was ordained an Anglican priest — and again, a steady climb in the church hierarchy, being named its archbishop in 1986, the Archbishop of Cape Town.
As the anti-apartheid movement swelled in South Africa, so, too, did repression by the state.
And with most militants from the African National Congress, or ANC, driven into exile, the archbishop stepped into the breach, presiding over funeral after funeral and giving voice to the Black oppressed majority of the nation.
He played a pivotal role in speaking out against the racist system of government and suffered arrest and attacks by police, tear gas at protests.
Throughout it all, he stayed true to his religious beliefs, a committed Christian who saw all life as valuable.
He spoke out firmly against violence, whether by the government or the freedom movement.
Martin Luther King Jr. at a march with striking Memphis sanitation workers, March 28, 1968.
King’s goal of building toward the Poor People’s March in the summer of 1968 was to merge the civil rights and economic rights struggles, especially for lowpaid workers like the sanitation workers, as well as the unemployed.
King’s unifying call that “all labor has dignity” is today being carried forth, especially by young workers exploited by the likes of the global behemoths Starbucks and Amazon.
These workers are leading the way for all workers classwide, demanding better working conditions, pay and benefits through union organizing, traditional like the Teamsters and nontraditional like the Amazon Labor Union.
King, who remained a fighter on the front lines for all forms of social justice until the end, when bullets tragically cut short his life.
The world is remembering him, but across mainstream western media outlets, there are convenient omissions.
When asked to compare Israeli apartheid with that of South Africa, he responded without hesitation that Israeli occupation was “far worse” than anything Black South Africans faced under apartheid.
Zionists labeled him an “anti-Semite,” and today they are, along with other white supremacists, celebrating his passing.
Desmond Tutu spoke vehemently against the invasion of Iraq, pleading with governments and the masses to oppose the war.
He advocated passionately for the release of Mumia AbuJamal and for the closing of Guantanamo Bay, a torture chamber for those accused by the United States of terrorism.
On every issue, Desmond Tutu endeavored to be on the side of the oppressed, the weak and wretched, no matter the risk or cost to himself.
He shined light into the dark corners of power; and now the world is a little dimmer without the magnificent brightness of his being.
The writer is an award-winning Palestinian novelist. concerns for justice and freedom, even beyond the borders of South Africa.
The archbishop, lovingly called “The Arch” by his friends and family, called the government violence, repression and separation against the Palestinian people a new form of apartheid.
He called for freedom for the Puerto Rican people from the United States government.
He critiqued the suffering and state violence against the Muslim minority in Myanmar.
And the little priest even visited a man on death row, where he wondered why a man had to be shackled in a little room divided by a glass window where the door was closed, shut, locked and didn’t even have door handles.
The Arch was quiet, serious, a ray of spiritual light in dark places and a joy to meet.
When apartheid fell in the 90s and South Africa became reborn as a democracy, Archbishop Tutu heightened his critique of the new Black government, which he said was getting rich as the people got poorer and poorer.
His passage on this planet was a message of love for the world’s oppressed, no matter where they were.
He struggled for change with his prophetic voice, his sweet humor, his deep love and a boundless sense of compassion.
Desmond Mpilo Tutu, born October 7, 1931, returned to his fathers after 90 summers, an example of love, not fear.
L] workers.org January 6, 2022 Page 11 Queer people and the United States Communist movement, 1950-1969 By Princess Harmony Communists the world over fight for the liberation of the working class and the oppressed.
From the very start, scientific socialism has also fought for the liberation of women from sexist and misogynistic worldviews and actions, ranging from the right to equal treatment under the law to access to abortion and more.
After World War II ended in 1945, by 1947 the United States government had opened a campaign to rid its State Department of all LGBTQ+ people and suspected communists.
In the eyes of reactionaries, these two groups were one, based on the idea that queer people were uniquely susceptible to communist propaganda.
The government developed security guidelines that removed many from their jobs and positions of responsibility.
The groups targeted were LGBTQ+ people, communist and socialist sympathizers, as well as alcoholics and others deemed “dangerous” and a threat to United States government and society.
In the late 1940s and early 1950s, the United States government began a witch hunt against queer people and communists.
He worked with other comrades organizing among the working class in California.
An unfortunate fact, however, was that LGBTQ+ people were not accepted in the CPUSA at the time, following a 1934 rightist decision by Joseph Stalin to deny rights to queer people in the Soviet Union.
Stalin’s position was that queer people were the end result of decadent capitalist ideology.
Previously the Bolshevik government had removed all anti-gay and what are now known as anti-trans laws which had been in place under the tsarist regime.
This unfortunate line didn’t stop queer communist organizing in the United States Five gay men— Harry Hay, Rudi Gernreich, Dale Jennings, Bob Hull and Chuck Rowland — oversaw weekly meetings in Hay’s home.
The others were fellow travelers — members of the movement who were nonparty members.
Its stated goals were to unify gay people, educate society and to get socially aware gay people into leadership in their community.
In the service of that mission, they created questionnaires to study the impact of bigotry on their community.
In many instances, it was the first time queer people, in this case gay men, had ever been asked about their experiences.
They did acknowledge his timeless and important contributions by saying he would always be a friend of the people.
Meanwhile, the left-led Mattachine Society faced intense scrutiny and red-baiting.
Members joining the society were scattered across the political spectrum.
Some were left-wing, but many others were to the right to the point of anti-communism.
The organization essentially lost its revolutionary spirit and ended up damaging the movement.
In the mid-1960s the Mattachine Society and the Daughters of Bilitis (a lesbian organization that was not communist-led) took a rightist position that acting according to heterosexual norms — men and women in rigid masculine and feminine clothing and activities — would make people be more accepting by seeing that LGBTQ+ people are “just like” heterosexuals.
These two early gay-rights groups explicitly rejected gender-nonconformity by dissuading gender-nonconforming people from expressing themselves in that way in their meetings and demonstrations.
But gender-nonconforming people would find revolution in their own way soon enough.
Trans women, queer hustlers and others — tired of being mistreated by the police in the Tenderloin neighborhood — took up cups of hot coffee and glass sugar shakers as weapons against the police.
They were winning until the police redoubled their efforts to crush the rebellion.
While not communist-led, they were supported by revolutionaries in the area.
Little did anyone know that the Compton’s Cafeteria Riot — which came and went without much notice from the rest of the country — would be a portent of revolutionary things to come.
The pandemic economy — sick workers can't do their jobs Continued from page 9 who came into the building.
These narrow requirements limited the amount of COVID-19 infections detected.
I feel limiting the amount detected was most likely the purpose of the system they established.
They have upped the number tested to 20%, presumably of the total kids in the building, since the second change is testing vaccinated as well as unvaccinated students.
Consent suggests that this is intrusive, rather than for public safety.
The city also is refusing to flip the consent issue, meaning they could assume all parents consent, unless the parents fill out a form to withdraw the consent.
But no, the city is assuming the parents do not consent, unless the parents fill out a form agreeing to consent.
Six feet was considered safe at the beginning of this pandemic but not possible in schools.
Three feet distance became the compromise, but even that was more suggestion than enforced policy.
The transmission rate of this variant seems to make distance a factor, a factor not being raised at this time.
The basic problem with keeping the schools open — in-person learning for many reasons is the best way to teach — is that testing has to be coordinated with treatment and prevention.
There are different types of tests, each with their own limitations and restrictions, each potentially providing different information.
The governor and the president and their officials can order 5 million, half a billion, any number of tests, but then these tests have to go to people, be distributed.
People have to be instructed on how to use them, how to report the results.
The teachers and the Parent Teachers Associations need to be involved in any decision-making around how schools respond to COVID-19.
Our pages report on people’s movements here and abroad, to not only inform our readers but to promote those struggles and show solidarity with them.
The WW Supporter Program was launched 44 years ago to help build this unique socialist newspaper.
For annual donations of $60, $120 or $300, members receive a year’s subscription, letters about timely issues and gift subscriptions.
El “juez” del Tribunal Supremo de Estados Unidos, Brett Kavanaugh, form6o parte de la mayoria del tribunal que voto a favor de dejar en pie la ley de Texas contra la justicia reproductiva, que hace ilegal el aborto después de unas seis semanas de embarazo, independientemente de las circunstancias.
La ley permite a un particular en Manifestacion a favor del aborto ante el SCOTUS, Washington, DC, 1 de diciembre.
Num. cualquier estado demandar a cualquiera que busque un aborto o ayude a las personas embarazadas a obtenerlo, y cobrar una recompensa de 10.000 dolares si gana en el tribunal.
En la reciente sentencia, se permite a los proveedores de abortos continuar con una pequena parte de su demanda contra la S.B. 8 (proyecto de ley 8) en un tribunal federal, pero no pueden demandar a los jueces y secretarios del estado o al fiscal general de Texas.
En la practica, la sentencia da luz verde a otros estados, como Florida y Ohio, para que aprueben una legislacion similar.
El alto tribunal habia permitido anteriormente que la ley S.B. 8 entrara en vigor mientras se tramitaban los casos contra ella.
La draconiana ley de Texas ha tenido, y seguira teniendo, el mayor impacto en las personas pobres y de color, aquellas que carecen de los fondos y el transporte necesarios para abortar en otros estados.
El] SCOTUS (Tribunal Supremo de Estados Unidos) se pronunciara el ano que viene sobre una ley antiabortista de Misisipi.
WW-MundoObrero@workers.org 6 de enero 2022 $1 La revolucién entré en La Habana, 1959.
Al hacer que Roe Wade sea esencialmente inaplicable, pone en peligro toda una serie de sentencias a estructura de gobierno y del Estado, la que explica como se han tomado y llevado a cabo estas y otras decisiones que son tan contrarias a la opinion de la mayoria del favor de los derechos pueblo.” civiles.
Continuo funcionarios de los ultima instancia por el explicando que “el protribunales estatales ; 7 ceso de concentracion y al fiscal general del Tribunal Supr. €mOmadas _ del poder en organestado, el Tribunal Zz ismos no democratiinvita efectivamente a fiable para ellos, mas cos.
De hecho, es ese mismo sistema el que otorga a los misoginos descarados el poder constitucional de poner sus sucias manos en los derechos y cuerpos de las mujeres, de los ninos victimas de incesto y de las personas oprimidas por razones de género.
Los trabajadores tienen protecciones en los contratos sindicales y en la legislacion, como el salario minimo, las leyes de Primero de Mayo de 2020 frente al almacén ne Amazon en ATeANn ANIO MUNDO OBRERO* editorial trabajo infantil, las normas de seguridad en el lugar de trabajo y el derecho a organizarse.
Aunque los propietarios de la fabrica de velas Mayfield Consumer Products de Mayfield no pusieron en peligro sus propias vidas, no tuvieron escrupulos para arriesgar las de sus empleados.
Al menos 15 trabajadores de la fabrica que querian volver a casa para ponerse a salvo fueron amenazados con el despido.
El] tornado arraso el edificio, matando a ocho e hiriendo gravemente a muchos mas.
En una demanda en la que solicitan danos compensatorios y punitivos, los abogados de los trabajadores acusan a la empresa de mostrar una “indiferencia flagrante” hacia su seguridad.
Muchos de los trabajadores de la fabrica estan encarcelados o han estado encarcelados.
Mayfield Consumer Products contrata a personas como ayuda temporal, despidiéndolas antes de que termine su periodo de prueba, para luego volver a contratarlas como nuevas personas a prueba.
Se ha despedido a trabajadores por ser epilépticos, tener sobrepeso o estar embarazadas.
La compania Mayfield fue multada anteriormente por violaciones de la seguridad en el trabajo.
Ningun crimen es demasiado grande en la busqueda de ganancias La critica de Dunning al capitalismo se dirigia a empresas de tamano similar a Mayfield.
Esta es, de hecho, la causa fundamental de la catastrofe climatica que ha llevado a un aumento en el numero y la gravedad de los tornados, huracanes, inundaciones y otros desastres que amenazan la vida de los trabajadores.
Yaes hora de que la humanidad -a través de la lucha revolucionariase deshaga del sistema asesino, explotador e impulsor de ganancias llamado capitalismo.
Los valores patriarcales sirven a la clase capitalista, para la que la maternidad es un servicio mas, que proporciona la siguiente generacion de trabajadores explotables.
Despojar a la clase trabajadora y a los oprimidos del poder de decidir cuando y si quieren tener hijos constituye un abominable ataque a los derechos humanos basicos.
La resistencia ya esta adoptando muchas formas, como desafiar al Estado formando redes para ayudar a las personas embarazadas a obtener la atenciOn sanitaria reproductiva que necesitan.
La negacion de la justicia reproductiva a millones de personas, especialmente a los jOvenes, podria ser un punto de inflexion en la lucha de clases en general.
Lo que se necesita son tacticas audaces, militantes, creativas y anticapitalistas.
E] Primero de Mayo de 2006, los trabajadores migrantes celebraron la mayor huelga general de la historia laboral de Estados Unidos.
