Resolving current crisis will show whether OSCE can deal w/conflicts&deliver on security or not,"" Klimkin tweeted after at the Informal Meeting of OSCE Foreign Ministers in Potsdam, Germany, on September 1, 2016.
According to Ukraine's foreign minister, the OSCE needs an effective judicial mechanism to guarantee respect of core values and principles and to bring to justice those who break rules.
If existing ones had worked, Russia wouldn't have brought 'Buk' to Donbas&shot down #MH17,"" Klimkin believes.
He underlined that all sides must fully guarantee the security and safety of the SMM monitors and equipment and ensure their unfettered access throughout the country, including in the conflict area.
Tu-154 crash near Smolensk was Moscow's aim – Polish Defense Ministry On September 2, Polish Defense Minister Antoni Macierewicz said that previously unknown information about the plane crash near Smolensk in 2010, which killed 96 people including Polish President Lech Kaczynski, would be disclosed soon.
We have horrific confessions by members of this commission,"" Macierewicz noted.
As reported earlier, the plane carrying Polish president Lech Kaczynski, along with 96 others, crashed while landing at Severniy airfield in Smolensk due to heavy fog and low visibility.
Polish and Russian aviation experts committee earlier concluded that the main reason for the accident was pilot error.
However, supporters of the largest Polish opposition party, ""Law and Justice"" , whose co-founder was Lech Kaczynski, claim the crash was the result of a deliberately organized attempt on the life of the Polish president, and declared that Polish and Russian authorities had repeatedly tried to conceal this.
The letter was signed by the Parliament Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Head of Parliament's Committee on Foreign Affairs, members of various fractions of the Ukrainian Parliament.
The letter also asks the G20 members to strongly condemn Russia's prosecution of pro-Ukrainian activists, including also Crimean Tatars and to release all imprisoned activists.
The letter in particularly focuses on Deputy Chairman of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People Mr Ilmi Umerov, who was arrested in Crimea in May 2014 on charges for the calls to change the territorial composition of the Russian Federation.
Ukraine, the EU, the U.K. and the United States have all called on Russia to release Crimean Tatar leader Ilmi Umerov.
G20 summit is taking place on 4-5 September in n the city of Hangzhou, China.
On February 26, 2014, Umerov along with other Crimean Tatars organised a demonstration against the occupation of the peninsula.
Later Russian Federal Security Service initiated a criminal case against him.
Last week Umerov felt sick during a court session, but much later was taken to the hospital.
The judge announced Umerov must undergo forensic psychiatric evaluation.
Thus, Umerov was forcibly placed into a mental ward for forensic medical assessment.
According to his lawyers, the conditions in the hospital are harmful for Umerov.
The lawyers say without urgent medical treatment their client could die.
The first time was in 2007 during a Ukrainian lunch at Morosani Hotel in Davos, Switzerland, where Viktor Yanukovych came to speak.
The second time was at a solemn reception in honor of Yanukovych’s 2010 inauguration at the Ukrainian House in Kyiv; Manfort arrived with oligarch Rinat Akhmetov, who demonstratively and politely made way for this inconspicuous American.
The ledger recorded the illegal cash Yanukovych and his entourage spent on politics.
Manafort’s name appears in the explanatory notes of twenty-two transactions over five years, for an estimated total of $12. million.
For example, the infringement on the rights of Russian speakers that became a major controversy during the 2010 presidential election did not actually exist.
Manafort was recommended to Yanukovych by Akhmetov, Yanukovych’s lifelong business and political partner.
Thanks to the oligarch’s referral to his Donetsk prot&#233;g&#233;, Manafort became a consultant to Yanukovych after his electoral defeat in 2004 and organized four election campaigns, including one presidential and three parliamentary races.
For example, when Yulia Tymoshenko’s conviction began to tarnish Yanukovych’s image in the West, the strategy became to clean up his reputation by denying political motivation in her criminal case.
For that reason, the presidential administration called in influential American lawyers from Skadden law firm, including Gregory B Craig, former counsel to President Bill Clinton.
Today, this episode has formed the basis of a criminal case against former Minister of Justice Oleksandr Lavrynovych.
The name Paul mentioned in the note is Manafort; and the initials SV refers to the former head of the Yanukovych administration, Serhiy V Lyovochkin.
In addition to advising Yanukovych and his inner circle, Manafort was in contact with United States ambassadors, trying to convey Yanukovych’s vision to them, even though he had not registered as a foreign lobbyist with the United States Department of Justice, a glaring violation of the Foreign Agents Registration Act.
After Yanukovych’s collapse, Manafort lost popularity, although he tried to stay in Ukraine a little longer.
He helped the oligarch Dmytro Firtash, who was arrested on a United States warrant in Austria and prosecuted for bribery, get off scot-free.
In recent weeks, Kyiv has been surrounded by American journalists who came to trace Manafort’s history.
The exposure of his corrupt ties to Yanukovych has become a key topic in the United States presidential election.
Realizing that Manafort’s presence on Donald Trump’s campaign staff was hurting the candidate’s ratings, the toxic political technologist was let go.
Manafort ostensibly resigned, and was thanked by the Republican presidential nominee for his work.
Manafort’s name appears next to payments to Ukrainian politicians, judges and members of the Central Election Commission, and journalists.
Many of those who were in opposition to Yanukovych are among the recipients of those funds.
Sergii Leshchenko is a member of parliament in Ukraine and former deputy editor of Ukrayinska Pravda.
In 2015, Chinese and Russian intelligence services were the most active in the Czech Republic.
Chinese diplomatic, intelligence and economic entities focused on drawing on their success from 2014 and actively worked on extending and maintaining Chinese influence in Czech politics and economy.
In 2015, the BIS did not identify any significant activities of intelligence services of other former Soviet Union countries or of partner intelligence services.
As in previous years, Russian intelligence services were the most active foreign intelligence services in the Czech Republic.
A large number of Russian intelligence officers were active under diplomatic cover of the Russian Embassy.
Intelligence officers under diplomatic cover were active also at the Embassies of other states; however, the number of Russian intelligence officials was much higher.
Such clandestine behavior concealing the affiliation to an intelligence services clearly signals activities threatening the security and other interests of the Czech Republic.
Regardless of the ongoing Ukrainian crisis and tense Russia-EU/NATO relations, Russia focused on activities aimed at maintaining and strengthening Russian positions and outlooks in Czech power engineering.
Furthermore, Russian economic, scientific and technological espionage continued in 2015 in the Czech Republic.
The above-mentioned activities pose a threat to the Czech Republic, EU and NATO not only in relation to the Ukrainian and Syrian conflicts.
The infrastructure created for achieving these goals will not disappear with the end of the two conflicts.
It can be used to destabilize or manipulate Czech society or political environment at any time, if Russia wishes to do so.
The central European country has a “disproportionate” number of Russian spies on its territory, the Prague-based BIS said in its annual report Thursday.
The agents are focusing particularly on spreading false information about armed conflicts in Ukraine and Syria, as well as trying to erode relationships among European countries, it said.
The tactics included relativization of truth and objectivity, and promoting the view that all sides lie, the report said.
Across the EU, Kremlin lobbyists, America-haters, and those the Germans call Putinversteher disseminate justifications and apologies for Russia’s absorption of the Black Sea peninsula and its hybrid war in the Donets Basin, also known as the Donbas.
Such “explanations” partly succeed because most citizens of the West are, in fact, not particularly interested in Crimea, the Donbas, or Ukraine as a whole.
Ukraine inherited the world’s third-largest arsenal of nuclear warheads when it gained its independence in 1991.
Most of the nuclear weapons left behind by the Soviet regime in Ukraine, to be sure, were not deployable, since the launch codes remained in Moscow and Ukraine had no technology to guide its inherited rockets.
But in theory Kyiv could have reset the fire-control systems, and built or acquired necessary additional technology to make its nuclear arsenal at least partially operational.
In 1991, the Ukrainian armed forces possessed numerous intercontinental ballistic missiles, long-range bombers and their payloads, as well as additional nuclear warheads—according to estimates by the United States Natural Resources Defense Council, a total of 4,025 units, or 15 percent of the former Soviet nuclear arsenal.
At this point, in other words, Ukraine had far more atomic weapons than the United Kingdom, France, and China combined.
Even if Ukraine had retained and made operational only a fraction of these weapons, today it would be a much-feared nuclear power.
Under diplomatic pressure from Moscow and Washington, Ukraine turned over all of its nuclear weapons to Russia after signing the Lisbon Protocol in 1992, which obligated ex-Soviet countries to surrender their arsenals.
In Kyiv, there was already then suspicion that the northeastern neighbor could one day seek to exploit the defenselessness of “Little Russia,” as Russian nationalists often refer to Ukraine.
Three of the five did so in a multilateral document signed with Ukraine; two issued unilateral declarations of their governments.
Moscow has now not only trampled the 1994 memorandum and numerous other multilateral agreements on the inviolability of European borders, but flagrantly breached a number of bilateral agreements between Moscow and Kyiv.
In the case of Crimea, it went so far as officially declaring an annexation and executing it by military force—a type of violent border-shift that has become rare since 1945.
The West remains, even after introduction of its much-praised sanctions, Russia’s most important trade and investment partner.
With the Russian economy and state budget structurally dependent on oil, the so far undiminished energy imports from Russia have made the EU an involuntary and indirect, but significant financial co-sponsor of Moscow’s foreign policy adventures in Ukraine, Georgia, Moldova, and Syria.
The situation appears even more curious in light of the fact that oil is fungible.
EU countries could, without substantial difficulty, replace most imports from Russia through contracts with other oil exporters.
However, the EU has not taken this step because of a mundane combination of obliviousness and venality.
So far the international community has punished Russia with only moderate export and individual sanctions, while the other BRICS countries have since actually courted rather than condemned the Kremlin.
Ukraine is receiving significant Western political and economic assistance, but up to this point little direct and official military support.
Many observers see a permanently frozen conflict in the Donbas as the most likely ultimate outcome, although the Ukrainian state would thus lose additional territory the five powers assured in 1994 would remain inviolable.
The NPT seems to be in as much jeopardy as Ukrainian territory as a result of Russian aggression.
In the case at hand, three atomic Security Council members grant a disarming country explicit and written security assurances in exchange for dismantling its nuclear weapons.
One of these great powers, however, 20 years later unilaterally declares them invalid while the others react with pathetic declarations and minor sanctions.
If a member of the Security Council is allowed to expand into the territory of a neighboring country, then the international nonproliferation regime becomes hollow, little more than a vehicle for the official atomic powers to advance their own agendas.
Moreover, a key reason for the West’s lack of military support for Ukraine lies in Russia’s overkill capacity and the fear of a third world war acutely felt by many Europeans.
This means that implementation of the nonproliferation regime has, in the Ukrainian case, caused the opposite of its intended aim.
Nonproliferation stipulations specified in the NPT and the special privileges Russia enjoys as an official nuclear weapon state ratifier combine to become instruments of a coldly calculated utilization of weapons of mass destruction to achieve an illegal military occupation and secure a scandalous territorial expansion.
As a result of Russia’s annexation of Crimea and its “hybrid war” in the Donbas, the present-day nonproliferation regime, with its exceptional treatment of the permanent Security Council members, could in the future, paradoxically, encourage rather than stem the construction or acquisition of weapons of mass destruction.
France reasserts its commitment to respect the independence and sovereignty of Ukraine in its current borders, in agreement with the principles of the final Helsinki Act and the Paris Charter for a New Europe.
France reminds its attachment to the principles of the CSCE according to which borders cannot only be modified through peaceful means and mutual agreement, and the participating States refrain from using threats or force either against the territorial integrity or the political independence of a State, or through any other means incompatible with the goals of the United Nations.
Worse, China is amplifying the corrosion of the international security system in what amounts to a Euro-Asian side game it has played since the beginning of the Ukrainian crisis.
Beijing has avoided taking a clear position on Russia’s conduct, and abstained from the spring 2014 UN General Assembly vote condemning the annexation of Crimea.
Behind the scenes, the Chinese are trying to extract the greatest possible political and economic benefit from the discord between Moscow and the West.
Beijing purposefully ignores the fact that Ukraine possessed nuclear potential that exceeded China’s arsenal many times over when it was handed a Chinese governmental declaration in support of Ukrainian territorial integrity and political sovereignty, similar to the French one, in December 1994.
China, as a powerful Security Council member, has thus strengthened the perception that the NPT will be ignored by the official atomic powers when it comes to asserting their national interests at the expense of non-nuclear states.
Andreas Umland is a senior research fellow at the Institute for Euro-Atlantic Cooperation, in Kyiv, and general editor of the book series “Soviet and Post-Soviet Politics and Society,” published by ibidem Press in Stuttgart.
United States President Barack Obama and Russian President Vladimir Putin had a longer-than-expected discussion on Monday about whether, and how, they could agree on a ceasefire deal in war-torn Syria, a senior United States administration official said.
Ukraine has arrested a man driving into territory held by pro-Russian separatists with thousands of United States dollars and millions of Russian rubles in cash, Ukraine’s defence forces announced on Facebook on Sunday.
Separatist militant groups in the regions are considered Russian-backed terrorist groups by Ukraine, however Moscow has repeatedly dismissed evidence that they are arming the groups or deploying Russian forces in their ranks.
The driver, a Ukrainian national, was stopped in a black Chevrolet Lacetti on Sunday, near the military checkpoint of Zaytsevo, Donetsk region.
He was allegedly heading towards the rebel-held town of Horlivka and a search of the gas-powered vehicle found stacks of cash stuffed in the fuel tank.
Bills of 10 million Russian rubles and $100,000 dollars, strapped together with elastic bands, were found in the car and the man was taken into custody.
This was declared by the USA State Department’s Coordinator for Sanctions Policy Daniel Fried in an interview with Delfi.
In the case of the Crimea, I can confirm that the United States will never recognize the accession.
I remember this very well, I was there together with President Clinton,"" Fried stressed.
According to him, the United States are determined to insist on compliance with the Minsk agreements, but their implementation still remains under question.
He also agrees with Ukraine’s position that Russia has not been fulfilling its part of the arrangements.
According to them, earlier the FBI released information in the U.S.A. with a list of all the IP-addresses that were used for committing cyber-attacks and directed security staff to monitor for signs of hacking into systems using the same pattern.
So far, NABU detectives are limited in their ability to intercept communications during their investigations; they have to work through the Security Service of Ukraine, which significantly increases the risk of confidential information being leaked and substantially affects the effectiveness of their investigations.
Providing a legal basis for the creation of specialized anti-corruption courts.
The establishment of a Supreme Anti-Corruption Court is provided for by a new law that was adopted together with constitutional amendments regarding the judiciary on June 2, 2016.
The effectiveness of NABU and the Specialized Anti-Corruption Prosecutor’s Office in prosecuting corrupt officials largely depends on the courts.
The creation of special anti-corruption courts for top corruption cases is crucial; judges should be selected transparently through open competition with the participation of representatives from international organizations.
In addition, special security measures should be put into place to protect anti-corruption judges’ lives and families.
Adopting a new law, “On the High Council of Justice,” without shortcomings.
However, the version discussed on July 27 contains a number of significant drawbacks that would allow current problems to continue for years.
In particular, the requirement that any candidate for the High Council of Justice have ten years of experience as a judge makes it impossible for new blood to enter the council.
Moreover, the bill jeopardizes the HCJ’s transparency, fairness, and efficiency when considering disciplinary cases against judges, and allows them to avoid being held accountable for their misconduct; it also provides no mechanism for responding to judges’ complaints about undue interference with their duties.
The bill should be adopted only after these shortcomings are corrected.
The terms of office for twelve of the fifteen CEC members expired on June 1, 2014, but they remain in their positions.
The reboot of the CEC is the first step in comprehensive electoral reform, which also includes the introduction of an open list proportional electoral system, one of the parliamentary majority's key commitments.
This bill aims to define the formation, organization, and legal status of the National Commission for State Regulation of Energy and Public Utilities, known as the Energy Regulator, and provide it with the powers necessary to implement its agenda in accordance with EU standards.
Activists demand that the bill be amended for the second reading to include provisions on a full reboot of the commission and introduction of market-level salaries for commission staff.
This package of bills will simplify the process for establishing capable decentralized communities, and will increase their number.
In addition, subsequent bills will ensure adequate funding of the communities considered capable by the government, and allow their local self-governing bodies to implement urban planning and develop the necessary documentation.
This bill establishes transparent, comprehensible, and predictable approaches to the calculation of fines by the Antimonopoly Committee for violations of economic competition; it also eliminates discrimination, protects businesses' interests, and increases Ukraine’s investment attractiveness.
Ukraine is committed to implement these reforms through the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement.
This bill provides for comprehensive healthcare reform by creating a network of autonomous state and municipal healthcare establishments.
This bill creates a fair pension system by moving to a single principle of pension calculation.
It improves the pay-as-you-go system by abolishing non-relevant payments; it also introduces a defined contribution system of pension insurance that will allow people to determine for themselves the level of their income after retirement, reduce the Pension Fund deficit financed from the state budget, and facilitate de-shadowing of citizens’ incomes.
The bill received a negative review by the Rada’s Scientific Experts Office, and was approved on July 7 with a gross procedural violation.
But in 2016, the Ukrainian issue is repeatedly being raised on the sidelines of the G20 Summit.
The meeting of leaders of the world’s top 20 economies, where G20 will discuss matters of building an innovative, healthy, coherent and inclusive global economy, opened in Sunday, September 4, in the Chinese city of Guangzhou.
The annual G20 summit is traditionally devoted to the global economic challenges.
But it is no secret that the heads of G20 states will also most certainly use this site to discuss geopolitical issues.
In 2016, despite the fact that Ukraine is not part of G20, the “Ukraine issue” is being actively discussed at the summit.
Ukraine’s Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin back in late August has already said that, given that the G20 Summit is to deal with the issues of global and financial stability, and the ""problem of the Russian aggression against Ukraine is a fundamental challenge to this stability,"" Ukraine, albeit not officially, will take its share of the summit’s agenda.
Moscow claimed that the summit in China could bring closer the removal of anti-Russian sanctions and lead to concessions on Ukraine on part of the EU and United States leaders.
As early as August 23, the Kremlin press service reported that disseminated information that, based on a telephone conversation between the Russian president, French president and German Chancellor, they intended to hold a joint meeting in Guangzhou to discuss the situation in Ukraine.
On August 29, Putin’s spox Dmitry Peskov said there was no final confirmation that such meeting was scheduled.
A few days later, Russian president’s aide Yuriy Ushakov said that there would actually be no meeting between the leaders of Germany, France and Russia in Normandy format on the summit’s sidelines.
Moreover, according to him, it was Merkel and Hollande who offered to limit the meetings to a bilateral format.
Therefore, Putin will confront the Ukrainian question at all bilateral meetings...""said first vice-speaker of the Verkhovna Rada, an envoy to the humanitarian subgroup of the Trilateral Contact Group Iryna Gerashchenko.
A Ukrainian diplomat, director of the department of international relations at Maidan of Foreign Affairs Foundation Oleksandr Khara shares this opinion.
He says that they are so ‘great’ that they choose to only speak with the powers that be,” he said.
While Putin sees Ukraine as some under-state, the Kremlin’s pocket media could not cover the Ukrainian issue, which is actually being raised at the meetings in China, any other way than at an angle of the Ukrainian president not being invited to the dialogue.
However, he said, the Ukraine’s Western partners of Ukraine would have never allowed for the meeting in the Russia-announced format because their standing values and policies differ hugely from those of Vladimir Putin.
Actually, this is why special attention should be paid to the bilateral meetings with the Russian leader.
One of these extremely important meetings was one between Putin and his American counterpart, United States President Barack Obama.
According to Dmitry Peskov, this meeting mainly covered the situation in Syria, but Ukraine was discussed as well.
However, according to the Center for Civil Society Studies CEO Vitaly Kulik, the mere fact that the Obama-Putin meeting has taken place is already “good”, because the Russian leader is still a no-handshake man.
The political scientist believes that during Obama's meeting with Putin such topics were discussed as the treats of escalation in Donbas, the implementation of the Minsk agreements by Russia, as well as the situation in Syria, and deterring terrorism.
Kulik is convinced that Obama has sent a clear signal to Putin indicating the strategic line of the State Department, which will not change even after a new president takes over the White House, whoever it may be.
At the same time, according to Kulik, the Ukrainian issues are not a priority at the G20 Summit.
Oleksiy Haran’ also believes that the Kremlin's statements about ""a good meeting"" should not be exaggerated.
According to him, the important thing now is that Ukraine managed not to weaken its position with regard to Russia.
It should be recalled that on September 1, the United States Treasury has put another 17 individuals and 20 companies into the sanctions lists drawn up in connection with the Crimea annexation and Russian aggression against Ukraine.
In particular, those were the contractors of the construction of the Kerch bridge – the passage planned to connect mainland Russia with the occupied peninsula.
Also there were officials and representatives of the law enforcement agencies in the temporarily occupied Crimea, and representatives of the Donbas militants.
By the way, Ukraine was also discussed in other formats on the sidelines of the summit.
In particular, the issue was raised during the meeting of Barack Obama with German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Francois Hollande.
But, according to Haran’, given that both France and Germany have already started talking about the primacy of security issues, this might be related to the Ukrainian position.
In turn, Vitaly Kulik believes that this meeting could have on its agenda the issue of dynamics of the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
Since the existing format of Minsk does not satisfy the parties, while the Normandy format is moving ahead too rough, it is possible that there is an ongoing search of the third format.
This could also be the subject of talks at the G20 Summit,"" the expert said.
Returning to the subject of the implementation of the Minsk agreements, it was discussed during the bilateral meeting between Angela Merkel and Vladimir Putin.
Moreover, journalists also took note of Putin's attempt to show signs of ""courtesy"", which failed to amuse Frau Merkel.
In fact, the president of the Russian Federation wondered whether the Chancellor was tired.
Ukraine's male chess team won a victory over the Russians getting closer to the medal stand.
Ukraine, China, Azerbaijan, the Netherlands, Belarus, and India are currently leading.
Having defeated the French team, being amongst the four leaders in the standings.
