Ethnic conflict; civil war; Russia is currently unable to achieve a friendly and stable regime in Kyiv and state failure; state fragility; thus hedges against the consolidation of an unfriendly pro-Western and international conflict stable regime by maintaining its control over parts of eastern Ukraine and management; conflict solidifying the dependence of local regimes there on Russian support.
This settlement gives Russia the opportunity to maintain the current status quo or settle for re-integration terms through which Russia can sustain long-term influence over Ukraine’s domestic and foreign policy.
Introduction The crisis in Ukraine since 2013 and its local, regional, and global ramifications indicates a return to the dynamics of violent state fragmentation prevalent in the early 1990s.
More strategically now than then, Russia is using violent civil conflict in countries in its so-called Near Abroad as a means to extend its own influence in the post-Soviet space and simultaneously to reduce that of the West.
The conflict in the Donbas area of Ukraine, from this perspective, potentially foreshadows a more fundamental transformation of Russia’s strategic behavior and illustrates how Russia may use different tactics of societal destabilization and covert occupation as a part of its military and security doctrine to manage a regional security complex that is critical to both its identity and ability to retain great power status and the capability to act globally.
Although largely shaped by Moscow, in some cases for more than two decades, these conflicts exist within a broader regional and global geopolitical context that is not always or entirely under Moscow’s control.
This external dimension has undergone far-reaching shifts with the consolidation and strengthening of Russia as a regional power with an ambition to play a dominant role in its Near Abroad and beyond, and increasingly with the military capabilities and political will to do so.
The emerging and re-emerging violent conflicts in what the EU and NATO consider their eastern neighborhood thus represent a major challenge to the West and its policies in the region.
Approaches designed to promote stability and peace through comprehensive social, economic, and political transformation and a geopolitical re-orientation of the countries in this now severely contested space towards the EU and NATO, albeit without any clear membership perspective, face a resolute challenge in the form of Russia’s promotion of its own version of influence-seeking qua supporting and establishing pro-Russian regimes and locking them into social, political, and economic dependencies through closer, Moscow-centered regional integration across much of the post-Soviet space.
Our focus in the following analysis is on understanding what drives Russian policy in eastern Ukraine.
At the same time, Ukraine suffers from systemic social, political, and economic crises, institutional weaknesses, and internal divisions that are enabled by competing vectors of linkages between different parts of Ukrainian society and their respective eastern and western counterparts and exacerbated by the exercise of great power leverage.
Drawing on the existing literature on Russian policy in the near abroad (e.g.
This has resulted in the creation of two new Russian-backed de facto states in the post-Soviet space that provide Russia with leverage over Ukraine and its Western partners and simultaneously serves as a “placeholder” before an opportunity may arise in the future for establishing a stable pro-Russian regime.
We demonstrate that the set of destabilization policies pursued by Russia are tools directed both at elites and society and aimed at the temporary dispersion of power in order to facilitate the replacement of incumbent local elites in Donbas with new, pro-Russian elites relying on a support base of hitherto marginalized, but newly empowered social groups.
This, in turn, has been implemented along with the gradual and strategic escalation of covert forms of occupation in eastern Ukraine—nomadic, creeping, and consolidating occupation—which have allowed Russia to establish a firm hold on parts of Donbas that it has used to prevent the establishment of a stable, legitimate, and pro-Western regime in Kyiv.
First, we develop a theoretical framework for understanding Russian strategy in the neighborhood and identify a suitable methodology for applying it to the single case study of the Ukrainian conflict.
We then carry out our case study using a chronological approach tracing the processes that underpin the evolution and implementation of Russian strategy and its results on the ground.
We conclude with a summary of our findings and offer some cautious reflections on policy implications.
Bader, Grävingholt, and Kästner argue that authoritarian regional powers have an interest in being surrounded by other autocratic regimes.
Yet, equally, autocratic regimes have an overarching interest in stability.
Thus, while there is a clear causal link between the rise of authoritarian powers, such as Russia, and the slowing down of democratization (Puddington 2007; Diamond 2008; Kagan 2008; Bader, Grävingholt, and Kästner 2010), as long as a stable domestic environment prevails, high incentives exist for presumptive regional or global hegemons to favor the continuation of the status quo, regardless of the prevailing regime type.
Instability, especially in a contested neighborhood, threatens this goal.
In analogy to the global competition argument that the United States and USSR viewed the colonial and postcolonial world as a field of battle in which the competition had all the characteristics of a zero-sum game, in which even the slightest gain in presence or influence for one side was seen as transforming immediately into a comparable loss of presence or influence for the other , Russian policies should, thus, prioritize influence over stability,e. seek the establishment, restoration, and/or maintenance of a regime in Ukraine that is aligned to Moscow, rather than the West.
The stability and “friendliness” Russia needs can be achieved either by “soft” or “hard” power, or a combination of both.
Like other post-Soviet countries, Ukraine is an important part of the neighborhood for Russia.
Thus, Russia is interested in a predictable, stable, and manageable Ukraine.
This goal can be achieved through promoting the rise and stability of a friendly,e. pro-Russian political regime.
Yet, developments in Ukraine and elsewhere in the post-Soviet space have demonstrated that friendly stability is not always achievable.
At the same time, we would expect a Russian approach aimed at creating a situation in which the sustainable realization of its interests remains a viable future option, for example through securing influence in and over Ukraine.
The current situation in Ukraine would thus appear the logical outcome of a strategy that, while not immediately achieving the preferred outcome of a stable and friendly neighborhood, “settles” for a temporary second-best result of preventing the worst-case scenario of a stable and hostile pro-Western country in the neighborhood.
This is a critical issue that connects our research question about the drivers of Russian policy in eastern Ukraine and our theory to our methodological approach, and thus ultimately determines the extent to which we can draw credible inferences from our analysis.
Reflecting on these expected observations also enables us to determine likely observations that we would make if our hypothesized logic of competitive influence-seeking were not true.
When determining our data requirements in line with observations that we can assume would confirm or disconfirm our hypothesized logic of competitive influence-seeking, we also need to consider the research context in which we gather our data.
We now consider these issues in turn as we specify our methodology and, in particular, justify our methods of data collection and analysis.
To begin with our expected observations, we should, first, be able to identify key moments in the development of the crisis in Ukraine that created opportunities and need for Russian responses to what the Kremlin would have perceived as events and processes detrimental to its objectives.
At each of these key moments, we should be able to see a change in policies, in particular, as it became clear that the preferred goal of a stable and friendly regime in Kyiv became unattainable.
Put differently, there should be an observable shift in policies towards achieving the second-best outcome of preventing a stable but unfriendly regime in Ukraine.
Given the logic outlined above, Russian policies should have shifted more and more towards creating a situation in which Kyiv is denied full sovereignty over its territory, while strengthening Moscow’s hold over separatist-controlled territories and/or simultaneously using the possibility of some form of partial conflict settlement as a means to destabilize the Ukrainian Government and further weaken and at times paralyze state institutions, while keeping alive the various divisions in Ukrainian politics and society that contribute to this institutional fragility.
Here, our logic of competitive influence-seeking would lead us to expect observations that would demonstrate the increasing extent to which Moscow was prepared to defend what it perceived as its vital security interests, including the extension of effective political control over more territory, keeping real the possibility of escalating civil war, and even major armed conflict between Russia and Ukraine.
Throughout this process, we should simultaneously be able to observe a Russian approach that would seek to achieve maximum possible influence in and over Ukraine, both directly and indirectly.
Direct influence could, for example, be secured through the use of military and economic tools, and indirect influence might be sought through securing representation of Russian proxies in Ukrainian politics as part of negotiations on the settlement of the conflict.
The most obvious disconfirmation of the way in which we have conceptualized our logic of competitive influence-seeking would be an absence of Russian policies that can be presumed to seek the prevention of a stable and unfriendly regime in Kyiv in the absence of any possibility to achieve stable and friendly neighbor.
In line with established standards of good practice in case study research, we rely on the textual analysis of relevant documents11, official statements,12 and participant observation13 and key informant interviews14 as our primary sources for data collection, as these allow us to utilize co-variation and process tracing (George and Bennett 2005; Bennett and Checkel 2014) as our main methods of data analysis.
This enables us to establish a thick analytical narrative that maximizes data reliability through triangulation and minimizes risks to interlocutors.
Using multiple sources also allowed us to compensate for limited access to policymakers in Donbas and in Russia, as did the use of experts in universities and think tanks elsewhere in Russia and Ukraine who have a particular familiarity with Russian policy and the evolving situation in Donbas.
Thanks to long-standing networks and contacts across the political spectrum in and beyond Kyiv and Donetsk, we were also able to conduct a number of interviews with internally displaced persons from Donbas who were evacuated with local government institutions, universities, and other organizations formerly based in now rebel-controlled territories.
We have not privileged any individual source or type of source in terms of weighing the evidence they provide, but rather use the mix of sources to which we have had access to offer a well-substantiated argument in which our claims are corroborated by more than one source and type of source in every instance.
Given the significance of the Ukrainian case and of Russia-West relations in the contested neighborhood more generally, this is clearly of importance for policy-making in terms of developing scenarios for future developments in this region and in this relationship and in terms of offering policy recommendations.
Failed agreements as key moments in the destabilization process The negotiation of the four agreements that have been concluded in the context of the Ukrainian crisis—the Kyiv Agreement of February 2014, the Geneva Agreement of April 2014, and the two Minsk Agreements of September 2014 and February 2015—are the key moments that we use to trace relevant developments, respectively, in the periods before, between, and after them to illustrate the evolution of Russian policy.
As we demonstrate below, each agreement saw a marked increase in provisions that would have strengthened Russian influence in Ukraine, and each period following the signing and partial or non-implementation of the political agreements concluded was characterized by gradual escalation of Russian destabilization of Ukraine.
As one of our interlocutors put it, “Russia’s strategic goal is to maintain control over its Near Abroad.
First we summarize the provisions in each agreement to substantiate our point that they represent an increasingly pro-Russian set of provisions extending the degree to which Russia would have been able to exert influence in Ukraine.
This confirms in some empirical detail our prima facie observation of the existence of key moments in the evolution of the Ukraine crisis and the qualitative differences between them.
Second, we offer a more detailed analytical narrative that traces the escalation of Russian policies towards Ukraine in response to each failed agreement.
This provides the detailed evidence of Russia’s policy of destabilization,e. denying the government in Kyiv any opportunity to consolidate its power and authority.
Our analytical narrative also illustrates how policy escalation and “improved” terms in each agreement go hand-in-hand.
Russia’s escalation tactics forced Kyiv to offer ever more concessions that were politically extremely controversial and undermined the government’s legitimacy—domestically as a result of the concessions made, and internationally due to its inability and unwillingness to implement them.
The purpose of the following section is to establish, by way of a textual analysis, why we think that they each represent a distinct step in Russia’s approach to the Ukrainian crisis and illustrate an increasingly more hard-line approach by Russia to securing its influence in Ukraine.
The Kyiv Agreement was concluded on 21 February 2014 between then Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych and three leaders of the parliamentary opposition—Vitaliy Klichko, Oleh Tyahnibok, and Arsenij Yatseniuk—witnessed by foreign ministers of France, Poland, and Germany.
The agreement establishes a period of transition until the end of 2014, encompassing a government of national unity formed by the signatory parties, constitutional reform aimed at a better balance of powers between parliament and president, and presidential elections following the adoption of a new constitution.
This would have provided for a managed transition during which Russia’s main ally at the time, President Yanukovych, would have shared power with the parliamentary opposition.
The outcome of the transition, however, would have been open ended in terms of both the constitutional nature of Ukraine and its next president.
Russia’s limited enthusiasm for the agreement is, thus, not difficult to understand, but in the actual course of events, the fatal blow was dealt by the extra-parliamentary Maidan opposition who rejected the agreement.
Having also lost the support of his own power base,17 Yanukovych found himself in an unsustainable situation and fled to Russia.
This clearly represented a significant problem for Moscow, as it now was left without a major source of influence in Kyiv and with no clear pathway to regain any either, as the timeline initially envisaged would have kept open a path for Moscow to have at least some indirect influence over Ukrainian politics through securing favorable terms in a constitutional reform process whose conduct and outcome would have involved the participation of pro-Russian forces.
A statement by the Russian Foreign Ministry consequently noted, e are surprised that several European politicians have already sprung to support the announcement of presidential elections in Ukraine this May, although the agreement of 21 February envisages that these elections should take place only after the completion of the constitutional reform.
It is clear that for this reform to succeed all the Ukrainian political forces and all regions of the country must become its part, but its results should be approved by a nationwide referendum.
The latter is also a recurring theme in official statements when it comes to Russia pushing for direct negotiations between the government in Kyiv and the de facto authorities in Donbas.
A statement by the Russian Foreign Ministry on 13 April, for example, emphasizes the need to “immediately start a true, national dialogue with equal participation of all the regions in the interests of the organization of swift and radical constitutional reform,”20 while later on references abound drawing parallels to national dialog processes elsewhere, such as in Afghanistan, Libya, Iraq, Yemen, Mali, and South Sudan and argue that in Ukraine, too, the government should directly engage with opposition forces in Donbas.
Similarly, the endorsement of a leading role for the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission and the committing of US, EU, and Russian monitors ensures a continuing “legal” Russian foothold in the crisis in Ukraine, while paving the way towards internationalized monitoring, and thus stabilization and entrenchment, of an emerging boundary line within Ukraine.
Through the constraints that this placed on Ukraine’s sovereignty, alongside the disarmament requirements for “all illegal armed groups” (thus including Ukrainian “volunteers” who had borne the brunt of the fighting until then), Russia laid the foundations for a potentially emerging de facto state in Donbas before this appeared as a seriously pursued option in the next stage of the conflict.
With militias in the Donbas region refusing to disarm and to end their occupation of government facilities, there was no progress on constitutional reform, and the activities of the OSCE mission became the only element of real implementation.
This triggered a renewed international effort towards a settlement resulting in the first Minsk Agreement of 5 September 2014, concluded under the auspices of the so-called Trilateral Contact Group consisting of representatives of the OSCE, Russia, Ukraine, and, notably, the separatists.
The marked qualitative change in Minsk I, compared to previous agreements, is the specific stipulation to “implement decentralization of power, including by means of enacting the ‘Law of Ukraine with Respect to the Temporary Status of Local Self-Government in Certain Areas of the Donetsk and the Luhansk Regions” and to “ensure the holding of early local elections” in accordance with this law.
If implemented, this so-called temporary status of the separatist-controlled areas and the political legitimation of separatist leaders through local elections would have fundamentally altered the situation in Ukraine and established a de facto state in all but name, albeit with yet unspecified local powers and influence at the center.
This was again an indication of an approach aimed at strengthening the representation of pro-Russian interests, including in the “inclusive national dialogue” that the agreement reiterates.
Their representatives, Aleksandr Zakharchenko and Igor Plotnitsky, have signed a number of the Group’s documents, and the Minsk agreements of 5 and 19 September.
This confirms our initial assumption of the existence of these key moments and the qualitative differences between them, thus providing a plausible basis for further investigation of our theory of competitive influence-seeking.
As noted above, the Kyiv Agreement was dead in the water within three days of its conclusion.
The anti-Western and anti-new regime sentiments that they expressed coincided with Russian security interests and Russia’s interpretation of the Maidan as a coup d’etat.
Rather as the former governor of Donetsk Oblast, Sergei Taruta, noted in a newspaper interview, Donbas did not agree with the Euromaidan and subsequent decisions by the newly appointed Ukrainian government.
Yet, this counter-Maidan failed to get sufficient traction outside Donbas, and Russia escalated its tactics and began to start nomadic occupation in Donbas.
This, in turn, “facilitated” the Geneva negotiations and the agreement achieved there in April.
As noted above, the Joint Statement that resulted from these negotiations also proved to be impossible to implement.
This, in turn, prompted Russia to increase its support to the rebels, especially in terms of equipment.
Over the following months, fighting between Russian-backed rebels and Ukrainian security forces and pro-Ukrainian militias continued and included the downing by rebel forces (Dutch Safety Board 2015) of a Malaysian Airlines passenger jet killing all people on board.
During discussions in one of our workshops, one participant noted, Russia invaded in Donbas gradually, pushing as far as Ukraine allowed.
On the one hand, Kyiv did not want to accept Russia’s demand for federalization.
These objectives were highly interdependent in their realization and Russia faced significant challenges in achieving them.
However, in the simultaneously ensuing turf battles among the major political-economic groups in Ukraine, local and Kyiv-based Donbas elites were not given an opportunity to re-align with the new regime in Kyiv.
They, thus, had few incentives to mobilize local resources in support of the government in Kyiv, but this did not automatically turn them into supporters of Russian-backed creeping occupation, especially as this posed a potentially considerable threat to their own interests.
Rather, the widely prevailing anarchy triggered by the anti-Maidan protests in Donbas had led to the establishment of two other types of politico-territorial arrangements in eastern Ukraine.
The first was informally coordinated by local Ukrainian oligarchs who challenged the new government in Kyiv for control at the local level, seeking the maintenance of the local elite’s political power and access to economic resources after the flight of Yanukovych.
Local oligarchs, such as Rinat Akhmetov, used the remaining structures of Ukrainian local authorities, which continued operating until mid-November 2014 to retain their influence in the large industrially developed cities where they owned and/or controlled significant assets, including critical transport and communication infrastructure.
This was the case, for example, in Donetsk and Yenakievo before Strelkov’s occupation in July 2014 and in Mariupol before the Ukrainian army retook the city in May 2014.
These local Ukrainian elites were not interested in waging a real war against Kyiv, which would have resulted in the destruction of the very assets they were keen to control.
In the city of Mariupol, for example, associates of Rinat Akhmetov took control in the wake of these anti-Maidan protests and began bargaining with Kyiv directly, while local authorities were more cautious and generally reluctant to challenge the central government in this way.
This bargaining process accelerated as soon as Aleksandr Borodai, the prime minister in the Russia-controlled wing of the DPR at the time, signaled his intention to expand territorial control towards Mariupol.
Akhmetov and other Ukrainian Donetsk elites quickly reached an agreement with Kyiv, which allowed them to keep hold of their assets and the Ukrainian army, in the form of the paramilitary “Azov” battalion, to restore full Ukrainian government control over Mariupol despite the fact that local Ukrainian security forces were paralyzed.
These events in Mariupol illustrate some of the key dynamics in these early stages of the conflict, including the fluidity of alliances on the ground between various state and non-state actors and their ability, at the time, to thwart the expansion of territorial control by Russian-backed forces.
Yet, local elites competing over control of economic assets in post-Yanukovych Donbas were not the only local “players,” and the multitude of other actors seriously complicated the situation and contributed to Kyiv’s eventual loss of control over significant parts of the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk.
The system of rule that they established was, thus, significantly different from what was going on in areas controlled by Kremlin-sponsored groups under the control of people like Aleksandr Zakharchenko or Igor Strelkov.
Thus, during the spring and summer of 2014, three different types of politico-territorial arrangements emerged in eastern Ukraine that reflected different dimensions of the conflict locally and in relation to the new government in Kyiv and exhibited different degrees of Russian control and influence.
This anarchical situation bore several risks for Russia and its strategy to use the conflict in eastern Ukraine as leverage over the government in Kyiv.
First, there was a danger that an agreement might be achieved between the “Donetskie” and Kyiv that would facilitate the consensual return of Donbas under the Ukrainian Government’s control .36 A second potential threat was declining local public support for any new arrangement and instead a popular preference to return to the status quo ante because of the lawlessness and criminality that the population of Donbas had to endure following the collapse of the Ukrainian state structures.
As Russian destabilization tactics escalated from nomadic to creeping occupation in order to consolidate territorial control in Donbas, the first objective, thus, was the physical removal from power of the local elite, including public servants, representatives of the middle class, liberal intellectuals, urban professionals, and other local opinion leaders.
This was achieved through the use of instrumental violence, including widely publicized intimidation, torture, and executions of local leaders.
The report highlighted “that certain categories of civilian are specifically targeted by separatist armed groups.
Empowering socially excluded groups in an ideational sense by giving them a future perspective and in a material sense by providing them with the means and at times leadership to pursue such promising new perspectives , in turn, also created the manpower necessary to achieve the first objective, the physical removal from power of local elites.
Hence, a pool of willing “executioners” became readily available to escalate conflict locally, displace local elites, and prepare the ground for their replacement.
By late August 2014, the fighting had further escalated, but had reached a stalemate on the ground with newly elected Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko unable to make decisive territorial gains or inflict significant losses on the increasingly well organized and equipped forces of the two self-proclaimed People’s Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk and their institutionally better performing hinterland.
Thus pressured, Kyiv agreed to a further round of negotiations in the Belarusian capital of Minsk, which resulted in the first of two Minsk Agreements on 5 September 2014, followed by an additional protocol two weeks later.
Yet again, implementation was at best selective and eventually stalled completely.
Subsequent parliamentary elections in Ukraine in October saw a strong showing of the pro-Western, anti-Russian bloc, but also exposed deep divisions and a high degree of apathy among the population, with a national turnout of just over half of eligible voters, and less than a third in Kyiv-controlled areas of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
It was only in this period after Minsk I that Moscow began to capitalize on the successful deployment of its earlier destabilization tactics during the periods of nomadic and creeping occupation.
These talks continued on and off throughout January and early February, but it was not before a 16 hours negotiation marathon on 11 and 12 February among the four countries’ leaders that the second Minsk Agreement was concluded, almost a year to the date of the 2014 Kyiv Agreement.
Each failed agreement implementation, thus, went hand-in-hand with an escalation of destabilization efforts.
In the period between late February and mid-April 2014, Russia supported and funded antiMaidan protests in mainland eastern Ukraine.
From mid-April 2014, Russia began supporting the rebels initially with money and weapons.
As a Ukrainian offensive gained momentum and ground in early summer 2014, Russia strengthened the rebels first through supplying more and more equipment, including heavier weapons, advisers, and eventually through a clandestine invasion of “vacationers” in mid-August.
This led to a period of “creeping” occupation by the rebels, who began to regain territory they had lost in May and June.
This major escalation of fighting and the losses suffered by the Ukrainian side facilitated a return to negotiations, producing the first Minsk Agreement on 5 September 2014.
An immediate failure of this agreement was averted by an additional protocol two weeks later, but eventually the volatile ceasefire established broke down and fighting resumed.
Following the parliamentary elections in Ukraine on 26 October 2014 with the strong performance of pro-Western, anti-Russian forces, any prospects of a pro-Russian government had clearly evaporated, and Russia now began to focus on consolidating the rebels’ territorial gains.
Thus, the period of “entrenching” occupation began, accompanied by more pronounced and comprehensive efforts at state-building in Donbas.
A simultaneous escalation of fighting to create militarily and strategically more viable rebel territories pressured Ukraine into another round of negotiations that produced the second Minsk Agreement.
Following the rebel capture of Debaltsevo, a more or less stable line of control was established between the sides that has remained in place despite sporadic clashes and very little progress on the implementation of the political provisions of Minsk II , indicating that, despite its volatility, the two sides have settled, at least temporarily, for the existing status quo.
From a Russian geopolitical perspective, Ukraine is too strategically important a prize to allow the country to drift out of a self-proclaimed Russian zone of influence.
Ukraine, similar to other countries in the post-Soviet space such as Moldova and Georgia, thus became a new battleground on which Russia and the West are locked in a competition for influence over that country’s domestic and foreign policy orientation.
I am convinced that Germany, France, and other countries will also be ready to offer such guarantees.
As Russian confidence in the willingness and ability of Ukraine to implement agreements diminished, it shifted its position towards including more implementation mechanisms and guarantees in each agreement with the aim of consolidating its own position and that of its proxies in an internationalized settlement process that would commit Russia and the West equally to abide by its outcome.
With the simultaneous realization that a stable and friendly pro-Russian regime in Kyiv was unlikely to materialize in the near future, Russia pushed for, and achieved, more specific requirements for constitutional changes to secure long-term influence in Ukraine through its proxy regimes in Donbas.
Yet, as these more elaborate agreements faced even greater obstacles to implementation, Russia, at the same time, consolidated its client regimes in Donbas.
Our case study of Russian policies in the Ukraine crisis thus serves as an initial plausibility test of a typological theory of competitive influence-seeking.
We have established Russian motivations for its policies and noted their outcomes in this specific case.
Conclusion Throughout the period from November 2013 to February 2015, Russia employed a spectrum of escalating destabilization tactics in order to shape the nature and outlook of the political regime in Ukraine, including diplomatic and economic pressure, propaganda campaigns, and low-intensity proxy warfare, including military occupation.
These tactics were used in a sequential, but cumulative way; that is, Russia sought to use, expand, and consolidate its influence across all spheres of Ukraine’s domestic and foreign policies, starting with non-violent methods in late 2013 and early 2014, and progressing towards more and more openly used violent tools while maintaining the pressure that non-violent methods deliver.
In other words, in line with the logic of competitive influence-seeking, Russia has sought to manage the level of instability in Ukraine in a way that does not preclude the emergence of an overall stable and friendly regime in Kyiv, but that prevents the consolidation of a stable and unfriendly regime.
The evolution of Russia’s tactics from nomadic, to creeping, to entrenching occupation, and ultimately to some limited form of state-building is consistent with our view that Russia’s neighborhood strategy in Ukraine is driven by the logic of competitive influence-seeking.
Russia is hedging against the consolidation of an unfriendly and stable, Western-supported regime in Kyiv by consolidating its control over parts of eastern Ukraine and solidifying the dependence of local regimes there on Russian support.
This gives Russia the opportunity to either maintain the current status quo or settle for favorable re-integration terms that establish Moscow-controlled regions with special status within Ukraine through which Russia can assert and sustain its long-term influence over Ukraine’s domestic and foreign policy orientation.
With these drivers of Russian policy in the so-called Near Abroad in mind, three more general conclusions can be offered about likely future developments.
First, confrontation between Russia and the West in and over this area is unavoidable as the EU, NATO, and their respective member states similarly consider their eastern neighborhood as strategically important for their security.
Such confrontation need not necessarily involve direct military hostilities, but at a minimum it is likely that some form of low-intensity conflict in Ukraine will persist and that there is a possibility of escalation around other de facto states, such as Transnistria in Moldova and Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia.
It is also conceivable that new “battlegrounds” might be opened up by Russia, such as in the Baltic states, especially in Estonia and Latvia both of which have significant Russian minorities.
Second, taking this logic of competitive influence-seeking through to its natural conclusion means accepting that, short of the “withdrawal” of one side or an agreed simultaneous withdrawal of both sides, there is little likelihood of restoring the full sovereignty and territorial integrity of the countries affected in the near future.
We may thus be facing the continuation and further consolidation of territorial divisions in Ukraine, Moldova, and Georgia, which in turn will increase the social and political obstacles to any conflict settlement short of legalizing the current state of affairs.
Recognition/annexation, however, is unlikely for as long as the continued existence of de facto states in eastern Ukraine gives Moscow leverage over Kyiv, either by ensuring continued instability that limits the domestic and foreign policy choices of the Ukrainian government or for as long as there is a reasonable prospect of their re-integration on terms favorable to long-term Russian influence in the country.
Third, in light of these difficult challenges locally, regionally, and globally, the management of stability and security in the contested neighborhood should remain a priority for policy-makers in Russia and the West.
In the absence of other institutionalized forms of dialog, this means that there is a place and a role for the OSCE in this process.
Not only is it an established and accepted actor in conflict settlement efforts in all but Abkhazia and South Ossetia, it remains the only transatlantic security actor that offers an established forum for negotiations for all parties to these conflicts.
Given that this is, at present, perhaps not the most thrilling prospect for effective security management, it might be time to invest more resources in reinvigorating this organization so it can live up to its conflict management and settlement potential.
We also acknowledge the existence of a growing critical geopolitical strand in the literature on Russia’s foreign policy , but cannot engage with it in detail for reasons of space.
For example, Russia’s interpretation of the failed 2003 settlement for Transnistria is that “once the parties have agreed upon something, external support should gently keep them at the negotiating table rather than trying to throw in some provocation, as happened in the case of Transnistria settlement in 2003.
While this is relevant for further tests of our theory in other cases in the future, it is clearly not relevant here as much of our theorizing is driven by us having prima facie established, through empirical observation, that the four political agreements concluded constitute such key moments.
In order to balance the protection of our interlocutors with the need to keep referenced information meaningful and credible for our analysis, we thus refer to an interlocutor’s affiliation but not to his or her rank or the date or location of the interview.
In addition, we have randomly assigned short references in order to obscure dates (May 2014, July 2014; August 2015, November 2015, December 2015; January 2016, February 2016, April 2016; April 2017) and locations (Brussels, Chisinau, Kramatorsk, Kyiv, London, Mariupol, Vienna, Washington, DC, and online/email) of interviews, as well as dates (May 2014; February 2015, April 2015, August 2015, November 2015, December 2015; February 2016, April 2016; April 2017) and locations of workshops (Chisinau, Kyiv, Rome, Washington, DC) for the purposes of increasing anonymity.
Public opinion poll was conducted in the period between February 8–18, 2014; 2032 respondents were interviewed.
We do not cover this particular sequence of events in our analysis, as Russia here pursued a very distinct approach, solely focused on the annexation of the peninsula and driven by military-strategic and political considerations that were distinct from those underpinning the Russian approach in mainland eastern Ukraine and addressed a particularly critical Russian security concern, namely securing its naval base in Sevastopol.
The authors also thank the anonymous reviewers of this article, as well as to numerous colleagues who have provided invaluable feedback on earlier drafts of this article, including members of NATO Defence College Senior Course 126, as well as Derek Averre, R William Ayres, Nino Kemoklidze, George Kyris, Harris Mylonas, Kevork Oskanian, Thomas Funch Pedersen, Jasper de Quincey Adams, Olivier Schmitt, Mark Webber, and Kataryna Wolczuk.
Arbitrary Detentions, Enforced Disappearances, and Torture in Eastern Ukraine.
Gushchin, Alexander W., Artem G Dankov, Sergey M Markedonov, and Sergey W Rekeda.16.
International Federation for Human Rights and Center for Civil Liberties.15.
In Strategiï Transformatsiï I Preventsiï Prikordonnikh Konfliktiv V Ukraïni , edited by Nataliya Zubar and Oleg Miroshnichenko, 9–49.
United States Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor.
