The United States propaganda is not just false, but it is absurd, United States publicist Eric Zuesse remarks, adding that it obviously insults the public's intelligence.
The entire case for Western sanctions against Russia is pure lie, American author and investigative historian Eric Zuesse emphasized, nailing the Obama administration for what he called its blatant propaganda and sheer hypocrisy.
US propaganda is ""so ridiculous, no intelligent and informed person would give it any serious consideration whatsoever.
The author referred to the United States State Department's ""Ukraine Travel Warning"" issued on July 16 and aimed at preventing American tourists from travelling to Eastern Ukraine and Crimea.
Apparently aimed at frightening the United States tourists out of their wits, the ""warning"" claimed that ""individuals, including United States citizens, have been threatened, detained or kidnapped for hours or days after being stopped"" at checkpoints in Donetsk and Lugansk.
The Obama administration obviously does not care that the reality on the ground differs tremendously from what it is saying.
The United States officials also remain silent about the fact that before Washington intervened in Kiev's domestic affairs, Ukraine was a unified and democratic country.
Remarkably, the United States political establishment and most notably Zbigniew Brzezinski ""mapped out"" the battle for Ukraine decades ago, United States publicist and activist Chris Ernesto wrote in 2014.
So far, Washington has desperately needed to bring Ukraine into its fold.
Eventually, in November 2013 the United States instigated a standoff with the Ukrainian government, dubbed the Euromaidan revolution, which then turned into a ""blatant"" coup. ""arly on, there were individuals in the Ukrainian government who recognized that there was an international and NATO-centered plot at work in their country, designed to overthrow the President and other elected officials using ‘swarming adolescents' and other more violent elements of protest and destabilization,"" United States analyst and author Brandon Turbeville narrated in April, 2015.
Crimea's secession from Ukraine as well as the unwillingness of Ukraine's eastern regions to recognize the illegitimate junta obviously contradicted United States plans.
Thus far, ""the United States State Department rejects the legitimacy of the overwhelming, and the repeatedly polling-confirmed, desire of the Crimean people to cease being Ukrainian ,"" Eric Zuesse stressed.
If they stay alive and within Ukraine, then the regime that Obama installed will get voted out of office,"" the investigative historian added.
According to the author, the irony of the situation is that it is Vladimir Putin who wants the Donbass region to remain a part of Ukraine, while Obama does not want them to return into the Ukrainian fold.
