Ukrainian military pilot Nadiya Savchenko is surrounded by media upon her arrival at Kyiv Boryspil Airport on May 25, 2016 in Boryspil, Ukraine.
Russia and Ukraine completed a high-level prisoner swap Wednesday, trading a Ukrainian helicopter pilot dubbed the country's ""Joan of Arc"" for two Russian servicemen accused of being members of Russian military intelligence.
The deal resolved a major dispute between the two countries, but it also reflected other deep tensions that include Russia's annexation of Crimea from Ukraine in 2014 and an ongoing battle against pro-Russia rebels in eastern Ukraine.
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko met with her, and he basked in a rare political victory.
Savchenko arrived in Kiev as the Russians, who were pardoned on Wednesday by Poroshenko, arrived in Moscow.
They were met by their wives and declined to speak publicly to Russian state journalists on the tarmac.
Alexander Alexandrov, were captured during fighting in southeast Ukraine, where pro-Russian separatists have carved out an unrecognized statelet after two years of war with Kiev.
Ukrainian officials said that the two Russians were proof that Moscow was managing the conflict in southeast Ukraine and continuing to send men and materiel to destabilize the new government.
In Russia, Savchenko was portrayed as a nationalist and convicted of abetting the murder of two Russian journalists killed in a mortar strike.
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko, left, looks at Ukrainian jailed pilot Nadezhda Savchenko during their meting in the Presidential Office in Kiev, Ukraine, on May 25, 2016.
Expected to be used as bargaining chips, all three were given lengthy prison sentences.
A Russian court gave Savchenko 22 years on murder charges, while the Russians were sentenced in April by a Kiev court to 14 years in prison each on terrorism and weapons charges.
Western officials, including Secretary of State John F Kerry, had lobbied Moscow for Savchenko's release, calling her a political prisoner.
Russia, which disavowed any formal connection to Yerofeyev and Alexandrov and said they had joined the separatists to fight as volunteers, also criticized their convictions.
On Wednesday, Russian President Vladimir Putin also pardoned Savchenko in an official decree.
Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said in televised statements that Putin had no plans to meet with Yerofeyev and Alexandrov, but that he had met with the parents of two journalists killed in the artillery strike that Savchenko was convicted of orchestrating.
The families of the deceased journalists personally requested that Putin pardon Savchenko, Peskov said.
A Ukrainian pilot who was sentenced to jail in connection with the deaths of two Russian journalists and became a symbol of her nation’s resistance to Moscow’s aggression was freed Wednesday as part of a swap for two Russian servicemen.
Putin was later shown thanking the two women for their ""humanitarian position"" on television in a meeting in Moscow that was attended by Ukrainian politician Viktor Medvedchuk, who Putin said played the role of mediator in the exchange.
Savchenko, a former Ukrainian helicopter pilot who fought in the Iraq War and later joined a pro-Ukrainian paramilitary battalion, was captured by separatist fighters during a battle near the village of Metalist, in southeast Ukraine, in June 2014.
Three weeks later, she reappeared in Russian custody, where she was charged with directing artillery fire that killed two Russian journalists during the fighting.
Savchenko said that she was kidnapped and spirited across the border, while Russian prosecutors said she had snuck across the border by pretending to be a refugee and was later arrested.
Her case became a cause célèbre in Kiev, where she was awarded the title Hero of Ukraine and elected as a member of parliament despite being in Russian custody.
The two Russians, Yerofeyev and Alexandrov, were wounded and captured by the Ukrainian army in fighting near the government-held city of Schastya in May 2015.
The Ukrainian government claimed that the two men were members of the Main Intelligence Directorate, Russia's military intelligence agency, and said their capture was proof that Russia had continued supplying men and weapons to the pro-Russian separatists.
Russia's Defense Ministry said the two had quit the military recently and were serving as volunteers with rebel militias.
