Audiotrainer Deutschtrainer Die Bienenretter German XXL German XXL Deutsch Aktuell Deutsch im Fokus Telenovela Bandtagebuch Landeskunde Community D Community D Das Porträt Podcasts & Newsletter Service Teaching German Teaching German DW im Unterricht Unterrichtsreihen Deutschlehrer-Info Coronavirus World Germany Business Science Environment Culture Sports TOP STORIES / World / Europe Advertisement Europe Ukraine to ditch Russian friendship treaty amid tensions The Russian-Ukrainian Friendship Treaty has been highly controversial on both sides in the past.
Demonstrators at an anti-war rally in Moscow in 2014 slammed Russia's actions in Crimea Since February 27, 2014, when the Russian annexation of Crimea first became visible with the occupation of the regional parliament in Simferopol by pro-Russian armed men, the question arose as to whether Ukraine should withdraw from the important friendship treaty with Russia.
In Article 2 of the treaty, which came into force in 1999, both sides agreed to respect their respective territorial integrity and existing borders.
From Kyiv's point of view, Russia grossly violated the treaty with the annexation of Crimea and the covert war in the eastern Ukrainian coal-mining region of Donbass.
In previous months, Ukraine informed both Russia and the UN of its intention not to renew the treaty.
The Ukrainian government mainly used legal arguments to explain why Kyiv only now decided to do discontinue the treaty four years after the annexation of Crimea.
The treaty has been referred to during various lawsuits against Russia before international courts.
Moreover, there were fears that the withdrawal from the treaty would ""unleash"" Russia, according to Ukrainian experts.
The decision was, however, against a formal withdrawal, but in favor of a non-renewal.
From Ukraine's point of view, this way is simpler under international law.
In short, Russia finally recognized Ukraine as an independent nation, including Crimea.
On May 31, 1997, the treaty was signed in Kyiv by the then-presidents of Russia and Ukraine, Boris Yeltsin and Leonid Kuchma, but it only came into force after both parliaments ratified it in April 1999.
The fact that such an agreement was not reached until six years after the collapse of the Soviet Union was mainly due to the dispute over the Black Sea Fleet.
Just three days before the signing of the treaty, Russia and Ukraine signed an agreement on the status and distribution of the Black Sea Fleet, in which Russia received the lion's share of the ships.
Critics complain that it does not contain any mechanisms for conflict resolution.
In the years that followed, Russian-Ukrainian friendship was repeatedly tested.
The already seriously crumbling relations were further strained in late 2003.
There was a dispute over the Ukrainian island of Tusla in the Kerch Strait when Russia tried to connect it to its mainland by building a dam.
Then came the gas dispute in 2006, when Moscow turned off the supplies to Ukraine for the first time, although the treaty expressly forbids economic pressure.
On both occasions, Kyiv protested loudly against the Russian measures but still kept to the treaty.
Ukraine asks Germany, NATO to send ships to Sea of Azov Gas delivery has long been a flashpoint in Russia's affairs with its neighbors In the summer of 2008, the treaty was on the brink of collapse from the Russian side.
The lower house of the Russian parliament, the State Duma, suggested to then-President Dmitry Medvedev that he consider withdrawing from the treaty if Ukraine were to make a bid for NATO membership.
At that time, the NATO summit in Bucharest sidelined the prospect of Ukraine's accession to the distant future.
But a Membership Action Plan , a kind of pre-accession program that Kyiv was striving for, was rejected.
Yuri Luzhkov, the then-mayor of Moscow, proposed to let the treaty with Kyiv expire in order to question Ukraine's ownership of Crimea.
From Kyiv's point of view, the border issue is unaffected due to a separate treaty on the border between Russia and Ukraine from 2003 that will remain in force.
Germany offers to mediate between Russia and Ukraine Ukraine: Living on the front lines Caught in the crossfire Every evening, the shelling begins around sunset.
The front lines near Donetsk see nightly mortar and machine gun fire as the conflict between the Ukrainian military and pro-Russian separatists’ rages on.
Caught in the crossfire are many elderly civilians who are too impoverished to go elsewhere.
Living on the front lines ‘Waiting for a shell’ Residents of Zhovanka in the so-called ‘gray zone,’ a thin strip of land separating warring militaries, line up to see a visiting doctor.
Living on the front lines Nowhere else to go Olexander Voroshkov, program coordinator for the regional charity SOS Kramatorsk, said residents continue to live in half-destroyed homes with leaky roofs, even through the winters, because rent in nearby Ukrainian cities has skyrocketed since the beginning of the conflict.
Living on the front lines Reliance on humanitarian aid Women line up to receive medicine and multivitamins in Zhovanka.
Food and humanitarian supplies are delivered to the town by charity organizations, as crossing checkpoints sometimes requires people to wait more than a day in line.
Living on the front lines Six broken ribs Svetlana Zavadenko stands before her home in Spartak.
She was injured when the walls collapsed after several mortars exploded in her yard.
Neighbors had to dig Zavadenko out of the rubble and she was sent to the hospital with six broken ribs and a ruptured liver.
She smokes “Minsk” brand cigarettes and laughs when asked what she thinks about the war.
Living on the front lines 'We lost hope' Zavadenko recovered from her injuries and lives alone with several pets.
Spartak has not had electricity, gas, or water services since 2014, so she uses a grill to cook her food.
For firewood, she goes to an abandoned furniture factory nearby and collects plywood.
Living on the front lines Possibility of a drawdown Damage from shelling on the outskirts of Donetsk.
Despite past failures in deescalating the war, a new ceasefire may be in sight after an October peace summit in Berlin, where Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko said he was ready to end hostilities in eastern Ukraine and would withdraw troops from the region.
Living on the front lines 'We lost too many soldiers to stop now' Even if both sides agree on a ceasefire, they will face opposition from their militaries, who claim their sacrifices were too heavy to simply put down their weapons.
Life on the Kerch Strait goes on as tensions mount Date 09.12.2018 Author Roman Goncharenko Related Subjects Vladimir Putin, Crimea, Dmitry Medvedev, 2018 World Cup, Ukraine, Donetsk, Russia, Russia's invasion of Ukraine Keywords Ukraine, Donbass, Russia, treaty, Crimea, Petro Poroshenko, Vladimir Putin, Sea of Azov, Kerch Strait Send us your feedback.
