My first trip to Ukraine was in early 1992, six months after independence was declared.
During that visit, I interviewed many people but the highlight was my interview with Leonid Kravchuk, the country’s first president.
Ever since, and despite the country’s struggles, I have kept my affection for Ukraine and its people.
Along with my Ukrainian friends, I have tried to help the country economically over the years by aiding business investment and reporting on its political situation.
In 2004, I spent four weeks covering the Orange Revolution, and returned in June 2015 concerned that the country’s decades-long struggle with Russia and its operatives had entered the most dangerous phase ever, of destruction and open warfare.
When I interviewed Kravchuk in 1992, every one was concerned about the region’s stability, the future of the Soviet Union’s nuclear stockpile and how Ukraine would protect itself from Moscow.
When the issue of nuclear weapons came up, and who was in charge, he explained that the weapons were divided amongst Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Russia and Byelorussia and there was a protocol that prevented an accidental nuclear war.
To illustrate, he escorted me, my photographer and a translator-friend into his private office where two telephones sat -one red and one white.
The red one connected him directly to the Kremlin and the white connected him to the leaders of the three other republics that housed nuclear weapons.
A nuclear attack was only possible, he said, if all four agreed upon it.
That seemed tenuous at the time, but what happened following those tumultuous events has contributed to today’s violence by Russia and its operatives who have caused 6,200 deaths, 30,000 wounded, 1. million displaced persons and the loss of 9% of Ukraine’s territory.
Last week, I asked Kravchuk for a follow-up interview -more than 20 years later after my first and a subsequent interview in 1993 -and he agreed.
My life would be in vain if they take this land and that is why there is no alternative but to fight,” he said.
I asked Kravchuk about Ukraine’s decision to surrender its nuclear weapons and whether that condemned the country to Russian infiltration and takeover.
Kravchuk then engaged in lengthy negotiations with President Bill Clinton and Vice President Al Gore but the United States and Western Europe imposed systematic pressure on us.
Alone and disarmed, the Russians spent the next 20 years tightening their grip, gutting Ukraine’s military and Ukrainian leaders let them do so.
Russians were here running the secret service and organizing meetings against Ukraine,” he said.
I asked him about a suggestion that Ukraine appeal under the Geneva Convention to be designated as an “occupied country” which will lead to a suspension of debts freeing up more money for defense and impose reparations on Russia for damage, displacement and deaths.
I think other prominent Ukrainians would agree to do this, but I think Russia would veto this on the Security Council and the General Assembly I have doubts about,” he said.
He wants to restore the Greater Russian Empire, not the Soviet Union,” he said.
This philosophy, he said, is no different than Hitler’s who wanted to incorporate all Germanic people under an expanded Third Reich empire.
He says Ukrainians must never give up to keep their country and he never will.
My first visit to Ukraine was in February 1992 and the City of Kiev was gray, bleak and joyless as was the rest of the Soviet Union.
Last month I re-visited -23 years and several other assignments later -to find a new nation of extremes.
There is prosperity and there is poverty; there is peace and war; cynicism and hope; there are reformers in high places and looters in low places as Russian operatives still lurk in the corridors of power.
The 2014 revolution forced the thieves and Russian puppets fully out of the shadows.
Former President Victor Yanukovych betrayed the people, stole from them and then began murdering them.
Events spiraled downward until he was toppled exposing his Russian-inspired kleptocracy.
This has enraged and called Ukrainians in greater numbers than ever to make sacrifices.
This trip I saw more flags than ever and met some remarkable patriots who have realized that the public itself must rally to the cause of trying to stop, and eventually reverse, the steady takeover by Russia since independence in 1991.
The world now knows that Yanukovych lived like a 19th Century Czar between 2002 and 2014 and oversaw the destruction of Ukraine's military in preparation for the slow invasion of Ukraine.
Its manpower was reduced and its equipment sold for profit by corrupt officials.
But most revealing was his estate outside Kiev and the scale of excess.
Before 2014, his lifestyle was top secret, guarded by 1,000 soldiers and a 25-foot high green fence along a 34-mile perimeter.
The corruption that has ruined Ukraine is no longer a whispered rumor or a mere suspicion.
The most poignant moment for me on this visit was an interview in a Kiev hospital with a young member of the Right Sector, led by Dmytro Yarosh.
If volunteers had not helped, he argued, the eastern half of the country would have fallen into Moscow's hands by now.
I interviewed ""Maley,"" his battalion code name, and he told me his story.
He lost patience so he took his grandfather's hunting rifle, and taped a brass plate his mother bought for him to his chest, and went to the front to join the cause.
The war is not close to Kiev or Lviv, but everywhere there are reminders in the form of memorials and men in fatigues, some asking for donations for the families and health care costs of the volunteer soldiers.
A 45-year-old professional woman I met in Kiev raises money for medicine and her husband helps volunteer battalions by procuring supplies.
At the time we spoke, he was driving a new, outfitted ambulance back from Belgium to the war front, paid for with donations and fundraising efforts there.
The diaspora is also re-awakening to Ukraine's needs, after two decades of being mistreated by Ukraine's corrupt officials.
Canada -with as many as two million people of full or partial Ukrainian heritage -has been quick to condemn Putin and to provide military training support and funds.
Canada also endorses the provision of lethal weapons to Ukraine by the west to repel and push back the Russians operatives, and now Russian troops, out of the country.
But Canada and others cannot do so unilaterally and are waiting for the White House to agree.
He's a former United States Ambassador to Ukraine and Russia and Fellow at the Atlantic Council in Washington.
But recent publicity that some Ukrainian militias are comprised of neo Nazis frightens some politicians and donors.
And there's concern about the corrupt army leadership and whether it's under control.
He and his volunteers have been helping to modernize the army by digitizing inventory, devising transparency procurement platforms to eliminate corruption, creating weapons and raising funds through a crowd funding site called peoplesproject.com -where interested donors from around the world can scan a shopping list of projects and causes for donors and use their credit cards to make donations.
Ukrainian software experts have also joined with aviation experts to make 40 drones a month, using available software and cameras and parts from China.
Volunteers have developed encryption devices to protect communications in the field and a radio communications system that allows frontline commanders to direct the movements of soldiers using tablets.
I learned on this trip that Ukraine's military industry has begun to work multiple shifts replacing the equipment that was sold for personal gain.
And 50,000 conscripts will be called up this year, the first of several mobilizations that will be trained, in part, by western military advisors.
All of these military reforms and citizen activism must continue if Ukraine is to win the war against Russia and the war against corruption at home.
But more western help, in terms of military equipment and debt relief, must arrive soon.
And in the end Ukrainians -who are easygoing and flexible -must become even tougher and more demanding that bribery, money laundering and influence peddling end.
Reforms are being undertaken but not quickly enough and this fall's mid-term election may reflect dissatisfaction.
If I had my way, for instance, the country's 20,000 prosecutors, like its traffic cops, would summarily dismissed and replaced with new people who are forced to adhere to reforms, the rule of law and transparency.
If reforms are stillborn, the next revolution following those in 2004 and 2014 won't be peaceful and leaders won't have enough time to scurry back to Russia.
Patriotic activism is spreading and has become the country's de facto official opposition party.
LVIV, Ukraine -It’s hard to believe, while touring this charming medieval city, there’s a war raging in this country against Russia.
But the fighting is 25 hours’ drive east, and the psychology is even further away.
There are reminders here and there, a memoriam to a lost loved one or volunteer soldiers in fatigues.
The city has population of 800,000, more than a dozen universities and enterprising people with world-class businesses and skills.
Along with Kiev and others, this region illustrates why this week’s Canada-Ukraine free trade agreement is a splendid idea.
It’s a national vote of confidence by Canadians in Ukrainians, with a very credible upside.
One-third of the world’s rich “black earth” as well as an over-sized share of brainpower.
The level of Literacy is 99. per cent, the education rate is the world’s fourth-highest and every year 16,000 software experts and 130,000 engineers graduate.
Just outside Lviv, I took a photo of two farmers in a horse-drawn cart commuting between fields.
Despite such primitive conditions, Ukraine remains the world’s biggest producer of grains, sunflower oils, mushrooms for Europeans and is now blanketed with apple orchards and processing plants to produce juice and cider.
The biggest upside for its agri-business is that the European Union has given the country full access to its market next year.
But the country’s human capital has found a major niche and been succeeding despite war and corruption.
The world’s fourth-biggest cluster of certified IT professionals is here, after the United States, India and Russia.
There are 100,000 software engineers and architects, proficient in English, building products and doing research for clients around the world.
He is CEO and founder of N-iX, with offices in Lviv, Sweden and Bulgaria.
Such commitments require stability and Russia since the seizure of Crimea and eastern violence, is losing out to Ukraine.
Likewise, the war has displaced 1. million people including thousands of IT experts who have resettled in Lviv or Kiev.
Ukraine now has the world’s first “geek army” of thousands of volunteers who are helping rebuild and repurpose the rag tag national army.
A succession of Russian puppets posing as Ukrainian Presidents downsized its forces and sold off its equipment to foreigners for personal gain.
His firm occupies three floors in a Soviet-style building with a security guard but no chairs or cheer in its lobby.
However, Pavliv’s firm is an oasis right out of Silicon Valley with high ceilings, plenty of natural light, open plan seating, clumps of chairs for meetings, a spacious kitchen and a large room with gym equipment, video games, fussball and cots tucked away for those with client meetings in the middle of the night.
It’s not coincidental that where corruption and meddling has been absent, Ukrainians create wealth and excellence.
The backdrop to trade deals is that the new government in Kiev is trying to eradicate corruption, but progress is slower than many want.
It’s tragic that Ukraine -the largest country in Europe, twice the size of Germany -has become Europe’s biggest under-achiever.
Ukrainians have staged two revolutions since independence -2004 and 2014 -to rid themselves of the rot within.
The next time won’t be peaceful because these 45 million people, gentle and smart, simply will have run out of patience.
He lives twenty miles from the current front and one-third of his constituency is in occupied lands.
World attention focuses on ISIS and Iran, with its half an atomic weapon.
But the biggest geopolitical issue is Vladimir Putin, backed by thousands of nuclear weapons, who is gradually conquering Ukraine, a democracy with 45 million people the size of Germany and Poland combined.
Even so, European and American retaliation has been soft, and ineffective.
It's also moving tanks, artillery, troops, and equipment into Ukraine by the trainload.
He's a former United States ambassador to Ukraine and Director of the Eurasia Center at the Atlantic Council in Washington.
He grabbed one-third of Georgia in 2008 using the same tactics and despite hideous publicity worldwide is riding high in Russian polls.
But slowly, in Washington, bipartisan support builds to provide defensive weapons to the Ukrainian army as soon as possible to halt the Russian creep.
Canada's Defense Minister Jason Kenney has stated boldly that Canada supports supplying Ukrainians with weapons but cannot do so unilaterally.
In January, he led a gigantic peace march in Kyiv after Russian artillery blew up a civilian bus in his town killing 15 civilians.
He dismisses Putin's claims that Russian military is not involved, that this is not an occupation, and the spontaneous effort by Ukrainian residents of Russian descent who want liberation and to rejoin Russia.
I am Russian speaking and part Russian and I identify as Ukrainian,"" he said.
Refugees are a financial burden for the country and many have moved in with relatives and friends.
He said that Ukraine is carefully checking those entering from the east in fear that Russian agitators will try to destabilize Ukraine in order to create a pretext for an invasion.
They march downtown or to the city hall, pulling out tricolor Russian flags and waving them.
They tear down the Ukrainian flag at administrative buildings, put up the Russian flag, and get the television cameras to provide an image to the rest of the world,"" he said.
His wife, children, and extended family remain in their village, but the family has an evacuation plan to stay with relatives in western Ukraine if the Russian tanks roll westward.
In the face of the well-equipped Russian onslaught, the Ukrainian military is trying to rebuild quickly after being dismantled by the Moscow-controlled former President who fled last year.
He looted the country financially and also appointed a Russian as defense minister who sold off the military's best equipment to foreign dictators for personal gain.
The country conscripted 50,000 men for military service this summer and United States, Canada, and Britain are supplying hundreds of military trainers and non-combat equipment.
Few members of the public know where Ukraine is much less its size and strategic importance.
The country is the third most educated populace in the world, with thriving software, aeronautical, pharmaceutical, and agribusiness sectors.
But the United States will wake up when the Russian Federation attacks a NATO country,"" he said.
Ukraine is a nation interrupted, its identity and promise stolen by invaders and predators for centuries.
But the two are distinctive and the Ukrainian language is as different from Russian as is Spanish from French.
Putin's postulation is not only inaccurate, but deeply hurtful and insulting, given Russia's historical and ongoing abuse of Ukraine.
In the 1930s, Joseph Stalin perpetrated one of the greatest crimes against humanity by purposely starving to death millions of Ukrainians for resisting his Five-Year Plan to collectivize agriculture.
The new movie is entitled Bitter Harvest and stars veteran actor Terence Stamp and new British sensation Max Irons, in his first leading role.
It is a love story set during one of history's darkest moments and portrays events most don't know and cannot imagine.
Canadian Ian Ihnatowycz produced this film to set the record straight for the West about the suffering of Ukrainians at the hands of Russia, a reality that still continues.
His parents and grandparents fled the country during the Second World War.
Given the importance of what happened, and that few outside Ukraine knew about it because it had been covered up, the story of this genocide needed to be told.
The scale of The Great Famine remained hidden by the Soviets, but in 1991 Ukraine declared independence and opened the Soviet archives.
These revelations led to a 2003 United Nations Joint Statement, signed by Russia, that declared the Holodomor had taken seven to ten million innocent lives.
Then on October 23, 2008, the European Parliament adopted a resolution recognizing the Holodomor as a crime against humanity.
The movie is a fitting backdrop to the current violence against Ukraine by Russia.
In 1933, alarming reports about mass starvation were reported in the British press, but ignored in the United States.
That same year, the United States officially recognized the Soviet Union and in 1934, Stalin won membership into the League of Nations.
Today, concern about Russia's illegal invasion of Ukraine has been muted considering that it is Europe's largest country, the size of Germany and Poland combined, with 45 million people.
Europe Between Hitler and Stalin, written in 2010 by Yale Professor Timothy Snyder.
The slaughter he documents and details is, quite frankly, difficult to comprehend.
The hunger was caused by collective agriculture, but the starvation was caused by politics,"" he wrote.
During the Great Terror of 1937 and 1938, ""the Soviet leadership identified peasants, the victims of collectivization, as the prime threat to Soviet power.
Nearly 700,000 were executed, although the true number may be somewhat higher,"" he wrote.
Another 300,000 were executed by Ukrainian government puppets of Moscow and hundreds of thousands more shipped off to Gulags and work camps.
Between 1933 and 1945, Snyder estimates that a total of 14 million non-combatants were killed by Stalin and Hitler in the Bloodlands, principally Ukraine, Poland, and Belarus.
The Holocaust, that killed six million Jews across Europe, took place during this time and has been well documented and depicted.
But Bitter Harvest represents the first feature film to expose the world to the catastrophic Holodomor mass murder.
Stamp's performance is riveting, as the patriarch of a family facing extinction, as is Max Irons' poignant portrayal of Stamp's grandson, a young artist and that of Samantha Barks as his lover.
Irons and Barks are ranking members of the ""Brit Pack,"" young and talented artists from United Kingdom who are successful internationally.
He is best known for his roles in The Riot Club in 2014, The White Queen and The Host in 2013, Barks for her performance in the movie version of Les Miserables, and Stamp is an acclaimed veteran of stage and screen.
Distribution plans are being negotiated and the film should be available to the public in 2016.
The movie was filmed at Pinewood Studios and on location in Ukraine where final scenes were shot days before Ukraine's corrupt former President opted in late 2013 to join Russia instead of the European Union.
That decision sparked mass street protests throughout Ukraine and eventually his overthrow.
In spring 2014, Putin took advantage of the chaos and sent in operatives to destabilize and occupy Crimea and the Donbas.
His objective was to invade and annex most, if not all, of Ukraine, but resistance has been heroic.
This time, Ukraine is once more a victim of Russian predation and once again a casualty of Russian propaganda and tepid concern by world leaders.
For these and other reasons, Bitter Harvest is an important movie that everyone should see.
This is the real narrative of Ukraine, an unbowed but bruised nation with defiant resilience, still yearning to be free.
