Katchanovski’s paper on separatism in eastern and southern Ukraine draws on his own questions included in the spring Kyiv International Institute of Sociology , rather than a separate survey; but as with many statistics, the devil is in the details.
Katchanovski’s claim of such high support is based on adding the 31 per cent who responded in favor of secession in order to join another country or to form an independent state with the 23 per cent of respondents who favored autonomy within a federal Ukraine.
Katchanovski alleges that Euromaidan “shooters” and “spotters” were based in twelve buildings occupied by Euromaidan supporters.
During the murder of protesters on 20 February, this hotel was also featured in many BBC and other reports as killed and wounded bodies were carried in and laid on the floor of its reception area.
Hotel Ukryaina is a large, former Soviet hotel, and it would simply have been impossible for the Euromaidan to have controlled the entire building during a period of chaotic violence and protests.
At the same time, it is difficult to believe that supposed Euromaidan “shooters” could have used weapons in the hotel without any foreign journalists noticing and reporting upon this.
Katchanovski never attempts to lay out his research and thus never allows readers and external reviewers to judge for themselves whether his arguments and his alleged evidence have merit.
He also apparently ignores readily available evidence that is instructive.
First, for some mysterious reason in neither of Katchanovski’s papers does he cite the numerous human rights reports produced by, for example, the UN, Council of Europe, OSCE, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, all of which lay blame primarily on Russia and separatists for crimes against humanity committed in the Donbas and Crimea.
Second, he downplays the number of foreign mercenaries who joined the separatists while at the same time exaggerating the number of foreigners who have allegedly joined Ukrainian security forces.
Meanwhile, Katchanovski ignores the fifty or more other volunteer battalions who have no similar insignia.
Azov battalion commander Andriy Biletsky was elected to parliament in Prime Minister Arseniy Yatseniuk’s Popular Front that obviously cannot be defined as any “far-right” political force.
A paper or presentation cannot be considered to be scholarly or academic if its author pre-selects the conclusion he/she wishes to advance in order to fit some political agenda and then marshals supposed evidence in support.
Katchanovski’s two paper’s are, thus, much more akin to polemical writing.
Whether a paper is indeed “academic” or not is decided upon by readers and reviewers – not by the author’s own declarations.
I visited Odessa in October to conduct academic research for a book I am writing on eastern Ukraine, and I investigated the tragic deaths of pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian protesters.
It was only after these killings of pro-Ukrainian activists that the situation on the ground in Odessa escalated into the tragic fire in the Trade Union building that killed pro-Russian protesters.
This report points to a group of pro-Russian activists who initially provoked the violence in the afternoon and reports that the first person killed was a pro-Ukrainian unity activist.
But, Katchanovski’s sympathies are only with the pro-Russian protesters who died.
As Marples too has pointed out, the photos used in Katchanovski’s paper are from videos and, therefore, are very blurry.
This makes it practically impossible to see snipers, never mind ascertain who they were.
There certainly could have been some protesters with guns, although in all of the videos and photos that I have collected, there are only a handful of armed people and these are standing among protesters on the streets – not “shooters” firing from roofs and hotel windows.
There are various additional explanatory hypotheses for the shootings that Katchanovski never even considers, such as the chaos that results during pitched battles or the collateral damage that results from the actions of different police, Security Service units and vigilantes involving weapons.
Also, the possibility of Russian actors is for some reason never even entertained by Katchanovski.
Ukayinska Pravda journalist Serhiy Leshchenko in his new book titled “Mezhyhirya Syndrome” about Yanukovych’s presidency investigates the influence and involvement of President Vladimir Putin and Russian intelligence operatives in Ukraine.
Even Putin has admitted that his forces assisted in Yanukovych’s fleeing from Ukraine.
A genuinely “academic” paper would have tried to objectively analyze and present these different scenarios and then in his conclusions provide and explain what the author took to be the most likely scenario.
Katchanovski instead seems to proceed in the opposite direction insofar as his paper on the massacre caused by snipers appears to have reached a foregone conclusion that is politically driven.
Still other elements of his paper also do not stand up to scrutiny as reflected in the following three examples.
First, Katchanovski criticizes the prosecutor-general’s office for not investigating the murders in a thorough manner.
But as is well known, this office is over-manned, incompetent and corrupt, and it has never been able to investigate high-level crimes such as the murder of journalist Georgi Gongadze in 2000 or presidential candidate Viktor Yushchenko’s poisoning in 2004.
Second, Katchanovski makes a rather unusual claim for anybody studying Ukraine that there is no written order by Yanukovych ordering the killings.
Orders, and especially controversial orders, are not written down in societies without the rule of law.
It is, therefore, not surprising that there is no written order as to who sent police special forces to repress the Orange Revolution on 28 November 2004; there is no documentary evidence to prove who gave the orders to conduct massive election fraud in that year’s election; and there are no documents to show who gave the order to poison former president Yushchenko.
Third, a conspiracy mindset was very deeply ingrained in the former USSR and in post-Soviet Russia and Ukraine where cover-ups, poor investigations and concealed evidence are pointed to as evidence of the existence of conspiracies.
His position ignores the crucial detail that the far right did not come to power after the Euromaidan came to power, and that they lost two pre-term elections in May and October 2014.
More importantly, Yanukovych had been preparing to flee throughout the third week of February as can be seen in the security camera videos at his Mezhyhirya palace that he left behind.
His flight from Kyiv was, therefore, not in response to a threat expressed by Euromaidan activist Volodymyr Parasiuk from the Maydan stage—who, incidentally, was not a member of Pravyy Sektor.
If a Ukrainian president dies or is incapacitated, there is provision in the constitution for the parliamentary chairman to become “acting president” until new elections are held.
The Chair of Ukrainian Studies at Ottawa organizes an annual conference on contemporary Ukrainian topics that is funded by the George W Danyliw Foundation.
The project was therefore truly visionary in the light of Russia’s recent annexation of the Crimea.
The annual conference at Ottawa has become a vehicle for providing an academic fig leaf to ideologically driven attacks on “Ukrainian nationalism” in the writings of individuals such as Katchanovski, John Paul-Himka, Pers Anders Rudling, Anton Shekhovtsov and, to a lesser extent, Andreas Umland, all of whom have been frequently invited speakers.
It is, thus, truly paradoxical—given, on the one hand, the huge import of these phenomena for current affairs in Ukraine and, on the other hand, their being almost ignored in academe—to find that these factors and issues are also ignored at the annual Chair of Ukrainian Studies conference, whose very focus is supposed to be on contemporary developments in Ukraine.
Intolerance is usually found on the extreme left and right but can also be found among academics who are traditionally assumed to hold liberal views.
