Share What Russia Wants from Ukraine share Print Two United States warships are expected to arrive in the Black Sea this week as a demonstration of the Biden administration’s support for Ukraine as fears mount that Russian President Vladimir Putin is contemplating an assault on his neighbor.
The Kremlin is overseeing the largest movement of Russian troops, tanks and missiles along the Ukrainian border since the annexation of Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula in 2014, according to Ukrainian and United States officials.
Russia has conducted at least three military training exercises adjacent to the Ukrainian border since mid-March.
The dispatch of warships to the Black Sea is meant to underline Biden’s affirmation.
An Ukrainian serviceman walks in a trench as he stands at his post on the frontline with Russia backed separatists near the town of Zolote, in the Lugansk region on April 8, 2021.
Fighting between Ukrainians and Russian-backed rebels in Ukraine’s Donbas region has been intensifying since the end of January, and senior Kremlin official Dmitry Kozak, who has blamed Ukraine for the clashes, has issued an ominous warning that a full-scale conflict would likely mean “the beginning of the end” for Ukraine, a statement viewed in Kyiv and Western capitals as a threat.
US, Allies Question Moscow's Motives Near Ukraine A Ukrainian soldier was killed and another wounded in Donbas on Saturday, Ukrainian military officials said, which is the fourth combat-related fatality for Ukraine’s forces this month alone.
The Ukrainians say the soldier died after Russian-sponsored forces opened fire with automatic grenade launchers and 82-millimeter mortars, weapons prohibited under the Minsk peace deal, a ceasefire protocol signed in 2014 that has been often ignored.
Twenty-six Ukrainian soldiers have been killed in the Donbas since the beginning of 2021, although some were in non-combat-related accidents.
Ukrainian forces and Russia-backed separatists have been contesting eastern Ukraine since shortly after Russia’s annexation of Crimea, that occurred in the wake of a popular uprising that led to the ouster of Ukraine President Viktor Yanukovych, a Putin ally.
Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelenskiy visits positions of armed forces near the frontline with Russian-backed separatists during his working trip in Donbass region, Ukraine April 8, 2021.
Since his surprise election in 2019 to the presidency in Kyiv, Zelenskiy has been urging for a new round of peace talks involving other Western leaders.
Later that year, the Kremlin and Kyiv agreed a prisoner swap, sparking hopes a peace deal might be in the offing, one that would halt the seven-year conflict between Ukraine and pro-Russian separatists backed by Russian forces.
Some Zelenskiy critics feared his search for peace would end up creating a permanent Russian enclave in Ukraine’s most easterly provinces, Donetsk and Luhansk.
But Zelenskiy hasn't budged on the issue of Ukrainian sovereignty over the Donbas, and has refused to accept, what he says, is a Russian charade when it comes to who controls and directs the pro-Moscow separatists.
Some observers hazard that recent Russian moves are an indication of Russian frustration with Zelenskiy, who has also been targeting Kremlin allies in Ukraine, including politician, tycoon and TV mogul Viktor Medvedchuk, a personal friend of the Russian leader.
Medvedchuk, along with his wife, have been accused of channeling funds from a Russia-based oil facility to the so-called breakaway republics in eastern Ukraine.
Landing crafts of the Russian Navy's Caspian Flotilla are pictured on the Don River during the inter-fleet move from the Caspian Sea to the Black Sea, on the outskirts of Rostov-on-Don, Russia April 12, 2021.
But analysts remain divided over what the Kremlin’s intentions are with the military buildup and are split over whether Putin really intends to launch a military offensive or is just testing the resolve of the West and Zelenskiy, improvising an exercise in brinkmanship to see what might happen.
If the Russian army units gathering close to Ukraine are deployed, it would mark an entirely new stage in the conflict that would have grave implications for international security,” he wrote in the latest issue of Ukraine Alert.
Biden Affirms United States 'Unwavering Support' for Ukraine in Call What is alarming some Western diplomats and analysts is the fiery language being used by Kremlin officials along with the nature of the coverage of the crisis by Kremlin-controlled Russian media outlets.
They are reporting Kyiv is planning an offensive on the Donbas and have been highlighting comments by Kozak, deputy chief of staff of the presidential administration, suggesting Ukraine may be plotting ethnic cleansing in the Donbas.
Peskov, President Putin’s spokesman, said Friday the Kremlin fears a resumption of full-scale fighting in eastern Ukraine and would be ready to take steps to protect Russian civilians in the Donbas.
Ukraine’s military chief dismissed the Russian claims that his country’s armed forces are preparing to launch an attack on the breakaway east, and, along with other Ukrainian officials, accuses the Kremlin of looking for a pretext to mount an offensive.
But other analysts and diplomats caution that the Kremlin is whipping up a frenzy over the Donbas more for domestic reasons than international ones and that Putin is looking to distract Russians from the ongoing agitation for the release from jail of firebrand opposition figure Alexey Navalny, whose health is reported to have worsened in prison.
They say the military buildup may be part of an electoral strategy ahead of parliamentary elections in Russia September.
Putin’s approval ratings are falling, and his United Russia political party seems destined for setbacks in the polls.
Shaping an emergency short of a full-scale war could boost the prospects of United Russia, allowing the party to benefit from a wave of patriotism, they say.
Although he doesn’t discount the Kremlin may want a brief but limited clash and has suggested the Kremlin may be thinking of repeating what happened in 2008 in Georgia when then Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili fell into a trap and responded to provocations from South Ossetia, another separatist region, and intervened, prompting a Russian intervention.
