February 2017 will mark the third anniversary of the collapse of the Kremlin-favored government of Viktor Yanukovych.
The regime’s demise was brought about by bitter protests and by civil society’s reaction to a brutal government response to the Maidan protestors.
In the aftermath of the turmoil of the Maidan and the collapse of the government, Ukraine saw the emergence of a pro-Western government promising reform and generally anxious to lessen Moscow’s influence, as well as an energized civil society committed to pressing for the implementation of serious reform measures and determined to draw closer to the EU and the United States.
The current government of President Petro Poroshenko and Prime Minister Volodymyr Groysman, appears, to many, to be moving slowly and cautiously in a positive direction, implementing much-needed government reform, addressing endemic corruption, and achieving economic progress.
For some, the government has already achieved what they believe has been the most substantial reform wave seen in Ukraine in the last 25 years.
Under Groysman, the adoption of a public asset and income declaration law required of all government officials has been hailed as a significant anticorruption achievement.
Significant reforms also have taken place in the federal prosecutor’s office, energy and banking sectors, and health care system.
Economic progress has begun to increase slowly as the government has reduced its budget and accounts deficits.
Shortcomings in the rule of law that have plagued the country are also reportedly being overcome.
The judicial system, however, remains a problem, and attempts to promote privatization have not been successful.
At the same time, the government’s cautious approach has failed to impress some sectors of a frustrated public that continues to pressure the government for more progress.
The influence of a small group of old-time oligarchs and politicians, who initially refused to relinquish power or support reform, remains a distraction, and the opposition continues to criticize the government.
And although the international community appears to be more encouraged by government action, many concede more work needs to be done.
Russia responded to the change of government in Kyiv by seizing Ukraine’s Crimea region and annexing it March 2014.
A 12-point agreement to end the conflict, known as Minsk-2, was reached by the leaders of Russia, Ukraine, France, and Germany and took effect in February 2015.
Since then, however, the separatists and their patrons in the Kremlin have shown little interest in fulfilling their responsibilities to implement Minsk-2, whereas Europe and the United States have continued to press Kyiv to move forward with implementing the agreement.
The United States and the EU strongly condemned Russia’s incursions into Ukraine and have imposed sanctions on Russian individuals and key Russian economic and business sectors.
The United States has committed close to $1. billion in foreign assistance to Ukraine to advance reforms and strengthen democratic institutions, including some $135 million in humanitarian assistance provided through the United Nations and $3 billion in loan guarantees.
In 2014, the Ukraine Freedom Support Act was adopted, which, among other provisions, authorized increased military and economic assistance for Ukraine.
In September 2016, the House adopted the STAND for Ukraine Act , which, among other provisions, clarified the position of the United States on Russia’s illegal occupation of Crimea.
Nevertheless, some observers believe there is a growing Ukraine fatigue in Europe and a euroskepticism taking hold in Ukraine, fueled by those who oppose the government and its reform effort and by those who have become disenchanted by Europe’s lack of actions to support the proEurope movement in Ukraine.
Concerns about the new United States Administration’s commitment to Ukraine also are raising the level of anxiety among many in Kyiv.
In addition, ethnic Ukrainians in the east 1 CIA , The World Factbook, 2016.
Since achieving its independence in 1991, Ukraine’s political scene has been largely dominated by a powerful political elite and politically well-connected businessmen, or “oligarchs,” who regularly manipulated the government for their own security and profit.
Ukraine’s recent political unrest involved, for the most part, former President Viktor Yanukovych.
Observers noted that when government security forces took forceful actions against the demonstrators, public reaction shifted from just protesting against Yanukovych’s failure to sign the association agreement, to the government’s lack of respect for the basic human dignity of Ukraine’s citizens.
The Kremlin reacted with great hostility toward the events in Kyiv, referring to them as an illegal coup.
The emergence of the new, pro-Western leadership in Ukraine also unsettled Moscow because of the presence of the large Russian Black Sea fleet stationed in Crimea.
In February 2014, heavily armed Russianspeaking forces, aided by Russian troops, began seizing airports and other key installations throughout the Crimean peninsula.
Following the military operation, Moscow announced it was annexing Crimea and making it a permanent part of Russia.
On March 16, 2014, Crimean authorities held a referendum in support of the annexation by Russia.
Ukraine, the United States, the EU, and others denounced the referendum as illegal and claimed it was not held in a free or fair manner.
At the same time, pro-Russia, armed rebels, aided by Moscow, began to seize government facilities and territory in the eastern regions of the country referred to as the Donbas.
These actions quickly evolved into a full-scale conflict requiring Ukraine to commit its military forces against the separatists.
Poroshenko pledged to move Ukraine closer to the West, to clean up rampant corruption, and to deal with the conflict that had emerged in the eastern part of the country.
Prime Minister Yatsenyuk maintained that his government’s primary goal was to adopt European standards, with the ultimate objective of EU membership for Ukraine.
Fie consistently reiterated that a key focus of his government would be to fight corruption, including by reducing government regulation and the size of the bureaucracy and by minimizing the influence of certain oligarchs in Ukraine’s society.
Fie stated that the government would cut the number of taxes it collected and devolve more budgetary power to local authorities.
President: Petro Poroshenko ; Prime Minister: Volodymyr Groysman ; Foreign Minister: Pavlo Klimkin; Defense Minister: Sepan Poltoral Source: CIA, The World Factbook, Economist Intelligence Unit.
The same day, Rada chairman Volodymyr Groysman announced that the legislature would conduct a review of the work of the Yatsenyuk Cabinet, which would precede a vote of no confidence on the Yatsenyuk government.
Flowever, Ukrainian law prohibits the Rada from considering additional “no-confidence” votes against a government for six months, so Yatsenyuk was given time to form a new government, make changes, and move the reform process forward, if possible.
Although conditions this time around were not exactly like those of the Orange Revolution, observers recalled how the mutual hostility between the leaders paralyzed the government, alienated voters, and delivered the presidency to Victor Yanukovych in 2010.
The very week in February that the current government survived a no-confidence vote, Rada deputies also approved five critical pieces of reform legislation to stay on track with IMF 12 Elizabeth Pond, “Gunfight at the Ukraine Corral,” Institute for International Strategic Studies, February 4, 2016.
Despite the recognized progress made in passing some reform legislation, opinion polls indicated that public skepticism remained high regarding the Poroshenko/Yatsenyuk government’s ability to implement those reforms.
The polls questioned the government’s commitment to make a serious impact in fighting the country’s deeply ingrained, crippling problem with corruption or to adopt additional legislation seen as necessary to move Ukraine forward.
Although Yatsenyuk initially survived the political uprising, a new level of disenchantment on the part of an already skeptical public as well as among some within the Rada who felt Yatsenyuk no longer held a mandate for governing made it unclear just how much success in addressing corruption Yatsenyuk, or a successor, could have achieved and how much trouble was in store for Poroshe nk When Yatsenyuk failed to form a new government by early April 2016, he indicated that he would resign, but only if a new prime minister was agreed to.
They said they were committed to continuing an International Monetary Fund program that is keeping Ukraine financially afloat, to fighting cormption and to rejecting the economic populism proposed by many in parliament.
The period since the formation of the Groysman government has been marked by slow but increasingly successful progress both in addressing reform and strengthening the economy.
Seen initially as a political move to consolidate Poroshenko’s influence and to satisfy critics, including in the United States, observers, despite some internal problems including a dispute between staff members from the prosecutor-general’s office and members of the new Anti-Corruption Bureau, continue to express optimism that Lutsenko appears committed to move forward on needed reforms and prosecutions of corrupt officials of both the former and current governments.
Groysman also replaced Natalie Jaresko, the highly popular minister of finance, with Oleksandr Danyliuk, formerly with McKinsey & Company.
Danyliuk, seen by some as a progressive technocrat, raised some initial concern as to whether he would be willing or able to undertake meaningful reforms over the long term, particularly if it meant an occasional disagreement with Poroshe nk Since then, Danyliuk appears to have won increasing support for his efforts.
Over the first 10 months in office, the Groysman government has, according to some, achieved some notable successes, particularly on the issues of energy subsidies, corruption, transparency, and banking reform.
What is unclear, however, is how much of the reform effort has been initiated due to a real desire to clean up the country and how much of it has been motivated by the need for outside financial assistance.
The IMF has had to consistently warn Kyiv that more difficult reforms were needed in the banking and pension sectors, a new initiative regarding the electronic declarations by high officials had to be put into place, land reform needed to get under way, and the important issue of privatizations needed to be pursued if the country wished to receive additional increments of IMF funding.
Nevertheless, the government has been able to move forward with the further reduction of household energy subsidies demanded by the IMF, even though the prospect of increased electricity prices spurred several street protests.
The takeover was backed by Kyiv’s international donors as necessary to protect the country’s financial system.
These and other examples of reform initiatives, however, have generated opposition to the government and have raised concerns about who in Kyiv wins and who loses from the success of the reform efforts.
Some fear that those who have the most to lose will act to slow the reform process down.
For instance, Anders Aslund warned that an attempt has been under way in the Ukrainian parliament to deprive the NBU of its independence and oust Hontareva.
This, according to Aslund, would have been a major reversal of Ukraine’s economic reforms.
Despite some concerns, these examples, along with others, led United States Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland to say that she was encouraged by signs of commitment to reform from Ukraine’s government.
And despite early concerns over the government’s appetite for reform, the EU and the IMF seemed satisfied that the Groysman government has been setting the right tone for moving the country forward.
In fall 2016, the IMF approved another $1 billion for Ukraine as part of the IMF’s $17 billion assistance program for the country.
An IMF mission visited Ukraine again between November 3 and November 17, 2016, to assess whether enough progress had been made to warrant the release of additional funds to Kyiv.
Apparently, the IMF decided that the government needed more time to meet international demands for progress and that no additional funds would be provided in 2016.
According to some, this particular IMF mission devoted atypical attention to governance, specifically to corruption, and the Ukrainian government must convince a skeptical IMF that it is doing something more about corruption either through deeds or credible policies.
The Carnegie study concluded that the process to get control over the influence of the oligarchs will take time, but that the success of any efforts to weaken their influence will depend primarily on whether Ukraine’s present-day institutions can be reformed with institutions that are robust and independent.
Despite the progress that must be attributed to the Poroshenko/Groysman government, several incidents since summer 2016 have called into question the stability and public acceptance of the Poroshenko/Groysman government, which could present problems in 2017.
Coming from a national icon, these comments sent shock waves across the frustrated nation and throughout the international community, which continued to oppose new national elections as potentially destabilizing.
The group is steadfastly libertarian on matters of personal choice and a staunch proponent of tough anticorruption measures that emphasize a strong rule of law and a professional, impartial judiciary.
According to the Ukraine Defense Ministry, the deaths of some 27 Ukrainian soldiers made July the deadliest month for the Ukrainian military in nearly a year.
As Ukraine transitioned into fall 2016, the Poroshenko/Groysman government seemed to feel it had achieved much.
In a major development, and a surprise to many, in early November, the Rada adopted a landmark anticorruption reform requiring thousands of government officials, including the president and prime minister, to declare their wealth in an online database.
This system was a key requirement of the IMF in exchange for the release of funds and was one of the conditions set out by the EU for an agreement on visa-free travel for Ukrainians.
According to some, the disclosure would ensure that the country would move away from a culture that tacitly allowed bureaucrats to amass wealth through cronyism and graft.
Since its adoption, more than 100,000 submissions have been reported, with the amount of wealth coming as a major surprise to most Ukrainians.
All three of the anticorruption bodies—the General Prosecutor’s Office, the National Agency for Corruption Prevention, and the National Anti-corruption Bureau—have announced their intentions to start investigations into the sources of such wealth among officials.
According to many, and despite its flaws, the disclosure initiative was seen as a significant step in tackling corruption.
The publicly available database makes it possible to uncover the sometimes murky connections between public officials via their involvement in different companies and can thus help to reveal conflicts of interest.
It is important for civil society and journalists to keep up the pressure for criminal investigations to be completed.
At a discussion sponsored by the Atlantic Council in October 2016, Natalie Jaresko, Ukraine’s former Finance Minister, suggested that Ukraine had indeed gone through the “longest and most successful reform process,” which not only has spurred GDP growth but also has seen inflation drop, lending reduce, and credit expand.
This process has occurred in spite of Russia’s occupation 26 “Ukraine Sees Ulterior Motives After Car Bomb Kills Journalist,"" Reuters, July 20, 2016.
However, Jaresko noted that the reforms were not yet irreversible and required continued international support.
Still others, such as Anders Aslund, have warned that if the new Ukrainian government becomes complacent the country’s gains could be lost.
Otherwise, according to Aslund, it risks an early parliamentary election—which it might not survive—next spring 2017.
Parliamentary elections are not slated until 2019, but populist parties, whose numbers are high in the polls, have been urging early elections.
This concern was heightened recently when Ukraine’s populist, anti-Russia, but euro-skeptic Azov Battalion apparently decided to form its own political party.
Observers believe any wavering of United States or EU support could signal to Moscow that Ukraine “fatigue” is growing and that Moscow could take additional steps to destabilize the government.
Many in 30 Comments of Natalie Jaresko at the Atlantic Council, October 11,2016.
Military Deadlock, Political Crisis,” Briefing #85, The International Crisis Group, December 19, 2016.
Recently, however, Russia’s actions in Syria and Moscow’s failure to ease the conflict in the Donbas seem to be hardening the EU position on Russia, which may benefit Kyiv for a while longer.
In addition, with Russia’s aggression in Ukraine still unsettled, few had wanted to invest in what some felt could become an extended war zone.
In December 2015, the IMF tweaked its rules regarding lending to countries in arrears to other states, allowing Ukraine to continue to receive IMF funding even 36 CIA, The World Factbook, January 5, 2016.
In February 2016, with progress on the IMF’s demands moving too slowly, IMF Director Fagarde warned then-Prime Minister Yatsenyuk that reforms were taking too long and that continued IMF support for Ukraine was in jeopardy unless the pace of reforms was increased.
In late 2016, however, it was reported that electricity prices had declined somewhat.
As noted above, when the free-trade agreement with the EU went into effect in January 2016, Russia suspended its own free-trade deal with Ukraine and banned all imports of Ukrainian food—to which Ukraine has responded in kind.
Russia’s tightening of trade restrictions resulted in Ukrainian exports to Russia being cut by 50%, although Russia is still an important market for Ukrainian metals and machine-building.
However, Ukraine’s economic outlook for the longer time could be inhibited by a continued stagnation in the economic outlook for the EU and by a rise in uncertainty as the UK and the EU begin Brexit negotiations in 2017.
The EIU forecasted growth in real GDP of around 1.1% in 2016 and 2.5% in 2017.
One area where Ukraine is making a great deal of progress is in agriculture, although more reforms are needed, according to some.
In 2016, the government estimated that grain sales will top 60 million tons, up 7% over 2015.
With respect to its need for direct foreign investment, at the end of 2015 the value of Ukraine’s foreign investments was over $60 billion.
Ukraine possesses large energy resources, although the sector has performed, according to many, below its potential and has traditionally operated in an environment of low energy prices, subsidies, and high consumption.
This sector became one of the first areas in which international donors demanded the new Ukrainian government concentrate its reform efforts.
The Poroshenko/Groysman government made a serious effort to address the corruption surrounding the energy sector and initiated several reforms, including reducing or eliminating subsidies, which has resulted in lower consumption.
Ukraine has historically been heavily dependent on Russia for its energy supplies and for the transit fees associated with the flow of gas through Ukraine to Europe.
Russia long sought control of Ukraine’s natural gas pipelines and storage facilities.
Ukraine’s vulnerability to Russian political pressure through energy policy has been mitigated somewhat by the fact that the main oil and natural gas pipelines to Central and Western Europe transit Ukraine’s territory.
Past Russian efforts to greatly increase gas prices for Ukraine provoked a crisis that resulted in the cutoff of Russian gas to Western Europe for several days in January 2006.
Elowever, after the EU raised objections that the project violated EU competition rules, Russia canceled the South Stream project in December 2014.
Ukraine and the EU are now facing another possible problem with Gazprom that could affect Europe’s supply of gas during winter 2017.
Recently, a court in Ukraine upheld a government decision to impose a $6. billion fine on Gazprom on the grounds that the Russian company had abused its monopoly position in the natural gas market between 2009 and 2015.
Some in Ukraine believe Gazprom may be preparing another gas crisis by threatening to cut gas supplies through Ukraine to pressure the EU to convince Ukraine to back off from insisting on the fine.
Ukrainian leaders acknowledge that in order to avoid likely future Russian efforts to use energy supplies as a political weapon, Ukraine would have to sharply reduce its overall energy 47 Ibid.
The Ukrainian Rada passed legislation reducing the energy subsidy provided to consumers, resulting in higher prices for gas or electricity but some reductions in energy consumption.
However, according to the E1U, in 2015, Ukraine was able to do without Russian gas only because a deep economic contraction in Ukraine had reduced demand/ 1 In 2016, Ukraine filled some of its underground storage facilities with gas to help get through winter 2016-2017.
Ukraine, however, has relied on the EU to act as a mediator with Russia to secure the ability of Ukraine to purchase Russian gas in the event more supply is needed.
Ukraine will also have to make much greater strides in energy conservation.
Until the collapse of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, the Kremlin preferred using indirect methods of influence in Ukraine.
These included “carrots,” such as favorable loan terms or lucrative business deals with Ukrainian politicians and oligarchs, but also “sticks,” such as de facto economic sanctions and using Russian media to attack uncooperative leaders.
Since the change in government, Ukrainian officials have reported increased Russian interference, particularly in Ukraine’s domestic political affairs and economy.
Russian disinformation and propaganda activities also have been on the rise.
For instance, the EU’s East StratcomTask Force, which documents cases of fake news and other disinformation in Europe, recently showed a parallel between the rise of disinformation targeting Ukraine in the infonnation space and military activity on the ground.
As the fighting in Donetsk and Luhansk escalated in December 2016, so did the discrediting of Ukraine in pro53 Op. cit.
Ukraine also was accused of violating Russian airspace over Crimea, 55 though the airspace over Crimea is not Russian but Ukrainian.
Further claims were made that the Ukrainian Deputy Foreign Minister accused the EU of betrayal; 56 that Ukrainian soldiers sell fuel to buy clothes; 57 and that there are only three ways forward for Ukraine—to be returned to Russia, to be divided, or to be subjected . 58 to a coup.
Ukraine has also been the target of numerous cyberattacks, all pointing to Russia.
Ukrainian government officials have reported that government computer servers have been hit by numerous and sophisticated cyberattacks, which some experts suggest may have come from Russia.
Speculation indicates the attacks seem to come from both Russian government sources and sources supported by the Kremlin, although the exact sources are rarely named, if known.
One example of a group identified as launching attacks is Black Energy, a known cybercrime toolkit that has been around since 2007 and was active in Georgia during its conflict with Russia.
As tensions rose between Russia and Ukraine, a new version of malware reportedly was detected being used by a mysterious group of hackers targeting Ukrainian government officials, specifically their office and cellular phones, to harvest information.
In 2015, Black Energy hackers apparently targeted government infrastructure in Dnipropetrovsk, a city in the southeast of Ukraine, as well as the Ukrainian railway, creating proxy servers at those locations to divert traffic.
An International Business Times article in 2015 suggested that intelligence services would be able to hide, for “plausible deniability,” behind groups such as Black Energy because the group is a widespread cybercrime tool used by hackers around the globe.
Another reported attack came in December 2015, when Ukrainian power companies experienced unscheduled power outages impacting a large number of customers in Ukraine.
In addition, there were reports of malware found in Ukrainian companies in a variety of other critical infrastructure sectors.
In January 2016, the Kyiv airport computer systems were apparently hacked, an attack blamed on Russian sources.
It was estimated at the time that a ban, with a few exceptions such as for dual technologies, including helicopter engines that were under contract, coidd cut close to 70% of Ukrainian-made military goods exported to Russia and force the closing or downsizing of the Ukraine military industrial base.
Tensions spiked again in November 2016, when Kyiv announced that the Ukrainian military would conduct missile tests in the region just north of the Crimean border.
Moscow warned Kyiv to keep the missiles out of Crimea air space or risk the possible shoot down of the missiles.
Since 2014, Russia has connected an extensive electricity grid from Russia to Crimea and announced plans to construct a bridge that would span the Kerch Strait, providing an 11 -mile roadway connecting Crimea and Russia.
With some 30,000 Russian servicemen already in Crimea (most supporting the Black Sea fleet), Moscow, in August 2016, announced the deployment of the S-400 anti-aircraft missile system to Crimea.
In another sign regarding the future of Crimea, elections were held in Crimea on September 18, 2016, for eight seats in the Russian Duma.
Four elected deputies represented single district and 4 were elected from party lists.
The ruling United Russia party won 73% of the vote and captured the most seats in Crimea.
Finally, it was reported in Russian press that the Kremlin’s latest state budget has pledged to boost the Crimean economy with a 37. billion rubles subsidy in 2017.
On December 19, 2016, the United Nations General Assembly voted 70 to 26, with 77 countries abstaining, for a resolution that recognizes Crimea as “temporarily occupied” by Russia and condemns the “abuses” and “discrimination” against Crimean Tatars, ethnic Ukrainians, and other groups on the peninsula.
Unrest in eastern Ukraine took an even more ominous turn in April 2014, when armed men stormed and occupied key government buildings and broadcast facilities in Donetsk and Luhansk, as well as in 61 “UN General Assembly Approves Resolution on Russian Abuses in Crimea,” Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, December 20, 2016.
In July and August 2014, the Ukrainian armed forces successfully dislodged the gunmen from strongholds in Slovyansk, Kramatorsk, and other towns, and began to move on separatist forces in the key cities of Donetsk and Luhansk.
Accusations flew on both sides as to who fired the missile, but for some it was clear—and more recently determined by the Dutch government after a lengthy investigation—that the missile was fired by the separatist forces using a Russian-supplied Buk missile.
Perhaps fearing further casualties and the loss of more territory, Ukraine agreed to a cease-fire plan during talks with separatist representatives and Russian officials and several European leaders in Minsk, Belarus, on September 5, 2014.
The signing of the agreement led to the end of the Russian-supported offensive against Ukrainian forces but did not fully end the fighting.
Sporadic, sometimes intense, fighting continued, resulting in over 1,300 deaths since the Minsk protocol was signed.
While actively engaged with United States allies in Europe in seeking a resolution of the crisis, the Obama Administration had, for the most part, left the leading role in negotiating a settlement to France, Germany, and Ukraine, whose representatives met with those of Russia in the so-called Normandy format, named after the place where the meetings first occurred in 2014.
Nevertheless, President Obama and Administration officials had been in regular contact with the main figures in the talks, including President Putin, President Poroshenko, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, and President Francois Hollande of France.
A Second Attempt at a Cease-Fire—A New Frozen Conflict Recognizing the failure of the Minsk-1 protocol to end the conflict and begin the process of achieving a political resolution to the Donbas, the presidents of France, Russia, and Ukraine and Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany met again in Minsk in early February 2015 to try to secure a new agreement to stop the fighting.
The agreement called for local elections in rebel-held regions and, more importantly and controversially for Kyiv, for legal and constitutional reforms to be negotiated with the rebels to give a special “decentralized” status to the region as well as amnesty for the separatist leaders.
The return of control to Ukraine of its side of the Russia-Ukraine border was conditioned on the implementation of the decentralization reforms.
Some expressed concern that the Minsk-2 agreement amounted to a step toward transforming the occupied parts of Donbas into a new Transnistria 67 and that the main difference between the 65 Some experts believe Russian troop levels in Ukraine are significantly lower.
As of the end of December 2016, few believe much has been accomplished in fully implementing the provisions of Minsk-2 by either side, despite commitments by both sides to do so.
However, while an OSCE Special Monitoring Mission is monitoring the cease-fire along the line controlled by Ukraine, Russia-backed separatists have restricted the operational area of the SMM, shot down or jammed SMM drones used to verify compliance, and denied the SMM any opportunity to go inside the rebel-controlled areas.
Although there have been some lulls in the fighting since February 2015, the OSCE’s SMM has consistently reported daily ceasefire violations—mostly artillery, mortar and rocket exchanges, and mostly on the part of the separatists.
The SMM has reported that the total cease-fire violations for 2016 will number in the thousands.
These cease-fire violations continue to result in numerous civilian and Ukrainian military casualties, estimated at more than 9,000 dead since 2015.
Although the OSCE continued to report sporadic fighting throughout August 2016, heavy fighting seemed to have subsided.
According to Ukrainian sources, 19 Ukrainian soldiers were injured in fighting along the line of conflict after the new cease-fire took effect.
Although other prominent separatists have recently met with suspicious deaths, the separatists immediately blamed the government in Kyiv and vowed to retaliate.
On December 19, the Ukrainian government reported that separatist forces had launched an artillery barrage and ground assault against Ukrainian military forces in the area around Svitlodarsk, west of the strategic town of Debaltseve.
Debaltseve itself is under separatist control, but the area is an important rail center.
The OSCE SMM had reported almost 3,000 explosions in the region in the build-up to the assault.
The Ukrainian military reported five Ukrainian military personnel killed and a large number of wounded during the assault.
The level of fighting, according to the SMM, represented the most serious flare-up along the front line in some months.
The withdrawal of heavy weapons from the front lines, particularly in the separatist-held areas, has been sporadic at best.
Where the SMM has been able to access territory in the Donbas, the withdrawal of some of the heavy weapons appears to have taken place.
However, the OSCE has also reported that much of the separatists’ heavy weapons and the military personnel supplied by Russia have been repeatedly repositioned along the front lines but not removed from Ukraine, as required by Minsk-2.
Several prisoner exchanges have taken place between Kyiv and the separatists.
The government in Kyiv announced on December 15, 2016, that it would release additional prisoners.
On the humanitarian issue, the UN has estimated that some 3. million Ukrainians on both sides of the contact line continue to require humanitarian assistance.
Early on in the conflict, both sides were reluctant to allow aid to flow into the eastern regions.
Lately, however, although humanitarian assistance continues to be restricted in the Donetsk region, aid is being provided.
The EU has reported a distribution of some €26 million in 2016 to organizations in Ukraine and the Donbas to provide aid, including €4 million in December.
Russia continues to report that it is also providing assistance to the people of the Donbas region, but international inspectors rarely have the chance to observe the kinds of assistance or its distribution.
On many of the Minsk-2 requirements placed on Kyiv, progress has also been mixed.
In Kyiv, the Rada has passed an amnesty law and adopted a special status law for the citizens of the Donbas.
Neither law has been signed by President Poroshenko, who has been reluctant to grant blanket amnesty due to the failure of the separatists to meet their Minsk obligations and until the International Criminal Court can investigate charges of crimes against humanity and war crimes against the leaders of the separatists.
The Rada has completed the first reading of a constitutional amendment that would provide a certain level of self-government in the Donbas.
The separatists have also rejected the provisions and demanded more far-ranging autonomy.
They say the border cannot be restored until elections are held in the Donbas.
The OSCE SMM has had access to only two checkpoints along the contested border, in Gukovo and Donetsk.
Since the conflict, Kyiv has stopped providing pensions and social payments to the citizens of the Donbas who live under separatist control.
However, individuals who cross into Ukrainian-held areas and register with the government can receive some form of social benefits.
Normal commerce between the two sides does not take place, although there is apparently a thriving black market for goods.
Some eastern companies, such as coal producing companies, who are registered tax payers in Kyiv apparently have been able to sell a limited supply of coal to the government.
Ukraine claims that Russia and the separatists have not honored the steps necessary to move the election process forward, including the provision of security and Russian troop withdrawal.
Although both sides have agreed to hold any elections in accordance with Ukrainian law, the Rada has yet to pass an election law because it is unclear whether Ukrainian government officials or political parties will be allowed into the region to help set up polling stations, print ballots, or even determine how ballots would be counted and reported.
The Ukrainian government also wants guaranteed open media coverage of the election and the ability of displaced persons to vote in their home areas.
The separatist’s demand that a total amnesty law be passed before elections can be held and apparently have not agreed to any of the election process demands by Kyiv.
Control of the border is critical for Kyiv in halting the continuous flow of Russian forces and equipment to the separatists, although for some, there is a question whether the OSCE can handle such a mission.
Some Ukrainian politicians insist that the border should be controlled by the Ukrainian Armed Forces as a precondition to elections.
The plan, according to some, was to have been ready in November 2016 and could have included a provision deploying an armed OSCE mission to the east to better protect the monitoring mission.
It was unlikely that the separatists would have agreed to such a provision, and since Russia continued to insist that it has no military forces in eastern Ukraine, it was unclear what exactly the road map would envision.
As noted above, although President Poroshe nk o won a hard-fought victory in initially moving legislation through the Rada to grant the increased autonomy for the Donbas called for in the Minsk-2 agreement, he does not have the necessary votes to pass this legislation as an amendment to the constitution.
He is unlikely to secure those votes unless major progress is made by the other side to stop the fighting or to ensure free and fair elections are held in the disputed regions.
However, Russian official statements and the Minsk-2 agreement view the separatist regimes as legitimate interlocutors for Kyiv in determining the future of Ukraine.
Moscow has insisted on the decentralization of Ukraine, under which the various regions would have wide autonomy in the areas of the economy, finance, culture, language, education, and external economic and cultural ties with neighboring countries or regions.
What had largely disappeared from official Russian rhetoric since the start of the conflict was is the concept of Novorossiya —that is, expanding Russia’s dominant control of the area to include 80 “Details of the Talks with Putin in Berlin,” Liga.net, October 21, 2016.
Since then, however, Ukrainian military forces have become somewhat more capable, and it may appear to Putin that realizing such an objective would now likely require a massive and perhaps politically unacceptable infusion of Russian military forces, with casualties.
At best, the situation in the east is likely to remain unresolved, with no cease-fire in place, Russia continuing to control the Russia-Ukraine border, and an agreement between Kyiv and the separatists on elections, amnesty, and decentralization remaining unlikely.
Such a status will continue to provide Moscow with leverage over Kyiv but might not afford the same opportunity to destabilize Ukraine as stepping up the conflict.
One unanswered question through this lack of progress is whether the leadership of the DPR and LPR would continue to adhere to Moscow’s strict line if little or no progress were made with Kyiv or whether Moscow would attempt to exercise more control over the regions.
Some believe the DPR, for instance, woidd like to become more independent of Moscow, exercising more control over the economic and business assets and decisionmaking of the region.
Recently, one report suggested that the DPR and the LPR were about to unite into one entity, reviving the concept of Novorossiya.
Such a union would, for some, represent a dangerous action, as it likely would make the DPR the dominant local player and set the stage for more Russian aggression deeper into Ukraine.
On the other hand, some suggest that because there is more enthusiasm for this idea among DPR leaders than among their counterparts in Luhansk, the former may be prepared to use a show of force, including open military conflict with the LPR, to secure such an outcome.
In December 2016, as noted above, some in the region apparently decided to take matters into their own hands when they launched a military assault against Ukrainian forces in the Svitlodarsk area, with the intent, according to the Ukrainians, of seizing more territory.
By contrast, some observers believe that Putin may eventually create the conditions for an election and reintegration of the Donbas region into the country, not because he is prepared to give up the region but because he believes such a move would further weaken European resolve to continue the sanctions regime on Russia.
Some Europeans had already suggested that sanctions could be incrementally lifted as parts of Minsk-2 are implemented.
When the EU agreed to extend its sanctions on Russia until July 2017, the idea of a deal was apparently dropped.
In this scenario, outlined by Alexander Motyl in a February 2016 article, Moscow appears to believe that by reintegrating the Donbas into Ukraine and having proRussia legislators elected to the Rada, Moscow could gain even more leverage in Kyiv.
Russia’s proxies, when allied with existing opposition parties, could control a certain bloc of votes on key issues in the Rada, effectively blocking some reform progress and perpetuating political instability.
Such a move by Putin also would force Kyiv and the Rada either to honor democratically elected MPs from the Donbas and offer them protection if they came to Kyiv or to ignore the will of the people of Donbas and refuse to seat them in the Rada, potentially inviting criticism from the West.
This scenario has raised some concern in Kyiv and has led some to suggest this could only become a politically divisive problem.
These officials initially believed there were additional financial consequences, created by continued low oil prices, Western sanctions, and Russian commitments in Syria that Moscow did not want to continue to incur in the current economic environment by prolonging the crisis.
However, Moscow seems able to weather the economic problems and has not waivered in support of its commitment to the separatists.
Other observers, however, believe these arguments miss the entire point of why Putin seized Crimea and supported the separatists in the first place—the destabilization of Ukraine and the reversal of its Western orientation.
In a statement on this issue, Ukrainian war hero Naydia Savchenko said that although she welcomed a Minsk cease-fire agreement, she disagreed with key aspects of the deal, including giving eastern Ukraine more autonomy and holding local elections in the Donbas.
As noted above, however, Savchenko found herself in some political hot water when in December she met with representatives of the separatists in Minsk, although her purpose was not clear.
He also argued that Putin knows “that it is much easier for the West to put pressure on Ukraine to 84 “Why Reintegrating the Donbas is Suicide for Ukraine,” Alexander Motyl, World Affairs, February 25, 2016.
This pressure seemed to be on full display when the foreign ministers of France and Germany met with President Poroshenko in February 2016.
For some, the pressure on Kyiv to meet the Minsk-2 requirements, including amending the Ukrainian constitution, would permanently reward the separatists, seen by many as mere street thugs with guns, for taking sovereign territory from their own country at the point of a gun.
Since then, however, the Europeans seem to have backed off from pressuring Kyiv to take the controversial actions many wanted while still insisting that both sides meet their obligations under Minsk-2.
This approach, in the eyes of some, reinforces resentment of the West and suspicions of Europe’s commitment to its own principles of rule of law and raises the question of whether Europe’s real priority is lasting peace and political reform or simply implementation of the Minsk agreement.
Military Deadlock, Political Crisis,” Briefing 85, International Crisis Group, December 19, 2016.
The EIB has already obligated approximately €3 billion, including infrastructure projects involving energy efficiency, modernization of water systems, and transport improvement projects.
The package also included close to €110 million aimed at developing the private sector, including small and medium enterprises.
Ratification of the pact was initially delayed due to Russian threats to block Ukrainian imports from Russian markets unless the pact was modified to protect Russia’s interests.
Provisional application rather than complete application occurred because the agreement must be ratified by all 28 EU member states.
In April 2016, voters in the Netherlands rejected the agreement, forcing the government to withhold ratification.
In December, the Dutch presented a document stating that the Netherlands wanted to make it clear that the AA was not a “stepping stone” for Ukraine to become a member of the EU, nor did it contain an obligation for the EU or its member states to provide collective security guarantees or other military aid or assistance to 95 “Tangible Results on the Road to Reform in Ukraine,” Vazil Hudak, EurActiv.com, December 19, 2016.
The EU Council, at its December summit, accepted the Dutch proposals, although not without some dissention among a few member states, and are now awaiting a ratification vote by the Dutch parliament.
The AA does provide Ukraine with the possibility of a gradual improvement in the Ukrainian economy as the trade relationship begins to take hold and matures.
The EU also helped modernize Ukraine’s natural gas transit system and worked on reversing the flow of pipelines through Slovakia so that Ukraine can receive gas from the West.
Finally, the EU agreed to accelerate its Visa Liberalization Action Plan to allow Ukrainians to travel throughout the EU, although that agreement had not been implemented by the end of 2016.
Despite hopes for a closer association with Europe promoted by veterans of the Maidan protests, some in Ukraine and Europe believe that post-Maidan disenchantment with Europe may be growing.
These observers claim that oligarch-run media outlets, which oppose reform and populist leaders who want a change in government, are increasingly promoting anti-EU messages.
Pointing to the difficulty in the EU’s ratification of the AA with Kyiv and the delays associated with implementation of the visa liberalization agreement, some in Ukraine are beginning to conclude that key EU member states are dragging their feet and have failed to honor their promises to Ukraine.
The Administration then issued two additional executive orders expanding the scope of the sanctions and announced visa bans and asset freezes against several senior figures from Russia and the secessionist Crimean government.
However, after the Malaysian Airlines tragedy on July 17, 2014, the EU largely matched and even in some cases went beyond United States sanctions.
Since January 2015, the United States and the EU have added to and extended the sanctions on Russian individuals and entities several times.
Although the EU sanctions were extended again, an agreement had to be reached between the member states that the EU would conduct a thorough review of the sanctions and hold a debate over their continued implementation.
Although Juncker in a meeting with Putin stated the EU’s intention to renew the sanctions, some felt Juncker’s attendance at the forum was to lay the ground for a softer policy toward Russia in the second half of the year.
Extending the sanctions required a unanimous vote among all 28 EU member states.
Despite the extension, some EU member states are concerned about the commitment of the incoming United States administration and whether United States support for the sanctions will continue.
Most believe that should the United States ease up on its sanctions, the EU will have no choice but to reverse its sanctions policy given current opposition to them, as noted above.
In December 2016, the United States administration blacklisted an additional 15 Russian individuals and companies for their dealings in Crimea and Ukraine.
At the July 8-9, 2016, NATO summit in Warsaw, the NATO-Ukraine Commission met.
Ukraine is currently the United States’ 80 th -largest goods trading partner, with $2. billion in total goods trade during 2014.
In December, the Department of State notified Congress that is was obligating $445 million to Ukraine for FY2016.
Recently, however, it was reported that the drones have been less effective than anticipated and that Russia and the separatist forces it supports can intercept and jam their video feeds and data.
These exercises seek to enhance interoperability and strengthen regional security through realistic training, while also sending an important signal of reassurance to Ukraine and other regional partners.
In the FY2017 NDAA, Congress extended the authority to provide additional security assistance to Ukraine through December 31, 2018, and authorized the use of up to $350 million in FY2017.
The NDAA, however, would limit the obligation or expenditure of funds to $175 million of the funds authorized to be appropriated in FY2017 until a certification is made that Ukraine has taken substantial action on defense institutional reforms.
The legislation would also have tightened sanctions enforcement with a new anti-evasion framework and require regular reports on banks illegally controlling Ukrainian assets—particularly Russian banks in Crimea.
Additionally, the bill would try to drive new private-sector investment to Ukraine, clamp down on Russia buying defense equipment or services from NATO allies, target human rights abuses in Russian-occupied areas, and call for a strategy to push back against Russian propaganda.
First, the prolonged discord at the beginning of 2016 over how to replace Yatsenyuk, create a new government, and avoid national elections stymied the political process and fueled doubts among the public regarding the reform agenda.
For some, reforming Ukraine is not rocket science, but it is also not easy and has had to be forced all along the way.
Prime Minister Groysman, who came into office with little public confidence in his willingness to seriously tackle the root causes of much of the country’s corruption, has since shown a relatively strong commitment to enact reforms and has appeared to be less intimidated than feared by those who oppose those reforms.
The potential for a significant period of instability and the possible necessity of a new national election in 2016, especially in mid-summer, when the government was hit with several political developments and challenges, was avoided.
Nevertheless, after 10 months of the Groysman government, those doubts still persist.
Instability has recently increased, in part due to the reemergence of powerful oligarchs and others with entrenched interests in not seeing too much change and attempting in subtle ways to derail the reformist agenda.
How Europe is supporting Ukraine’s transformation,” Gustav Gressel, European Council on Foreign Affairs, October 5, 2016.
The United States and Europe, while urging a faster pace for reforms and more confidence-building among the public, would like to avoid a new national election in 2017, as signs indicate that opposition forces could present a strong challenge—aided, for many, by Moscow.
The other major challenge for Kyiv is of course eastern Ukraine but also, fundamentally, Vladimir Putin.
To Putin, according to many, Ukraine is not a legitimate state and Ukrainians are not an independent people.
Ukraine is merely a territory that Russia has a right to or a state that Moscow should have influence over, regardless of who lives there.
The fighting between Russian-supported separatists and the Ukrainian military along the demarcation line continues to flare up at times, resulting in continued fatalities and casualties.
In addition, according to the OSCE Monitoring Mission, there have been periodic reports that weapons and ammunition continue to cross into eastern Ukraine from Russia.
Nevertheless, many analysts believe that the resumption of large-scale fighting in eastern Ukraine is not likely in the short term, although with Kyiv showing no sign of bending, heavy fighting could resume.
At the very least, the region continues to evolve into a frozen conflict.
Beyond the need for a cease-fire, the separatist rebels in the Donbas do not seem to be moving forward in implementing other parts of the Minsk-2 agreement.
Although elections are supposed to take place in the disputed territory, it appears unlikely at this time that the separatists would allow a totally free or fair election.
The facts on the ground in the Donbas have also created an internal challenge to the government in that the stalemate in the Donbas continues to fuel the growing gap between those individuals, particularly inside Ukraine, who do not want to implement parts of the Minsk-2 agreement—particularly by amending the Ukrainian constitution—or to accommodate the separatists at all until the separatists fulfill their responsibilities to Minsk-2 and those, under pressure from the outside, who want to keep the process moving forward as long as the other side appears willing to do so.
This, of course, could change as Putin and his supporters try to stir up political chaos in Kyiv or conclude that the mood of European countries and United States to support Kyiv is diminishing.
Putin could offer to hold elections anyway, though such elections likely would be flawed.
Because some European leaders have suggested that sanctions could be incrementally reduced as individual elements of the Minsk-2 agreement, rather than the agreement in its entirety, are achieved, Putin could conclude that for the West, progress—however imperfect—would nevertheless be progress, and that would be good enough for Putin’s overall plans for Ukraine.
The dilemma for Poroshenko and Groysman would be whether to accept the Kremlin’s conditions.
The new unknown factor for Ukraine’s future also will be the position of the new United States administration.
If Washington signals a willingness to step back from its support for Ukraine and the sanctions on Russia, many believe EU solidarity will crack and Ukraine could find itself quickly searching for a way to accommodate Moscow.
At the same time, although a period of political stability and progress in the economic and reform efforts of the Groysman government would be good for Kyiv and the West, despite the continued conflict in the east, such progress could also cause problems for Kyiv.
Continued success in reform, coupled with the EU’s decision to renew sanctions on Russia until July 2017 and continued NATO military deployments in Eastern Europe, could force Putin to react.
Putin and his allies have not reacted well to Europe’s continued sanctions or to recent NATO actions, and faced with actual reform successes in Kyiv, could be forced to react in some way to protect his position at home.
Some also feel that with Putin’s objectives in Syria well on their way to being realized, Putin could turn his attention back to Ukraine.
For instance, the Kremlin could support an increase in fighting in eastern Ukraine to slow the reforms and to generate opposition to the government for its inability to control the conflict.
The Kremlin’s disinformation and cyberattack efforts could increase in anticipation of national elections in the spring.
Increased support channeled to opposition political groups intended to stir the skeptical public could place additional pressure on the Groysman government.
Or Putin could offer some kind of deal to the incoming United States administration to try to draw a wedge between Washington and Brussels.
All of these options would pose substantial risks for the interests of the United States and the EU to promote stability, security, and economic development in Ukraine.
On December 20, 2016, the United States blacklisted an additional 15 Russian individuals and companies for their dealings in Crimea and Ukraine.
The Treasury Department designated seven individuals and eight corporate entities involved in a range of projects, including the construction of a bridge connecting Russia to the Crimean peninsula.
It also targeted businesspeople who are associates of President Vladimir V Putin or are involved in activities that aid in Russia’s destabilization of Ukraine.
