Directionality as a thematic category is a novel methodological approach in memes research.
While the memes reference a given news story or event, they continued to be consumed and reproduced along similar thematic categories.
This tendency to follow a narrative is at once endemic to viral media in general and unique to memes given their remix, parody, iteration, and rapid diffusion.
Russian Internet, Internet memes, Russia–Ukraine conflict, cult of Putin, participatory digital culture Overview of the Conflict During 2014, Russian and Ukrainian netizens took to the Web to discuss aspects of conflict between their two countries by using memes.
Internet memes offered them the opportunity to criticize or support the policies and politics on both sides as the issues emerged.
One such meme that emerged during the Crimean crisis references a phone conversation between United States President Barak Obama and Russian President Vladimir Putin.
The Crimea River meme was tweeted by @RuNetMemes’s Twitter account on March 4, 2014, and expresses simultaneously that Obama should simply accept the annexation ; portrays Putin as clever, if not also cool; and captures a major point in the conflict succinctly in a multi-image-panel meme with dialogue balloons, similar to a comic strip.
The Crimea River meme, along with its many memetic counterparts, discusses several issues related to the Russia–Ukraine conflict (such as diplomatic and policy issues between the United States and Russia on the issue of the annexation of Crimea) and divulges insights into the manner in which individuals use memes to talk about a conflict.
Yet, in the case of the Russia–Ukraine conflict, the Internet became the proving ground for a flourishing participatory digital culture wishing to express itself in memetic terms.
Iterative, rapidly diffused, and easily consumed and reproduced, Internet memes are signposts of discursive activity and have been the focus of a growing body of research.
These contributions mostly focus on memes that discuss topics, events, and people related to the United States.
However, little research has been conducted on the Russian Internet and its memes.
Denisova suggests that memes are a coded language of dissent on the Russian Internet.
Arestova, Balandina, and Budko investigate the origins of the Internet meme in Russian culture.
The specific aim of this article is to present the findings from a content analysis of Internet memes to uncover thematic tendencies as well as structural differences and innovations in creating memes related to the conflict.
Additionally, the article offers directionality as a tool in analyzing Internet memes.
Directionality is also an important tool in analyzing memes, because it enhances our understanding of narrative construction among members of participatory digital culture.
It is also worthwhile to note that this analysis draws on an array of disciplines for the purposes of meaning-making across the various memes included in this study and which were produced during the course of the conflict in 2014.
Freudian psychology, literary theory, postmodern thought, sociological theory, and recent conceptualizations in the fields of media and communication form a tool kit for the analysis of Internet memes in this study.
It was necessary to remain broad for the simple purpose of aligning memetic artifact with appropriate interpretation.
But first it is necessary to understand the differences between memes and Internet memes.
Distinguishing Memes from Internet Memes In The Selfish Gene, Richard Dawkins extrapolates the meme as a cultural corollary to the biological gene and uses the term to explain evolutionary advances from the perspective that a meme is a cultural phenomenon.
Dawkins views the meme as a thoroughly selfish and virulent idea that vies for human attention in order to infect the mind like a virus, followed by its replication and further spread from brain to brain.
The meme of evolutionary biologists shares characteristics with its digital counterpart but is foremost an associative concept of cultural evolution.
Indeed, the digital counterpart to Dawkins’ meme, the Internet meme, is hereby defined as a remixed, iterated message that is rapidly diffused by members of participatory digital culture for the purpose of satire, parody, critique, or other discursive activity.
Virtual physicality, social and cultural connection, and purposeful production and consumption accentuate the meme as artifact but also relate directly to the duality of structure , which implies an interaction between agent and social system.
Virtual physicality implies a cognitive as well as digital memory trace.
Giddens defined memory traces as the structuring properties that enable the merging of time and space in social systems.
Memory traces allow individuals to engage in similar social practices across time and space.
It is an especially useful concept regarding Internet memes, because their production, consumption, remix, and reproduction occur in the human mind as well as in the digital environment.
The recursive production, consumption, and reproduction of memes evince their importance and underscore their virtual physicality in participatory digital culture.
Memes as artifacts also possess cultural and social attributes as they are produced, reproduced, and transformed to reconstitute the social system.
In other words, individuals within the social system understand the process of meme creation.
Further, the creation or reproduction of memes may encourage the continued production of a given meme for an indefinite period of time.
Thus, memes as artifacts underscore the purposeful production and consumption among members of participatory digital culture.
As artifacts of participatory digital culture, Internet memes are the result of purposeful production and consumption because of social and cultural connections experienced onand off-line.
Virtual physicality is merely a symptom of their existence as Internet memes.
Identifying and Analyzing Russian and Ukrainian Memes A content analysis was conducted of all tweets from 2014 on @RuNetMemes’ Twitter feed.
An initial review excluded memes that lacked an explicit or implicit reference to the Russia–Ukraine conflict.
Explicit references feature a comparison and/or a contrast between Russia and Ukraine.
Implicit references require inference to understand the connection between the meme and the conflict between Russia and Ukraine.
Such memes include humorous, insulting, cynical, condescending, or similar portrayals of Russian and Ukrainian leadership but without a direct reference to the conflict.
The date range January 2014 to December 2014 was used to identify memes that refer to the conflict between Ukraine and Russia.
The rationale for the date range is a combination of convenience and timeliness.
A sample was identified as either explicitly or implicitly referring to the conflict.
The sample was then analyzed in terms of directionality and theme, which is discussed in greater detail in the analysis section.
The Internet memes chosen for this study are taken from the Twitter account @RuNetMemes managed by Kevin Rothrock and Tatyana Lokot.
As such, the choice of memes published by @RuNetMemes is subjective and therefor a limitation on the representative value of this research.
However, given no other known forum for the analysis of Internet memes created during the Russia–Ukraine conflict in 2014, the choice to draw from the Twitter account was logical.
Coding and Reliability An emergent coding method established thematic categories.
Emergent coding was appropriate after an initial examination of the data.
The content analysis revealed several dominant themes that fall into the three emergent coding categories, all of which were mutually exclusive, exhaustive, and reliable.
Although the analysis is qualitative, computing a reliability coefficient was necessary to ensure precision in assigning memes to an appropriate category.
It must be noted that the categories do not assume that memes coded as directionally Russian or directionally Ukrainian were necessarily created or tweeted by a Russian or Ukrainian, nor does the researcher assume that Ukraine consists of pro-EU and pro-Russia halves.
The rationale for using directionality is to shed light on the intended audience of the meme in terms of social critique.
In other words, for a meme to be coded as directionally Ukrainian, it is not essential to this inquiry to know whether a Ukrainian or Russian person created the meme.
Directionality as a coding concept for Internet memes is helpful, because it reveals the subject matter as well as the audiences.
Language Kevin Rothrock, the moderator of the Twitter account @RuNetMemes, provided English translations of any Russian and/or Ukrainian text to accompany the original text on the memes.
Additionally, as the researcher, I feel it appropriate to note that my level of proficiency in Russian allows me to understand its use as the most salient language among memes in the sample.
Understanding the Emergence of Memetic Themes Generally, the themes that emerged from the analysis suggest impassioned perspectives on both sides of the conflict.
Although the narrative may reference a given news story or event, the memes themselves continued to be consumed and reproduced along similar themes.
Often, and especially in the case of the Ukrainian memes, the tweets included an image macro.
As Wiggins and Bowers point out, once text is added to an image—which can be a photograph, screenshot, or other graphic content–it becomes an image macro meme.
However, in the case of the tweets on @RuNetMemes, several examples do not fall into this definition.
Image macro memes typically establish the joke at the top of the image with the punchline placed at the bottom.
This type of structure positions the image as a visual connection between the top-bottom parts of the joke.
The vast majority of memes in the sample did not follow the prescriptive structure for image macro memes.
However, as mentioned previously, its structure is not typical for image macro memes.
One reason for the difference in structure may be due to a novice level of experience in creating memes among Russian netizens as well as their presumed limited familiarity with United States image macro memes, such as Condescending Wonka or Philosophical Raptor.
Analysis Internet memes as the unit of analysis tended to cluster around two categories.
Directionally Russian implies memes that are decidedly pro-Russia, anti-Ukraine, pro-Putin/Kremlin, and anti-United States/European Union.
Directionally Ukrainian memes are explicitly pro-Ukraine, pro-United States/European Union, anti-Putin/Kremlin, and/or anti-Russia.
Memes that did not thematically fit into either category necessitated the creation of a third category, designated as directionally neutral or indeterminate.
Some memes initially seemed to be a possible match for either of the two major categories.
Although they were thematically relevant to the Russia–Ukraine conflict, their intent was impossible to discern.
Major themes Example Nyash Myash/Natalia Sexualized and fetishized remix of Poklonskaya’s speech as well as later Poklonskaya comments in the media Vague references to Russia– Image of Crimea on a half-eaten cake; Maidan protestors as characters in Ukraine conflict World of Warcraft Popular Cultural References in Ukrainian and Russian Memes Absent among the memetic exchanges are references to Russian or Ukrainian television, film, art, literature, or pop culture as the source material for creating insults of Russia’s perceived opponents.
One reason for the dominance of United States film references may simply be the popularity of United States films abroad.
Film References for Directionally Russian and Directionally Ukrainian Memes.
Type of meme Date Directionally Ukrainian Putin as Neo from The Matrix dodging questions January 17, 2014 Inspirational portrayal of Maidan protest with Batman from The Dark Knight January 24, 2014 Reference to Iron Man to critique Yanukovich’s lack of resources January 29, 2014 Putin as Don Corleone and Yanukovich in reference to The Godfather February 27, 2014 Lenin as Forrest Gump running from Ukrainian patriots February 27, 2014 Weekend at Bernie’s with Putin, Yanukovich, and Medvedev March 11, 2014 Russian ambassador to United Nations as Dr.
In terms of filmic genre, The Lord of the Rings is an epic fantasy adventure, and World War Z is apocalyptic horror.
However, the scenes selected for the memes depict desperation, impending doom, and/or catastrophe.
Incidentally, the World War Z reference includes Ukrainian text on the right side of the two-image panel.
The narrative development maintained the catastrophic theme even though the two memes in the directionally Russian category were several months apart.
The directionally Ukrainian memes tended to use the film reference as a means for criticizing Russia or its leadership, but did so with an almost whimsical tone, which was absent from the Russian memetic counterparts.
Common film genres among the directionally Ukrainian memes included science fiction, superhero, mafia/crime, dark comedy, romantic-comedy-drama, and comedy.
Analysis Scatological insults, specifically references to urine or excrement, were unique to memes coded as directionally Russian and targeted Ukraine and the European Union.
Considering the absence of such vitriolic insults among the directionally Ukrainian memes, the motivation to use scatological references suggests an intense hatred of Ukraine for aligning itself with the European Union.
Comic strip shows Winnie the Pooh eating excrement while praising Ukraine.
Regardless of the homosexual and scatological references, the factual nature of the insult is unimportant.
The greater the familiarity that members of participatory digital culture have with a given insult, the more likely it will be used for thematically similar memetic creation, especially if it serves to further the memetic conversation, because it will likely persist until it is no longer needed.
Homosexuality-as-decadence led by the United States secretary of state.
As such, memes that refer to homosexuality as an insult conceptually capture Voloshinov’s position and maintain the moral purity and heterosexual masculinity implied within Putin’s personalization of politics as spectacle , discussed in greater detail below.
Perhaps the core of any insult reveals more about the aggressor than the target.
The term homosexuality-as-decadence reveals a latent heterosexual insecurity especially directed at men who oppose Putin’s policies.
Its use as a concept in this analysis reflects no judgment held by the author.
Additionally, although a few directionally Russian memes resemble common memetic structures , the preponderance of memes in this category demonstrated an inconsistent pattern in terms of structure.
This structure seems to be largely unique to the directionally Russian memes, with no directionally Ukrainian memes copying this structural strategy.
Homosexuality-asdecadence is a major theme among the directionally Russian memes and fits well within the larger discourse of Putin’s personalization of politics as spectacle.
Discussion In lieu of substantive political and social commentary, members of participatory digital culture celebrate memetic dialogue by recursively reproducing thematically similar content.
The memes in this category are symptomatic of the current political and social constellation of Russian society.
Structural references to Putin—such as perceptions of his power, masculinity, and dedication to duty—form an essential component of the propaganda that supports Putin’s personalization of politics as spectacle.
A Personalization of Politics as Spectacle The political era that Vladimir Putin has established since 1999 is defined by the personalization of politics as spectacle.
However, it would be ill advised to read the Putin cult as analogous to the cult of Stalin.
Guillory contends that Putin is a “unifying symbol the much older notion of the king’s two bodies” — Putin’s personal life and his public persona.
Usually well scripted and planned, the Russian public occasionally catches a glimpse of Putin’s personal side, as when he shed tears to learn of his successful election to an unprecedented third term as Russian president or when he announced plans to divorce from his wife, Lyudmila.
Putin’s public persona, well-crafted to assert authoritativeness, provides the best examples of Putin’s cult as the personalization of politics as spectacle, such as the Internet memes that seek to promote Putin above Russia as morally pure and virile.
Indeed, and as Cassiday and Johnson have argued, the Putin cult is not neoSoviet but rather post-Soviet, and I would add that it is entirely postmodern as well.
Putin’s Memetic Spectacle Spectacle is particularly relevant to this discussion of Internet memes.
As noted by Wiggins and Bowers , memes are a genre of online communication.
With regard to the Ukraine–Russia conflict, memes embody the reification of Putin’s personalization of politics as spectacle.
As Cassiday and Johnson note, Putin’s cult transcends itself through officially sanctioned and planned portrayals of the Russian leader.
In addition to the planned aspect of the Putin cult, Russian netizens recursively consume and produce memes either specific to or related to Putin to further the personalization of politics as spectacle.
Ross wrote that the cult emerged from Putin’s arguably formidable personality.
Accordingly, memetic references to Putin seek to defend Putin from opponents, either real or imagined.
Although neither of the categories of memes in this analysis emphasize Putin himself, his virtue as a virile, masculine heterosexual is implied when memes accuse Russia’s opponents of homosexuality.
Equally, Putin’s moral purity, love of animals, devotion to the Russian Orthodox Church, and his tireless efforts at building a better Russia for Russians are implied when memes associate urine and excrement with Ukrainian leadership and the European Union.
Memes that oppose Ukraine, the European Union, and/or the United States use direct, threatening language, perhaps because of the circuitousness of Western political rhetoric.
Analysis In contrast to the directionally Russian memes, the Ukrainian examples seem to react to and exist as a result of Russian aggression in eastern Ukraine and its annexation of Crimea.
Although the Ukrainian memes certainly evince original components, they do not move beyond themes stimulated by Russian actions.
Memes that are coded as directionally Ukrainian largely respond to Russian actions in eastern Ukraine and Crimea and its relationship with the West.
A common theme among the blue-yellow memes that emerged after the visual protest of August 20 was the low level of intelligence among Russian police and leadership.
Especially prolific among memes coded as directionally Ukrainian, pop polyvocality meant the purposeful inclusion and remix of popular cultural references such as films, familiar memetic structures such as image macro memes with setup at the top of the image and punch line at the bottom, and the intentional remix of Putin’s own parade of images and tropes used for his personalization of politics as spectacle.
Interactions between Putin and Medvedev figure prominently in critical memes, with special emphasis on ineffective (if not blundering) leadership.
In most cases, Medvedev is portrayed as a well-meaning but completely inept leader who relies on input and direction from the moderately less-inept Putin.
Memes that criticize the separatists tend to portray Ukrainian protesters as simple civilians who are defending their home from Russian incursions.
RuNet Memes @RuNetMemes · Jan 17 The man dodges questions like Neo does bullets.
Clever remix of image macro meme by changing image to match punch line.
The clip was uploaded again to the Japanese YouTube channel, where it garnered massive popularity among Japanese netizens —a fact that relates to the anime-zation of Poklonskaya in a series of remixed, iterated memes deriving from the Nyash Myash meme.
RuNet Memes @RuNetMemes · Mar 27 The obsession with this woman goes all the way to the top.
An autotuned Natalia Poklonskaya is featured in the video intermixed with an anime version of Poklonskaya.
As of this writing, the original Nyash Myash video uploaded to YouTube has nearly 18 million views.
A host of related memetic examples surged in the wake of the popularity of the initial Nyash Myash video.
The preponderance of Nyash Myash memes positions her as strong, professional, loyal, and favored by the Kremlin.
However, the Nyash Myash video shows a desire for reconciliation between the two belligerents—a sentiment largely absent elsewhere.
The Nyash Myash memes from the sample taken from RuNet Memes position Putin as allegedly infatuated with Poklonskaya without actually mentioning the Russia–Ukraine conflict, as in the case with the other directionally Russian or directionally Ukrainian examples.
Other memes coded as directionally neutral or indeterminate included vague references to the conflict, such as a simple image of a half-eaten cake decorated with a map of Ukraine.
As a directionally neutral meme, it clearly has something to say about the Russia– Ukraine conflict, but it remains unclear which audiences are being addressed and for what purposes, especially when compared to the memes coded as either directionally Russian or directionally Ukrainian.
Viewing memes about the Russia–Ukraine conflict reveals a situation in which consumers are recursively producers.
Spreadable media-as-Internet memes have the potential to become massively distributed, possibly inspiring further iterations that are then rapidly diffused.
Parody sits at the heart of memes; it violates the origin through its remix and replacement with imitation.
In the current Russia–Ukraine conflict, however, it is remarkable that Internet users perceive the meme as a conduit for meaningful criticism, discussion, and possibly debate.
Memes are remixed, iterated messages that are rapidly spread for the purpose of continuing a conversation.
As artifacts of participatory digital culture, the Internet memes associated with the Russia–Ukraine conflict demonstrate a communicative capacity to not only satirize and poke fun but criticize political policy, especially in quarters where criticism has no lease.
Admittedly, though, while several of the Internet memes in this study offer superficial insults of political opponents or policies, the opportunity to voice such criticisms or insults is in and of itself worthy of study given the limitations on expression in Russian media.
In other words, the Internet meme offers Russian, Ukrainians, and others the opportunity to voice their opinions—be they superficial or serious.
The manifestation of their opinions as an Internet meme to be easily produced, consumed, and distributed coalesces as a narrative that may have been otherwise ignored or impossible to share.
This study has shown memetic directionality as an analytical tool useful to discuss meaning from discursive exchanges on the memescape.
Specific to the directionality of the memes, individuals who identify as belonging to the Ukraine, European Union, and pro-West side necessarily understand the social and cultural cues included in the memes which are useful in further memetic creation.
The same is true for those individuals who identify more with Putin, pro-Kremlin, and so on.
Finally, memes as artifacts in the Russia–Ukraine conflict, given their virtual physicality, are the result of purposeful production and consumption also because of social and cultural connections experienced onand off-line.
In the case of Ukraine and Russia, memes are a tempting tool for the dissemination of tightly encapsulated social/political critique, and they are relatively easy to understand by many people.
In this particular case, a Moscow judge ruled that a specific instance in which a celebrity’s image was used in an image macro meme qualified as a violation of personal privacy of Valeri Syutkin, a Russian singer.
Memes are sure to accompany the Russia–Ukraine conflict as it continues, and more attention must be given to the design and use of memes on both sides.
Memes appear to have the power to encourage their propagation and perhaps also their censorship.
Putin, Putiniana, and the question of a post-Soviet cult of personality.
Internet memes, public participation, and the Occupy Wall Street movement.
Humor as a means of dissent in the digital era: The case of authoritarian Azerbaijan.
Japanese netizens put reality on hold for a moment, fall in love with new attorney general of Crimea.
The relationship between cohesiveness, uniqueness, and quiddity concreteness.
Russia was ready to put nuclear forces on alert over Crimea, Putin says.
