Muratov said at the time that he would publish the document “next Wednesday” but in fact the deputy editor Andrei Lipsky published it today, Tuesday, February 24.
In his interview with Ekho Moskvy, Muratov had explained that he had learned that the memorandum was drafted in a group close to the Kremlin that included Konstantin Malofeyev, a wealthy businessman and promoter of Russian Orthodox causes and philanthropies tied to the cause of “Novorossiya,” which in the short term involves establishing Russian enclaves in neighboring countries and defending the “Russian World” of ethnic Russians and Russian speakers outside of Russia and in the long term involves annexing parts of Moldova, Ukraine and Belarus.
As Novaya Gazeta aptly notes in commentary at the end, the tone of the document is so cynical, however, that these nationalistic motifs so often heard in Russian state media are not even invoked, but there is only cold calculation.
Malofeyev worked closely with his PR consultant Aleksandr Boroday, who was later to become the head of the “Donetsk People’s Republic” and Col.
Even after these figures were removed, they continued to be seen together. and appear at some conferences and in the media.
A document has come into the possession of Novaya Gazeta which, presumably during the period between February 4-12, 2014, last year, was “brought” into the presidential administration.
In fact, after the announcement of this material on Ekho Moskvy, Malofeyev’s press service, has categorically denied this claim and has announced the intention of Mr Malofeyev to go to court.
The document which we publish is interesting for the fact that at the earliest stages of the Ukrainian political crisis — that is, before the flight of Yanukovych from Kiev and the coming to power of the “Banderite junta” — it prescribes the justification, step by step, and also the political and PR logistics for the interference of Russia in Ukrainian affairs and the breaking off from Ukraine of Crimea and the eastern regions.
And while the actual course of the Ukrainian drama has introduced some correctives, on the whole, the high degree of coincidence of this project with the ensuing actions of the Russian government are striking.
The orthography and punctuation of the original are basically preserved.– Novaya Gazeta.
In assessing the political situation in Ukraine, we must proceed from the recognition, first of all, of the bankruptcy of president V Yanukoych and his ruling “family,” who are rapidly losing control over political processes.
Secondly, the paralysis of the central government and the absence in the country of a coherent political subject , with which the Russian Federation could conduct negotiations; third, the low likelihood of the appearance of such a consensus subject after early parliamentary elections and presidential elections announced by V Yanukovych February 4 of this year.
Early parliamentary and presidential elections can become an excuse for a new spiral of demonstrations and stormings of civil war, a deepening of the “east-west” electoral divide and in the final analysis will hasten the disintegration of Ukraine.
Although the results of the Munich conference provide sufficient grounds to consider that the European Union and the USA will allow the disintegration of the country and even not consider such a turn of events to be extraordinary.
The political, diplomatic, financial, and informational support of the Russian Federation no longer has any sense.
Thirdly, under conditions of almost total paralysis of the central government, incapable of even under the threat of a default and the absence of Naftogaz of the cash for payment for Russian gas, to form a responsible government, Russia is obliged to interfere in the geopolitical intrigue of the European Union, aimed against the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Above all, this is because otherwise, our country risks losing not only the Ukrainian market for energy sales but much more dangerous, even indirect control over the gas transport system of Ukraine.
This will deliver a blow to the positions of Gazprom in Central and Southern Europe, causing enormous loss to the economy of our country.
Russia should not by any means limit its policy in Ukraine only to attempts to influence the Kiev political set-up.
The Constitution of Ukraine in any event is incapable of becoming a mechanism with which the integration of the Ukrainian eastern territories and the Crimea into the state and legal field of the Russian Federation could be legitimately launched.
As Art. of the Fundamental Law of Ukraine states, questions of change to its territories is decided exclusively by an all-Ukrainian referendum.
Meanwhile, a referendum under Art. of the Constitution of Ukraine, proclaimed by popular initiative at the demand of no less than three million citizens of Ukraine who have the right to work, under the condition that the signatures regarding the setting of the referendum are gathered from no less than two thirds of the regions and no less than 100,000 signatures in each region.
Thus, Donetsk, Lugansk, Rostov and Voronezh regions are in the euro-region “Donbass” ; Kharkov and Belgorod regions are members of the euro-region “Slobozhanshchina]; Bryansk and Chernohiv regions are members of the “Dniepr” region and so on.
Russia using the legitimate, from the perspective of the European Union legal instruments of euro-regions must attain the signing of agreements on border and trans-border cooperation and also establish direct state-treaty relations with the Ukrainian territories where there are persistent pro-Russian electoral sympathies present.
The current events in Kiev persuasively indicate that Yanukovych’s time in power may end at any moment.
Thus, there is less and less time for Russia to have an appropriate reaction.
The number of people killed in the riots in the capital of Ukraine directly testify to the inevitability of civil war and the impossibility of a consensus, with the preservation of Yanukovych in the post of president.
Under these conditions it is seen as correct to play on the centrifugal aspirations of various regions of the country with the purpose in one form or another initiating the annexation of its eastern regions to Russia.
Of course, Russia, taking upon itself the support of Crimea and several eastern territories will be forced to take on a very burdensome budgetary expenditures in its current situation.
Undoubtedly, this will have an effect on macro-economic stability and prospects for the growth of its economy.
Moreover, it can count on the appearance of a new Slavic migration stream headed from the west to the east — in counterweight to the Central Asian migration trend.
The industrial potential of Eastern Ukraine, including the military-industrial sector included in Russia’s military-industrial complex, will enable a more successful and rapid implementation of the program of re-armament of the Russian Federation Armed Forces.
What is no less important, the constructive, “smoothing” participation of Russia in the process of the highly-likely disintegration of the Ukrainian state will not only lend a new impulse to the integrationist projects of the Kremlin but also enable our country to preserve, as has already been said above, control over the gas-transport system of Ukraine.
And along with this to substantially change the geopolitical set-up in Central and Eastern Europe, returning Russia here to one of its chief roles.
For the launching of the process of the “pro-Russian drift” of the Crimea and eastern Ukrainian territories events must be created in advance to lend this process political legitimacy and moral justification.
And also a PR strategy must be built to accentuate the forced, reactive nature of the corresponding actions of Russia and the pro-Russian-minded political elite of the south and east of Ukraine.
The latest events in Western Ukraine , in the course of which the opposition proclaimed its independence from the government of Kiev, provides a basis for the eastern regions to proclaim their own sovereignty, with their ensuing re-orientation to the Russian Federation.
The retaliatory actions in the eastern Ukrainian regions must be dual in structure and in scenario.
At first demonstrators must articulate their wish not to be “hostages of Maidan”, and its attempt to usurp the rights of other regions and a large part of the population of the country regarding its own civilization and political choice and its nonacceptance of the “ideology of civil war and splitting of the country” which political representatives of the Western Ukrainian elite are espousing.
The slogans of the moment must be the justified wish not to “support by tax withdrawals the pro-fascist forces” of Western Ukraine and the government dependent on them oriented to the demands of the European Union and not the needs of its citizens. – Direct sovereignization with the ensuing annexation to Russia as the only guarantee for stable economic development and social stability.
It is extremely important that “world public” have as few reasons as possible to doubt the legitimacy and honesty of these referendums.
The preliminary plan for such work has already been developed and can be realized in a two-week period.
It is important to arrange these events with a PR campaign in the Russian and Ukrainian press.
This includes – drafting and launching in media rotation conceptual documents which are manifestos of sorts of the western Ukrainian and eastern Ukrainian separatism.
That is, even before the moment which is characterized in Moscow as the “coup d’etat” which became the chief justification for its subsequent actions.
The memorandum provides a pejorative evaluation of Yanukovych who subsequently for a long period in the public space would be portrayed by the Russian government as the victim of a coup and the only legitimate leader of Ukraine.
The memorandum is written in a pragmatic tone — to the point of cynicism.
It has no “spiritual and historical” justifications for Russian interference in Ukraine.
The authors of the document are concerned to lend “legitimacy” to the incorporation of Ukrainian territories into the “state legal field” of Russia.
In particular, they believe that a legal basis exists for the first step – that is mixed Russian-Ukrainian euro-regions which in turn joins the Association of European Border Regions.
The authors are convinced that using this legal instrument, Ukrainian regions with “persistent pro-Russian sympathies” can be drawn into direct state-treaty relations.
The memorandum contains a number of crude distortions of reality which were supposed to show the “reactive” and coerced nature of Russian actions All of these arguments are later actively used by Russian propaganda.
