Needs a full overhaul due to new sanctions in February 2022; the previous list was outdated already.
International sanctions during the Russo-Ukrainian War International sanctions have been imposed during the Russo-Ukrainian War by a large number of countries against Russia and Crimea following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, which began in late February 2014.
The sanctions were imposed by the United States, the European Union and other countries and international organisations against individuals, businesses and officials from Russia and Ukraine.
Russia responded with sanctions against a number of countries, including a total ban on food imports from Australia, Canada, Norway, the United States and the European Union.
Contents 1 By Canada, the United Kingdom, the United States, the European Union and Australia 1.
By Chechnya, against United States and EU institutions' leaders 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References By Canada, the United Kingdom, the United States, the European Union and AustraliaEdit Prior to 2022 invasionEdit The European Union, United States, and Canada imposed an initial round of sanctions on 17 March 2014.
Albania, Iceland and Montenegro announced on 11 April that they would align themselves to the sanctions.
The United States expanded its sanctions on 28 April to include 17 Russian companies.Japan, Canada,Australia, took similar actions soon thereafter.
The EU also joined the sanctions of 28 April and furthermore instructed the European Investment Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to suspend the signature of new financing operations in Russia.
The EU again expanded its sanctions repeatedly over the following months.
In May 2018, the European Union and Switzerland add five individuals to their sanctions lists for these individuals' organising the March 2018 Russia presidential elections in Crimea and Sevastopol.New Zealand imposed ""largely symbolic"" sanctions in May 2014.
The United States expanded its sanctions several times, including in December 2015 and April 2018.
International sanctions during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine This section is empty.
Crimea Aleksei Chaly Chief of the executive committee of the Sevastopol City Council Russia Sergey Chemezov CEO of Rostec Russia Andrey Vladimirovich Cherezov Deputy Minister of Energy for Russia Federation in the Department of Operational Control and Management for Electric Power; supports power supply for Crimea and Sevastopol that is independent of Ukraine Russia Mikhail Degtyarev Member of the State Duma Russia Oleg Deripaska Russian businessman Ukraine Vladyslav Nykolayevych Deynego Deputy Head of the People's Council of the unrecognized Luhansk People's Republic.
Ukraine Valery Kaurov Former President of the effectively defunct Federal State of Novorossiya; asked Russia to deploy troops to Ukraine.
Russia Suleiman Kerimov Russian businessman Ukraine Hennadiy Kernes Mayor of Kharkiv Ukraine Ravil Khalikov First Deputy Prime Minister and previous Prosecutor General of the unrecognized Donetsk People's Republic Ukraine Alexander Khodakovsky Minister of Security of the Donetsk People's Republic Ukraine Alexander Khryakov Information and Mass Communications Minister of the Donetsk People's Republic Russia Dmitry Kiselyov Head of the Russian Federal State News Agency Rossiya Segodnya Russia Andrey Klishas Member of the Federation Council of Russia.
Russia Andrey Kovalenko A leader of the Eurasian Youth Union Crimea Olga Kovitidi Council member for the Autonomous Republic of Crimea Russia Dmitry Kozak Deputy Prime Minister Crimea Andrey Kozenko Member of the Duma represents Crimea and on Committee for Financial Markets Russia Vladimir Kozhin Head of Administration under the President of the Russian Federation Ukraine Nikolai Kozitsyn Commander of Cossack forces.
Russia Alexey Milchakov, also known as Serbian or Fritz Commander of the 'Rusich' unit, an armed separatist group involved in the fighting in eastern Ukraine.
Russia Sergey Mironov Leader of the Russian Parliament faction A Just Russia Russia Yelena Mizulina Member of the State Duma and the A Just Russia party Ukraine Aleksey Mozgovoy Commander of the separatist Prizrak Brigade Crimea Georgiy Muradov Deputy Prime Minister of Crimea.
Ukraine Aleksandr Yurevich Petukhov Chairman of Sevastopol Electoral Commission during March 2018 elections Russia Andrei Pinchuk Former Minister for State Security of the Donetsk People's Republic Russia Vladimir Pligin Chairman of the State Duma Constitutional Law and Nation Building Committee Ukraine Igor Plotnitsky Former Defence Minister and the former Head of the Lugansk People's Republic.
Ukraine German Prokopiv Active leader of the ""Lugansk Guard"" Russia Yurii Protsenko Member of insurgent group near Slovyansk Ukraine Mykola Prysyazhnyuk Former Minister of Agrarian Policy and Food of Ukraine Ukraine Artem Pshonka Son of former Prosecutor General Viktor Pshonka.
Ukraine Yuriy Sivokonenko Member of the Parliament of the unrecognized Donetsk People's Republic and works in the Union of veterans of the Donbass Berkut.
Russia Russian Agricultural Bank aka Rosselkhozbank State-owned agricultural bank that provided ""material support"" to Russian officials.
Financial transactions are heavily restricted by United States Treasury Russia RusHydro Russian hydroelectric company, one of Russia's largest energy producers.
Financial transactions are heavily restricted by United States Treasury Russia Sovcomflot Russia's largest maritime and freight shipping company.
Russia VO Technopromexport , both OOO and OAO Company supplying support for independent electrical power supply in Crimea Russia Interautomatika Company supplying support for independent electrical power supply in Crimea Crimea Chornomornaftogaz Crimea-based gas company, allegedly sanctioned in order to prevent Russian state company Gazprom from dealing with or acquiring it.
According to the Ukrainian government she has since repaid government funds that had been allegedly misappropriated.
The list is said to include eight Swedes, as well as two MPs and two MEPs from the Netherlands.
Finland's national broadcaster Yle published a leaked German version of the list.In winter 2014/15, three politicians from Lithuania, Latvia, and Poland, respectively, were blocked from entering Russia.On October 22, 2018, Russian President Vladimir Putin signed a decree on special economic measures in relation to Ukraine’s unfriendly actions against Russian individuals and entities.On August 21,2021, Russia expanded its economic sanctions on Ukrainian individuals to include Foreign Minister Dmitry Kuleba and National Security and Defense Council Secretary Alexei Danilov.
On March 15, 2022, Russia's foreign ministry says it has imposed sanctions on United States President Joe Biden and 12 other United States officials.
Russia has imposed personal sanctions on 61 United States officials including Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen and Energy Secretary Jennifer Granholm and leading defence and media executives, the Russian foreign ministry said on June 6,2022.
Moscow is set to bar entry permissions for 26 nationals of Canada in response to the country’s earlier announced measures, the Russian Foreign Ministry said on May 21, 2022.
On June 14, 2022, Russia has imposed sanctions on 49 UK citizens, including journalists, defence officials and arms industry executives, in response to western punitive measures against Moscow over President Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine.Russia imposes an entry ban for 9 Icelandics, 16 Norwegians, 3 Greenlanders and 3 Faroe Islanders in retaliation for their joining the European Union Sanctions, the Russian Foreign Ministry said in a statement released on April 29, 2022.
They include Prime Minister Kishida Fumio, Foreign Minister Hayashi Yoshimasa and other senior lawmakers.Organization sanctions The Russian government has approved a list of legal entities, which are subject to retaliatory sanctions.
The relevant resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers was published on the official portal of legal information on May 11, 2022.
The list includes 31 companies from Germany, France and other European countries, as well as from the USA and Singapore.
In particular, it includes former European subsidiaries of Gazprom, traders and operators of underground gas storage facilities.
In particular, Russian authorities, legal entities and citizens will not be able to conclude transactions with the sanctioned entities and organizations under their control, fulfill obligations to them under completed transactions, and conduct financial transactions in their favor.
These bans were earlier established by a decree of Russian President Vladimir Putin.
The resolution sets additional criteria for transactions that are prohibited from being performed with companies from the sanctions list.
These are transactions concluded in favor of the sanctioned persons, or providing for the making of payments, transactions with securities with the participation or in favor of such companies, or transactions involving the entry of ships owned or chartered by sanctioned persons, in their interest or on their behalf, into the Russian ports.
The resolution appoints the Russian Finance Ministry responsible for sending proposals to the Cabinet of Ministers on making changes to the list, as well as on granting temporary permits for certain transactions with persons under sanctions.
The document comes into force from the date of its official publication.
Terry Manion General Manager and Vice President of Raytheon Canada Mike Mueller President and CEO of Aerospace Industries Association of Canada John Ossowski Head of the Canada Border Services Agency Craig Baines Commander of the Canadian Navy, Vice Admiral Jocelyn Paul Commander of the Canadian Land Force, Vice Admiral Alain Pelletier Deputy Commander of United States-Canadian North American Aerospace Defense Command , Lieutenant General Marc Parent President and CEO of CAE Inc.
Edmund Clark Former president and CEO of TD Bank Group Andrew Coates Manager at Lockheed Martin Canada James D Irving CEO of Irving Shipbuilding Inc.
The people on the list have been banned from entering the Chechen Republic and had all bank accounts frozen on 27 July 2014.
The copyright holder of this document allows anyone to use it for any purpose, provided that the copyright holder is properly attributed.
Redistribution, derivative work, commercial use, and all other uses are permitted.
Australian Government Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.14-09-01.
Action Targets Eight Ukrainian Separatists, a Russian Pro-Separatist Organization and Three of its Leaders, a Crimean Bank, and Three Former Yanukovych Officials"". treasury.gov.
Ottawa announced travel bans on the chair of the Sevastopol Electoral Commission, Valery Medvedev, and chair of the Crimean Electoral Commission Mikhail Malyshev. economic sanctions on Crimean oil and gas company Chornomornaftogaz.
The Swiss authorities have so far frozen some CHF5.75 billion of sanctioned Russian oligarch assets, with the total expected to rise as the European Union announces further measures.
