This paper analyses the Crimean crisis in the light of the principles of contemporary international law, as well as in the light of the Russian doctrine of international law.
This analysis shows that the arguments put forward by Russia are untenable and in contradiction with the previous Russian doctrinal approaches towards the principles of self-determination and territorial integrity.
Introduction Crimea’s annexation by Russia in 2014 marks a serious crisis of contemporary international law and of the world security system.
In fact, the annexation has challenged the system of contemporary international law.
Status of Crimea under the USSR Before 1991,e. before the moment of the USSR’s dissolution as a subject of international law, Ukraine was a state and Crimea formed an integral part of its territory.
In other words, even before the USSR’s disintegration, Crimea’s status as part of Ukraine’s territory should have been respected from the perspective of international law.
From the outset it should be recalled that the USSR by its legal nature was a subject of international law.
This meant that not only was the USSR a sovereign state and subject of international law but also its component Soviet republics had the same legal nature.
According to the UN Charter, membership is only open to sovereign states.
Article 80 of this Constitution envisaged the right of the 1 Kurs mezhdunarodnogo prava.
Thus, Ukraine was a sovereign state before the USSR was created, was a state during its existence, and continued its existence as a sovereign state after the USSR’s dissolution.
The Ukrainian SSR was party to a number of international treaties and member of some international organizations.
It may be argued that Ukraine’s status as a sovereign state under the USSR, as well as its constitutional right to withdraw from the USSR, had formal, rather than real character.
Nevertheless, without this status and constitutional right, Ukraine would not have been legally able to withdraw from the USSR in 1991 and gain actual political independence.
Under the laws of international treaties, Ukraine therefore had the right to withdraw from that treaty.
One of the myths promoted by Russia with respect to Crimea’s transfer to Ukraine became apparent by Russia’s president using the expression “Khrushchev’s gift to Ukraine”, as if it was a unilateral ungrounded move, a sort of a whim of the Soviet leader.
Furthermore, it was also argued that Russia’s and Crimea’s population allegedly did not consent to the transfer of Crimea to Ukraine.
However, Crimea was transferred to Ukraine in accordance with the Soviet constitutional law of that time.
In effect, this meant Russia’s consent to Crimea becoming part of Ukraine.
In other words, the change of Art. of the Constitution of the RSFSR and the removal of the Crimean oblast provides evidence for Russia’s consent to the transfer.
Under the law of international treaties, Russia’s consent to transfer Crimea to Ukraine and Ukraine’s acceptance may be considered an international agreement.
The legal status of Crimea as an integral part of Ukraine’s territory was then enshrined in the Constitution of the Ukrainian SSR of 1978.
Moreover, Russia has always officially supported Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
It must also be taken into consideration that in the December referendum of 1991, held on the issue of Ukraine’s proclamation of independence, 54 % of the valid votes were in favour of Ukraine’s independence.
After the USSR’s dissolution within the framework of the Commonwealth of Independent States , a number of agreements were concluded, which mention the principles of territorial integrity and inviolability of borders of the former Soviet republics.
The Russian Supreme Soviet tried to declare Sevastopol a Russian city on 9.7.1993.
Referring to the Russian-Ukrainian Treaty of 19.11.1990, the UN Security Council denounced the declaration, since both parties to the treaty had consented to the territorial integrity of each other within their current borders.
In a letter dated 19.7.1993 addressed to the President of the Security Council, the representative of the Russian Federation transmitted the text of a statement, issued on 11 July by its Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in connection with the resolution of the Russian Supreme Council regarding the status of the city of Sevastopol.
The statement contended that the resolution diverged from the policy followed by the President and the Government of the Russian Federation in upholding Russian interests as regards matters relating to the Black Sea fleet and in maintaining bases for the navy of the Russian Federation in Ukraine, in Crimea and in Sevastopol.
Regarding its relations with Ukraine, the Russian Federation would 6 It is worth noting that the right to self-determination figures in this Agreement as an inalienable right of the CIS member states, rather than of peoples as such.
That is why they were looking for reliable legal guarantees aimed at the prevention of any such territorial claims.
Ukraine has also concluded a number of international agreements with Russia on the status of the Black Sea fleet, which presupposed respect for Ukraine’s territorial integrity and non-interference in its internal affairs.
When the issue of the nuclear arsenal in the territory of Ukraine arose and Ukraine was asked to abandon this arsenal, Ukraine’s leadership asked for reliable guarantees of its territorial integrity, sovereignty and security.
On 14.1.1994, in Moscow, the presidents of Russia and the United States had officially informed the then Ukrainian president L Kravchuk that Russia and the United States were ready to provide Ukraine with guarantees of its security.
In the trilateral Declaration of Russia, the United States and Ukraine it was provided that, as soon as Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty I entered into force, and Ukraine became a party to the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a non-nuclear state, Russia and the US would confirm their obligation, in accordance with the principles of the CSCE Final Act, and would respect the independence and sovereignty, as well as existing borders of the state-participants in the CSCE, recognizing that changes to the borders may be performed only peacefully and by agreement.
Repertoire of the Practice of the Security Council, Supplement 1993-1995, Vol.
It is interesting to note that in April 1997 a round-table discussion was organized by the Moscow Association of International Law.
Only a few participants claimed that the transfer of Crimea did not pertain to the city of Sevastopol, because the city had allegedly obtained the status of “a city of Russian republican subordination”, by virtue of a decree in 1948.
Khlestov that it would signify “the final surrender of Russian pretensions” regarding Sevastopol, if the city was leased from Ukraine, was widely approved.
Besides, according to the Constitution of Ukraine of 1978 Sevastopol was a city of “republican subordination”, that means a Ukrainian, not Russian city.
Doubts were expressed about this Treaty in the Ukrainian parliament, but the key argument which managed to put all these doubts and concerns to rest was that this Treaty conclusively guaranteed that Russia lost any legal opportunity to challenge the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Kolodkin, the then president of the Russian Association of International Law.
To sum up, by annexing Crimea Russia has violated not only generally recognized principles of international law as expressed in the UN Charter, but also a whole range of international treaties and agreements concluded with the participation of Russia and Ukraine, as well as the UN Security Council’s decision.
To put the matter simply, the principle of estoppel obliges states not to contradict themselves.
First of all, it displayed obvious inconsistency in territorial issues after the USSR’s demise.
During the existence of the USSR several territorial transfers took place, including transfers of certain historical Ukrainian territories to Russia.
For example, Ukraine transferred part of its territories bordering with Smolensk, Kursk, Belgorod and Voronezh oblasts to Russia.
In 1924, the big city Taganrog with the surrounding area, inhabited predominantly by Ukrainian population, was transferred to the Russian Rostov oblast.
The Shakhtin area in Donbas and Starodubschyna were also transferred to Russia.
Under the USSR, part of Ukraine’s territory was also transferred to Moldavia.
Despite these territorial changes, Ukraine, unlike Russia, has never raised any territorial claims to Russia or to any other post-Soviet state after the USSR’s dissolution.
To illustrate Russia’s inconsistency and violation of the principle of estoppel the case of Estonia is also instructive.
After the incorporation (annexation) of Estonia into the USSR a considerable part of Estonia’s territory was transferred to Russia on the basis of the then existing Soviet legislative acts.
These territorial changes were legitimate according to the official Soviet position because they were unanimously approved by the competent Supreme Soviets.
After regaining its independence, the Parliament of Estonia declared these decisions null and void.
It argued that Estonia was annexed by the USSR in violation of international law.
Referring to its recognition of Estonia’s independence on 24.8.1991, Russia claimed that the border had to remain as it was.
Furthermore, Estonia’s insistence on the Tartu frontiers was considered to be contradictory to the principles of the CSCE Final Act and to threaten the stability of the Baltic region.
As we can see from this case, Russia behaves inconsistently and is in breach of the principle of estoppel.
On the one hand, it insists on the border with Estonia from 24.8.1991, on the other hand, it denies that its border with Ukraine, including Crimea, from the same date should remain.
Russian Doctrine of International Law on the Right to Self-Determination and Principle of Territorial Integrity Among decisions of the Russian Constitutional Court we can find several important judgments revealing Russia’s international legal position on the issue of relationship between the right to self-determination and the princi20 See T Langstrom , 256.
For example, in 1995, in connection with the war in Chechnya, the Russian Constitutional Court had issued a decree in the case concerning the constitutionality of certain edicts of the president and a decree of the federal government issued for the regulation of the conflict in the republic of Chechnya.
In its decree the Constitutional Court had also made reference to the UN Friendly Relations Declaration of 1970.
It dealt with the question whether certain legislative acts of the Republic of Tatarstan, including a referendum concerning the future status of the republic, were in accordance with the constitution.
As a result, the Tatarstan decree on holding a referendum was found to be in contravention with Russia’s constitution and thus ineffective.
Tiunov, referring to the Court’s decision on Tatarstan , argues in his textbook on international law that in international law the right to selfdetermination is limited by the principle of territorial integrity and the principle of respect for human rights.
Blischenko, self-determination of nations should not take place at the expense of other nations living in the same territory; if this happens, it should be qualified as an international crime and the issue of international responsibility, including criminal responsibility, of those persons involved in such politics should be raised, irrespective of their official position.
Chernichenko is of the opinion that this “right” is not a necessary element of the right to self-determination.
By contrast, the legality of secession depends on the consent of the state from which secession shall take place.
Starye i novye teoreticheskie problemy, Izdatel’stvo “NIMP”, Moskva 1999, 186.
In this connection, it is argued that “political, nationalistic, separatist, criminal and other factors often become a driving force for the use of this principle for selfish goals.
All peoples and states in the contemporary world are mutually intertwined.
National interests of one people should not be realized at the expense of the violation and diminishing of the legal rights and interests of other peoples.
In Ostroukhov’s view “external self-determination”,e. secession, can be legal only when authorities of a state make “internal self-determination” impossible, i.e. when the state’s government, for instance, deprives a part of the country’s population of autonomy and discriminates against it.
From the point of view of contemporary international law the most important aspect in the principle of self-determination of peoples is to secure conditions for its free development in any form which is chosen by the people.
Moiseev, Suverenitet gosudarstva v mezhdunarodnom prave, Vostok-Zapad, Moskva 2009, 50.
Regarding Russian doctrine of international law after Crimea’s annexation, there are relatively few legal arguments aimed at the justification of this move by Russia.
Perhaps, the most “original” and peculiar of these arguments is the one expressed in the open letter by the Russian Association of International Law addressed to the Executive Council of the Association of International Law regarding the so-called “peaceful annexation” of Crimea by Ukraine in 1991.
The Crimea remained in the same state, namely in the USSR with a capital in Moscow, which was at the same time the capital of Russia.
By definition, an annexation means the forcible acquisition of a state’s territory by another state.
Second, the transfer of Crimea to Ukraine from Russia was a transfer of the territory of one sovereign state to another, because under the USSR’s Constitution, as well as under the constitutions of the Ukrainian SSR and Russian SFSR, both Soviet republics were sovereign states.
Additionally, statehood of Ukraine was proved by its membership in the UN as one of its founding members.
Quite the contrary, officially it has always supported Ukraine’s territorial integrity and Crimea’s status as part of Ukraine’s territory.
Russia’s Arguments Aimed at the Justification of Crimea’s Annexation In trying to justify Crimea’s annexation, Russia has put forward a whole range of arguments.
First of all, some of these arguments were presented in the addresses, speeches and interviews of Russia’s president, V Putin.
Later these arguments were used and elaborated by Russian international lawyers, who tend to be apologetic rather than critical with respect to Putin’s argumentation.
The peculiar feature of Russian legal argumentation striving to justify Crimea’s annexation is that there is not enough international legal argumentation as such, and Russian lawyers are inclined to put at the centre of their analyses those matters that belong to the domain of internal matters of Ukraine, to its internal politics.
Incidentally, I would like to remind you that when Ukraine seceded from the USSR it did exactly the same thing, almost word for word.
Under both the USSR’s Constitution and the Constitution of the Ukrainian SSR, Ukraine, being officially a sovereign state, had a sovereign right to freely withdraw from the USSR, whereas Crimea never had such a right under either the USSR’s Constitution or the Ukrainian SSR’s Constitution.
Additionally, Ukraine had the right to withdraw from the Union Treaty of 1922 on the basis of which the USSR was created in accordance with the law of international treaties.
Officially, the population of Crimea has never been considered a separate people, neither by Ukraine nor by Russia.
Legally, the Crimean population is an integral part of the people of Ukraine which has the right to self-determination as a totality.
Chernichenko, part of the population of one state, which is of the same ethnicity (having, in terms of Chernichenko, “general national roots”) with the majority of population of other state , does not have the right to self-determination.
Third, the right to self-determination, as Russian doctrine of international law and the Russian Constitutional Court maintain, does not include the right to secede from the existing state.
The right to self-determination may not undermine the territorial integrity of an existing state.
Fourth, Ukraine’s Constitution does not allow secession and Ukraine’s criminal law makes it a crime to undermine the territorial integrity of the state.
Fifth, Russia and Ukraine have always viewed attempts to secede as dangerous separatism, which should be combated by national and international legal means.
Sixth, the so-called “referendum” in Crimea was unconstitutional according to the Ukrainian constitution45 and was nothing but a sham.
This fact alone is enough to not recognize the “referendum”, since its holding ostensibly violates the principles of the non-use of force in international relations and non-interference with internal affairs.
Additionally, it recognizes that the authority must lie in the hands of democratically elected organs, representing the local inhabitants.
The possibility of the free expression of will in a referendum depends upon the fulfilment of these requirement.
Volovova, Plebistsit v mezhdunarodnom prave, “Mezhdunarodnye otnoshenia”, Moskva 1971, 38.
One of the reasons for the illegality of a plebiscite, according to Professor Volovova, is “the holding of the people’s voting in the absence of the necessary conditions established in the law”; and its results are only legally valid when the absolute majority of the citizens, meeting the requirements of the law, took part in it.
As we can see, the “referendum” in Crimea did not meet all these requirements put forward in the Russian doctrine of international law.
It is interesting to note that when talking about the principle of nonintervention of states into internal affairs, Russian authors underline that the obligations of states under this principle include non-interference with issues such as the form of governance, the holding of referenda and plebiscites.
Discussing changes of states’ territories with the use of plebiscites, Russian authors maintain that under contemporary international law any territorial changes are only legal with the consent of the states involved.
Lastly, the international community as represented by the UN, the Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe did not recognize the legality of this “referendum”, thereby effectively declaring it null and void.
In fact, this “referendum” was nothing but a mockery of democracy and the right to self-determination.
Bekyashev , Mezhdunarodnoe publichnoe pravo, Uchebnik , Prospekt, Moskva 2005, 84.
The Argument of Coup d’État One of the key arguments of Russian politicians and lawyers aimed at a justification of Crimea’s annexation is that in Ukraine in February 2014 an illegal coup d’état had taken place, 55 as a result of which, arguably, the Ukrainian state collapsed and the Crimean population, in fear of a violation of its rights, acquired the right to secede from Ukraine.
The argument of the coup d’état was also used by the Association of Lawyers of Russian Federation in its “Statement Concerning the Situation in Ukraine and Legitimacy of Conducting the All-Crimean Referendum on the Status of Crimea on March 16, 2014”, which was issued on 18.3.2014.
There is no doubt that the cause of the tragic events in Ukraine was the forceful change of government in Kiev that occurred outside the constitutional framework as a result of illegal actions of radical elements in the Maidan movement whose participants largely comprise the current government in Kiev.
Removal from office of Ukrainian President proclaimed by the new, self-appointed leaders of Ukraine does not fit in any legal framework.
At the same time, the Association is trying to play the role of the Ukrainian Constitutional Court with this statement, judging whether or not the change of government in Kiev “occurred outside the constitutional framework” and what “fits in any legal framework” in Ukraine and what does not.
Furthermore, the idea of the Russian Association of Lawyers “to proceed from a general principle of law, Ex injuria non oritur jus” seems out of place because under the principle of sovereign equality of states it is up to the Ukrainian legal system rather than to Russia or the Russian Association of Lawyers to judge whether “the tragic events in Ukraine” were legal and legitimate or not.
It is worth recalling that when in October 1993, Russia’s president B Yeltsin committed a coup d’état and crushed the Russian parliament, Ukraine did not interfere in the internal affairs of Russia and officially refrained from commenting on the character of these events in Russia.
Regarding a coup d’état, first of all, it should be remembered that a coup d’état as such is a matter of national, not international law and it is not a violation of international law.
The order established by revolution or coup d’état has to be considered as a modification of the old order, not as a new order, if this order is valid for the same territory.
The government brought into permanent power in an unconstitutional way is, according to international law, the legitimate government of the state whose international identity is not affected by these events.
Hence, according to international law, victorious revolutions or successful coups d’état are to be interpreted as procedures by which a national legal order can be changed.
Both events are, viewed in the light of international law, law-creating facts.
It could even be argued that for Russian officials it was merely part of a political rhetoric without legal consequences.
International law does not intervene into internal struggles, which lead to a change of government 59 H Kelsen, Principles of International Law , 1966, 387.
That is why the government, which effectively and independently exercises power, is considered to be the representative of a state in international relations.
When faced with an uncertainty over whom to consider the legitimate representative of Ukraine in international relations – V Yanukovych, who had lost effective control over Ukraine and escaped abroad, or the Ukrainian government which effectively exercised power in Ukraine – Russia should have recognized the new government as the representative of Ukraine.
It cannot be argued that as a result of a “coup d’état” or “revolution” Ukraine ceased its existence as a state, even temporarily.
The words of professor Moiseev are also important because they imply that there is only one people in Ukraine which is the source of Ukraine’s sovereignty,e.
Ukrainian people taken together, which is also the true and only subject of the right to self-determination.
Moiseev, O nekotorykh mezhdunarodno-pravovykh pozitsiyakh po krymskomu voprosu, Vestnik Diplomaticheskoi akademii MID Rossii.
I have personally always been an advocate of acting in compliance with international law.
I would like to stress yet again that if we do make the decision, if I do decide to use the Armed Forces, this will be a legitimate decision in full compliance with both general norms of international law, since we have the appeal of the legitimate President, and with our commitments, which in this case coincide with our interests to protect the people with whom we have close historical, cultural and economic ties.
Moiseev, published in “Nezavisimaia Gazeta” in 2013 under the telling title “Carte-Blanche.
It is interesting to note that when V Yanukovych was in power, Russia had never raised the issue of any violations of human rights in Crimea, at least on the official level.
Moiseev, Kart-Blansh, Resheniyam Soveta Bezopasnosti OON net al’ternativy.
In other words, had there been any signs of the violation of human rights in Crimea, Russia, instead of resorting to force, should have turned to such international organizations as the UN, the Council of Europe, the European Convention on Human Rights and OSCE, of which it is a member.
The very fact that Russia made no serious attempt to turn to these organizations is very telling.
Moreover, as the reports and documents of these organizations on the situation in Crimea clearly demonstrate, there was no violation of human rights in Crimea on the part of Ukrainian authorities.
Indeed, the violations started only after Russia invaded and annexed Crimea.
Of special concern to the international community are now violations of the rights of Crimean Tatars by the Russian occupation authorities in Crimea.
As mentioned above, Russia also justifies its actions by reference to the concept of “intervention by invitation”,e. the appeal of Ukraine’s president V Yanukovych to the Russian president to use force within Ukraine.
It is noteworthy that by the time of that appeal, Yanukovych had already left the territory of Ukraine and escaped to Russia.
Moreover, in the light of Ukrainian criminal law such an “appeal” could be viewed as high treason.
The Russian doctrine of international law has always viewed “intervention by invitation” with great suspicion.
For the Russian doctrine of international law, the major yardstick, allowing it to ascertain whether a given “intervention by invitation” is legal or not, is the “reaction of the international community, universal international organizations and, first of all, the UN”.73 The reason why the Russian doctrine of international law has always been critical of interventions and interferences into internal affairs of states lies in its emphasis upon the principle of non-interference with internal affairs of states.
The important value of this formula is its strict and categorical character.
Conclusion Crimea’s annexation by Russia is an obvious and flagrant violation of a whole range of norms and principles of international law, beginning with the UN Charter and ending with bilateral international treaties concluded between Russia and Ukraine.
This annexation stands in sharp contrast to the Russian doctrine of international law with respect to such principles as territorial integrity and self-determination.
The arguments which were put forward by Russian politicians and legal scholars in an attempt to justify Russia’s annexation do not look convincing in the light of the whole previous legal argumentation of Russia.
