November, 2017 resources, and the fact that these resource gaps could be substantially mitigated by control over Ukraine’s resources.
President Vladimir Putin’s annexation of Crimea and control of large swathes of the Donbas region has left world leaders perplexed as to his motives in Ukraine.
These territories were given to Ukraine in the 1920s by the Soviet government.
This paper provides a different perspective on the Russia-Ukraine conflict and I do not apologize for raising different issues that may frustrate even the most enduring reader.
This paper contributes to the explanation of Russia’s motives in Ukraine and, I consider the Ukraine’s military industrial complex and human resources so important to Russia that the Russia’s leaders are willing to wage war to acquire control over them.
Regardless of the literature’s explanations, understanding why Russia attacks Ukraine remains unclear for two principle reasons.
First, scholars have not addressed Russia’s underlying strategic resource gaps in terms of military industrial capability and human resources that are threats to Russia.
Second, scholars have not addressed how Russian control over Ukraine might close these resource gaps.
Firstly, by identifying the strategic resource gaps that represent existential threats to Russia, secondly, by identifying how Ukraine’s resources can close or mitigate Russia’s resource gaps and secure Russia’s survival, and I do this through the lens of the resource dependency theory which will be reviewed in the next section.
However, before proceeding to the theory, let us consider a parallel situation prior to the Second World War.
Germany’s booty after the invasion of Czechoslovakia was the addition of 3. million Sudeten Germans to their population, the Skoda munition works the second most important arsenal in Europe was in their hands, the Czechoslovakia army with personnel and equipment of 35 divisions, and the total Czechoslovakian population of ten million toilers and soldiers were added to Germany’s strength.
Therefore, we have enough reasons to suppose that addition to Russia of the 13. million Russian-speaking Ukrainians, acquisition of Ukraine’s huge military industrial complex along with its huge stockpiles of Soviet era weapons, a military of 1. million including reserves, and the overall population of around 42 million might potentially have a very similar effect in terms of changes in the strategic balance of power in Europe.
THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES & METHODOLOGY Against this background, I use the lens of the resource dependency theory to provide an alternative explanation to Russia’s foreign policy in Ukraine.
The resource dependence theory has been used to explain interstate advantages and politics and has primarily an external focus.
Hence the location predicts the geographical areas of interest to Russia.
The central premise of this paper argues that President Putin’s invasion of Ukraine is motivated by Russian Federation’s need for critical resources from Ukraine to close Russia’s resource gaps and secure Russia’s survival.
Hence, the following two hypotheses constitute the resource dependency theory explanation of the Russia-Ukraine war.
Russia’s gap in military industrial capability and human resources are a threat to Russia.
Ukraine resources can fill or mitigate Russia’s resource gaps in military industrial capability and human resources.
The first criterion for selecting the independent variables was that they must be a threat to Russia and, second, Ukraine’s resources can close or significantly mitigate Russia’s resource gaps.
A reconnoitre study suggested that the two most critical resource gap threats to Russia were in the military industrial complex and human resources.
The key premise here is that resource gaps is the most important explanatory variable in the equation.
I theorize that Euromaidan revolution threatened Russia’s control of Ukraine’s resources and when Russia was faced with a plausible loss of the resources to the European Union, the Russian invasion was inevitable.
An EU control of Ukraine’s resources would deny them to Russia and when the resources are properly developed by EU finance and technology they would be a direct strategic threat to Russia.
Hence Russian control of Ukraine’s resources for its own use and strategic denial to the EU became the motive for the Russia’s aggression towards Ukraine.
To establish validity, effort was made to triangulate the data by corroborating evidence from multiple sources of data on each phenomenon.
First, the resource gap variable must present a threat to Russia and second, Ukraine’s resources must fill or significantly mitigate the resource gap.
RUSSIA’S GAPS IN MILITARY INDUSTRIAL CAPABILITY AND HUMAN RESOURCES AND IN HOW FAR UKRAINE’S RESOURCES MITIGATE THEM The findings suggest that the Russian Federation has existential resource gaps in military-industrial capability and human resources.
Prior to the war, Ukrainian firms produced more than 3000 components and complete armament systems for the Russian military.
This includes the RM-36 intercontinental ballistic missiles designed by the Yuzhnoye Design Bureau and manufactured by the Yuzhmash industrial complex in Dnipropetrovsk.
The SS-18 Satan is the world’s most destructive intercontinental ballistic missile and is armed with 10 independently targetable 750kt nuclear bombs or one 20 megaton nuclear bomb.
The SS-18 Satan is a true doomsday weapon and poses an existential threat to Russia’s enemies.
Moreover, it is the JSC Khartron, Kharkov that produces the guidance system for all SS-18 Satan ICBMs.
Additionally, Ukraine enterprises produce the guidance systems for the SS-25 mobile missile launchers and SS-19 silo based strategic missiles that are made in the Kharkov region of Ukraine.
Notably, it was the Ukrainian Yuzhmash that designed the R-5M, the USSR’ first nuclear ballistic missile.
All tallied, critical Ukrainian components and their servicing constitute 80% of Russia’s strategic missiles forces.
Hence Russia has a strategic resource gap in missile technology and one can argue that without Ukraine’s missile technology Russia’s long-term status as the preeminent nuclear power is at risk.
Consequently, closing this resource gap by acquiring control over Ukraine’s missile industry is a survival issue for Russia.
Strategic missiles and components are not the only Ukrainian resources critical to Russia as all branches of the Russian military have critical components designed, made and/or serviced in Ukraine because by the late 1980s seventy five percent of Ukraine’s industrial capacity was used to manufacture Soviet weapons and components and the Russian navy was mostly built in Ukraine.
The Mykolaiv oblast in southern Ukraine was the Soviet Union’s key ship building centre with its shipyards, shipturbine and gearbox factories.
The Mykolaiv shipyards built most of the Soviet, now Russian, navy’s capital ships including its flagship, the aircraft carrier Admiral Kuznetsov that was launched in 1985 from Nikolayev South Shipyard on the Black Sea coast of Ukraine.
Although the Russian navy has received some new locally built corvettes and frigates, the Russian industry simply cannot produce large warships.
This situation is a critical resource gap for Russia and its ability to project power outside its immediate boarders and Russia can mitigate this resource gap, in naval technology, by taking control of the Ukrainian shipbuilding industry.
Moreover, the Russian air force uses mostly air-to-air missiles produced in Ukraine and, Russian fighters have auxiliary systems made in Ukraine, including the hydraulic system for Russia’s newest fighter the Su-34.
The Russian army transport aircraft and helicopters use Ukraine jet engines made in Antonov factory in Kyiv and Motor Sich factory in Zaporizhia.
In 2015, President Poroshenko placed a ban on military exports to Russia which stopped the delivery of Progress D-18t engines used in the production of the Russian AN-140, the tactical airlift aircraft for the Russian Army.
The AN-70, medium military transport, was a joint Russian-Ukrainian venture and the Ukrainian sanction caused the cancellation of the project and, in the heavy military transport category, the production and upgrading of the An-124 heavy military airlifter came to a halt and, one half of the components of the AI222-25 engine manufactured by the ODK company near Moscow for the YaK130 trainer aircraft were made in Ukraine.
The Ukraine’s military industrial complex was for strategic reasons located in the eastern and southern part of the country.
After Ukraine’s independence, much of the military industrial complexes were organized into one state owned enterprise called Ukroboronprom Ukrainian Defence Industry.
Also, Ukraine has many enterprises producing machinery and mills crucial to Russian’s military and industry and, perhaps, the heavy fighting around the city of Kramatorsk was basically over the control of NKMZ industrial complex which produces mining equipment, steel mills, and other industrial equipment, mostly marketed to the Russian Federation and Kazakhstan.
The Russian control of Crimea added 13 Ukrainian defence companies to Russia’s toll and 18 defence companies located in Luhansk and Donetsk are now in Russia’s hands.
Little evidence is in existence of what Russia has done with the defence companies in the Donbass but, one eyewitness accounts tells of a total evacuation to Russia of the manufacturing equipment of defence company manufacturing rifle magazines in Luhansk.
Ukraine’s sanctions on Russia have limited but, not stopped, exports of defence components to Russia and to make up for the lost Ukrainian components, Russia has instituted an import substitution program but, claims of its success needs to be viewed with caution as building up a sophisticated defence industry takes decades, not months, as demonstrated by the Ukrainian TVZ-117 engine which powers many of Russia’s helicopters.
Russia instituted an import substitution program for helicopters and planned to use their own Klimov VK-2500 engine for all their helicopters but only 30 were available for import substitution in 2015 as the Russian production output of these engines was already earmarked for installation in the Kamov-50 and Kamov-52 attack helicopters.
Noteworthy is the fact that the Kimov-2500 engine was designed and first manufactured by the Motor Sich company in Ukraine and is one of the world best turboshafts.
President Putin’s ten-year plan for a massive rearmament of the Russian Federation military can not materialize due to critical resource gaps unless Kremlin gets control of Ukraine’s valuable military industrial complex with its original and rare competence that the Russian Federation has not been able to duplicate.
The military industrial complex requires large highly educated pool of human resources which will be analysed in the next section.
The Russian military industries have suffered a crisis in personnel because of lack of critical skills and the Russian demographic trends.
Moreover, the age structure of the population is a cause for concern as the Russian population is aging and only 21% of the population under 20 years of age.
From the resource dependency theory perspective, the declining and ageing population is a strategic resource gap that poses an existential threat to Russia.
Hence, it must be addressed by President Putin and the answer is most likely an acquisition of large part of Ukraine as its population of 45 million bridges the Russian Federation’s resource gap in human resources.
Furthermore, the strategic denial of the human resources to the EU is of lesser importance to Russia but Ukraine’s low wages and well-educated workforce has the potential for the EU to have on its borders a low-cost production centre rivalling China’s labour costs and India’s service industry.
CONCLUSION, IMPLICATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS The empirical findings support the two hypotheses based on the resource dependency theory approach and give legitimacy to the theory’s explanatory ability.
In a nutshell, the Russian Federation has critical resource gaps in military-industrial capability and human resources.
Furthermore, Ukraine’s resources fill or significantly mitigate Russia’s resource gaps.
Consequently, the Russian government actions in Crimea and Donbass corresponded to the theory’s suggestion that a government takes actions to secure resources critical to its existence.
The domino effect of the scenarios discussed above is that Russia is likely to attempt to gain control of more geographical areas where Ukrainian resources are located.
The specific areas of interest to Russia are the Ukraine districts east of the river Dnieper because of the human resources and the location of main industrial complexes.
The Black Sea coastal districts of interest to Russia are Crimea for its ports and the Mykolaiv and Odessa districts for their shipbuilding industries.
Also, the capital Kiev is of interest to Russia because of the scientific institutions and industrial capacity located there.
The immediate outcome of Russia’s resources gaps was the annexation of Crimea and the war in the Donbass region where much of Ukraine’s resources are located.
The intermediate outcome is perhaps the ongoing Russian New Generation Warfare in Ukraine and ultimately Russia may attempt to get effective control of the resource rich areas mentioned above as the specific areas of interest to Russia.
This article is perhaps the first study to investigate the Russia-Ukraine war from the resource dependency theory perspective with an emphasis on Ukraine’s military industrial complex and human resources and 68 Russia’s war with Ukraine is to acquire military Jokull Johannesson industrial capability and human resources provides a fresh insight into Russia’s aggression in Ukraine.
The key premise that the aggression is motivated by the Russia’s gap in critical resources and that control of Ukraine bridges this gap receives little attention in the literature and public media.
Therefore, we may need to refocus our thinking about the Russia-Ukraine war and perhaps wars in general and shift from a geopolitical focus to a more business oriented perspective and consider wars as extension of business.
The theoretical contribution of this study shows that the resource dependency theory can contribute insight into the underlying causes of the RussiaUkraine war and shed light on the aggressor’s strategic intent and actions.
This finding suggests increased influence of resource scarcity on government policy in international relations, which is characterized by conflicts and wars fought over fundamental resources such as human resources and critical industrial capacity.
The implications for future research are that the resource dependency theory can be used for the analysis of other conflicts such as the Syria war and China’s actions in Asia.
A resource dependency theory analysis of plausible Russia-China and Russia-EU conflicts appears to be particularly fruitful.
Especially if one considers the plausibility of a merger of these combinations rather than a war between them.
The implications for the Ukraine government are that it needs to make it clear that resources under threat will be denied to Russia by defence, evacuation or destruction.
Finally, the Ukrainian military-industrial complex is a treasure to international arms businesses marketing to an ever more turbulent world.
Consequently, foreign defence businesses have a tremendous opportunity to acquire key resources in Ukraine at a time when low market value and the low exchange rate make the resources a real bargain.
The application of the resource dependency theory to the explanation of the motives for armed conflict, in this paper, lays down a concrete basis for further research into the motives for military conflicts in other geographical areas.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The author is thankful to the anonymous reviews providing very constructive reviews and suggestions which were incorporated into the final version and improved this paper.
Moreover, the author thanks colleagues and friends who reviewed the drafts of the paper for the same.
Designing and conducting case studies in international business research.
Qualitative research in organizational and vocational psychology, 1979–1999.
Rogozin, D Deputy Prime Minister and Chairman of the Military-Industrial Commission, Russian Federation.
Stephen F Cohen on the US/Russia/Ukraine History the Media Won't Tell You.
