He is the author of Russian Nationalism and the Russian-Ukrainian War and joint editor of Ukraine’s Outpost.
Misplaced use of the term ‘civil war’ to describe the Russian-Ukrainian War is correlated with three factors.
First, denial or downplaying of Russian military and other forms of involvement against Ukraine.
Third, highly exaggerated claims of regional divisions in Ukraine that point to the country as an ‘artificial’ construct.
The fourth section provides a detailed analysis of ‘full spectrum conflict’ that includes Russian intelligence activities, Russian nationalist mercenaries, Putin’s rhetoric providing signaling to Russian nationalists , information warfare and cyber-attacks, Russian discourse on limited sovereignty, and Russian military invasion of Ukraine.
Theory, Terminology, and Why Ukrainians Do Not See a ‘Civil War’ Terminology is problematic in discussions about whether a ‘civil war’ is taking place in Ukraine.
James Fearon defines a civil war as a violent conflict within a country fought by organised groups that aim to take power at the centre or in a region, or to change government policies.
A civil war challenges the sovereignty of an internationally recognised state, takes place within the boundaries of a recognised state, and involves rebels that are able to mount organised, armed opposition.
A violent rebellion would be likely if the state unleashed repression against minorities who hold political grievances.
Ted Gurr has stressed the salience of ethno-cultural identities and their capacity to mobilise, the importance of levels of grievance, and the availability of opposition political activities.
Scholars have also debated the causes of civil wars as either ‘greed’ or ‘grievance,’ which can arise from contestation over identity, religious, and ethnic factors.
Sambanis argues that realism and neo-realism are unable to explain the outbreak, duration, and termination of civil wars because both sets of theories assume that the state is a unitary actor and cannot therefore explain why ethnic, religious, and class divisions emerge and threaten a state’s sovereignty.
Neo-liberal theories, Sambanis believes, are better equipped to explain the outbreak of civil wars and the role of non-state actors in fomenting them.
As polarisation increased, inflamed by Russia’s information warfare and politicians’ rhetoric and outright disinformation, violence escalated.
What is often ignored in discussions about whether what is taking place in the Donbas should be described as a ‘civil war’ is Ukrainian public opinion.
Ploeg dislikes the fact that only 13.6% of Ukrainians believe that there is a ‘civil war’ in their country and blames this on ‘anti-Russian’ media.
In a 2018 poll, the Donbas conflict was viewed as a ‘civil war’ by a low of 5.1% in western Ukraine and a high of 26.5% in eastern Ukraine.
Furthermore, 72% of Ukrainians believe that there is a Russian-Ukrainian War, ranging from a high of 91% in the west to 47% in eastern and 62% in southern Ukraine.
Regional versus national identities provide a weak explanation for why protestors transformed into armed insurgents in the Donbas, but not in the other six oblasts of southeastern Ukraine.
Transforming minority support for separatism in Donetsk and Luhansk was only possible because Russia provided far more resources in its ‘full spectrum conflict’ to these two regions.
The Donbas had deprecated and denigrated Ukrainian majorities, while aggressive pro-Russian minorities were accustomed to undertaking violence against their opponents.
Tolz and other western scholars have long noted that civic identity is weak in the Russian Federation.
The Russian World is, in fact, a claim to the allegedly common Russkij ethno-cultural, religious, and historical identity of the three eastern Slavs.
Russia is a ‘state-civilisation,’ and Putin is gathering ‘Russian’ lands that he believes are part of the Russian World.
The Russian Orthodox Church concept of ‘Holy Rus’ supports the rehabilitation of Tsarist Russian nationality policy of a ‘All-Russian People’ with three branches.
Arel alludes to an understanding of ‘Russian’ identity as encompassing the three eastern Slavs.
Ukrainians in the Donbas who thought of themselves as ‘Russians’ were most likely the same as those who claimed to hold a Soviet identity.
During the 2014 crisis, sitting on the fence was no longer possible, and many Ukrainians who had held a mixed identity adopted a civic Ukrainian identity to show their patriotism.
In Zaporizhzhya and Odesa, mixed identities collapsed from 8. and 15.1% to 2 and 2.3%, respectively.
Mixed identities were never strong in Kherson and Mykolayiv, where they collapsed to a statistically insignificant 0. and 1.6%, respectively.
This is what Kharkiv scholar Zhurzhenko called the ‘end of ambiguity’ in eastern Ukraine.
Russian Intervention in the Decade Prior to the 2014 Crisis Training and Support for Separatism in Ukraine In November 2004, Russia supported a separatist congress in Severodonetsk in Luhansk oblast, organised by Yanukovych in protest to the Orange Revolution denying him his fraudulent election victory.
In February 2014, a similar congress of the Ukrainian Front in Kharkiv was planned after Yanukovych fled from Kyiv, but failed to go ahead after regional leaders from southeastern Ukraine and the president failed to turn up.
Yanukovych’s plans in 2004 and 2014 drew on a long tradition of creating pro-Russian fronts.
So-called ‘Internationalist Movements’ were established by the Soviet secret services in the late 1980s in Ukraine, Moldova, and the three Baltic States to oppose their independence.
Baryshnikov unequivocally states that Ukrainians ‘are Russians who refuse to admit their Russia-ness;’ in other words, he supports the Tsarist Russian nationality policy of three branches of the ‘All-Russian People,’ which was rehabilitated by Putin.
Russian Penetration of Ukraine’s Security Forces Sakwa and Matveeva seek to downplay Yanukovych as a friend of Russia and, in doing so, minimise Russia’s intervention in Ukrainian affairs prior to 2014.
Security Service of Ukraine and military officers undertook espionage for Russia in the critical early stages of the conflict in 2014.
When Poroshenko said in March 2015 that 80% of Security Service of Ukraine officers defected in spring 2014, his claim was met with disbelief in Crimea, but he was not exaggerating.
Ukrainian nationalists stereotypically painted as ‘western Ukrainian’ are often from eastern Ukraine.
President Yanukovych’s use of violence against protestors was lobbied for by Putin during his one-on-one meetings with the Ukrainian president and by Putin’s senior advisers Surkov and Glazyev.
The Berkut forces that undertook human rights abuses and killed protestors were brought to Kyiv from Crimea, the Donbas, and elsewhere in eastern Ukraine in the belief that Kyiv-based Berkut would be unreliable.
When these Berkut officers returned home, they were greeted as heroes and, in many cases, deserted to Russian forces in Crimea or joined Russian proxy forces in Donbas.
High levels of participation of eastern Ukrainians in volunteer battalions in 2014 grew out of the Euromaidan.
For a historian, it is surprising that Cohen believes that civilisations and identities are set in stone and never change.
Impartial scholars would apportion blame on both the EU and Russia, both of which pressured Yanukovych to make a decision in their favour.
The EU could not understand the depth of Russia’s hostility to Ukraine joining the Association Agreement because they did not believe it was aimed against Russia.
This was evident in the rehabilitation of Tsarist Russian White émigré ideologies and thinking of Russia and its neighbours.
Medvedchuk has been Putin’s representative in Ukraine since at least 2004, the year Putin and Svetlana Medvedvev, wife of former Russian Prime Minister Medvedev, became godparents to his daughter Darina.
In the USSR, Medvedchuk had been a Soviet-appointed attorney for Ukrainian dissidents Yuriy Litvin and Vasyl Stus between 1979–1980.
According to them, Ukraine could only maintain its identity at the centre of Eurasia rather than on the edge of Europe; Ukraine’s growing trade with the EU since 2014 shows this to be untrue.
All three supported Russia’s interventions and military invasion in 2014.
One of ‘Operation Armageddon’s’ most important periods of activity was from 1 December 2013, when the Euromaidan took off, to 28 February 2014, a day after Russia launched its invasion of Crimea.
Putin and Kirill used the celebrations of the anniversary of the 1,025th anniversary of the Christianisation of Kyiv Rus to rebuild a contemporary eastern Slavic Union in the Russian World.
Denial, obfuscation, minimising, or ignoring evidence of Russia’s ‘full spectrum conflict’ is used to give credence to the claim that a ‘civil war’ is taking place in Ukraine.
In support of her claim that separatists were not Russian proxies, Matveeva writes that ‘military supplies switched on and off,’ ignoring many other aspects of Russian involvement and Russia’s intervention prior to the Euromaidan and immediately after Yanukovych fled from Kyiv.
Cohen’s denial of Russia’s military invasion in Ukraine is in keeping with his denial of Russian hacking of the 2016 United States elections, chemical weapons attack against Russian defector Sergei Skripal in Britain, and every other nefarious action of which Russia is accused of undertaking.
Hahn downplays Russian forces in spring 2014 as ‘negligible’ and ‘non-existent,’ and minimises Russia military intervention.
In writing that ‘it is fundamentally a civil war,’ Hahn views the conflict taking place between ‘western Ukrainian nationalists’ and ‘good,’ pro-Russian eastern Ukrainian Russian speakers.
Western Ukrainian ‘fascists’ came to power in a coup d’état during the Euromaidan and made Russian speakers a ‘stigmatised minority’ , closed Russian language media, and demonised President Putin.
This is a novel way to describe the annexation of a neighbour’s territory.
Serhiy Kudelia applies ‘civil war’ to the entire period until summer 2014, when Russia invaded Ukraine.
In 2009, Russian diplomats in Odesa and Crimea were expelled for supporting separatists.
Russian volunteers who were trained in Russian camps joined the conflict.
There is a mass of evidence, collected by the Security Service of Ukraine, that Russian intelligence officers undertook training and coordination with, and providing leadership to separatist forces throughout 2014.
Egorov is a senior officer from the FSB elite spetsnaz unit, which is a successor to the KGB’s V Department’s elite Vympel spetsnaz unit.
Bellingcat’s research and captured documents released by the Security Service of Ukraine show the close ties between Surkov, Yevgeny Prigozhin, Wagner Group mercenaries, the Moscow headquarters of GRU, and FSB and Russian intelligence on the ground in Ukraine, who coordinated and supplied military equipment to Russian proxies in the Donbas in 2014.
The 12 April 2014 invasion of mainland Ukraine by GRU officer Girkin and 50 Russian spetsnaz soldiers is evidence of Russian military boots on the ground at the beginning of the conflict.
A day after his intervention in mainland Ukraine, the Security Service of Ukraine published intercepted telephone calls between Girkin and his handlers in Moscow, including to and from his Russian telephone number.
Girkin admitted that he had coordinated his action with Crimean Prime Minister Aksyonov.
It is not coincidental that rallies simultaneously began on 1 March 2014 in 11 southeastern Ukrainian cities on the same day that Putin received authorisation from the Federation Council to intervene militarily in Ukraine.
Kudelia’s argument that the violent seizure of official buildings ‘happened sporadically and in a decentralized manner’ is simply naïve and unbelievable.
It is improbable that rallies would have broken out coincidentally on the same day in 11 locations when only 11.7% of the population in southeastern Ukraine supported the seizure of buildings and a very high 76.8% opposed this action.
Kharkiv journalist Andriy Borodavka estimated that ‘around 200’ Russian citizens had been bused from Russia to Kharkiv.
Oplot grouped together athletic members of a Kharkiv sports club who had acted as Ministry of Interior vigilantes during the Euromaidan and were most likely involved in some of the killings of protestors.
After the failure of the Kharkiv People Republic, Oplot members fled to the DNR and joined Russian proxy forces.
Moscow student blogger Arkady Khudyakov replaced the Ukrainian flag on the roof of the Kharkiv State Administration building with a Russian flag.
Russian ‘political tourists’ and neo-Nazis, with the assistance of Russian intelligence, tipped peaceful anti-Kyiv protests into violence and then armed insurgencies.
The arrival of Russian neo-Nazis in the Donbas led to violent attacks against pro-Ukrainian protestors, confirming that external intervention was a central factor in the transition from peaceful protests to violent conflict.
It would be truly incredulous to believe that Russian intelligence was not involved in coordinating pro-Russian ‘uprisings’ in southeastern Ukraine, or that they were not behind Chuprikov in Donetsk and Khudyakov in Kharkiv.
That most of the violent protestors were actually Russian ‘tourists’ proved to be comical in Kharkiv, where they took control of the Opera House mistakenly believing the building to be the city hall.
Putin, Suslov, Medvedchuk, and Glazyev aimed to transform these protests into pro-Russian uprisings, which would take control of oblast and city councils and state administrations.
Leaks of Surkov’s emails , Glazyev’s telephone conversations , and a February 2014 Russian strategy document provide abundant evidence of Russian intervention during the Euromaidan and in spring 2014.
Putin’s Signalling and Nationalist Coalitions Erin K Jenne believes that external lobbying and external patrons are key factors in determining the mobilisation of minorities because they signal an intention to intervene, which radicalises demands towards the central government.
Pro-Russian forces and Russian nationalists understood Putin’s signalling as Russia’s intention to either annex ‘New Russia’ in the same way as it had Crimea or to detach the region and create a semi-independent state aligned with Russia in the Eurasian Economic Union.
In February–April 2014, the presence of Russian nationalists , activities of Russian intelligence operatives, and invasion into mainland Ukraine by Girkin’s Russian spetsnaz at the same time as Russia annexed Crimea heightened fears among Ukrainian policymakers that Russia was seeking to dismember Ukraine.
Melnyk believes that the annexation of Crimea and destabilisation of southeastern Ukraine should be treated together.
Foreign powers have intervened in the majority of civil wars and, the longer the civil war continues, the more likely it is that there will be outside intervention.
Foreign powers should be reasonably confident of success; the projected time horizon of the intervention is short and domestic opposition is minimal.
In February 2014, Putin took a gamble when Russian forces invaded Crimea, but they met no resistance; large-scale infiltration of Ukrainian security forces by Russian intelligence led them to calculate that Ukrainian resistance would be minimal.
It is highly improbable that Russia spontaneously launched a military operation on 27 February 2014, only five days after Yanukovych fled from Kyiv.
Plans for Crimea were prepared as a contingency during earlier crises in Russian-Ukrainian relations in 2004, between 2008–2009, and after Putin’s 2012 re-election.
Sanshiro Hosaka rules out a last-minute improvisation and views Russia’s invasion of Crimea as a ‘well-considered and proactive move’ to maintain Ukraine within Russia’s orbit.
Russia’s invasion and annexation of Crimea strongly influenced perceptions of Russian policies towards mainland Ukraine among Ukrainian policymakers.
Russian Information Warfare Most western scholars ignore Putin’s obsession with Ukraine and Ukrainophobia, which permeates Russia’s information warfare and was analysed in chapter 4.
Matveeva devotes little space to Russia’s massive information war against Ukraine, which played a central role in the 2014 crisis; while not denying the power of the Russian media at the same time Matveeva barely mentions it.
Russian information warfare and disinformation were central components of its ‘full spectrum conflict’ towards Ukraine.
Talking of Kharkiv, Borodavka admitted, ‘Yes, the FSB plays a role in supporting pro-Russian groups.
But the most important vector is the Russian media’ in mobilising violent conflict and political instability.
An information campaign of this nature and intensity would be viewed by every country it would be directed against as an act of aggression by a foreign power.
NATO’s understanding of the growing importance of Russian cyber warfare, information warfare, and disinformation led to the opening of a NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence in Riga, a Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence in Tallinn, and a Communications and Information Agency in The Hague.
To counter Russian disinformation, the EU created the East StratCom Task Force , and the United States government established a Global Engagement Centre.
One can only read this with incredulity following Russia’s 2008 recognition of the independence of the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia and annexation of Crimea.
Sakwa denies that Russia never sought ‘a return to spheres of influence,’ which is untrue because Russia believes it can be a great power only by controlling and the West recognising its exclusive sphere of influence in Eurasia.
Russia has always sought United States and international recognition of Eurasia as its exclusive sphere of influence.
Mikhail Suslov writes that ‘the idea of a sphere of influence’ is hardwired into the ‘Russian World’ imagery.
The Russian World demands an exclusive Russian sphere of influence over the three eastern Slavs based on ‘common’ culture, values, language, and religion.
At the same time, Laruelle confusingly writes that nationalism does shape Russian foreign policy on identity questions, such as ‘Russians’ as a divided nation, and in other areas.
A rehabilitation of Tsarist Russian and White émigré views of Ukraine and Ukrainians is evidence of a nationalistic Russian foreign policy.
Beyond western political scientists working on Russia, there are few government policymakers, think tank experts, or journalists who would believe that Russian foreign policy is not nationalist.
Wayne Merry views Putin’s war against Ukraine as a clash of sovereignties because Russia is at odds with the UN and international law in not viewing Ukraine and most former Soviet states as ‘sovereign’ entities.
Claiming the status of first among equals for itself and seeking a nationalist primacy of its own interests, Russia is in ‘pursuit of suzerainty,’ whereby a great power exercises control over its neighbours’ external relations while giving internal autonomy to a satrap, such as Lukashenka.
This factor should be understood within the broader context of Russia viewing Ukraine as an artificial state together with Russia’s view of its Eurasian neighbours possessing limited sovereignty.
Military Invasion Jonsson and Seely define ‘full spectrum conflict’ as combining military, informational, economic, energy, and political components.
Aiming to avoid a large-scale war, ‘full spectrum conflict’ fell back on the use of the Russian military if its proxy forces were on the verge of defeat, as in August 2014 when Russia invaded Ukraine.
Military forms of hybrid warfare only work when there is popular support among the local population, which clearly did not exist in six of the eight oblasts of southeastern Ukraine; even in the Donbas, the population was divided.
A full-scale Russian invasion would have ‘destroyed the fiction that Russia was not involved’ and would have had two strategic consequences.
The first consequence would have been that the Russian public would have found out they are at war with Ukraine.
Until now, Russians, with limited access to independent sources of information, have believed the myth of Russia’s non-involvement in the ‘civil war’ in Ukraine.
It is highly improbable that Russian information warfare could spin Russian forces as openly fighting a war against Ukrainians.
The second consequence is that a Russian invasion would have led to a full-blown crisis with the West, NATO placed on high alert, and the introduction of a far more severe sanctions regime, similar to that pursued against Iran.
In a detailed study of Russian control over the parts of Donbas it has occupied, Donald N Jensen brushes this aside as an outcome resulting from ‘civil war’ or ‘popular uprising,’ and believes that the conflict was manufactured by Russia to prevent Ukraine’s integration into the West.
Jensen documents how Donbas proxies were controlled by Russia from its inception with all major military decisions made in Moscow.
Evidence of Russia’s invasion is available from an array of official sources, think tanks, and academic studies, including within Ukraine.
Russia supplies training, leadership, fuel, ammunition, military technology, and intelligence, and there is a presence of Russian military, intelligence, mercenaries who fought in frozen conflicts in Eurasia, members of organised crime, and nationalist extremists.
Control is exercised through Kremlin ‘curators,’ such as Suslov in 2014–2020.
Military ‘advisers’ and Russian intelligence coordinate their policies through the Centre for the Management of Reconstruction.
The Inter-Ministerial Commission for the Provision of Humanitarian Aid for the Affected Areas in the Southeast of the Regions of Donetsk and Luhansk acts as Russia’s shadow government.
Andrew S Bowen believes that a Russian strategy only became clear in late 2014.
From May 2014, Russia has provided surface-to-air missiles, which were used to shoot down five Ukrainian helicopters, 2 fighter jets, an AN-30 surveillance plane, and Ilyushin IL-76 over the course of two months.
Russian artillery fired a huge number of shells into Ukraine over July and August 2014.
Because of a high number of casualties among Russian proxies and Russian forces from Ukrainian air power, Russia sought to change the military balance on the battlefield by suppling the sophisticated surface-to-air BUK missile system that shot down MH17.
Putin’s personal anger at being humiliated for a second time by a western-backed Ukrainian revolution undermined his ‘gathering of Russian lands’ that would have turned Ukraine away from the EU and toward the Russian World and Eurasian Economic Union.
The fourth factor is Russia’s long-standing territorial claims against Crimea going back to the early 1990s.
The final factor is the Lukyanov Doctrine’s view of Ukraine as possessing limited sovereignty, which is a product of both the Soviet-era Brezhnev Doctrine and the first point; namely, Ukraine being perceived as an artificial state.
Russia’s ‘full spectrum conflict’ began following the Orange Revolution and continued through to 2013.
Between 2012–2013, Russia launched a massive trade, intelligence, cyber, and informational operation to pressure Ukrainian leaders to drop EU integration.
In the decade prior and in 2014, pro-Russian extremists were given paramilitary training, and Russian intelligence infiltrated Ukrainian security forces, especially in Crimea.
With a high level of infiltration, it is unsurprising that Russian intelligence was active on the ground in Ukraine between 2013–2014 during the Euromaidan and after Yanukovych fled Kyiv.
Russian spetsnaz soldiers intervened in mainland Ukraine from occupied Crimea and, with the assistance of Russian nationalists and political tourists trained in Russia and bussed into Ukraine, transformed protestors into armed insurgents.
Taken together, these different aspects of Russian ‘full spectrum conflict’ constituted Russian intervention from the first day of the 2014 crisis.
Western scholars should place greater trust in the Ukrainian public, which has never seen evidence of a ‘civil war’ in Ukraine.
The impact of the full range of Russian ‘full spectrum conflict’ was the opposite to that which Putin sought, and three areas of which are analysed in the concluding chapter.
Putin’s policies towards Ukraine undermined a pro-Russian ‘east’ and the Soviet concept of Russian-Ukrainian ‘brotherly’ peoples, thereby increasing Ukrainian civic national integration and severely curtailing Russian soft power in Ukraine.
Putin’s inability to comprehend his mistakes in these three areas and his longevity in power for another sixteen years make the chances for peace low.
On Oplot Igor Girkin interviewed by Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye, 23 August 2019.
Further Reading on E-International RelationsOpinion – Putin’s Obsession with Ukraine as a ‘Russian Land’ Vladimir Putin’s Imperialism and Military Goals Against Ukraine Ukraine and the Russian Challenge to the European Order Reflections on Ukraine’s Conflicting Story in the Media Why Russian Hybrid Warfare Is a Threat To … Russia.
E-IR is an independent non-profit publisher run by an all volunteer team.
Your donations allow us to invest in new open access titles and pay our bandwidth bills to ensure we keep our existing titles free to view.
Donations are voluntary and not required to download the e-book your link to download is below.
