When factual reporting on major elements in Russia’s disinformation and propaganforeign policy priorities is not favorable, Russia uses da ecosystem.
In an August 2020 report, the United States state-funded international media outlets to inject Department of State’s Global Engagement Center pro-Kremlin disinformation and propaganda into outlined the five pillars of Russia’s disinformathe information environment. tion and propaganda ecosystem.
According to the Atlantic Council’s Digital Kremlin’s talking points while equating themselves Forensic Research Lab, RT has “garnered a signifwith publicly funded, transparent and journalistiicant audience,” in Latin America, specifically highcally independent media organizations such as the lighting the growth of RT’s Facebook page during British Broadcasting Corporation and Voice the COVID-19 pandemic.
RT and Sputnik’s opaque organistatistics are incorrect, this does not diminish their zational structure and lack of financial transparency demonstrable ability to play a key role in the launobscure the true extent of the Russian governdering of narratives across Russia’s disinformation ment’s control over the outlets’ editorial processes ecosystem.
Moreover, Russian govRT’s content has the ability to change the opinions ernment officials and the outlets’ leadership have of its viewers.
One recent study reported that Ameropenly discussed RT and Sputnik’s role as tools of ican consumers exposed to RT content are more state propaganda. likely than those not exposed to prefer that the United States withdraw from its global leadership RT and Sputnik’s role as disinformation and proposition, even when the consumers are aware that paganda outlets is most obvious when they report RT is funded by the Russian government. on issues of political importance to the Kremlin.
RT and Sputnik's Role in Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem 3 Introduction R T and Sputnik are Russia’s primary media outlets that produce content for non-Russian speaking audiences.
RT, ""RT AND S PUTN IK ARE formerly known as Russia Today, is a Russian N OT TR A NSPAREN T , state-funded and state-directed news outlet, which began broadcasting internationally A N D TH EIR O V ERA L L in December 2005.
Launched 2 in November 2014, Sputnik is the main foreign-facing project of Rossiya Segodnya, an international news agency created in late overall goals appear to be fundamentally different 2013 by a presidential executive order to from independent media.
Russian government officials in-chief of both RT and Rossiya Segodnya. and RT and Sputnik leadership, as well as the Moreover, RT’s parent company, TV-Novosti, outlets’ former and current employees, have made was founded by RIA Novosti, and RIA Novosti’s comments about the striking differences between founder’s rights were transferred to Rossiya Russian state-funded and directed media outlets Segodnya via the aforementioned 2013 and independent international media organizations presidential executive order.
In addition, the organizational Rossiya Segodnya. structures of both RT and Sputnik are difficult to decipher and their public financial records are RT and Sputnik attempt to equate themselves incomplete. with major independent and fact-based international media outlets—likely in order to RT and Sputnik play an important role within increase their reach and credibility—and to Russia’s disinformation and propaganda portray any efforts to criticize their activities ecosystem.
However, RT to disseminate disinformation and propaganda and Sputnik are not transparent, and their 4 Global Engagement Center narratives to audiences outside of Russia to this paper include three case studies that illustrate influence public opinion and foreign policy in RT and Sputnik’s biased, agenda-driven journalism, favor of the Kremlin’s political goals.
There is a and show how the outlets inject disinformation well-documented relationship between Russian and Kremlin propaganda into the information state-funded media outlets and other pillars in the environment.
The first case study examines RT’s ecosystem, such as the weaponization of social reporting during the 2014 Maidan revolution and media, the cultivation of proxy sources, and cyberthe subsequent Russian invasion of Ukraine.
For example, RT second case explores how RT and Sputnik reported and Sputnik frequently give favorable coverage to on Turkey before and after the Turkish military shot organizations such as WikiLeaks that have received down a Russian aircraft following its incursion into information from hackers working for Russian Turkish airspace in November 2015.
RT and Sputnik’s work as disinformation and propaganda outlets is clearest when reporting on issues important to the Kremlin.
RT and Sputnik's Role in Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem 5 6 Global Engagement Center RT and Sputnik's Organizational Structure and Lack of Transparency R T and Sputnik’s leaders argue a false equivalency between their outlets and fact-based media organizations, obfuscating how the outlets spread Russian government disinformation.
First, RT and Sputnik lack BBC and VOA’s transparent organizational and financial structures.
Second, the extent and the nature of government involvement in the outlets’ activities is significantly larger at RT and Sputnik.
Finally, RT and Sputnik’s leadership have acknowledged the influential roles their outlets play as amplifiers of Kremlin-backed narratives.
In contrast, VOA and BBC have documents detailing their editorial independence from the governments that fund them.
For example, the relationship between Simonyan and Aleksey Gromov, the First Deputy Chief of Staff of the Russian Presidential Administration, whom independent media call “Putin’s media puppetmaster,” is well noted.
RT and Sputnik's Role in Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem 7 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, moved from the Russian diplomatic service to manage RT’s Arabic language service expansion from 2007-2011.
After leaving RT, he re-entered the diplomatic service as the senior counselor at the Russian Embassy to the United States, and later became the head of the Russian Mission to the Palestinian National Authority in Ramallah.
Former and current RT and Sputnik employees have also provided firsthand insights into the control the Kremlin has over RT and Sputnik’s management and content.
One employee spoke of training for journalists intended to ensure their reporting would reflect the Kremlin’s positions.
Another shared the Russian government maintains an advisory team that oversees RT’s hiring process.
Several employees said RT chooses inexperienced journalists to be able to shape their perceptions and limit their pushback on editorial decisions—claims confirmed by other sources.
Daniel Lange, a former employee at RT DE , the German-language branch of RT, said the leadership of RT DE ordered him to spy on Russian opposition figure Aleksey Navalny while Navalny was recovering in a Berlin hospital from a Russian Federal Security Service assassination attempt using a chemical weapon.
Other employees of RT DE reported they received criticism from Moscow for being too slow to publish an article about an October 2020 video conference featuring Russian President Putin.
For example, the staff received detailed emails about conspiracy theories they could actively promote.
Similarly, a former Sputnik White House correspondent revealed his supervisor’s insistence on preapproving any questions he planned to ask the White House press secretary.
The journalist’s questions were frequently changed by his supervisor to be more aligned with Russian policy, and when the journalist veered away from the official line, he was reprimanded.
The number of ---people --who --have ----spoken out and the similarity of their experiences suggest the Russian government directly and consistently influences the reporting of both RT and Sputnik.
After RT and Sputnik employees came forward with their stories, RT reportedly began requiring all employees to sign nondisclosure agreements.
As an example of the direct confluence between RT’s activities and its support for the Kremlin’s foreign policy objectives, RT journalists and other specialists went to work at Belarusian state media outlets after the Belarusian staff left in protest over the 2020 fraudulent elections.
As a result, the style of Belarusian state media changed to become closer to Russian style disinformation and propaganda.
For example, 8 Global Engagement Center Belarusian state media began to promote closer links between Russia U NLIKE MAJOR FACT BASED and Belarus and started to use common Russian disinformation INTERNATIONAL MEDIA phrases such as “color revolutions” and “foreign agent” in their reporting.
O U T LETS , RT A N D SPUTNIK This Russian support for the Lukashenka regime via RT appears to LACK FISCAL TRANSPARENCY be similar to other forms of political, financial and military assistance Russia has provided to support the regime.
Organizational Structure RT and Sputnik’s organizational structure and management hierarchy are opaque.
Until December 2021, Rossiya Segodnya, Sputnik’s parent company, showed only Dmitriy Kiselyov as the general director and Margarita Simonyan as editorin-chief.
Rossiya Segodnya recently created a management page that lists a few of the senior staff at their outlets, but still does not provide any detail about how the outlets are managed.
The organization that operates RT, TV-Novosti, lists Aleksey Nikolov as the general director and Margarita Simonyan as editor-in-chief in government documents.
Of the employees listed, it appears that some work for both RT and Rossiya Segodnya despite the two organizations claiming to be separate.
In some cases, senior staff alternate between the different outlets and Rossiya Segodnya.
The fact that certain individuals appear to work for more than one outlet at a time – and rotate between organizations – indicates a connection, at least via personnel.
In contrast, independent and fact-based media outlets to which RT and Sputnik incorrectly compare themselves, whether private or government-funded, are consistently more transparent about their organizational structure and management hierarchy.
Most provide detailed documents about how their organizations are run, the company’s strategy, and lists of board members and upper management.
When organizational charts of media outlets such as VOA and BBC are examined, organizational structures are readily apparent.
RT and Sputnik's Role in Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem 9 Finances Unlike major fact-based international media outlets, RT and Sputnik lack fiscal transparency.
They do not publish public budget sheets or detailed annual financial reports, and the public must rely on vague estimates occasionally announced by the Russian government.
The limited amount of information they do provide about budgets and expenditures is difficult to track and often includes conflicting figures.
However, in a 2015 interview with the Russian independent media outlet Dozhd TV, Simonyan said the budget for that year was 18 billion rubles.
While officials do sometimes round figures when describing budgets, these discrepancies are significant.
The leadership of both Russian organizations are likely aware of fiscal issues and are deliberately selective and obfuscating.
As the editor-in-chief of both RT and TV-Novosti, Simonyan chairs the budget committee, according to TV Novosti’s charter.
In 2020 and 2021, TV-Novosti did not publish the mandatory Ministry of Justice reports regarding their budget.
This is especially true for Sputnik, which receives a portion of Rossiya Segodnya’s budget, but does not disclose how much.
Its 2019-2020 report includes information on salaries, expenditures, performance ratings, etc.
German state-funded Deutsche Welle publishes similarly transparent information about its performance and budget.
Other RT and Sputnik staff share Simonyan’s view that high-quality, unbiased journalism is not the media’s goal.
In a speech to young journalists, Sputnik Editor-in-Chief Anton ""THE INFORMATION WEAPON, OF Anisimov stated, “One thing we’re telling all the aspiring COURSE, IS USED IN CRITICAL MOMENTS, journalists that come and say that we want to work for Sputnik, make sure that what you believe in is in accord with what AND WAR IS ALWAYS A CRITICAL MOwe do.
RT and Sputnik's Role in Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem 11 and war is always a critical moment.
Simonyan credits the 2008 Russia-Georgia war with shaping her views on how RT needed to evolve in order to appeal to non-Russian audiences.
The outlet’s initial purpose was to showcase Russian culture and improve Russia’s global image.
Simonyan said in a 2012 interview that limiting the channel to Russian topics limited RT’s appeal to foreign audiences, so the outlet changed its focus accordingly.
He said, “We are supported by the presidential administration and by the government.
Objectivity is a myth that we have been offered; it has been imposed on us.
Despite publicly comparing themselves to international media outlets such as BBC, DW, and VOA, statements by the leadership of RT, Sputnik and the Russian government clearly indicate that they work in support of the Kremlin’s policies and goals.
The ecosystem reflects both the sources of disinformation and propaganda and the tactics that these channels use.
RT and Sputnik do not work in a vacuum within the disinformation and propaganda ecosystem.
Each pillar has the potential to create a piece of disinformation or a narrative that the other pillars pick up, modify, and amplify.
These relationships have a media multiplier effect that boosts each pillar’s reach and resonance.
The media multiplier effect can create disinformation storms with potentially dangerous effects.
Russia’s government-funded and directed outlets are effectively influencing viewers’ political convictions.
RT and Sputnik's Role in Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem 13 February 2021 article by Erin Baggott Carter and Brett L Carter in Security Studies showed for the first time that RT persuades some Americans to prefer that the United States withdraw from its global leadership position.
On average, American media consumers exposed to RT content are 15 percent less likely to support an active foreign policy, 20 percent more likely to believe the United States is doing too much to solve global problems, and 10 percent more likely to value perceived national interests over the interests of United States allies.
The study showed that informing people the Russian government funds RT did not return participants’ opinions to their prior perspectives.
Connection to Cyber-Enabled Influence Operations In addition to amplifying Kremlin narratives, RT and Sputnik facilitate and engage in cyber-enabled influence operations in close coordination with other pillars in the information ecosystem.
RT and Simonyan have a close relationship with Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks.
According to a United States intelligence community report from 2017, Simonyan and Bogachikhin visited Assange in the Ecuadorian Embassy in 2013.
RT and WikiLeaks’ close relationship is noted by the fact that RT tweeted at least twice about new batches of WikiLeaks releases before WikiLeaks itself made any announcements.
RT and Sputnik, as well as proxy sites, then amplified and favorably covered the leaked information.
The malware was linked to stories posted on Twitter about a pause in the Oxford-AstraZeneca vaccine trials at the time.
Both RT and Sputnik have promoted vaccine conspiracy theories and amplified instances of adverse reactions to U.S., UK, and European-origin vaccines, often with misleading headlines or inaccurate context.
Similarly, Facebook found Sputnik employees engaged in coordinated inauthentic behavior by using pages and accounts to represent themselves online on independent news pages and general interest pages.
In these cases, three pillars of Russia’s ecosystem, state-funded global messaging, weaponization of social media, and cyber enabled-disinformation, worked together to amplify negative coverage and disinformation meant to harm Russia’s perceived adversaries.
A proxy site is an unofficial mouthpiece promoting disinformation THEORIES AND AMPLIFIED INSTANCES and propaganda.
In the context of Russian OF ADVERSE REACTIONS TO U.S., disinformation and propaganda, some proxy UK, AND EUROPEAN-ORIGIN VAC sites have direct links to the Russian state, some CINES , OFTEN WITH MISLEADING are enmeshed in Russia’s disinformation and HEADLINES OR INACCURATE CONTEXT. propaganda ecosystem, and others are more loosely connected via the narratives they promote.
RT and Sputnik have mutually beneficial relationships with writers for proxy sites, including Finian Cunningham, Pepe Escobar, and Christopher Black.
Several of the proxy sites these writers create content for, are directed, controlled, and/or guided by Russian intelligence services.
News Front is a key player within the Russian disinformation and propaganda ecosystem and aims to spread disinformation narratives into non-Russian media.
In a May 2020 Sputnik interview, the head of News Front, Konstantin Knyrik, accused independent social media companies, which had previously removed News Front’s accounts for using manipulative tactics, of censorship.
News Front’s social media activity “relied on a combination of authentic, duplicate and fake accounts...posing as independent news entities,” according to Facebook.
DFRLab analyzed Facebook’s removal of pages and accounts affiliated with News Front, and found News Front’s Spanish-language pages heavily amplified content from Russian state-controlled media outlets, including RT and Sputnik.
RT amplified Knyrik’s call for the Russian government to retaliate against social media companies, depicting the measures against the manipulation of social platforms as an attack on “alternative media” and repeating the Russian Foreign Ministry’s complaints about alleged discrimination against Russian-language media on YouTube.
Aleksandr Malkevich, a Russian national involved in spreading pro-Russian disinformation abroad, also participated in the May 2020 Sputnik interview with Knyrik.
RT and Sputnik's Role in Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem 15 Russian oligarch Yevgeniy Prigozhin, who finances global malign influence operations on behalf of the Kremlin.
RT AND SPUTNIK’S According to the United States Department of the Treasury, Malkevich and News Front coordinate disinformation activities.
EFFORTS TO UNDERMINE PUBLIC CONFIDENCE IN FZNC “expert” Maria Butina, who also hosts one of RT’s current shows on YouTube, pleaded guilty to “one count AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN of conspiracy to act as a Russian agent in the United States without registering with the Justice Department” in December COVID-19 VACCINES 2018.
She now is also a member of the DAMAGING TO THE OVERALL Russian Parliament, representing President Putin’s United Russia party.
RT and Sputnik regularly amplify Butina’s HEALTH AND WELL-BEING OF ALL GLOBAL PUBLICS. statements demonizing the United States, including claims that she was prosecuted because of the color of her hair, that she was enslaved, or that United States authorities “stuff” female prisoners with hormones to transform them “into obese monsters” to prevent them from rioting.
In addition to spreading distorted narratives in support of the Kremlin’s broader strategic objectives, it spreads disinformation and propaganda aimed at undermining confidence in U.S., UK and European COVID-19 vaccines.
NEO combines views of pro-Kremlin Russian academics with those of conspiracy theorists and critics of United States policy.
RT and Sputnik’s Role in Spreading COVID-19 Disinformation and Propaganda RT and Sputnik have played a key role in the spread of COVID-19 related disinformation.
Their reporting has promoted conspiracy theories and sown disinformation about Western vaccines while simultaneously promoting the Russian made Sputnik V vaccine.
RT and Sputnik’s promotion of COVID-19 related disinformation narratives also attempts to undermine trust between citizens and their governments.
Sputnik France claimed the European Union’s management of the pandemic and vaccine distribution has been a disaster.
RT and Sputnik’s narratives undermining America, UK, and European COVID-19 vaccines while promoting Russian vaccines is counterproductive and damaging to global public health.
According to several studies, RT’s COVID-19 coverage targeting foreign audiences differs significantly from its coverage in Russian.
Independent Russian-language online outlet Meduza described the difference in the coverage as “worlds apart,” claiming Russian domestic vaccine opponents often use RT’s foreign language content to justify their views.
Novaya Gazeta, which investigated RT France, reached similar conclusions, demonstrating how the outlet focused on criticizing COVID-19 related restrictions abroad, while either ignoring or approving comparable restrictions imposed by Russian authorities domestically.
In September 2021, YouTube deleted two accounts associated with RT DE for violating the company’s COVID misinformation policy.
In December 2021, YouTube again took down an RT DE affiliated channel that RT created in an attempt to circumvent the September take downs.
In response to the deletions, the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs spread disinformation blaming German authorities and media for allegedly conspiring against RT DE, and threatened German journalists in Russia saying, “there will certainly be a proper response from Russia.
RT and Sputnik's Role in Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem 17 Conclusion T he Russian government attempts to obscure RT and Sputnik’s role as key instruments of state disinformation and propaganda.
The Kremlin claims a false equivalency between the state-directed RT and Sputnik and other publicly funded, transparent, and journalistically independent media organizations, but the differences are stark.
Russian authorities are significantly involved in the decision-making process related to the outlets’ personnel and editorial policies.
Moreover, RT and Sputnik are far less transparent about their management and financial structures than publicly funded international media.
Most importantly, RT and Sputnik play an important role in Russia’s disinformation and propaganda ecosystem as global conduits for the Kremlin’s false claims, and by interacting with other key pillars in the ecosystem.
Unclassified open-source information illustrating RT and Sputnik’s activities is readily available to both governments and the general public.
These outlets are not comparable to independent international media outlets.
Instead of providing objective, fact-based reporting, RT and Sputnik operate as state-funded global messengers of Russian government disinformation and propaganda.
The Kremlin uses these outlets in an attempt to gain political advantage when Russia does not benefit from the truth.
This report’s case studies included as annexes demonstrate how the Kremlin has used these outlets to interfere in elections, undermine democracy, and threaten the rules-based international order.
Russian State-Funded Media Outlets T he summary below outlines the relationships between the various Russian state-funded media outlets.
The order stipulated that all the property of the dissolved entities will be transferred to the newly formed state international news agency Rossiya Segodnya (translates to Russia Today, but is separate from RT), the stated purpose of which is to provide information on Russian state policy and public life for audiences abroad.
According to the order, all of RIA Novosti’s founder rights for the various organizations it created, such as TV-Novosti, were also transferred to Rossiya Segodnya.
Rossiya Segodnya is the parent company of Sputnik, RIA Novosti , and by relation to RIA Novosti, TV-Novosti.
Dmitriy Kiselyov General Director; Margarita Simonyan Editor-in-Chief; Galina Kozhina First Deputy General Director; Sergey Kochetkov First Deputy Editor-in-Chief24 Sputnik: Sputnik is Rossiya Segodnya’s main project/brand targeting foreign audiences.
It is the replacement for RIA Novosti’s international news service and Golos Rossii following the 2013 presidential executive order that liquidated them both.
Therefore, this link is likely made given her role as editor-in-chief of parent company Rossiya Segodnya.
Anton Anisimov Editor-in-Chief; Andrey Blagodyrenko Head of Sputnik in countries that neighbor Russia; Tural Kerimov Head of Sputnik in non-Commonwealth of Independent States ; Aleksey Orlov Head of Sputnik for Russian-speaking audiences.
Originally a state-owned news agency founded in 1941, but liquidated in 2013 by a presidential executive order.
Rossiya Segodnya kept the name RIA Novosti and restructured it to be Rossiya Segodnya’s main project/brand targeting domestic audiences.
According to independent media outlet Proekt, Alexsey Gromov’s son, also named Alexsey Gromov, is KUB’s manager.
ADIJ was founded in 2019 by Simonyan, Nikolov, and a few other individuals described by the independent Russian media outlet Open Media as Simonyan’s RT associates.
Redfish is a digital content creator that is aimed at the Western political left.
There is significant overlap between Ruptly and other outlets linked to TV-Novosti.
Ruptly grew out of RT’s FreeVideo project, which RT launched in 2009 but is no longer in service.
In 2018 the Ruptly Verification Unit, which is a part of the outlet that claims to be dedicated to fact-checking videos, merged with and absorbed a branch of RT that investigated news sources called RT Digital.
Xenia Fedorova has been the head of RT France since its debut in 2017 and was also the head of Ruptly from 2015 to the beginning of 2017 after which Toktosunova took over.
Both Ruptly and Redfish are located in Berlin, and until 2021 when Maffick closed its Berlin office, Ruptly, Redfish, and Maffick shared the same address.
This discrepancy could be an indicator of a lack of organizational independence.
Like RT and Sputnik, Ruptly presents itself as an outlet independent of the Kremlin’s influence, and the connection between Ruptly and TV-Novosti may not be obvious to the average news consumer.
Various Western companies have used Ruptly’s footage, and according to Tubular Labs, it was the most-watched news agency on YouTube in 2020.
In 2021 Ruptly made the shortlist for the UK-based Association for International Broadcasting News Agency of the Year award.
Aleksey Nikolov, managing director of RT and general director of TV-Novosti, was the former AIB Chairman from 2016-2018 and an Executive Committee member from 2018-2020.
Nikolov has also been a judge for the AIB’s annual awards 10 of the 11 years of its existence.
Maffick was originally registered in Germany as Maffick Media GmbH, where it shared the same business address as Ruptly and Redfish.
Despite dropping “Media” from its name, Maffick kept many of the same pages that it ran as subsidiary of Ruptly, continues to use email addresses with the “Maffick Media” name, and runs an online page under the name of an opinion show that RT hosted.
During a dispute with Facebook, a United States court found that Maffick was unable to demonstrate that it was likely to succeed in showing that a “Russia state-controlled-media” label put on Maffick’s Facebook pages was false.
Maffick has registered under the Foreign Agents Registration Act , and its documents include information on $5. million in transfers from TV-Novosti to Maffick since October 2019.
Case Study — 2014 Russian Occupation of Crimea R T’s growth and development have reflected shifts and changes in the Kremlin’s foreign policy.
The outlet’s parent company, TV-Novosti, was founded in April 2005 and RT’s first broadcast was in December 2005.
Both events closely followed Ukraine’s November 2004 January 2005 Orange Revolution, which was in response to a fraudulent presidential election that favored Moscow’s preferred candidate, Viktor Yanukovych.
The revolution ended following a second run-off election won by Viktor Yushchenko.
The uprising resulted in intense scrutiny of Russia’s involvement in internal Ukrainian affairs from both the international community and the media.
Some speculated one of the main goals of RT, or Russia Today as it was known then, was to improve the image of Russia tarnished during the Orange Revolution.
Editor-in-Chief Margarita Simonyan mentioned in an April 2012 interview that RT’s performance during the 2008 Russian invasion of Georgia was an important lesson on whether it could serve its purpose of influencing the non-Russian information space with Kremlin talking points.
It was clear it had failed, which likely led RT to rebrand with the help of a PR firm just after the war.
Major political events in Ukraine once again occurred at the same time as major changes in Russian state media.
Following the beginning of Ukraine’s Maidan Revolution in November 2013, President Putin liquidated RIA Novosti, a state-owned news agency founded in 1941, and Golos Rossii , a radio station founded in 1929.
The December 2013 order stipulated that all the assets of the dissolved media outlets would be transferred to the newly formed state international news agency Rossiya Segodnya.
Two months after the signing of this order, Russia invaded Ukraine and RT began broadcasting the Kremlin’s disinformation to the world.
Denial of Russian Military Involvement RT played an important role in attempting to influence foreign audiences in support of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and eventual occupation of Crimea.
While Putin and other government leaders denied Russian military presence in Ukraine, RT promoted Kremlin talking points through false, misleading, and biased coverage of events.
Most international media reported the Kremlin’s initial denials of any Russian military presence and balanced it with coverage of credible, well-documented Russian troop presence.
RT and Sputnik's Role in Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem 23 Putin finally did admit there had been Russian troops in Crimea, RT presented his statements without any context.
RT repeatedly called the Russian military presence “self-defense forces” and an RT propaganda piece simply posted multiple photographs of locals R U S S I A posing with the soldiers accompanied by positive quotes.
The outlet also reported Putin’s misleading claim that he had never denied the OBFUSCATED ITS Russian troops’ presence, without mentioning that he had, in fact, CRIMEA said that there were no Russian forces in Crimea.
A review of RT’s reporting on Russian troop presence in Ukraine shows its content ROLE IN diligently followed Kremlin talking points.
AND EASTERN Fascism and Neo-Nazis In a likely attempt to damage the reputations of Maidan Revolution UKRAINE TO activists, the Ukrainian leadership, and the Ukrainian Armed Forces in the eyes of both Ukraine’s allies and the Russian population, the Kremlin pushed the narrative that neo-Nazism was rampant in MITIGATE Ukraine prior to, during, and after the annexation of Crimea.
Before military intervention, RT began to run stories about alleged Nazism I N TERNATIONAL in Ukraine.
These stories promulgated the FOR UKRAINE, falsehood that Ukrainians supported Nazism and fascism.
The reporting was so biased that the UK’s Office of Communications, known as Ofcom, found multiple RUSSIAN PUBL I C RT UK reports “failed to maintain due impartiality” and threatened statutory sanctions against the outlet.
This grossly exaggerated SUPPORT neo-Nazi narrative, which the Kremlin continues to peddle today, is designed to build public support at home and abroad that Russia’s FOR MILITARY military intervention in Ukraine is justified.
In 2018, a Dutch-led joint investigation team concluded that a Buk surface-to-air missile belonging to Russia’s 53rd Anti-Aircraft Missile Brigade shot down the plane.
In an effort to counter this narrative, RT developed a series of alternative theories to try to cast doubt on the facts.
RT promoted the conspiracy that there was a Spanish air traffic controller at Ukraine’s airport who claimed that there were Ukrainian fighters escorting the Malaysian Airlines flight right before it crashed a theory debunked by the airport.
Putin also promoted this narrative in an interview after it was widely known to be false.
The “disrespect for facts” in RT’s reporting about the flight led one of their journalists to quit on the air.
RT Targeting Audiences with Ukraine-Focused Content The data points to a clear RT strategy to target non-Russian audiences with Kremlin messaging on Ukraine.
A March 2015 study showed the majority of videos posted to RT’s flagship English-language YouTube channel were about Ukraine.
Videos on Ukraine accounted for 27 percent of all RT videos and about 27 percent of views.
For RT Deutsch, as RT DE was known at the time, 43 percent of videos and 42 percent of views were focused on the conflict in Ukraine.
About 40 percent of RT’s French language YouTube account’s videos and views were also of videos on Ukraine.
On its U.S., Spanish-language, and Arabic-language channels, however, RT was not as successful in promoting its Ukraine videos which underperformed compared to videos on other topics, likely due to low audience interest in the Ukraine.
Follow-On Efforts and Praise from Putin Russia obfuscated its role in Crimea and eastern Ukraine to mitigate international reaction and deter support for Ukraine, while building Russian public support for military intervention.
RT spread the Kremlin’s disinformation under the guise of journalism and created confusion about the truth.
Following up on the work RT did at the beginning of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, Russia expanded its operations and created an entirely new media outlet, Sputnik, which was announced on November 10, 2014.
The unveiling of this new propaganda outlet came just two days before NATO assessed Russia had sent troops and military material into eastern Ukraine.
RT’s Simonyan was reportedly one of the recipients of the “For Service to the Fatherland” award.
RT and Sputnik's Role in Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem 25 Annex 3: Case Study — 2015 Downing of Russian SU-24 A nother example demonstrating how RT and Sputnik serve as tools to reflect and amplify the policies of the Russian state is their coverage of the Turkish military’s 2015 downing of a Russian Su-24 military aircraft after it entered Turkish air space on the border with Syria.
Before the shootdown, RT and Sputnik’s Turkey-related content did not demonstrate a clear agenda, and stories varied in tone and content.
Its editorial policy changed drastically just as Moscow’s stance towards Ankara became increasingly hostile.
When President Erdogan publicly apologized in June 2016 for the incident, RT and Sputnik’s coverage of Turkey reflected this reconciliation and negative coverage largely dissipated.
Wide-Ranging Coverage Before the Shootdown On November 24, 2015, the Turkish military shot down a Russian Su-24 jet fighter, claiming it had violated Turkish airspace.
Russia argued the jet was downed over Syrian territory and posed no threat to Turkey.
The tone of the content ranged from critical pieces accusing Turkey of supporting terrorists to positive stories about President Erdogan participating in the opening of a mosque in Moscow.
An article about the October 3, 2015, accidental Russian incursion of Turkish airspace portrayed Turkey as an understanding partner.
Coverage Turns Hostile to Reflect the Kremlin Line President Putin described the November 2015 shoot-down as a “stab in the back delivered by terrorists’ accomplices,” and accused Turkey of funding ISIS through oil purchases.
Putin also alleged the Turkish government had been promoting “Islamization” inside Turkey, warning that Russian tourists visiting Turkey could face security risks.
To reflect this new aggressive Kremlin posture, RT and Sputnik significantly shifted their Turkey-related propaganda narratives, according to several studies and current and former RT staff interviewed by the Oxford Internet Institute.
The study describes how staff members, “cited changes in RT’s narratives about Turkey” and noted “RT has usually portrayed Turkey in a less critical way.
Petersburg and agreed to bridge their differences over the downing of the Su-24.
The meeting followed Putin’s words of support for Erdogan immediately after the failed July 2016 coup d’état attempt in Turkey.
After the August summit, “Russia’s information operations in Turkey seemed to disappear almost entirely,” writes Unver.
According to The Economist, since the meeting, Sputnik Turkey “has drummed up support for the rapprochement between Turkey and Russia,” focusing on praising Turkey’s acquisition of Russia’s S-400 missile system “as a sign of the country’s increasing independence” from NATO and the United States.
RT and Sputnik's Role in Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem 27 Annex 4: Case Study — Spring 2021 Russian Military Buildup on The Ukrainian Border I n March 2021, Russia began, what at the time was the largest buildup of troops and military equipment on its border with Ukraine and in occupied Crimea since Russia’s 2014 invasion.
The buildup was intentionally very visible, and this time Russia did not deny it.
By May 2021, Russia claimed the buildup was part of a “routine” military exercise and that at least some of its troops would be pulled back from around Ukraine.
Surrounding this build up, some familiar themes from past disinformation campaigns, especially from the 2014 invasion as outlined in Annex 2, reappeared.
At the time of publication, Russia has once again built up its military presence on the Ukrainian border, this time surpassing the amount of troops in March 2021.
Return of Narratives Developed in 2014 In 2014, Russia developed and deployed multiple disinformation narratives against Ukraine, many of which were highlighted in Annex 2.
During the Spring 2021 buildup of troops and military equipment, Russian state-controlled media outlets once again deployed these incorrect narratives.
Russia was able to build upon the disinformation foundation it laid in 2014 by repeating and reinforcing old narratives.
This is a proven effective tactic, as studies have shown that people are more likely to accept a falsehood as true after being repeatedly exposed to it.
The United States and NATO’s Support for Ukraine’s Territorial Integrity Raised Tensions A disinformation narrative that Russia repeatedly used in 2014 was that NATO Allies’ verbal statements of support for Ukraine’s right to protect its sovereignty and territorial integrity meant the United States, European countries, and other partners wanted Ukraine to go to war with Russia on their behalf.
This goes hand in hand with another false claim that Russia is not instigating the conflict but just reacting to the situation.
During the military buildup in Spring 2021, RT and Sputnik published various stories to try and frame Russia’s buildup of troops as a response to Western provocations.
Ukraine Has a Serious Nazi/Fascist Problem As mentioned in Annex 2, in 2014, Russian state-funded and state-controlled media began spreading disinformation narratives describing the Ukrainian government, and a significant portion of the population, as either fascists or Nazis.
Even after Ukraine became the second country in the world, after Israel, to simultaneously have a Jewish president and prime minister, Russian disinformation media outlets continued to push this narrative.
RT continued to feature this false accusation on its homepage even following the Kremlin’s announcement that it intended to remove Russian troops from around Ukraine’s borders and Crimea following the Spring 2021 troop buildup.
The Italian-language branch of Sputnik published an opinion piece in which the author wrongly claimed “Russian citizens” in Ukraine, and Russia itself, are threatened by neo-Nazi aggression from Ukraine.
The Greek-language version of Sputnik incorrectly reported on April 12 that Ukraine’s authorities are reluctant to confront militant groups with supposed neo-Nazi affiliations.
RT’s Arabic, Spanish and German-language branches also published false neo-Nazi narratives during the early 2021 military buildup.
Ukrainian Armed Forces Intentionally Injure Children RT has repeatedly continued to spread disinformation narratives after they have been debunked.
On April 3, 2021, the Russian press first reported a story of a young boy allegedly killed by a Ukrainian Armed Forces drone in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine.
On April 5, StopFake contacted locals in the village where the event allegedly took place, who confirmed that a boy tragically died, but not because of the Ukrainian Armed Forces.
On April 6, RT’s show “In Question” reported the story of the boy, with a video by Ruptly of the boy’s grandmother giving an emotional interview about how she found his dead body.
At the end of the report, they did qualify that the story was not proven to be true; however, at the time of filming, it had already been debunked.
Sputnik’s Spanish channel reported on the story, as did RT’s Spanish channel on April 9, three days after the OSCE had published its report showing the boy did not die from a drone.
This story is similar to another disinformation item published by the Russian press in 2014.
On July 12, 2014, a woman told Russia’s Channel One she had witnessed Ukrainian soldiers crucify a young boy and drag his mother to death behind a tank.
The next day, a Novaya Gazeta journalist was unable to find any witnesses in the town where the killings allegedly happened.
It was later proven the woman who first spoke to Channel One was lying.
Like the fake story about the boy being killed by a drone, RT mentioned the story despite it already having been debunked.
The outlet also doubled down on the original disinformation narrative by claiming that multiple “babies” were crucified.
One-Sided Reporting and Blatant Disinformation Instead of providing a balanced account, RT and Sputnik frequently present only the Kremlin’s position on an issue.
On RT’s television shows, disinformation and propaganda that makes the Kremlin look good (and its perceived adversaries look bad) is repeatedly stated as fact.
Despite RT’s attempts to market its shows as debates or discussions in which “all things are considered,” pro-Kremlin statements are rarely questioned.
RT and Sputnik's Role in Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem 29 On April 6, 2021, in the same episode of RT’s “In Question” that reported about the debunked story about the drone killing a boy, RT listed false reasons justifying Russia’s military buildup, including an alleged promise by United States President Ronald Reagan to General Secretary Gorbachev to not expand NATO, which Gorbachev said never happened, and the incorrect claim that Ukraine had outlawed the Russian language.
When speaking in Russian, Rossiya Segodnya is always referred to using the Russian words, while RT is always said in English.
See Annex One for more details on the Russian state-owned media landscape.
Pillars of Russia’s Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem for more information about the ecosystem.
The unusual attendees for a media outlet that had not yet started broadcasting in Russian included Russian Prime Minister Spokesperson Dmitriy Peskov; Nikolay Zakharov, head of public relations for the FSB; Sergey Devyatov, head of press relations for the Russian Federal Guard Service; aide to then President Medvedev, Arkadiy Dvorkovich, who is photographed next to RT’s Simonyan; and Konstantin Zatulin, Russian State Duma member and featured person in the Glazyev tapes, which revealed via leaked audio that Russia was involved in organizing pro-Russian protests in Ukraine.
Simonyan, Nikolov, and a few other individuals whom the independent Russian media outlet Open Media describes as Simonyan’s RT associates, founded ADIJ in 2019.
There is no clear indication why ADIJ, a company established in 2019, became the new parent company of TV-Novosti, which was created in 2005.
As of January 2022, she still listed herself as working at RT France, but as the Deputy editor-in-chief.
Some reports mention that Vasily Pushkov was the director of the International Cooperation Directorate for Sputnik, while other articles label him as the as director of International Cooperation at Rossiya Segodnya.
The British values the BBC aims to bring to the world in good journalism.
VOA will serve as a consistently reliable and authoritative source of news.
Neither the BBC nor VOA’s mission statements say they exist to bring their respective countries opinions to the world.
Contrary to the law, TV-Novosti has not published form number ON0001 since 2010, and it has not published form number ON0002 since 2019.
The Ministry of Justice has not punished TV-Novosti despite its violations.
The closest similarity is a Russian organization called Public Collegium on Press Complaints which acts as a self-regulator for Russian media and is funded by the Russian Presidential Grants Fund.
Rossiya Segodnya is a member of the chamber of the Collegium, but RT is not.
For example, in November 2020 a complaint was made to the organization about an RT report, and RT did not participate in the hearing.
Western allies of Ukraine supplying ‘Kiev regime’ with weapons & inciting ‘bloody, distructive’ force in Donbass, Russia claims; Russian troops on Ukraine border ‘ready to defend country’ in event of war says Defense Minister Shoigu, warning of NATO buildup; The West’s sole prerogative is that Russia has no right to self-defense... even when the threat is right on its border ; and Moscow orders ships to conduct Black Sea naval exercises amid confusion over whether United States will deploy warships to volatile region.
Moscow Calls on Kiev, NATO to Refrain From Actions That Could Lead to Further Escalation in Donbass; Brits Push Russia War; Siege of Russia by United States and its Allies Offers a Lesson for China; Lavrov Says Berlin Should Provide Info on Navalny Before Asking Questions About Ukraine; and Why Kiev's Preparation for War in Eastern Ukraine Cannot but Worry Russia.
