He was a supporter and financial backer of the Orange Revolution of 2004, after which he became Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council.
Under Yushchenko he also served as Foreign Minister, and under Yanukovych he was Minister of Trade and Economic Development.
He was also a very prominent and wealthy oligarch as the owner of Roshen chocolate manufacturers, and Channel-5 television network, which provided him with significant political influence.
In the summer of 2014, after the tumultuous and tragic protests in Kyiv, he was elected president, defeating his arch-rival Yulia Tymoshenko in the first round of the elections.
He came to office with a mandate, essentially, to clean up Ukraine, resolve the impasse with Russia in the Donbas and the annexed Crimea, place the country on a more stable footing, and move the country decisively toward the European Union, starting with the signing of an Association Agreement rejected by his predecessor.
He also supported the Minsk Accords of February 2015, to remove heavy weaponry and forces from the war zone, and to amend the Ukrainian Constitution to provide more autonomy for the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
Opinion polls indicate that almost 70% of respondents distrust him, the highest by far of any candidate in the 2019 presidential campaign.
His positive ranking is around 13%, putting him in a close race for second place with Tymoshenko, with a political neophyte actor and TV star Vladimir Zelensky enjoying a healthy lead with the election less than three weeks away.
Poroshenko has adopted an election slogan of “Either me or Putin,” which many saw as insulting to his opponents as signifying that only he could be trusted to stand up to the Russian president.
Another slogan—'there are many candidates, only one president’—was a direct copy of Putin’s own slogan in the Russian presidential elections of 2012.
The reality is that it is rather late to construct an image of a determined fighter for Ukraine.
That, he may be, but on several other levels, the presidency of Poroshenko has fallen well short of expectations.
Ukraine today is the poorest nation of Europe, surpassing in this regard even Moldova.
In part, this decline could be explained through losses of important economic territories as a result of a conflict with Russian-backed separatist.
Crimea was not a great loss in economic terms, but Russia’s construction of the Crimean Bridge over the Kerch Strait and a naval buildup in the Azov Sea has virtually curtailed sea trade between the port of Odesa and the ports of Berdyansk and Mariupol in Donetsk Region.
But it can also be explained by the failure to end corruption and oligarchic control of Ukraine.
While some oligarchs have been weakened—Firtash and Kolomoisky being the most obvious examples—others have thrived, such as Henadii Boholyubov, Yuriy Kosik, Kostyantin Zhevago, and not least Poroshenko himself.
Others have survived the losses incurred through the conflict and revived their businesses, including Rinat Akhmetov and former president Kuchma’s son-in-law, Viktor Pinchuk.
All the above are billionaires, contrasting with the fate of most of the population over the past five years.
While the army has been strengthened under Poroshenko, paramilitary armed groups that have loose attachments to the government have thrived.
The National Corps, which developed from the notorious Azov Brigade and the C14 group have organized mass marches, attacks on Roma camps, LGTB marches, and others, without the slightest protest from the Ukrainian president.
If these groups have attachments to the government, it is to former Governor of Kharkiv and now Interior Minister, Arsen Avakov, but Poroshenko has been notable for his silence in condemning the attacks.
The Memory Laws of 2015 resulted in the opening of formerly banned archives of the KGB as well as removing Communist statues, emblems, city, and street names.
But they also continued and deepened a process of developing a national narrative heroizing wartime nationalists that caused Ukraine’s closest EU ally, Poland, to respond by declaring the 1943 massacre of Poles in Volhynia by the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists as an act of Genocide in July 2016.
Such measures also tend to divide rather than unify a country that was badly shaken by the events of 2014-15.
Aivaras Abromavacius as Minister of Trade and Economy , Alexander Kvitashvili as Minister of Health , and Natalie Jaresko as Minister of Finance , as well as Prime Minister Arsenii Yatseniuk , who criticized the president for failure to enact ‘real changes’ as the IMF threatened to withhold credits if further progress was not made in reducing corruption.
Poroshenko appointed former president of Georgia, Mikeil Saakashvili as governor of Odesa region in May 2015, granting him Ukrainian citizenship with a task of combating corruption.
Eighteen months later, Saakashvili was dismissed, and he blamed Poroshenko for hindering him in carrying out his task.
In July 2017, Poroshenko abruptly stripped Saakashvili of his Ukrainian citizenship.
The initial appointment may have been the president’s chief error, but his behavior subsequently does him little credit.
The deaths of the ‘Heavenly Hundred’ in Kyiv’s Maidan in February 2014 have resulted likewise in very little.
Four members of the High Council of Justice have been accused of corruption.
Likewise, according to Oleg Sukhov writing in the Kyiv Post , the principal Anti-Corruption Court has halted several cases of various crimes including in July 2018, one for embezzlement involving the son of Avakov, Oleksandr.
Sukhov also noted that when the government released the frozen funds of the All-Ukrainian Development Bank managed by Yanukovych’s son Oleksandr, some $2 billion of these funds were transferred to Poroshenko’s International Investment Bank.
This is today’s Ukraine and it is not substantively or materially different from the Ukraine of Yanukovych.
Poroshenko has the funds and power to challenge again for president but it is hardly surprising that many Ukrainians are looking for something different.
