The Ukrainian World Congress is calling for a worldwide boycott of goods made in Russia in response to Russia's brazen aggression against Ukraine.
Russia is persistently violating international conventions with its attempts to take control of Ukraine's territory.
This was first evidenced by the illegal and forceful annexation of Crimea which, even according to the statistics of the Presidential Council on Civil Society and Human Rights, was supported by only 15 30% of voters.
In addition, with the goal of disrupting the Presidential Elections on 25 May 2014 in Ukraine, Russia's special forces and accomplices are instigating brutal acts of violence and provocations in Eastern and Southern Ukraine, including the illegal referendums in the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts on 11 May 2014.
The UWC is the international coordinating body for Ukrainian communities in the diaspora representing the interests of over 20 million Ukrainians.
The UWC has member organizations in 33 countries and ties with Ukrainians in 14 additional countries.
Founded in 1967, the UWC was recognized in 2003 by the United Nations Economic and Social Council as a non governmental organization with special consultative status.
Given that one of Russian President Vladimir Putin's stated reasons for invading Crimea was to prevent ""Nazis"" from coming to power in Ukraine, it is perhaps surprising that his regime is growing closer by the month to extreme right-wing parties across Europe.
In Ukraine, he simply wants to grab territory that he believes rightly belongs to him.
In the European Union, he hopes that his backing of fringe parties will destabilize his foes and install in Brussels politicians who will be focused on dismantling the EU rather than enlarging it.
In Hungary, for example, Putin has taken the Jobbik party under his wing.
The third-largest party in the country, Jobbik has supporters who dress in Nazi-type uniforms, spout anti-Semitic rhetoric, and express concern about Israeli ""colonization"" of Hungary.
The party has capitalized on rising support for nationalist economic policies, which are seen as an antidote for unpopular austerity policies and for Hungary's economic liberalization in recent years.
Vona also met with Russia Duma leaders including Ivan Grachev, chairman of the State Duma Committee for Energy and Vasily Tarasyuk, deputy chairman of the Committee on Natural Resources and Utilization, among others.
In fact, there have been persistent rumors that Jobbik's enthusiasm is paid for with Russian rubles.
The party has also repeatedly criticized Hungary's ""Euro-Atlantic connections"" and the European Union.
And, more recently, it called the referendum in Crimea ""exemplary,"" a dangerous word in a country with extensive co-ethnic populations in Romania and Slovakia.
It seems that the party sees Putin's new ethnic politics as being aligned with its own revisionist nationalism.
The Kremlin's ties to France's extreme-right National Front have also been growing stronger.
Marine Le Pen, the party leader, visited Moscow in June 2013 at the invitation of State Duma leader Sergei Naryshkin, a close associate of Putin's.
She also met with Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin and discussed issues of common concern, such as Syria, EU enlargement, and gay marriage.
France's ProRussia TV, which is funded by the Kremlin, is staffed by editors with close ties to the National Front who use the station to espouse views close to National Front's own perspective on domestic and international politics.
The National Front wishes to replace the EU and NATO with a pan-European partnership of independent nations, which, incidentally, includes Russia and would be driven by a trilateral Paris-Berlin-Moscow alliance.
In the same interview, he mentioned that he had visited Crimea several times in the past year.
The Greek government imprisoned Nikos Michaloliakos, its leader, and stripped parliamentary deputies of their political immunity before slapping them with charges of organized violence.
Golden Dawn has never hidden its close connections to Russia's extreme right, and is thought to receive funds from Russia.
It was also Dugin who hosted Jobbik leader Vona when he visited Moscow.
In his letter, Dugin expressed support for Golden Dawn's geopolitical positions and requested to open a line of communication between Golden Dawn and his think tank in Moscow.
Finally, a cable made public by WikiLeaks shows that Bulgaria's far right Ataka party has close links to the Russian embassy.
Reports that Russia funds Ataka have swirled for years, but have never been verified.
But evidence of enthusiasm for Russia's foreign policy goals is open for all to see.
Meanwhile, party leader Volen Siderov has called repeatedly for Bulgaria to veto EU economic sanctions for Russia.
The Putin government's cordial relations with Europe's far right sit oddly, to say the least, with his opposition to ""Nazis"" in the Ukrainian government.
Yet Putin's dislike for Ukrainian ""fascists"" has nothing to do with ideology.
The country's Svoboda and Right Sector parties, which might do well in the post-Viktor Yanukovych Ukraine, stand for independence in a country that Putin does not believe should exist separate from Russia.
Similarly, Russian support of the far right in Europe has less to do with ideology than with his desire to destabilize European governments, prevent EU expansion, and help bring to power European governments that are friendly to Russia.
In that sense, several European countries may only be one bad election away from disaster.
As support for Jobbik increases, the anti-democratic, center-right government of Prime Minister Viktor Orban has tacked heavily to the right and recently signed a major nuclear deal with Russia.
Russia plans to lend Hungary ten billion euro to construct two new reactors at its Paks nuclear plant, making Hungary even more dependent for energy on Russia.
Jobbik's Vona wants to go even further, taking Hungary out of the EU and joining Russia's proposed Eurasian Union.
European parliamentary elections, which are scheduled for the end of May, are expected to result in a strong showing for the far right.
A weak economy, which was weakened further by the European Central Bank's austerity policies, has caused the extreme right vote to surge.
Current polls show the far-right parties in France and Holland winning the largest share of seats in their national delegations.
Brussels strategists worry that 20 percent of members of the new European parliament could be affiliated with parties that wish to abolish the EU, double the current number.
That could cause an EU government shutdown to rival the dysfunction of Washington and deal a major blow to efforts to enlarge the Union and oppose Russian expansionism.
It is strange to think that Putin's strategy of using right-wing extremist political parties to foment disruption and then take advantage – as he did in Crimea – could work in southern and western Europe as well.
Or that some of the extreme right parties in the European parliament, who work every day to delegitimize the European Union and whose numbers are growing, may be funded by Russia.
To counter Russia, European leaders should start launching public investigations into external funding of extreme-right political parties.
If extensive Russia connections are found, it would be important to publicize that fact and then impose sanctions on Russia that would make it more difficult for it to provide such support.
Pro-European parties must find a way to mobilize voters who are notoriously unwilling to vote in European parliament elections.
Europe will also have to rethink the austerity policies that have worsened the grievances of many Europeans and pushed them to support the anti-system, anti-European right.
Although Germany has banned extreme right parties from representation, other countries have not.
Germany may have therefore underestimated the extent of damage austerity policies could do to the European project and should rethink how its excessive budget cutting, monetary prudence, and export surpluses are affecting politics in the rest of Europe.
Rather than making another land grab in his back yard, he might watch patiently from the sidelines at the end of May as pro-Russia far-right parties win a dramatic election victory in European parliamentary elections.
These elections could weaken the European Union and bring Russia's friends on the far right closer to power.
Actuellement la vie des habitants dans ces regions situées en plein milieu de l'Europe s'est transformée en un cauchemar continuel.
Le 15 mai – ""Dans la nuit, les troupes ukrainiennes ont complètement détruit la base militaire cachée des terroristes près de Kramatorsk."" déclare le Président par intérim, Oleksandr Tourtchynov.
Le 15 mai – En vue des élections présidentielles du 25 mai, les terroristes pro-russes ont changé de tactique.
Dlatego dziś życie mieszkańców Wschodniej Ukrainy pozostaje ciągłym horrendum w środku Europy.
Dlatego bierzemy na siebie odwagę informować państwa o wydarzeniach na Ukrainie.
My postaramy się być uczciwymi. 15 maja – Na Donbasie wskutek użycia przez prorosyjskich terrorystów broni palnej z ich rąk za cały czas rozruchów antypaństwowych zostały zabite 78 osób.
Prezydenta Ołeksandr Turczynow. 15 maja – Ze względu na przygotowania do wyborów prezydenckich 25 maja, prorosyjscy terroryści zaczęli masowo stosować taktykę zajęcia lokali okręgowych komisji wyborczych.
W miejscowości Krasny Łucz uzbrojone prorosyjscy ""Kozacy"" okupowali lokal okręgowej komisji wyborczej nr 109, wcześniej został także okupowany lokal okręgowej komisji wyborczej w mieście Antracyt. 15 maja – Piotr Poroszenko nadal zwiększa swoją pozycję w wyścigu prezydenckim i ma szansę wygrać wybory już w pierwszej rundzie.
Wraz z przedstawicielami organizacji pozarządowych i mieszkańcami miasta pracownicy hut imienia Illicza i ""Azowstal"" rozpoczęły demontaż barykad.
Huty imienia Illicza i ""Azowstal"" są własnością oligarchy Rinata Achmetowa, który ostatnio zaczął występować o jedność Ukrainy. 15 maja – Europejski Komisarz ds.
Należy ich unikać, ale dzisiaj oto trudniej, bowiem zagnieździły się one w Sieci.
Trolling, a w nieco spolszczonej wersji trollowanie, to rozsyłanie w internecie masowo bzdur.
Nie są już tępe, choć z tępoty korzystaj – tępoty tych, do których rozsyłają swoje wiadomości.
Gdy chodzi o konflikt rosyjsko-ukraiński trolle mają ogromne znaczenie.
Niemcy mają wyrzuty za sumienia w związku z II wojną światowa wobec Rosji, wobec czego trzeba nazwać Ukraińców faszystami.
Jakiegokolwiek związku z faszystami Niemiec natychmiast się przestraszy.
Francuzi nic nie wiedzą o Ukrainie i sądzą, że jak ktoś pisze cyrylicą i jest prawosławny to już Rosjanin.
Każdemu należy się właściwa wiadomość, spreparowana odpowiednio do kompleksów, niechęci czy ignorancji.
W Niemczech do antyfaszystów, we Francji na przykład do wielbicieli talentu Depardieu, do Polski najlepiej na portale z nazwą Kresy w tytule.
Dalej robotę wykona masa użytecznych idiotów, rozmnażając to w setki tysięcy miejsc.
Moskwa niegdyś atakowała za pomocą hakerów, na przykład na łotewskie portale rządowe.
Putin idzie za duchem czasu i udoskonala metody wraz z swoimi expertami od internetu takimi jak Władisław Surkov czy prokremlowskimi blogerami jak Konstantin Rykow, Aleksy Czadajew czy Maria Sergeyewa.
Internet, który wedle cyber-utopistów miał być narzędziem globalnej demokratyzacji, staje się bronią podstępnej propagandy dyktatorskich reżymów.
Jest tylko nadzieja, że Europejczycy nie są aż tak głupi jak sobie Putin wyobraża.
Internet jest ogromny i można mieć nadzieje, że w tej społeczności, jaka zapełnia internet, jest dość rozsądku, aby kłamstwo nie zatriumfowało.
I każdy kto nie pozostaje obojętny wobec konfliktu rosyjsko-ukraińskiego i używa internetu głosuje za rozsądkiem lub przeciw niemu.
La Russia, annettendo la Crimea, ha effettuato un atto di aggressione nei confronti dell'Ucraina.
Ora essa ha introdotto gruppi terroristici e sovversivi in Ucraina orientale.
Il suo fine è quello di vietare che le elezioni presidenziali legittime abbiano luogo.
In questo modo la vita in Ucraina orientale si è trasformata in un incubo nel cuore dell'Europa.
A Krasnyi Luch i ""cosacchi"" filorussi armati stanno tentando di impossessarsi della commissione elettorale distrettuale N109.
Insieme ai rappresentanti delle organizzazioni cittadine e agli abitanti, i lavoratori dell'impresa di Illich e ""Azovstal'"" hanno iniziato a smantellare le barricate.
Zato je sad život u Istočnoj Ukrajini pretvoren u totalni užas u centru Evrope.
U mestu Krasni Luč naoružani proruski ""kozaci"" osvajaju izbornu komisiju N109.
Zajedno sa predstavnicima društvenih organizacija і stanovnicima saradnici kombinata ""Ilič"" i ""Azovstalj"" počeli su da demontiraju barikade.
Kombinati ""Ilič"" i ""Azovstalj"" su u vlasništvu Rinata Аhmetova, koji je u poslednje vreme počeo da se zalaga za nedeljivost Ukrajine.
A Rússia realizou um ato de agressão contra a Ucrânia, anexando a Crimeia.
Depois disso, ela enviou grupos subversivos de terroristas para Leste da Ucrânia.
Assim, a vida das pessoas em Leste da Ucrânia foi transformada para um pesadelo no centro da Europa.
Por isso, tomamos a coragem de informar-vos sobre os acontecimentos na Ucrânia.
Auto-proclamado ""governador popular""da virtual ""República popular de Luhansk"", Valeriy Bolotov oficialmente mudou para Federação Russa – o chefe adjunto do Serviço nacional da fronteira Serhiy Astakhov.
Na terça-feira, separatistas de Luhansk informaram sobre tentativa de assassinato do Bolotov – aparentemente, é caso de conflitos entre os vários grupos terroristas.
Em cidade de Kramatorsk, em 13 de Maio aconteceu um combate entre militares ucranianos e terroristas pró-russos.
Unidade de 95 brigada aerotransportada de Forças Armadas da Ucrânia que está participando da operação anti-terrorista caiu em emboscada preparada pelos bandidos.
Os bandidos que atacaram soldados pára-quedistas ucranianos utilizaram armas que não tem o exercito ucraniano.
Em cidade de Odessa os terroristas explodiram agência bancária do Privatbank que pertencente ao Ihor Kolomoisky – um de mais eficientes chefes da administração de região , que suporta o governo da Ucrânia.
Esta tentativa é considerada como vingança de terroristas pró-russos para sua posição pró-ucraniana.
De manhã os representantes de organizações pró-russas e bandidos armados chegaram para edifício da unidade militar número 3037 de distrito de Budyonny da cidade de Donetsk com a finalidade de tomar armas.
Procuradoria ""anistiou"" três separatistas que depuseram as armas em região de Luhansk.
Grupos subversivos russos receberam a tarefa de desmoralização de militares ucranianos e população local – coordinador de grupo Resistência da Informação, Dmytro Tymchuk.
Os separatistas tentaram parar o funcionamento de minas em regiões de Donetsk e Luhansk da Ucrânia – o chefe de Sindicato Independente de Mineiros de Donbass, Mykhailo Volynko.
We exspress our sincere gratitude to the International Renaissance Foundation that supported this publication.
