However, in spite of its importance to the politics of Ukraine and global politics this mass killing have been central subject of only a couple of studies.
These studies concluded that the Maidan massacre of the protesters was a false flag operation and that far right organizations were involved in the mass killing of both police and the protesters.
However, the dominant narrative promoted by the governments and the media in Ukraine and the West attributed the Maidan massacre of the protesters to the government forces and mostly ignored killings of the police.
The official investigation by the Prosecutor General Office of Ukraine charged Berkut special police commanders and members with the massacre of the Madian protesters on Viktor Yanukovych orders and publicly stated that Berkut policemen and Internal Troops servicemen were killed by unknown persons of unknown allegiance.
It examines court testimonies of wounded protesters and relatives of the killed protesters, results of forensic ballistic and medical examinations, investigative experiments, and videos and photos of the Maidan massacre shown during the trials.
The 55 minute long online video appendix with added English-language subtitles is compiled from brief synchronized segments of on-site reports by American, Belgian, Belarusian, British, Finish, French, Dutch, German, Polish, Russian, Spanish, and Ukrainian TV correspondents and social media videos by various Maidan protesters who filmed this massacre on February 20, 2014.
The study finds that the Maidan massacre investigations and trials revealed a variety of evidence, such as results of forensic examinations and testimonies of many wounded protesters, which shows that at least the absolute majority of the protesters were killed and wounded from Maidancontrolled locations and that the investigation and trials were for this reason stonewalled.
The analysis shows patterns of ineffective and delayed Maidan massacre trials and the GPU investigations, trumped-up charges, and ignoring, reversing, and covering-up of the evidence, which was revealed by the GPU own investigation and which pointed to the massacre of the protesters and the police by “snipers” in the Maidan-controlled buildings and not by the Berkut police.
The paper discusses implications of this study for understanding the Maidan massacre and the conflict in Ukraine and the international conflict over Ukraine.
Maidan massacre trials and Ukrainian government investigations made public for the first time a large volume of various evidence, such as results of forensic medical and ballistic examinations and testimonies of wounded protesters concerning this politically crucial case of mass killing.
The dominant narrative promoted by the governments and the media in Ukraine and the West attributed the Maidan massacre of the protesters to the government forces and mostly ignored killings of the police.
If the Yanukovych government, its police and security forces, or any pro-Yanukovych “third force” did perpetrate this mass killing one would expect speedy and effective investigations and the prosecutions with 3 forensic ballistic and medical evidence, synchronized videos, witness testimonies, and documents proving such an massacre order and involvement in the mass killing beyond reasonable doubt.
It was in the interest of the new governments to conduct such investigations and prosecutions and reveal such evidence.
This is the highest profile political crime in Ukraine and one of the most significant in contemporary Europe.
A trial for the Maidan massacre on February 20 is the trial of the century because of its political significance.
The Maidan governments legitimacy relied to a large extent on this mass killing, which ultimately brought them to power.
The Maidan massacre was one of the most documented if not the most documented cases of mass killing in history.
Protesters were shot in the very downtown of Kyiv City in presence of thousands of witnesses and more than one hundred journalists from Ukraine, the West, Russia, Poland, and other countries.
The massacre was recorded in numerous videos filmed by the journalists and protesters, in live broadcasts of some Ukrainian TV channels, in Internet video streams, and security cameras on various buildings.
While this case involved several dozen killings of the Maidan protesters, many of the moments of these killings and the special company of the Berkut police shooting were captured in various videos, while communications of Security Service of Ukraine Alfa snipers and commanders during the massacre were intercepted and recorded.
Such volume of evidence is unprecedented in the typical cases of murder or political violence.
The GPU has both highly qualified investigators and resources to identify both 4 organizers and perpetrators of the Maidan massacre of the protesters and the police and others involved in this crime.
Conversely, if the elements of the Maidan leadership and Maidan or Maidan-linked shooters were involved in the massacre of the protesters, the speed and effectiveness of the investigations and the prosecutions would be expected to be the opposite.
And the evidence of such an involvement would be covered up and the evidence of the government forces involvement would be expected to be falsified or lacking.
The official investigation by the Prosecutor General Office of Ukraine publicly and consistently denied since the very start of its investigations that the Maidan opposition was involved in the massacre.
The GPU, after it arrested and charged the Berkut special company policemen in April 2014 with the massacre on February 20th, repeatedly publicly denied that that any snipers shot protesters from the Maidancontrolled buildings, such as the Hotel Ukraina, or stated that ongoing investigation did not confirm this.
Previous Studies and Controversies It would have been easy and convenient to accept without proper research and analysis of evidence the dominant narrative that the government forces on the Yanukovych order massacred the unarmed Maidan protesters.
The massacred protesters were from the Maidan opposition, which was led by parties that presented themselves before, during, and after the “Euromaidan” as pro-Western and democratic.
However, the Maidan parties and leaders resorted to similar and even more undemocratic actions and policies, in particular, violent ones, before, during, and after the “Euromaidan,” such as an attempt to attack the parliament on February 18, 2014 and the “AntiTerrorist Operation” in Donbas in 2014.
These politicians and parties often changed political and policy positions and alliances in order to get or preserve power, and had links to oligarchs, corruption and in some cases in the past to organized crime.
The evidence and investigation results suggest that some other highly publicized cases of violence during the “Euromaidan,” such as abduction and crucifixion of Dmytro Bulatov and killings of the first three protesters in January 2014 were staged by elements of the Maidan opposition.
The dominant narrative of the Maidan massacre was based on widely publicized graphic videos and media reports showing the special Berkut company shooting with live ammunition into direction of Maidan protesters and many protesters being killed and wounded around the 6 same time.
In spite of its importance to the politics of Ukraine and global politics the Maidan massacre have been central subject of only a couple of academic studies.
This operation was organized and covertly conducted by elements of the Maidan leadership and concealed armed groups of shooters or “snipers” in order to win the asymmetric conflict during the “Euromaidan” and seize power in Ukraine.
It was extremely irrational from a cost vs. benefit perspective to massacre both the protesters and the police or the protesters alone for Yanukovych and his government but in rational self-interest of some far right and oligarchic opposition leaders.
The study showed that concealed armed Maidan groups, such as the special Maidan company, which were based, in particular, in Music Conservatory and the Trade Union buildings, broke a truce agreement between Yanukovych and the Maidan leaders and started the massacre in the early morning on February 20, 2014 by targeting Berkut and Internal Troops units with live ammunition fire, inflicting mass casualties, and forcing them to retreat.
Then such groups of concealed shooters or “snipers” massacred the unsuspecting Maidan protesters from Maidan-controlled buildings or areas, such as the Hotel Ukraina, Bank Arkada, Zhovtnevyi Palace, and Horodetskoho Street and Muzeinyi Lane buildings.
The analysis found that the special Berkut company was most likely shooting at the Maidan “snipers” and as warning to stop the advance of unarmed protesters to the presidential administration and to evacuate Internal Troops from Zhovtnevyi Palace during this advance.
But the study did not exclude that the police killed or wounded some of the protesters, specifically armed ones, because of lack of publicly available information about circumstances of shooting of many of them.
This academic study was used by the GPU in their investigation of the Maidan massacre and by different sides during the Maidan massacre trial.
In contrast, some other studies of the “Euromaidan” attributed the massacre of the protesters to the Berkut anti-riot police or snipers from the Security Service of Ukraine and Internal Troops.
However, they were not based on a comprehensive analysis of this crucial case of political violence There is not a single academic study of trials and government investigations of the Maidan massacre.
Since this crucial case of political violence is highly politicized, academic analysis of the revelations from the trials and investigations could help to determine which party of the “Euromaidan” conflict was involved in this mass killing.
The Maidan opposition leaders during and immediately after the massacre publicly accused the government snipers from SBU Alfa and Internal Troops Omega units and the special Berkut company of perpetrating the massacre of the protesters on the Yanukovych orders.
Ukrainian government leaders after the “Euromaidan,” for example president Poroshenko, publicly stated during investigation and the trial that the arrested Berkut company members perpetrated this massacre on Yanukovych orders.
However, Poroshenko stated in his speech on the third anniversary of the Maidan massacre in 2017 that Maidan protesters were shot by snipers from the Hotel Ukraina, the Music Conservatory and a building nearby.
Since the president of Ukraine was speaking on the site of the massacre on Instytutska Street and was referring to that massacre site, this statement implied that protesters were shot from the back and the side and 10 from the top and not by the Berkut police on the barricades in front of the protesters.
President Poroshenko, Oleksander Turchynov, the Head of the National Security and Defense Council, and the head of the SBU stated in February 2015 that Vladislav Surkov, an aide of Russian President Vladimir Putin, was personally coordinating foreign “snipers” on the Maidan but presented no supporting evidence.
However, Serhiy Leshchenko, a member of the Poroshenko’s faction in the parliament, revealed that Surkov arrived in Kyiv by plane after the massacre was already over.
The Prosecutor General of Ukraine and the head of its department in charge of the Maidan massacre investigation stated later that they did not have evidence about such Surkov’s and Russian snipers involvement in the massacre.
Nadiya Savchenko, who was turned into a national hero and elected to the parliament as the number one candidate of the Fatherland party because of her outspokenness during her trial in Russia, said in her Zik TV interview in 2017 that she saw gunshots by “snipers” from the Hotel and other locations during the Maidan massacre.
She told this and other information about the Maidan massacre to the investigators.
However, Savchenko stated that she would not make her understanding of this massacre public now because this would lead to a discord.
The Western governments and organizations, such as the European Union , either explicitly or implicitly, by threatening sanctions, blamed the Yanukovych government and the government forces for the massacre of the Maidan protesters when and after it happened and before any investigation was conducted.
Michael McFaul, who served as the United States Ambassador to Russia at the time of the massacre, stated that this mass killing was committed by the Yanukovych government.
He rejected findings Katchanovski and referred to unidentified and undisclosed United States government data as evidence.
However, the United States ambassador to Ukraine told Biden during their visit to the massacre site in 2015 that “snipers” were on surrounding buildings.
This contradicted the GPU investigation that protesters were massacre by the Berkut police on the ground and not by any snipers in surrounding buildings but was consisted with Katchanovski 2015a) findings.
The Prosecutor General of Ukraine stated in 2014 that he gave videos of the Maidan massacre to the FBI to enhance their quality.
The Western governments and organizations generally ignored the Maidan massacre trials and investigations even though this mass killing was one of the most serious human rights violations in contemporary Ukraine and Europe overall and it had crucial political significance beyond Ukraine.
Many top Western officials paid tribute to the killed protesters on the site of the massacre during their visits to Ukraine.
Such Western governments stance concerning the Maidan massacre investigations and trials contrasts with their various public statements and other forms of involvement concerning other politically important criminal cases and trials, such as the Yulia Tymoshenko trial during the Yanukovych presidency, cases of corruption in the Ukrainian government after the “Euromaidan,” and the successful United States administration pressure to remove Viktor Shokin as the GPU head.
Similarly, the EU did not show interest in investigations of this mass killing even though in a leaked intercepted telephone call with the EU foreign affairs chief, the Estonian minister of foreign affairs referred to Olha Bohomolets, the head of the Maidan doctors team, pointing out similarity of the wounds among the protesters and policemen, and indicating that some Maidan leaders hired “snipers” and stonewalled the investigation.
In contrast, the Russian government and media, as well as ex-president Yanukovych and former top officials of his government, who fled to Russia following the massacre, stated immediately after the massacre and then often repeated that the Maidan massacre was a part of a coup d’état or a fascist coup by some of the Maidan leaders, radical elements of the Maidan opposition, and the United States government.
However, they have not presented sufficient evidence in support of their statements.
For instance, Yanukovych made such claims in 2017 in his letters to the United States president Donald Trump, leaders of Germany, France, Poland and Russia, and the Council of Europe and the European Parliament.
In these letters, he named such People’s Front leaders, as Oleksander Turchynov (the acting president after the Yanukovych overthrow and the current head of the National Security and Defense Council), Andriy Parubiy, (the head of the Maidan Self-Defence and the current head of the Ukrainian parliament), Serhiy Pashynsky (the head of the presidential administration under Turchynov and the current head of the National Defence and Security committee of the Ukrainian parliament), and Arsen Avalkov (the current Minister of Internal Affairs) as organisers of the Maidan massacre.
Yanukovych stated in his interviews, his Ukrainian and Russian court testimonies, and in his letter to Trump and other foreign leaders that he had documents and witnesses in support of his claims.
But he did not make such evidence public citing potential threats to witnesses in Ukraine.
Oleksander Yakymenko, the SBU head under Yanukovych, testified in a Russian court concerning the “Maidan coup” in the end of 2016 that the SBU identified by name several Maidan snipers who massacred the police and protesters, and that they included some Georgians, a former SBU Alfa officer, who then reportedly worked in the Fatherland party security.
The ex-SBU chief stated that during the Maidan massacre on February 20, 2014 the SBU located 10 snipers in the Music Conservatory, obtained their photos and then tracked five of them entering the Hotel Ukraina but lost track of other five snipers.
Andriy Klyuyev, the former head of the Yanukovych administration, stated in the end of 2016 that one of the Maidan leaders hired snipers from Georgia and the Baltic States.
He identified Pashynsky as this leader and one of the Georgian snipers identified in a protocol of his interrogation by senior Right Sector activists.
The reported Georgian snipers is consisted with Caucasian accent of one of unidentified snipers in intercepted radio-communication of their coordinated shooting.
However, he did not made public the specific evidence in support of his statements.
Some international organizations examined the Maidan massacre trial and investigations in their reports, but they did not conduct their own investigations of this mass killing and ignored academic studies of the massacre.
They did not question the official investigation conclusions that the government forces on the orders of the Yanukovych government were responsible for the massacre of the protesters.
The report revealed that contrary to the public statements, the official investigation had evidence of “shooters” killing at least three protesters from the Hotel Ukraina or the Music Conservatory and that at least 10 protesters were killed by unidentified “snipers” from rooftops of buildings.
However, the GPU reportedly informed the court representatives in the fall of 2014 that the Ukrainian law enforcement agencies were not interested in assisting such an ICC investigation.
As it was expected on the basis of its statutes and precedents, the ICC suggested that it would not pursue the Maidan massacre case and other cases of political violence during the “Euromaidan” because they did not constitute crimes against humanity.
A report by Euromaidan SOS, other Maidan organizations, and lawyers of the killed protesters in June 2015 also concluded that the government investigation was ineffective and that it was stonewalled.
It is noteworthy that Bellingcat, a team of amateur investigators based on open source information, did not conduct any analysis of the Maidan massacre, even though its founder promised to do it.
Their investigations, which generally focused on violence by separatists and covert direct Russian military intervention in Donbas in August 2014 and February 2015, got significant publicity in the leading Western media.
The Western mainstream media with some exceptions, primarily involving a testimony by Yanukovych, did not cover the Maidan massacre trials and investigations.
Google news searchers produced no reports of major revelations from these trials and investigations of evidence of the massacre of the protesters by “snipers” from the Maidan-controlled buildings and the massacre of the police by the far right organizations.
The Western mainstream media, with a few notable exceptions, explicitly or implicitly attributed the Maidan massacre to the Berkut police or government “snipers,” dismissed the false flag massacre as a conspiracy theory, and generally repeated the Ukrainian government statements and prosecution charges at face value.
A Reuters investigation in 2014 reported that the prosecution case against Berkut members was problematic because it relied primarily on videos and photos and misrepresented or ignored some key pieces of such evidence.
An investigative report by a Monitor ARD TV program in Germany 2014 reported that the government investigation was manipulated and that concealed shooters who targeted the protesters were based in the Hotel Ukraina.
An investigative report by the BBC in 2015 corroborated findings of Katchanovski and earlier versions of this study concerning the covert presence of armed protesters at the Music Conservatory and their shooting of the police.
There was significant coverage of the Maidan massacre trials and investigations in the Ukrainian media.
However, these media reports generally presented the government investigation version.
This coverage, with some exceptions, omitted major evidence revealed by these trials and investigations that suggested the massacre of the protesters by shooters in the Maidan-controlled buildings and the massacre of the police by the far right.
While the Ukrainian media reports during and soon after the massacre contained various evidence of “snipers” in the Hotel Ukraina and other Maidan-controlled locations, such reports have since became rare even though the February 20th massacre trial revealed much more such evidence.
In contrast, the Russian media coverage was dominated by the false flag theory of the massacre.
However, the media in Russia, with certain exceptions, also did not report the revelations from the Maidan massacre trial and investigations.
Instead, it often relayed statements about this massacre by Yanukovych and his former government members, who found refuge in Russia.
Western, Ukrainian, and Russian media cannot be regarded a priori as reliable sources concerning the conflict in Ukraine in general and the Maidan massacre in particular.
Academic studies show that Western media coverage of foreign countries and conflicts, in particular in Ukraine, Iraq, Syria, Libya, is often political biased and in many cases factually incorrect.
The media often follows their respective governments or political elites in covering foreign countries and conflicts, in particular in the case of Ukraine.
There is various evidence of government censorship and self-censorship by journalists and mostly oligarch-controlled major media, in particular, television.
For instance, a Ukrainian professor, who was a Maidan activist and a Right Sector volunteer, stated that she was told in a letter that her blog on Liga.net news site was closed because she asked questions which went against the official narrative of the Maidan massacre.
She admitted that she was told by Right Sector activists by the end of February 2014 that they had a sufficient weapons and that some of her far right acquaintances transported weapons to Maidan.
However, there were a number of Ukrainian media reports, which raised doubts concerning the official narrative of the massacre and the investigation failures.
They contain sworn testimonies by wounded protesters, relatives of the killed protesters, ex-president Yanukovych, the commander of the Internal Troops under Yanukovych, results of forensic ballistic and medical examinations and investigative experiments, and demonstrations of videos and photos of the Maidan massacre pertaining to specific killed and wounded protesters.
The timing is consistent with time-stamped compilations of videos of the massacre that are based on similar synchronization and are used during the trial as evidence.
The analysis includes information concerning GPU investigations of this massacre of the protesters and the police in over 2,000 court decisions.
These court decisions are publicly available in the official online Ukrainian court decisions database.
Media interviews of prosecutors, Maidan victims’ lawyers and Berkut lawyers, and various media reports about these trials and investigations are also examined.
Revelations from the Trials and Investigations a) Trials and Investigations of the Maidan Massacre of the Protesters on February 20, 2014 The GPU initially stated in March 2014 that its investigation identified snipers who massacred the Maidan protesters, identified their locations, and seized their weapons, and that foreigners were investigated in the involvement of the massacre.
The GPU also officially stated in the beginning of April 2014 that protesters were shot with a Simonov “sniper rifle” from the Hotel Ukraina.
The Simonov rifle is not a sniper rifle but a semi-automatic carbine of the same caliber bullets as the AKM; the Simonov was generally removed from military and police service in Ukraine and was available as a hunting rifle.
The GPU publicly denied from the start of its investigation that there was evidence that some Maidan leaders and armed protesters were involved in the massacre of the protesters.
However, the Maidan leaders who became the government leaders after the “Euromaidan” were not interrogated until two and half years after the massacre.
The GPU also denied that there were any “snipers” in this hotel or other Maidan-controlled locations and that they massacred the Maidan protesters.
The GPU prosecutors also stated that their investigation did not find evidence that SBU Alfa snipers or snipers from other government units killed protesters.
Although the SBU head stated in April 2014 that they identified positions of SBU snipers on Kostelna Street and on Ukrkoopspilka building on Khreshchatyk, he omitted that these positions were on February 18 and not February 20.
Similarly, the GPU reported that its investigation did not find evidence of Russian government snipers or any other third force involvement in the Maidan massacre.
The fact that policemen equipped with Kalashnikov assault rifles and positioned in a plain view of the protesters and hundreds of foreign and Ukrainian journalists do not fit any definition of professional or unprofessional snipers, whom numerous protesters and journalists identified as killers at the time of the massacre, was ignored.
The GPU arrested in April 2014 and charged the Berkut special company commander and two members of this police unit with the murder of 39 out of 49 killed Madian protesters on February 20 on Yanukovych order.
However, the Berkut special company commander was released by a court to a house arrest and he then fled to Russia.
The investigation established the place of the shooting for only half of these 39 protesters.
In the beginning of 2016, this trial was restarted after a deputy commander of a Berkut regiment and its two other members were also charged with the February 20th massacre.
The charges against all Berkut members in this case were expanded to killing of 48 and wounding 80 protesters on February 20 and to terrorism.
These revised charges also included killings of those protesters, whose shooting the GPU investigation previously attributed to unidentified “snipers” in the Hotel Ukraina and other buildings.
Killing of a Georgian protester on February 20 was not included in the charges, and circumstances of his killings have not been officially disclosed.
The GPU admitted that testimonies of these wounded protesters about their positions and directions of gunshots, along with videos, photos, forensic reports, and findings of expert reports and investigative experiments, showed that they were shot from other sectors than the Berkut sectors.
These undisclosed sectors imply Maidan-controlled locations, such as the Hotel Ukraina, since the GPU investigation did not find evidence that any government or “third force” snipers, other government units, or “titushki” killed the protesters on February 20th.
Eyewitnesses among protesters, and her own depiction of her position at the moment of the shooting and a location of an entry wound in her NTV interview combined with her location pointed to shooting from the Main Post-Office, which was then used as the Right Sector headquarters.
Yanukovych and his government officials were not charged by the GPU in the Maidan massacre case, which is currently in the trial stage.
He and the former head of the Internal Troops testified from Russia via video link as witnesses in this trial in Ukraine.
They both denied that they issued any orders to use firearms to kill protesters and both stated that the protesters were massacred from the Maidan-controlled buildings, such as the Hotel Ukraina.
The commander of Internal Troops also stated that his police units were also shot from the Hotel Ukraina.
No evidence of the massacre order by Yanukovych or his government officials, police, and SBU commanders have been presented during the trials or revealed in the media.
The pace of the trial and its remaining stages suggest that a verdict in this crucial case could be no sooner than in a couple of years.
In contrast to the various evidence of delays of the trial by the GPU and the far right, there is no evidence of such delaying tactics by the Berkut members, who are being tried, their lawyers, Yanukovych, the former head of Internal Troops, wounded protesters, and relatives of the Maidan victims.
Berkut members remained in Ukraine after the massacre, often continued to serve in the police until they or their colleagues were arrested and charged.
Most of the charged Berkut members afterwards fled to Russia, Russian-annexed Crimea or some other countries, such as Poland.
The trial of the Berkut members for the massacre of the protesters on February 20 was delayed several times by far right activists.
Attacks by C14, a neo-Nazi organization affiliated with Svoboda party, disrupted two Maidan massacre trial sessions.
Veterans of the Azov regiment of the National Guard of Ukraine and its civilian branch participated in one of the attacks inside of the courtroom.
The non-interference of the police and the lack of any prosecution for such repeated attacks by small groups of far right activists suggest top government officials involvement or backing of such disruptions of the trial.
The forensic ballistic examinations, conducted for the GPU investigation, found that 19 protesters were killed on February 20 by 7.62x39mm caliber bullets.
In the case of Ivan Bliok, the forensic expert examination of the bullet reported that it could be fired from SOK94 model of Vepr hunting carbine based on Kalashnikov machine gun.
Four other of these protesters were shot either by military grade bullets or by expanding hunting bullets of the same caliber.
Their caliber did not match calibers of weapons used by the special Berkut company, whose members were charged with killing them.
This bullet caliber does not match calibers of weapons with which Berkut and other government units in Ukraine were armed at the time of the massacre.
His killing was filmed by a French photographer in a widely publicized video.
Forensic medical examination, which was presented by the GPU during the trial, revealed that Chmilenko was shot at a steep vertical angle with bullet holes in his neck and left shoulder.
His position at the moment of his shooting in this video and a significant angle of his wound indicate that Viktor Chmilenko was shot from the Hotel Ukraina.
Oleksander Khrapachenko was killed by a corroded .308 Winchester caliber expanding hunting bullet.
This NATO bullet caliber does not match the caliber of AKMS used by members of the special Berkut company, who are charged with his killing.
These forensic ballistic reports were conducted on the prosecution request in spring and summer of 2014, but they were made public for the first time only during the Maidan massacre trial on June 30, 2016.
The videos show that he along with several other protesters was hiding behind a wall, which completely shielded them from the Berkut positions, at the moment of his killing.
A protester, who was near him at the moment of his killing stated in Ukrainian media interviews and in a YouTube video, that Ushnevych was rumored to had been shot by a handgun from a nearby Maidan-controlled area.
He also stated that their group including himself were shot from the back and from the sideways while they were behind this wall and near it.
One killed protester and one wounded protester were shot with 7.62x54 caliber bullets.
The prosecution stated that since the caliber matches Dragunov sniper rifles, this shows that they shot by unidentified government snipers.
But these bullets were not of a special sniper type but of LPS type developed in 1908 for Mosin rifles.
However, a deputy commander of Berkut regiment stated during the trial that a Mosin rifle was later found in Dnipro Hotel and that the investigation did not test if it matched these bullets.
This hotel was then used as a Right Sector base, and Parubiy helped the Right Sector to evacuate their weapons in music cases without confiscating or checking if they were used on Maidan.
A Spilne TV live video stream referred to protesters who were in the Hotel Ukraina at the time of the massacre and were armed not only with hunting rifles and AKMS but also with Mosin rifles.
Forensic ballistic examinations determined that wounded protesters were also shot by 7.62x39 caliber bullets, hunting pellets, 9mm handgun bullets, and in the noted case, by7.62x54 30 caliber bullets.
But in contrast to the cases of almost half of the killed protesters from whose bodies or near them bullets were found and examined, forensic ballistic examinations of only a small number of bullets of wounded protesters were conducted.
In some cases, such as Zastavnyi and Tretiakov, the bullets were lost after they handed in them to the investigation.
A forensic ballistic examination conducted by government institute experts on the prosecution request with use of an automatic computer based IBIS-TAIS system in January 2015 found that bullets extracted from killed protesters, trees, and the Hotel Ukraina rooms did not match bullet samples from any 7.62x39 caliber Kalashnikov assault rifles of members of the entire Kyiv Berkut regiment, including the special Berkut company.
Previously, the senior government officials claimed that it was not possible to conduct such matching because both the weapons used by the Berkut special company during the Maidan massacre and the Berkut bullet samples database were stolen by Berkut commanders and members who escaped with them to Crimea in order to remove such crucial evidence.
However, the SBU and the GPU revealed in 2016 that the Berkut weapons cut into pieces were found in August 2015 buried in a shallow pit and in a nearby pond in a Kyiv City park.
The GPU announced later that a leader and a member of a pro-Maidan organization of veteran paratroopers removed, cut into pieces, and buried the Berkut weapons.
Similarly, 18 out of 20 wounded protesters had wounds at significant vertical angles.
This suggests significant mismatch in vertical angles of bullet directions in the absolute majority of cases of the killed and wounded protesters, when their positions at the times of their shooting are compared with positions of the police on the ground.
In 13% of cases, protesters had wounds from significant vertical angles when the Berkut was positioned on the ground but significantly above them.
The match in nearly horizontal levels between the Berkut and shot protesters was in just 6% of cases.
In three cases , an eyewitness testimony mentioned during the trial and synchronized and time-stamped videos revealed that these protesters were killed before the Berkut special police company members appeared at the massacre area.
The significant vertical angles of wounds are in all cases consistent with “snipers” in Maidancontrolled buildings or on the roofs of these buildings and not with their shooting by the Berkut police which was in these cases located on the nearly horizontal levels with the shot protesters.
In the cases of exceptions when directions of wounds was bottom to top, these directions are consistent with forensic ballistic and medical findings of evidence of ricochets , inclinations of the head or lack of sufficient information about specific circumstances of wounding.
Other evidence suggests that in all three cases of exceptions, when the wounds direction was reported by forensic medical examinations or the wounded protesters themselves during the trial at nearly horizontal levels at the time when the Berkut policemen were located on 32 the nearly even level with them, these protesters were shot not from the Berkut positions direction but from Maidan-controlled areas directions.
A forensic report about entry and exit wounds locations at nearly horizontal level and his position in a video seconds before and after his killing indicate that Ihor Kostenko was shot from a Maidan location.
A ballistic expert found during an on-site GPU investigative experiment that Anatolii Panchuk was wounded in his left back area from a sector, which excludes the Berkut barricade but includes Zhovtnevyi Palace corner, Kinopalats and Muzeinyi Lane areas.
Similarly, Volodymyr Buchenko testified three times during the investigation that he was shot from direction of the Hotel Ukraina and saw a sniper on its second floor at that time.
Similarly, other evidence made public during the trial, indicate that in all but one uncertain case lacking such specific information protesters with wounds from significant vertical angles when the Berkut was positioned significantly above them, were also shot from the Maidan-controlled buildings and not by the Berkut.
A ballistic expert in an on-site investigative experiment identified Zhovtnevyi Palace and not the ground level in front of it as the most likely location of the shooter in the Ksenchuk case because of steep angle of his wound.
The Berkut was filmed in front of this building shooting around that time, while Ksenchuk was among other protesters below them on the hill.
A forensic ballistic report determined that the 7.62x39 caliber bullet which wounded Ksenchuk was industrially made but not from live ammunition.
This suggests a training bullet, which was modified and put into a bullet casing with gunpowder, and indicates that he most likely was shot not by the Berkut special company or any other government law enforcement unit.
The GPU investigation, this protester, and Berkut did not identify himself in any of the videos.
But information about his location in the investigative experiment video and other evidence presented during the trial, such as location and direction of wounds, points to simultaneous wounding of another protester near him from similar vertical and horizontal angles and matches a simultaneous wounding of him and another protester in Zelenyi Front video at 9:14am.
These forensic ballistic reports along with other evidence, which revealed during the trial, indicate that these protesters were killed from the Hotel Ukraina.
Because bullets went through through bodies of more than half of the killed Maidan protesters, many other protesters, probably near half, were likely killed from the same weapon.
For instance, his brother testified during the trial that Andriy Saienko was shot not from a Berkut position but from a top floor of the Hotel Ukraina.
But the prosecution still charged two Berkut members with killings of Saienko and all other these protesters.
Similarly, a forensic medical report, which was conducted for the GPU investigation in May 2014 and made public during the Maidan massacre trial, found that Ihor Dmytriv was killed by a bullet that entered on the right side of the body and exited on the left side at a very steep angle.
The moment of his killing was captured in a BBC News video, shows that he was shot when he faced the Berkut police at about the same level on the ground.
His position means that it was physically impossible to shoot him from the Berkut direction in front of him, and the wound direction points to the top of the Hotel Ukraina, Bank Arkada, or Horodetskoho Street buildings in between.
The ballistic analysis of a bullet found in his clothing stated that he was shot from the same exact weapon as Saienko, Kemsky, Zhalovaha, and several other protesters.
In some cases, the forensic medical reports presented during the trial are not sufficient to make conclusions about directions from which protesters were killed because exact wounds locations are not specified or because positions of the protesters in the moments of their killings, shortly before or after were not captured in videos or photos.
But such information based on media and social media reports indicates that at least the absolute majority of the protesters were killed from the Maidan-controlled buildings and not by the Berkut.
At least 12 protesters, including a Maidan medic, out of 26 wounded protesters, who testified during the trial or whose investigation cases were presented during the trial, testified during the trial or investigation that they were shot by “snipers” from the Hotel Ukraina, Bank Arkada, and Zhovtnevyi Palace or witnessed snipers in these buildings.
For instance, Pavlo Onufriiv testified during the investigation that there were one or two snipers in black uniforms on the roofs of this hotel and Zhovtnevyi Palace and that he was shot by a sniper that might had been located on the hotel roof or the roof of Zhovtnevyi Palace.
Similarly, Borys Kharchuk testified during the trial on September 22, 2016 that he was wounded by a sniper from a Hotel Ukrana window.
He said that he was shot immediately after he saw two persons in black clothes and black balaklavas in a Hotel Ukraina window between the fourth and the sixth floor, and one of them was aiming a rifle.
When Kharchuk shouted “snipers,” he noticed that another protester near him was shot in the back and he himself was wounded in his arm when he turned to look at this protester.
A ballistic expert during an on-site investigative experiment concluded that Roman Kotliarevsky was shot from a sector ranging from the Hotel Ukraina to Bank Arkada.
A forensic medical report made public during the trial confirmed that Kotliarevsky was shot in the top back part of his right thigh at a steep angle from a top to bottom direction.
This wounded medic stated during this investigation experiment that he was most likely shot from the Bank Arkada based on the steep direction of his wound channel.
A forensic ballistic report, made public during the trial found that this medic was shot from the same 7.62x39 caliber weapon, which was used to kill Mykola-Oleh Pankiv.
However, many of these protesters during the trial changed or dismissed as unimportant their earlier testimonies about snipers in these locations.
Ballistic experts during investigative experiments conducted for the GPU investigation determined that Kravchuk was wounded not from the Berkut barricade, as the prosecution claimed, but from the Bank Arkada or the attached metro entrance.
A video showing his position behind a tree just prior to almost simultaneous first two woundings and his reported wound locations and steep directions of these wounds are consistent with the Bank Arkada.
However, a Belgian VRT video shows that his position at the moment of the last wounding in was different than he described during the trial and the investigative experiment.
This position facing the Hotel Ukraina and forensic medical reports conclusions that the entry wound was located in the left knee area and the exit wound in his left thigh area point to a gunshot from the Maidan-controlled Hotel Ukraina.
The failure to investigate various evidence of “snipers” in the Maidan-controlled buildings and denial of their presence there indicate a deliberate cover-up.
For example, 19 wounded protesters testified during the trial and/or the GPU investigation that they were shot from the Hotel Ukraina, Bank Arkada, Muzeinyi Lane, Horodetskoho Street, Music Conservatory, Main Post Office, and Zhovtnevyi Palace, these directions, and/or witnessed themselves or were informed by other protesters about “snipers” in these buildings.
Borys Kharchuk, Pavlo Onufriiv, Sviatoslav Kolesnikov, Oleksander Huch, Volodymyr Buchenko, Volodymyr Venchak, Yuri Kravchuk, Roman Kotliarevsky, Bohdan Datsyshyn, Roman Tityk, Anatolii Panchuk, Anton Lubianetsky, Yaroslav Hrabovetsky, Yuri Ksenchuk, Vadym Lapko, Ihor Vikuliev, Petro Kovalchuk, Andrii Navalianyi, and Petro Ladym.
However, the GPU charged the special Berkut company with attempted murder of all these 22 protesters, with the notable exception of Honcharovsky.
Other cases of the wounded protesters either have not been yet presented at the trial or there is lack of reliable evidence concerning locations of their shooters.
There are also BBC, CNN, ICTV, Spilne TV, ZDF, and Ruptly videos showing armed Maidan protesters or unidentified shooters covertly shooting from the Hotel Ukraina.
A significant part of the trial sessions involved debates among participants about directions of gunshots.
Overall, analysis of forensic medical reports about vertical and horizontal locations of wounds combined with videos of positions of these protesters at the moments of their shooting or shortly before and after also indicates that at least the absolute majority them were killed from directions of the Hotel Ukraina and other Maidan-controlled areas.
For instance, investigative experiments for the government investigation concluded, based on his wife eyewitness testimony about his position at the time of the killing, entry and exits wounds locations, and their significant vertical angle, that Melnychuk was most probably killed from a Hotel Ukraina area ranging from the six to eight floor.
This is consistent with a Maidan protester eyewitness report in a video of the Melnychuk killing that a “sniper” was on the seventh floor of this hotel.
In her trial testimony, Parashchuk’s sister stated that, based on forensic medical reports concerning his entry wound and a video showing the moment of his killing, he was shot dead in in the back of his head from the Hotel Ukraina.
The onsite investigative experiment, which was conducted for the GPU investigation in July 2014, concluded that Evhen Kotliar was shot in the neck from the Hotel Ukraina seconds after Huryk was killed there.
A forensic medical examination found that Anatolii Zhalovaha was shot in the right back of his head behind his ear from right to left, back to front, and bottom to top directions with the bullet exiting in the middle of his forehead.
This direction is also consistent with conclusions of official forensic ballistic examinations that Zhalovaha was shot from the same exact weapon as Saienko, Kemsky, and at least seven other killed protesters.
An investigative on-site experiment concluded that Volodymyr Chaplynsky was shot dead from the Hotel Ukraina when he was filmed running away in a widely publicized video of the massacre.
Its conclusion is consistent with his position at the moment when he felt to the ground in this widely publicized video and with a forensic medical report finding that the bullet went into his body from the top to bottom, left to right, and front to back directions and the entry wound was on the left side of the neck and the exit wound was on the back of his right shoulder blade.
But the investigation reversed its own earlier conclusion that this protester was not shot from the Berkut barricade.
However, the video clearly shows that Chaplynsky position at the moment of the first gunshot with the left side of his body facing the Bank Arkada along with the steep wound angle and the locations of the entry and exit wounds point to the Bank Arkada.
The prosecution and Maidan victims’ lawyers relied on “complex examinations”, reversed results of ballistic and medical examinations, and mostly changed testimonies of wounded protesters during the trial to argue that the Berkut special company killed 48 and wounded 80 protesters on February 2014.
However, these complex forensic reports were conducted by medical experts and not ballistic experts without any on-site reconstruction or measurements close to the completion of the GPU investigation in the end of 2015.
They relied on videos and results of reversed forensic and ballistic examinations and testimonies and investigative experiments.
These complex forensic reports in all cases pointed to the Berkut positions as the sector of fire from which the protesters were killed or wounded.
They ignored all evidence to the contrary, including the one collected by the GPU investigation.
For instance, such an examination concluded that Ustym Holodniuk was shot in the head from a sector, which included the left side of the Berkut barricade, because his face at the moment of his killing was turned in the direction of 4-5 hours o’clock angle towards a camera in a video, which was filmed from the Hotel Ukraina.
However, this video shows that Holodniuk had a significantly different position with the right side of his head and body at 2-3 o’clock hours position from the camera.
While the trial so far have not revealed a single such case in which all evidence unequivocally points to killing and wounding of a protester from Berkut positions, certain cases are either contradictory in terms of available evidence or uncertain because of the lack of evidence.
Therefore, the evidence presented during the trial cannot exclude that some protesters could have been shot by the Berkut.
It is possible to infer a similar general pattern for cases of killed and wounded protesters not yet presented during the trial.
A forensic ballistic examination, which linked bullets from a part of killed and wounded protesters to specific weapons of the Berkut special company, was done in the middle of December 2015 within a few weeks of the end of the investigation.
The results of this examination, which was conducted manually, contradicted findings of more than 40 previous forensic ballistic reports conducted both manually, including by some of the same experts, and by using a computer based automated system.
Its results also contradicted findings of forensic medical reports and positions of protesters in videos that indicate that they were shot from the Maidan-controlled buildings and that it was physically impossible to kill and wound them from the Berkut positions on the ground.
Similarly, these complex examinations reversed results of several forensic medical examinations by switching entry and exit wounds, in most cases without any explanation given.
Such reversals meant, with exceptions of a couple of cases, reversal of directions of their shooting from the Maidan-controlled locations.
However, in these and other cases it was still physically impossible to kill them from the Berkut barricade because such reversals and significant vertical angles of wounds imply that they were shot at a steep angle from below the ground.
The same concerned forensic medical examination reports about entry and exit wounds of other killed protesters as evidence that they were killed from the Berkut barricade positions.
Because of steep angles of wounds in protesters, such as Viktor Chmilenko and Roman Varenytsia, such entry and exit wounds would imply that these shots were from below the ground.
There were no evidence of bullet ricochets identified in ballistic and medical examinations in these cases.
Since forensic textbooks and studies state that the angle of deflection is typically smaller than the angle of impact in ricochets, such ricochets with significant angles of vertical deflection were improbable from the Berkut barricade, because it was practically at horizontal level with the killed protesters.
The on-site investigative experiments conducted by the GPU did not use any measurements or lasers to determine bullet trajectories.
The Berkut lawyers stated that experiments also changed positions or wounds locations of killed protesters, such as Dmytriv and Tochyn, in order to fit them to the Berkut positions sector of fire.
Because of the reversed results of forensic ballistic examinations and questioning of their results by Berkut lawyers, a Kyiv court issued a ruling in November 2016 to conduct a new forensic ballistic examination of bullets by different ballistic experts.
New investigative experiments have to determine with help of precise measurements whether the protesters were shot not only from the Berkut special company positions but also from such buildings as the Hotel Ukraina, Bank Arkada, Zhovtnevyi Palace, Horodetskoho Street 11, Muzeinyi Lane 8 and 10, the Main Post Office, and the Music Conservatory.
Berkut lawyers requested that the new investigative experiments check bullet trajectories from these buildings along with three buildings in the government forces-controlled areas.
However, both new forensic ballistic examinations and investigative experiments were significantly delayed.
New investigative experiments were not completed by the April 18, 2017 deadline set up by the Maidan massacre court.
These experiments are conducted by the GPU after the end of working hours and they last no more than a few hours because Kyiv Mohyla Academy students, selected as experiment witnesses, have classes and examinations.
Large crowds of people who walk in the area of the massacre after the end of their work also slow down the experiments.
As a result, the investigative experiments were extended by the court until September 1, 2017 and trial sessions were reduced from two to one per week because of this extension.
Time-stamped and synchronized videos in video compilations along with other evidence presented during the trial showed that at least four protesters were killed before the special Berkut company first appeared and started shooting with Kalashnikovs and pump rifles a few minutes after 9:00am.
The trial revealed that Pekhenko was shot from a steep vertical direction, while Arutiunian, Vaida, and Baliuk were killed by hunting pellets.
Public announcements from the Maidan stage at that time warned protesters about “snipers” in the Hotel Ukraina and Kozatsky Hotel and not to shoot protesters in the back during their advance.
A Facebook post by the GPU head revealed that the GPU both ordered and was itself involved in making these synchronized video compilations.
These video compilations and other videos were used extensively during the trial as an evidence of the massacre of the protesters by the Berkut.
However, their size in these compilation, which simultaneously combined 12 different videos, was too small to discern such information.
Security cameras footage from Zhovtnevyi Palace, the Hotel Ukraina, and Bank Arkada was not included in the compilation and not made public in spite of its importance since it showed both the massacre site at the time of the massacre and because various evidence of “snipers” in these buildings.
The head of the GPU special department in charge of the Maidan massacre investigation stated that a security camera from Bank Arkada automatically stopped recording just before the start of the mass killing in front of this building and resumed recording immediately after because there was no movement there.
The Prosecutor General of Ukraine admitted that much of evidence in the Maidan massacre was destroyed when the massacre area was “cleaned” on orders of the Maidan leadership.
With the partial exception of a blue helmet of Holodniuk, the investigation and the trial did not present any expert examinations of bullet holes in helmets and shields of the killed and wounded protesters.
A Berkut lawyer stated during the trial that no forensic ballistic expertise of the Holodniuk’s helmet was conducted.
A video showing the bullet holes in the white helmet of Roman Huryk was made public for the first time during the trial.
Pro-Maidan veterans of law enforcement, who filmed his helmet on the killing site on February 21, 2014, pointed locations of these bullet holes and identified the entry and exit holes.
The video showing these bullet holes was shown during the Maidan trial.
A Berkut lawyer during the examination of the Huryk case on July 21, 2016 also pointed these locations of the bullet holes and their direction pointing towards the Bank Arkada.
One Kharkiv Berkut member was arrested in June 2016 and charged with killings of the first three protesters on February 18, 2014.
Another Kharkiv Berkut officer was arrested at the same time and charged with wounding of 33 protesters on the same day.
They, like their accused counterparts in the February 20th massacre case, continued to serve in the police at the times of their arrests.
Their cases went to trials only in around the third anniversary of this massacre in 2017 and the actual trials have not started.
However, both these Berkut policemen were released from the detention by Kyiv courts in spite of such serious charges.
One of them, who was charged with attempts to kill 33 Maidan protesters fled along with three other Berkut members to Russia soon after being released from arrest by the Kyiv Appeals Court in March 2017.
The same concerns the release and escape of the Berkut special company commander charged with the massacre of the Maidan protesters on February 20.
Even the basic evidence concerning killing and wounding of these three protesters have not been made public by the prosecution or the media.
The GPU only reported that these three protesters were killed by hunting pellets in the Kriposnyi Lane area after the police clashed with protesters after failed attempt to storm the parliament.
Similarly, 33 other protesters were wounded by such pellets on the same day and in the same area.
However, a member of the Maidan leadership was filmed in this area shortly before these shootings evacuating a car with a hunting rifle, equipped with a silencer and optics, of a Maidan protester, who was stopped by other Maidan protesters.
This protester said in a Ukrainian media interview that he came there along with a group of hunters from Western Ukraine.
The GPU stated that he was not involved in the massacre simply because his hunting rifle did not fire then.
Moreover, one of these killed protesters reportedly was shot from roof of a building in the back of his head and not from the ground-level positions of the Berkut.
The investigation reported that four protesters died from head trauma and related injuries during the counterattack by titushki and the police.
However, no one was identified and charged for their killings, and evidence concerning specific circumstances of their killings has not been made public, even though videos show many protesters gravely beaten by titushki and the police around the same time and place.
Similarly, the investigation did not identify any suspects in killings of 12 protesters during a storming of the Maidan by the police in the evening of February 18 and around the midnight.
The GPU, the special parliamentary commission, a media report based on the GPU investigation, and other evidence reported that about half of them were killed by pellets of hunting bullets.
There is no information about any investigations of involvements of groups of concealed Maidan shooters in the Hotel Ukraina and the Trade Union buildings and other nearby buildings in killings of these protesters in spite of various such evidence and in spite of similar killings of the police around the same time and place, in particular, by hunting pellets and bullets.
The SBU Kyiv Regional head was charged with responsibility for killings of 10 protesters during this “anti-terrorist operation” by the Berkut police, the Internal Troops and the SBU Alfa, which attempted to seize the Trade Union building that served as the headquarters of the Maidan, including the Right Sector.
The specific names of the victims in this case have not been made public, and his trial which was not open.
But the GPU stated that the head of the Kyiv SBU was responsible for death of two protesters, one of whom was reportedly a neo-Nazi, in a fire in the Trade Union building even though the investigation de facto admitted that the fire was started by the protesters during an attempt by the SBU Alfa to seize this building.
A UN report stated that a court returned charges against him to the GPU because they were not specific.
However, a named suspect in the journalist killing was himself killed in the separatist-controlled Donbas.
A Maidan lawyer stated that the evidence against this suspect was problematic.
No specific evidence was released by the investigation in both these cases with the exception of information that the protester was shot by a small caliber bullet.
The court decisions and the investigation also revealed that several protesters were misrepresented in the media for a long time as victims of the lethal police violence.
The head of the Kyiv branch of the neo-Nazi Social National Assembly admitted in his interview that they burned this building.
The GPU investigation, court decisions and a verdict, and a long withheld video revealed that a Svoboda company commander was driven over by another protestor after this protester seized a track and tried to slam it into the police.
This was the only case with a verdict in the Maidan massacre case, but the protester was not charged with killing but with traffic violations and was granted an amnesty under the amnesty law for Maidan participants.
The failure to identify suspects or their affiliation in these killings is clearly not due to lack of evidence.
Three members of the special Maidan company admitted in their BBC and Ukrainian media interviews that they and other armed protesters there shot the police in the early morning of February 20th from a Kalashnikov assault rifle, a Kalashnikov-based Saiga hunting carbine, and hunting rifles with intentions to kill or wound them.
Its commander said that this company was organized and based in the Music Conservatory after talks with the Right Sector.
A CNN video shows a commander and some armed members of this company going to the protesters barricade in front of the Maidan stage followed by sounds of loud gunshots around 8:20am.
The GPU stated that these admissions of shooting the police were contradicted by their investigation even though the GPU own investigation determined that two Berkut officers were killed by 7.62mm caliber bullets from either a Kalashnikov assault rifle or Saiga on the Maidan between 8:00 and 8:20am and that the direction of fire pointed to Conservatory or nearby barricade.
Two other policemen were killed from the angles pointing to barricade near the Trade Union building with large caliber hunting pellets.
The commander of this Maidan armed unit, who is now a member of the Ukrainian parliament, refused to be interrogated by the GPU even though he also de facto admitted that his unit shot the police.
The investigation also confirmed that a few dozen policemen were wounded in the morning of February 20.
It is noteworthy that the GPU investigation determined that the last policeman on that day was wounded at about the same time as Symysiuk was killed.
This implies that the covert shooters in the Hotel Ukraina and other Maidan-controlled buildings did not kill or wound any policeman during the massacre of the protesters following a swift retreat of the police from the Maidan after they came under live ammunition fire there.
After this admission, this deputy Vikings commander was posthumously awarded Hero of Ukraine title by president Poroshenko for his service in a Right Sector paramilitary unit during the war in Donbas.
Kyiv court decisions revealed that the Prosecutor General Office of Ukraine investigated the leader and members of the Right Sector and “Warriors of Narnia,” a neo-Nazi unit, for their suspected killing and wounding of the Interior Troops servicemen and the police during the Maidan massacre.
Other court decisions revealed a similar investigation of a leader and members of Sokil, a youth affiliate of far right Svoboda party, Bratstvo far right party and other unidentified Maidan activists for their suspected involvement in the killing and wounding of the Interior Troops servicemen and the Berkut police during the Maidan massacre.
For instance, court rulings specifically refer to two Right Sector activists, who were wounded during a Right Sector attack of a separatist checkpoint in Sloviansk on April 20, 2014 and many other Right Sector members as suspects in GPU investigation in killings and wounding the police on the Maidan.
The court decisions stated that the weapons used by the wounded checkpoint attackers were the same weapons from which two Internal Troops servicemen were killed and three other policemen wounded on the Maidan on February 18.91 However, the GPU is unlikely to charge and bring to trial any protesters who killed or wounded the police during the Maidan massacre.
Killing and wounding of the police by participants of the “Euromaidan” protests are covered by the amnesty law, which was adopted by the parliament soon after the violent overthrow of Yanukovych.
The GPU investigation of the massacre of the police is conducted separately from its investigation of the massacre of the protesters even though they happened in the same time and place.
The government investigation did not even officially consider a version of the killing of both police and protesters by Maidan shooters, specifically far-right-linked shooters.
For instance, no forensic ballistic comparisons of bullets, which killed both police and protesters, were conducted, in spite of similarity of the types and calibers of ammunition and similarities of the police and the protesters wounds reported by heads of the Maidan medics.
Conclusion The Maidan massacre of the protesters and the police was the most politically consequential case of violence in independent Ukraine and one of the most consequential cases in the contemporary politics.
However, it was a central subject of only a couple of academic studies which concluded that this was a false flag operation involving far right and oligarchic Maidan parties.
One does not need to be a forensic expert to determine, based on the positions of victims in videos and on the map and locations and horizontal and vertical directions of their wounds in forensic medical reports, that at least the absolute majority of the Maidan protesters were killed and wounded from the general direction of Maidan-controlled buildings.
It was physically impossible to shoot these protesters from the air several to several dozen meters above the Berkut positions or from below the ground from the Berkut direction in absence of forensic evidence of ricochets.
Similarly, it was physically impossible for the Berkut police to shoot the absolute majority of the protesters when the exact times of their killing and wounding do not coincide with the times of the Berkut shooting in synchronized videos.
It was also physically impossible for the Berkut special company to kill a significant part of the protesters by hunting pellets before this armed riot police unit first arrived and started shooting near the massacre area.
Likewise, shooting protesters, who were separated from the Berkut positions by a concrete wall, trees and shields without piercing these obstacles, is beyond the realm of possibility.
It was also physically impossible by the Berkut to shoot the protesters from weapons whose caliber did not match calibers of weapons used by the police and other government units.
Similarly, it was impossible for government or any third force “snipers” without any detection by hundreds of Maidan protesters, Western and Ukrainian journalists and without any trace in numerous videos, live broadcasts, and security cameras footage, to enter 65 with weapons, shoot for hours, and leave the Maidan-controlled buildings, specifically many rooms in the Hotel Ukraina, in particular, ones occupied by Svoboda deputies.
The analysis shows that the investigations and the trials were largely ineffective in determining and prosecuting specific organizers, perpetrators and others involved in this mass killing of the protesters.
Not a single person has been convicted for the Maidan massacre of the protesters more than three years after this mass killing in February 2014.
Ongoing trials and investigations are unlikely to produce any verdicts before the fourth anniversary of the massacre and likely even longer.
The study finds that the Maidan massacre investigations and trials revealed a variety of evidence, such as results of forensic examinations and testimonies of many wounded protesters, which suggests that at least the absolute majority of the protesters were killed and wounded from Maidan-controlled buildings.
The analysis shows patterns of ineffective and delayed Maidan massacre trials and the GPU investigations, trumped-up charges, and ignoring, reversing, and covering-up the evidence, which was revealed by the GPU own investigation and which pointed to the massacre of the protesters and the police by “snipers” in the Maidan-controlled buildings and not by the Berkut police charged with the massacre of the most protesters.
Similarly, the investigation revealed evidence of involvement of the Maidan armed groups, in particular far right or far right linked, in the mass killings of the police.
But the 66 investigation of the police killing was also delayed and stonewalled.
The investigation failed to identify specific perpetrators and organizers of this massacre of the police.
The amnesty law, which was adopted by the parliament after the violent overthrow of Yanukovych by means of the Maidan massacre, prohibited prosecutions and convictions of “Euromaidan” participants for these crimes.
GPU prosecutors on their own have no interest to do such ineffective investigations of one of the most if not the most documented cases of mass killing.
They by themselves have no capability or motives to delay and stonewall the investigations of the massacre of the police and the protesters and to ignore or deny overwhelming evidence that the protesters were massacred by concealed shooters in the Maidan-controlled locations.
The same concerns the failure to investigate the massacre of the protesters and the police as a single case to determine if the same “snipers” shot both the protesters and the police.
Similarly, destruction or disappearance of some crucial evidence, releases and escapes of Berkut officers charged with the massacre of the protesters, and unexplained reversals of results of forensic ballistic and in several cases medical examinations and testimonies of wounded protesters about “snipers” in the Hotel Ukraina and other Maidan-controlled buildings fit the same pattern.
All this suggests involvement of some top government leaders in such stonewalling of the investigation and the trials and the cover-up, but identities of these leaders cannot be determined by the analysis based on publicly available data.
However, this study relied on publicly available evidence, specifically from the government trials and investigations.
Therefore, it is unable to determine specific identities of organizers and the perpetrators of the Madian massacre.
The revelations from the trials and investigations provide a corroboration that the Maidan massacre was a successful false flag operation.
This has major implications for understanding the 67 “Euromaidan,” the nature of the political transition, and the political system in Ukraine.
These revelations also have major implications for understanding the relative role of a part of the Maidan opposition, which became a part the government as result of this massacre, in the start of the violent conflict in Ukraine, which escalated from this massacre to the civil war in Donbas, direct Russian military interventions in Crimea and in Donbas, the Russian annexation of Crimea, and the international conflict between the West and Russia over Ukraine.
This study also implies that the coverage of the Maidan massacre by the Western mainstream media, which generally immediately attributed the massacre to the Yanukovych government and forces, and did not report major revelations from the trials and investigations, was unreliable.
Further research is needed concerning the puzzling silence of the Western governments concerning the Maidan massacre investigations and trials in Ukraine and their immediate attribution of the massacre to the Yanukovych government and his forces.
