The place that's rather difficult to get intoBy Steve RosenbergBBC News, CrimeaPublished21 March 2017SharecloseShare pageCopy linkAbout sharingImage caption, Russia hopes a bridge to Crimea will solve many problemsThree years after Russia annexed Crimea, a move bitterly contested by Ukraine's government, the region remains in a state of flux.
It's difficult to get into, and for many people, it's difficult to know where it's going.At Kiev International Airport, I hand my passport to a border guard.
Those pauses at passport control are an indication of the current tension between Moscow and Kiev a relationship clouded by enmity and suspicion.
Our final destination is Crimea, the Ukrainian peninsula annexed by Russia three years ago.
Image source, Getty ImagesImage caption, Parades marked three years since Russia annexed CrimeaFor journalists based in Russia, there are faster ways of reaching the Crimean peninsula.
Board a plane in Moscow and two hours later you can be in the Crimean capital Simferopol.
Ukraine, however, warns foreign nationals that anyone entering ""temporarily occupied Crimea"" without Kiev's permission and without crossing an official Ukrainian border may be banned from future entry to Ukraine.
First, we visit the Ukrainian Migration Service in Kiev to obtain the ""dozvil"" a document issued by the Ukrainian authorities permitting travel to Crimea.
Three hours later, permission slips in hand, our long car journey south begins.Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014 was a watershed moment.
Three years on we are travelling to Crimea to gauge the mood.It is dark by the time we reach the final Ukrainian checkpoint before the peninsula.
The no-man's land between the Ukrainian and Russian checkpoints is tiny no more than 50m long.
The appearance here of British journalists has raised official eyebrows.
Image caption, Crimea has a wide variety of Vladimir Putin murals and postersMy interrogator notes down my answers on a piece of paper.
The inquisitive young man with ""no name, only a rank"" invites my colleagues for similar conversations.
We spend the night in the van waiting for Russian customs officers to process our papers and allow our TV equipment through.
Ten hours after arriving at the Armyansk crossing, we finally clear the checkpoint.Simferopol is the administrative centre of Crimea.
Most of the cars have switched to Russian number plates, brand new buses manufactured near Moscow have taken to the roads.
And, peering down from billboards is the Russian president with some of his choicest Crimea quotations just to remind everyone who is in charge.Image caption, In this poster Putin promises to boost Crimea's spa facilities""Crimea was famous for being the spa of the Soviet Union,"" declares Vladimir Putin in one poster.
All Russian army social programmes will be extended to Sevastopol and the Black Sea Fleet,"" he promises in another.
This video can not be playedTo play this video you need to enable JavaScript in your browser.Media caption, Voices from the annexOn 22 February 2014, Ukraine's pro-Moscow president Viktor Yanukovych fled the country after what he and his Russian allies called an ""illegal coup"" in Kiev.
Armed with Russian weapons, they seized government buildings, the parliament, the airport and blocked Ukrainian army bases.
Following a hastily organised referendum, it was announced that more than 95% of people who had taken part had voted for Crimea's ""reunification"" with Russia.
A statue honouring The Little Green Men has been erected near the Crimean parliament building.
Many of those in Crimea who welcome Moscow's rule see the bloody conflict in eastern Ukraine as confirmation that Russia is a safer home.
They discount evidence that unrest in the Donbass was incited and bankrolled by Moscow.
Until recently her sister had been living in Luhansk, one of the self-proclaimed separatist republics in eastern Ukraine.
There is another reason why Nadezhda, an ethnic Ukrainian, trusts Moscow more than Kiev it is out of nostalgia for Soviet times, when she regarded Moscow as her capital.
Nadezhda describes Crimea joining Russia as ""a return to the Soviet Union.
Image source, Getty ImagesImage caption, People pass a mural of Putin at the wheel of a shipNostalgia and fear are powerful feelings.
But they are not enough to sustain pro-Russia sentiment in Crimea at the level of 2014.
With economic links to Ukraine cut, the only way of keeping the peninsula supplied is by sea or air.
Moscow insists that will change once it has completed a road and rail bridge linking Crimea to the Russian mainland.
The bridge is a multibillion-dollar statement that Moscow is here to stay.
As well as higher prices, there is Russian red tape.I visit a document registration centre in Simferopol.
They have come to exchange Ukrainian documents, like deeds for apartments, for Russian ones.
Image caption, People queue for a long time to change Ukrainian documents to Russian onesI ask Alyona if she could imagine Russia handing Crimea back to Ukraine.
I am talking to Nadia beside the statue of Ukraine's most famous 19th Century poet, Taras Shevchenko.
It is Shevchenko Day and a group of twenty people have come here with flowers to mark the poet's birthday.
In Russian Crimea, public expressions of Ukrainian pride attract special attention.
Image caption, Crimea's economy has struggled to adjustA woman called Lidiya overhears our conversation.
Three years ago America was planning to station soldiers in three schools in Sevastopol,"" she claims.
If people think they live badly in Crimea today, let them go and live in the Donbass in eastern Ukraine.
Image caption, Umer Ibragimov is desperate to find what happened to his missing sonWe drive to the town of Bakhchysarai in central Crimea to meet Umer Ibragimov.
Umer, a Crimean Tatar, is desperate for information about his son Ervin.
CCTV cameras caught the moment he was seized by men in uniform and bundled into a vehicle.
Ervin Ibragimov was a member of the executive board of the World Congress of Crimean Tatars.
Its elected representative body, the Mejlis, which had opposed the 2014 referendum on joining Russia, has been ruled an ""extremist organisation"" and banned.
Human rights group Amnesty International accuses the Russian authorities of ""systematic persecution"" of Crimean Tatars.
It was Josef Stalin who had ordered the deportation an act of collective punishment and paranoia.
The Soviet dictator suspected Crimean Tatars of collaborating with the Nazis.
My mother and father told me later they'd be given just 15 minutes to gather their belongings,"" recalls Umer.
Conscripted into the Soviet army in the late 1970s, he spent a year fulfilling his ""internationalist duty"" fighting in Afghanistan.
While Russia and the West argue over sanctions, sovereignty and borders, it seems that most people here are just trying to get on with their lives, trying to adapt.
Image caption, The region's traditional tourist appeal has diminished""Everything calmed down,"" artist Svitlana Gavrilenko says.
If we become a part of Ukraine again, we will need to solve all this stuff again.
In the Black Sea resort of Yalta I find the promenade packed with people enjoying a seaside stroll in the sunshine.
The sound of the waves crashing on the shore mixes with jazz chords from street musicians.
Rodion believes ""it's not completely impossible"" that Crimea would one day return to Ukrainian rule.
I don't think Russia in its modern state, with Putin at the top, could ever give Crimea back,"" she tells me.
