The Russians then seized the ships and have detained their 24 crew members.
Russia's 2014 seizure of Crimea was rightly seen as a serious violation of global norms, but few at the time recognized it as creating new tinder for war-other than maybe out of a long-term smoldering Ukrainian revanchism.
But Ukraine and foreign observers said it marked the culmination of a yearslong effort by Moscow to force its authority on the Sea of Azov, the waters of which are shared between the two countries, according to a 2003 agreement.
The latest confrontation began last weekend as the three small vessels tried to pass through the narrow Kerch Strait separating Russia's mainland from Crimea.
The martial law was imposed following the weekend incident in the Kerch Strait between Crimea and mainland Russian Federation.
Petro Tsygykal, chief of the Ukrainian Border Guard Service, announced Friday at a security meeting that all Russian males between 16 and 60 will be barred from travelling to the country while martial law is in place.
In light of the escalation, United States President Donald Trump called off a planned meeting with Vladimir Putin, with whom he had been scheduled to hold talks on Saturday on the sidelines of the G-20 summit.
We will remind, the legendary ""Valkyrie"" the Russian, who defend Ukraine on the frontline, commented on the introduction of martial law.
And they should encourage leaders not only in Moscow and Kyiv but in Washington and European capitals to open their history books.
For centuries, the Ukrainian church has been part of the Russian Orthodox Church.
Both the Russian Orthodox Church and Russian authorities are strongly against the move, and have warned Ukraine not to do it, fearing sectarian violence.
There are three Orthodox communities in Ukraine, including two breakaway churches.
There are now three Orthodox communities in Ukraine, including two breakaway churches.
The country is on high alert following a clash between Ukrainian and Russian naval vessels in the Sea of Azov on November 25.
Now, it's moving close to forming an independent church, a momentous step pushed by Poroshenko that would split the world's largest Orthodox denomination.
