The Russia-Ukraine confrontation delivers a good example of modern economic warfare.
This paper reviews its basic methods and demonstrates that economic aggression comprises a very important component of Russia’s hostile strategy towards Ukraine.
It also reveals some specific features of the Ukrainian economy that enable the economic aggression of Russia.
The tools of economic warfare are presented as direct and indirect ones.
This situation could be considered as a textbook example of a modern hybrid war.
The policy of protectionism, trade wars between countries areg. of such kind.
From the point of view of economics, such phenomena have been considered as interference into market in order to distort laissez fair.
However, it is not clear at which point hostile economic actions against another country turn into EW per se.
As stated in a collective monograph recently published by the Ukrainian National Institute of Strategic Studies, “establishing a fact of aggression in the non-military spheres of social life is extremely complicated, or even impossible.
We assume that in case of EW, the primary goal of hostile actions is to cripple the opponent’s economy, but not to gain any economic benefits, which could be the case with a protection policy.
A set of goals related to EW could reach far beyond the economy;g. in case of Russia’s EW against Ukraine it is not only to weaken Ukrainian economy, but also to make Ukraine admit policy in line with Russia’s vision of its sphere of dominance where other nations must obey the ‘older brother’ and share its worldview; otherwise they are penalized.
As Russia conducted and continues to engage in multiple acts of EW against Ukraine, we used the plural, not singular in the article’s title.
However, before 2014 EWs were sporadic and partial as they concerned some specific ware groups and markets.
On the contrary, the ongoing economic warfare is a much more complex phenomenon and is characterized by desperateness of the parties.
In order to assess the current Russia-Ukraine economic warfare, we need first to reveal its goals and ways.
These issues attracted attention of many economists from Ukraine and globally.
A systematic approach and important policy recommendations concerning adaptation of the Ukrainian economic policy in order to survive in EW with a much stronger and unpredictable opponent one could find in publications by Paul d’Anieri, Anders Åslund, Przemyslaw Furgacz, Sergii Kulytski, Yaroslava Bazyliuk, some Ukrainian experts from the National Institute of Strategic Studies and Razumkov Centre.
Ukraine suffers losses due to Russian economic aggression because its economy has weaknesses, a result of persisting structural problems and Soviettime legacy.
The most obvious ones are lower scale of economy in comparison to Russia and very strong economic dependence on Russian markets and supplies.
Through decades of Ukrainian state independence not much has been done in order to build a strong and efficient national economy.
This list could be expanded with additional macro-factors, like the soaring disparity of Ukraine’s international trade (within 2001-2014 its cumulative negative trade balance with Russia reached $77 billion7); a dangerous level of dependence on energy supplies from Russia including those for the nuclear power plants; excessively high Russian share in export of services and military products.
A special place in the vulnerability of Ukrainian economy is held by its dependence on Russian gas and oil supplies 9.
In the late 1990s, P D’Anieri concluded that economic relations, especially energy trade between both counties, is a weak point of Ukrainian economy and policy; it has been often used by Russia for coercion in order to reach political goals concerning Ukraine, like the CIS membership, Black Sea Fleet placement, NATO non-accession, management over the Ukrainian gas pipelines etc.
Here also belongs inefficiency of markets, many of which are still too concentrated and have been prone to monopolistic power by the largest companies controlled by oligarchs.
Market inefficiency struck one of the most important economy sectors – banking.
In Ukraine, a dominance of so called ‘pocket banks’ which actually served the only one big client and associated persons has been observed; these banks had been often used for exercising some special schemes for massive offshore money transfers.
What is especially dangerous from the point of view of the ongoing conventional and hybrid wars unleashed by Russia against Ukraine is a significant share of financial markets being under the influence of Russia.
According to Volodymyr Lanovyi, Russian banks control about 40 per cent of commercial bank capital in Ukraine and have an 18 per cent share in the market of financial services; most Russian banks are making losses and do not invest into the Ukrainian economy, rendering services only to Russian-owned companies and pumping out currency from the country in order to fund Russia’s hybrid war11.
The government at the central and local levels has been accused of corruption and acting more in private interests than for public welfare.
This formed a soil for Russia to exert direct influence over state policy in Ukraine before the Revolution of Dignity.
All the features mentioned above made possible for Russia to a exert multifaceted strategy of weakening the Ukrainian economy in order to fell it completely and, with support of a pro-Russian ‘fifth column’, to restore Russian political dominance in Ukraine.
Within this global goal we could distinguish some subsets of EW goals which have been pursued through implementation of different instruments.
A good illustration for this situation could be a $15 billion loan from Russia ($3 billion of which had been received before outbreak of the Revolution of Dignity in 2013) to the former Ukrainian government as a pay to the ex-President for not signing the Association Agreement with the EU; another one is the so-called Kharkiv agreements of 2010 which prolonged Russian Black Sea Fleet presence in Ukrainian Sevastopol for 25 years, in return Russia offered a $100 discount on the price of gas.
The fact of political motivation of economic strikes is an object of common agreement among most experts in Russia-Ukraine economic relations.
Another goal, an internal one, could be implicitly derived from the logic of actions of the Putin regime.
Ukrainian companies compete with Russian producers in export of agricultural products, metals, military products, aviation transportation, space services etc.
Hitting these industries with sanctions, embargoes etc. would open new possibilities for the big Russian companies which are closely related to the governing regime.
And, last but not least – using EW to trigger social instability in the country will make it possible to change the political course of Ukraine through installing spokespersons and political parties which are loyal to Russia.
There exists an enormous catalogue of ways and techniques for EW in achieving these goals.
Most of them have been applied by Russia in the course of the ongoing hybrid war against Ukraine.
The EW measures could be presented in two groups – direct and indirect ones.
Direct measures of EW include actions taken with the intention to openly damage the opponent’s economy.
Most of them have been quite extensively discussed within a context of the Russia-Ukraine economic controversy by P Furgacz for 2014-2015.13 2.
Ban on specific types of international cooperation that are essential for the opponent country.
To this belong stopping agreements on cooperation in different spheres (academic, scientific, military, labor migration, trans-border movement), denial of access to objects of physical infrastructure as well as to the natural space for users from the opponent country.
It must be mentioned here that these measures are initiated exclusively by an economic aggressor who is convinced of his superiority as an economic power.
The aggressor selects the sphere and time for an attack and expects his endeavour to be successful.
While analyzing the list of EW acts undertaken by Russia, one would see that Russia applied all the instruments listed above, also initiating these measures.
However, the mechanism of sanctions was activated in the middle of 2015, far behind the EU, USA and many other countries which imposed personal and economic sanctions against Russia for its actions in Ukraine in March-July 2014.
Indirect measures of EW include actions that are a by-product of other hybrid war actions.
Striving to defend its own independence, the country must restructure its economy, produce and buy more and more weaponry, increase army staff etc.
Expansion of the military expenditures could be achieved through austerity measures taken in other public spheres and needs imposition of additional taxes that depress private demand and investments.
In 2013, the Ukrainian defence budget was 1. per cent to GDP, but in 2017 it reached 3. per cent.
This diminishes incentives for local and foreign investors and generates an outflow of foreign capital.
According to the Ukrainian Ministry of Finance, DFI net inflow to Ukraine dropped in 2014 by more than 10 times , which meant a massive capital outflow caused by expansion of military actions.
Within the next two years it recovered to some extent, but still not reached the pre-war level at $1.9 billion in 2017.
The total stock of DFI in the Ukrainian economy dropped in 2013-2016 by $17. billion.
Capture or destruction of industrial assets and physical infrastructure in course of the military actions and occupation.
Russian occupation of parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions which had been very significant exporting and manufacturing regions of Ukraine (10 per cent of GDP in 2013), led to national GDP drop by 7 per cent in 2014 to 2013 15 that could be derived from 70 per cent GPD decline in the occupied East and destruction there of about 12,000 units of physical assets 16.
Russian attacks and Ukrainian response EW had been initiated by Russia against Ukraine a long time before the hybrid war actually started.
The principles were applied many times in order to force Ukraine to carry out policies demanded by Russia.
However, since 2012, as Ukraine approached the signing of the EU Association Agreement, hostilities have been accelerating and growing in intensity within a plan of action to make Ukraine change its path20.
After the Crimea annexation and triggering the war in the East of Ukraine, EW between the countries became permanent and total.
In 2014, Russia abolished a preference regime to selected imported goods from Ukraine and imposed higher customs on them.
In 2015, the Free Trade Agreement between Russia and Ukraine was abolished and the most favored nation treatment regime had been imposed, which also led to an increase in custom duties for Ukraine.
According to some estimates, as a result of this act the average custom duties for Ukrainian goods increased by 7. per cent; however, for Russian goods, due to the different export structure, only by 1. per cent; in result, Ukraine got higher trade balance deficit 21.
Russia-Ukraine EW now consists of many separate wars which actually embrace all good groups traded.
In July 2014, the import of Ukrainian milk products was prohibited; in October 2014, export and transit of fruits and vegetables through Russian territory from Ukraine was banned; in August 2015, export of Ukrainian agricultural products was banned.
Russia has tried to financially destabilize Ukraine by barring it from the most important source of export proceeds stemming from gas transit.
Success in realization of this project would mean significant problems for the Ukrainian economy.
Since fall 2017, Ukraine has been an object of the hacker attacks that aim to seize control over the critical infrastructure objects and paralyze the state administration, the origin of the attacks was admittedly Russia.
Of course, not only Ukraine was attacked by them, but it is priority target.
EW acts from the Russian side were supported by the information war instruments.
Attempts to undermine the trust of Western partners in the Ukrainian economy and government.
As an example is information aired in August 2017 by the Russian Federal News Agency that Ukraine could not be a good gas transit partner for Europe 24.
Discrediting the governmental economic policy for the Ukrainian people, including policy of economic sanctions against Russia.
In June 2017, the Russian Internet media including the official ones launched information that Ukrainian sanctions against occupied Crimea hurt its economy much more than the Crimean one.
This fake news was based on an interview of a well-known Ukrainian agriculture economy expert on an effect of the Ukrainian sanctions on the Crimean agriculture.
Creating a picture of an imaginary great dissatisfaction with the policy of the Ukrainian government.
To this row belong the ongoing efforts to show that Ukrainian business elite does not support the economic policy carried out by its own government.
In all the cases of trade wars mentioned above Ukraine fought back by imposing reciprocate sanctions to Russia.
Nevertheless, Ukrainian total losses have exceeded those of Russia in absolute and relative numbers.
However, there are some economic spheres where Russia’s losses were much higher than the Ukrainian ones.
Ukrainian military-industrial complex produced a lot of the components which are essential for the Russian military industry.
The truth is that the most goods of military use produced in Ukraine and exported to Russia cannot be replaced by the Russian domestic production in the short run.
As stated above, Russian banks played significant role in Ukrainian market of financial services, but their extensive presence in this key market increased risks of possible financial destruction of Ukrainian economy done on Kremlin demand.
With regard to this danger, on March 2017, Ukraine imposed economic sanctions on the biggest Russian banks with state capital operating in Ukraine 29.
They were barred from engaging in financial operations with the mother companies, receiving loans on the Ukrainian interbank market, transferring capital abroad, attracting deposits, buying securities, paying out dividends and interest on securities, sharing of profit and capital.
After this decision their active operations were paralyzed, so many decided to withdraw from the Ukrainian market.
In September 2015, Ukraine initiated a ban on flights of Russian aviation carriers to/over Ukraine.
Not all EW acts from Russia’s side were successful due to effective response from Ukraine.
This could be true concerning attempts of financial destabilization of the country.
E.g. in June 2014, Russia demanded Ukraine to pay $4. billion for gas consumption in the occupied Crimea and around $70 billion according to the gas supply contracts as of 2009.
In April 2014, Russia declared denouncement of the Kharkiv agreements as of 2010 and set a natural gas price for Ukraine at the level $485 instead of $268. per 1,000 m3 before; in result, Ukraine completely stopped buying natural gas from Russia, relying on supply from European countries.
The other examples of successful defence of the country’s economic interests could be stopping payments from Ukrainian state budget to occupied territories, which created additional fiscal burden for Russia.
In the nearest future Ukraine could be in the position to apply financial penalties to Russia.
Of course, Russian companies do not accept the legality of these penalties, but the judgments of Ukrainian and international courts will soon give Ukraine a legal right to confiscate Russian assets anywhere.
These legal actions are potentially 31 In May 2018, in line with the abovementioned Stockholm Arbitrage judgment Ukraine initiated a mandative confiscation of the Gasprom assets in the UK, the Netherlands and Switzerland.
Private Ukrainian companies whose property was confiscated by Russia in the course of Crimea annexation (where Russia “nationalized” about 5,000 Ukrainian enterprises) and occupation of Donbas also appealed to the international courts in order to get compensation for the assets lost.
A first success is a judgment of the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague as of May 2018 that supported their claim against Russia in the amount of $159 million34.
Thousands of cases against Russia submitted by private persons are being filed in the European Court of Human Rights, which also could mean significant monetary penalties for aggressor.
The risks stemming from Russian capital in Ukraine are high because it seeks not only profit, but domination and control of whole industries applying political, economical and information tools 36; and not the least – it uses its own profits for funding proRussian terrorists in the East.
As well-known Ukrainian economist Oleksandr Paskhaver put it, “We do not need Russian capital.
That is why in March 2018 the new Law On Privatization was adopted, prohibiting Russian companies from taking part in privatization competitions.
In 2013, a civil campaign started “Don’t buy the Russian goods” which resulted in significant sale cuts of the Russian consumer goods thanks to attaching country stickers to the tags or a ban enacted by decisions of local authorities (in result, the annual export of Russian consumer goods to Ukraine diminished by $100 million 38 ); a civil campaign against the Russian banks resulted in significant outflow of deposits and increased their operational losses.
A ban on any trade with the occupied territories of Crimea and Donetsk/Luhansk region was introduced after massive campaigns organized by civil society organizations.
An account of the economic fight outcomes The outcomes of the Russia-Ukraine EW could be presented as economic losses of the involved parties, adjustment strategies applied by economic agents, a new configuration of economic relations.
As shown above, Ukraine experienced massive economic losses due to the hybrid war carried out by the Russian Federation; EW accounts for a significant fraction of these losses.
The aggressive economic actions from Russia’s side did not remain unanswered.
However, there is the problem of much higher importance of trade with Russia to Ukraine, than of trade with Ukraine to Russia, as well as structural differences in trade which made response to the hostile economic actions less effective.
So in most cases within a narrow context of Russia-Ukraine economic controversy Ukraine suffered absolutely and relatively higher losses than Russia.
A Åslund divides these losses into four categories (forfeiture of economic assets on the occupied territories, destruction of the capital assets due to the war actions, capture of cash flows, and diminishing of real FDI inflow); according to his calculations, Ukrainian value loss (in case the territories would be gone forever) amounts up to $100 billion 39 excluding sacrifice of possible economic gains steaming from impossibility of economic use of natural and financial resources located in these territories.
As concerns Russia, its main economic loss is associated with the economic sanctions applied by the USA, EU and other countries of the world because of the Russian aggression against Ukraine.
Efficiency of these sanctions is questioned by the Russian officials who continually claim that “these sanctions make the Russian economy stronger”, which does not ring true even from the perspective of textbook microeconomics.
Because of sanctions, Russia became toxic as an economic partner and experiences a significant outflow of foreign investments; dismantling of cooperation in the R&D sphere diminishes its chances for development in the future.
A raw estimate of actual losses due to these sanctions done by the nongovernmental Russian experts differs greatly.
According to Grigorii Yavlinsky, Russia is losing annually about three trillion ruble 40.
These losses are not critical, but significant, and in the long run could become fatal for the county’s economic progress.
In order to increase the economic and fiscal burden of occupation for Russia, the Ukrainian government banned any economic relations with the occupied territories.
As concerns the adjustment strategy, Ukraine has chosen a way of diminishing vulnerability of its economy caused by its tight connection to the Russian markets.
Ukrainian goods have been exported more and more to other than Russian markets, especially to Europe.
This shows that Ukraine has achieved significant progress in untying the Gordian knot of seemingly eternal bonding with the economy of its opponent.
This data, disregarding some fluctuations (like in 2017, when an increase in the mutual trade was observed that gave reason to some observers to state that this fact is “underscoring a complicated spider’s web of geopolitical and economic interests that still bind the two erstwhile Soviet allies” 42 ), demonstrate that Ukrainian goods that are rejected by Russia now are being supplied to the bigger and less risky European and Asian markets.
This is especially true for the Ukrainian agricultural export, which expanded despite a complete closing of the Russian markets.
Ukraine still has significant economic bonds with Russia; however, they became looser with time.
A drastic drop in bilateral export and import that occurred 2013-2017 means that the forecasts made by some experts concerning impossibility to overcome Ukraine’s economic dependency from Russia 43 did not come true; it looks like Russia will soon become an insignificant trade partner instead of number one in 2012.
Disregarding current harsh times, the Ukrainian economy has potential to adjust to a new situation because its government has pursued a strategy of reorientation of economic relations with developed markets.
As P Furgacz put it, after some time the situation will change and Russia would achieve much bigger losses because of EW than Ukraine 44.
There occurred also a significant change in the inter-country labor migration.
Despite all the losses stemming from a conscious choice of cutting economic bonds with Russia, Ukraine stands to gain much more in the future, like technological advancement of production, its higher quality, the civilized and non-politicized trade relations, inflow of foreign investments with advanced technologies.
But in order to achieve all this, there should be furthered a consequent policy of cutting down relations with Russia.
The radical reforms in all the spheres of society including economy became a topical agenda.
As concerns re-configuration of economic relations, Ukraine drives to complete breakdown of the existing structure and mechanisms of external economic relations.
This conclusion follows from the fact that in March 2018 Ukraine scuttled the Agreement on Programme of economic cooperation with the Russian Federation for 2011-2020 47 that held a coordinated vision of Ukraine and Russia onto prospects of the long-run mutually beneficial economic cooperation.
It means that Ukraine has no more interest in cooperation with Russia in various spheres of economy (like energy production, aviation, space industry, agriculture and so on, which were prioritized in the Agreement 48) and will look for more reliable partners which do not further political interests through economic relations.
Another event that signalizes a radical turn in Ukrainian policy is stopping all activities within the Commonwealth of Independent States since May 2018.
However, all the above-mentioned shows that Ukraine is moving fast away to the point of no return in its economic relations with Russia.
That is why it seems irrelevant “to plan the depth of economic restrictions concerning Russian Federation with regard to grade of its aggression” 50 as some experts put it; Ukraine needs a strategy of reducing to a possible (economically rational) minimum the bilateral economic relations regardless of how Russia behaves within a specific period of time.
That is why we fully support a forecast made by the experts of the Ukrainian Razumkov Centre that Ukraine as an independent state has no other choice but confronting coexistence with Russia that means permanent EW, drifting away and diminishing the volume of mutual economic relations.
With regard to such developments it would be interesting to assess prospects of the Ukrainian economy in the nearest future.
Conclusions Since 2012, Ukraine has struggled to hold fast as an independent state in its military, political and economic combat with a much stronger opponent – Russia.
As Ukraine has no intention to give up its independence, this situation has become a permanent one.
The economic controversies between two nations evolved into the permanent and total economic war.
The best way to win an EW for Ukraine is to minimize the volume of its economic relations with Russia and the adversary’s presence in economy, as well as launching radical reforms in all spheres, economy first of all.
Due to the huge difference in size and structure of economy, Ukraine could collapse in this situation without support from the civilized world.
Being outraged by Russia’s breaking the world order with its aggressive actions against Ukraine, the most significant countries of the world introduced economic and other sanctions against Russia which hampered its tries to undermine the Ukrainian economy or to capture other territories.
In fact, the results of current economic warfare are opposite to the expected ones.
First of all, Ukraine made no political concessions as concerns its independence and statehood.
In political sense, Ukraine is now far away from Russia in comparison to 2013.
Secondly, Russian direct and indirect actions against the Ukrainian economy did not succeed in destroying it.
Of course, they had a significant negative effect, but the Ukrainian economy shows the signs of recovery and demonstrates accelerating growth that is connected with advancements in technology and quality of goods.
The ‘eternal’ bonds with Russian economy seem to weaken with a trend to make Russia an insignificant trade partner of Ukraine.
Russia also did not succeed in ousting Ukraine from the global markets.
Being pushed out the Russian markets, Ukrainian goods nowadays are successfully traded in EU and Asia markets.
The recent experience of Russian EWs with the bordering post-Soviet countries which sought to break the long-lasting economic ties with Russia (the Baltic states, Moldova, Georgia) demonstrates that the course chosen by Ukraine could be a success.
To these measures belong first of all financial sanctions according to judgments of Ukrainian and international courts.
Ukrainian government must act pro-actively in its financial claims against Russia for capturing/destroying economic assets and cash flows as well as stay pressive concerning a confiscation of Russian public assets in Ukraine and globally according to its legal claims.
There are also some non-finalized but unforgotten issues that could be put on the agenda.
E.g. it could be a case with $80 billion of the USSR Sberbank assets in Ukraine as well as other Soviet assets abroad which were gone in 1991 as Russia declared itself the legal successor of USSR; Ukraine did not agree, but at that time lacked political will and power to insist on full compensation.
The only mainstay of survival and triumph in an economic war with a much stronger opponent is a consequent policy of economic reforms to raise the nation’s economic capacity and to encourage Ukrainian people to work more efficiently.
