Chapter 4 Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West Olexiy Haran and Petro Burkovskiy Facing challenges from Russia, the West is struggling to preserve its principles of collective responsibility for regional security in Europe and to develop a common approach toward necessary yet politically painful and economically costly efforts to limit Putin’s actions and plans.
At the same time, leading Ukrainian foreign policy decision-makers are desperately pursuing the twin goals of freezing the Donbas conflict and maintaining international support for the country.
In this chapter we begin with a general analysis of mutual perceptions from both sides, then proceed to identify key interests and concerns regarding the war in Donbas, and analyze whether the political aspects of the Minsk agreements can be implemented.
We argue that Putin’s success in attacking Ukraine, which is impossible to achieve without undermining unity among Western powers, could embolden him to exert his power and influence in wider Europe.
Moreover, as U.S.-EU ties are likely to undergo some stress after elections on each side of the Atlantic in 2016 and 2017, Russia will to be tempted to take advantage of such turbulence by pressing forward with its goals in Ukraine and pushing the so-called “grey zone” of insecurity westward before a new equilibrium is found within the Euro-Atlantic area.
Ukrainian Perceptions of the West amid War with Russia Following the events of 2014–2016, Ukrainian decision-makers have accumulated a number of concerns about Western attitudes toward Russian aggression in Crimea and the Donbas.
First, the Crimea annexation ultimately destroyed Ukrainian trust in Western security assurances.
EUROPE ’ S EAST FACES AN UNSETTLED WEST 2014 address to the United States Congress.
The helpless reaction of the UN and the OSCE in February–March 2014 proved that existing international, global and regional organizations that are designed to deal with security matters have little impact when a member state faces aggression from another member state, particularly if that other state is a nuclear power.
In April 2014 negotiations were conducted in Geneva with participation of the United States, the EU, Ukraine, and Russia.
However, for reasons unexplained in public, the “Geneva format” was not renewed.
At the very beginning of the crisis, the new Ukrainian authorities had little hope for Western support, given the weak international reaction to the 2008 war between Russia and Georgia.
According to Ukrainian officials, their Western counterparts urged maximum restraint without offering any kind of practical support to stop and contain Russia.
Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West 53 of major Western powers to fulfill their NATO obligations should a similar crisis arise in the Baltic region.
Russia continues to benefit from such anxieties and vague Western political commitments.
In addition, by engaging in provocative and dangerous behavior in the Baltics, which it justifies publicly as a “reaction” to NATO “reinforcements,” Russia makes it easy for pro-Russian political players in Germany, France, Italy and other countries to advance arguments against any military assistance to Ukraine as a non-member of Alliance.
Although the United States and the EU sanctioned Russia, and NATO responded to Russian provocations towards the Alliance’s eastern neighbors, this policy remains dependent on a consolidated approach that is itself reliant on the perception that all NATO member states are sharing the burden, as well as on the ability of political leaders to withstand domestic pressures.
In 2015–2016, however, the debates that erupted over how to deal with the even more urgent migration crisis revealed serious fissures within the European Union.
Moreover, statements by United States President Donald Trump have also raised serious concerns in both western and eastern Europe whether the new United States administration might advance new approaches that would question long-standing principles that have guided United States foreign policy towards Europe.
Second, Kyiv believed that the Western powers only began to develop efficient countermeasures against Russia after they suffered directly from the consequences of the Kremlin’s aggression in Ukraine.
When the city of Mariupol came under indiscriminate rocket attack in January 2015, however, resulting in 30 deaths and hundreds of injured, the EU did not manage to augment its economic sanctions.
Consultations about implementation of the DCFTA dragged out due to Russian objections, resulting in delay of the DCFTA for one year until January 1, 2016.
At the same time, when the Russian energy company Gazprom threatened to cut gas supplies to Ukraine due to unsettled arrears and penalties, the EU Commission and major EU countries intervened very actively and forced the Russian gas giant to disconnect its claims to Ukraine from its transit business with the Ukrainian company Naftogas.
Moreover, Ukraine was given loans and bank guarantees that facilitated alternative gas contracts with the European energy companies and, consequently, diversification of gas imports.
Third, Ukraine is concerned about a possible agreement between the West and Russia to reset their relations at the cost of Ukraine’s territory and sovereignty.
This perception is fueled particularly by the European approach to implementation of the Minsk agreements.
For instance, after German Chancellor Angela Merkel met with Ukrainian President Poroshenko in Berlin in February 2016, the German government continued to insist on constitutional reform in Ukraine and Russian involvement in determination how the local elections in Donetsk and Luhansk were to be held.
French president Hollande reiterated this position in an address to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe.
The key point is that from the very first Minsk agreement in September 2014, Russia and Ukraine each pursued contradictory goals.
According to 7 Contracts about reverse gas flows were negotiated and concluded before the conflict.
Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West 55 our reading of Poroshenko’s peace plan10 and Putin’s peace arrangement,11 as well as the Protocol on the results of consultations of the Trilateral Contact Group, signed in Minsk on September 5, 201412, Moscow linked peace with limiting Ukraine’s sovereignty by means of federalization and a “special status” for the Donbas.
Kyiv, on the other hand, saw peace as a tool to recover occupied territories and escape from Russian military pressure.
Despite unbridgeable differences between Ukraine and Russia about the ultimate destination of the Minsk agreements, the EU and the United States not only insist on implementation of these flawed agreements, they also seek selective cooperation with Russia, regardless of the Kremlin’s long-term goals.
Within the EU, initial steps were taken to engage in new cooperation with Russia in January 2015, just when Russian troops were trying to seize the strategic town of Debaltseve, in violation of the Minsk-1 agreements.
The return of Debaltseve to Ukraine was not even discussed in the negotiation process until late 2016.
How this benefits Russia is hard to understand; it certainly does not benefit us.
Essentially, the current Russian regime is ruling the country not by giving Russian society more opportunities to develop itself and therefore seeking more benefits from international cooperation, but by tying people’s welfare more tightly to state power and its projection abroad.
From this point of view, Russia will not swap stabilization of Ukraine for offers of deepened trade or cooperation from the West.
It is just a matter of time before the instrument of selective cooperation backfires and destroys a tenuous European solidarity.
Competition among individual countries to win more benefits from “selective cooperation” with Russia will always cast a shadow over the need for a common policy.
For example, during the December 2015 EU summit, Italy already questioned the EU approach to sanctions against Russia, as German energy companies lobbied their government to approve Nord Stream 2.16 This was repeated at the October 2016 EU summit, when Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi initially resisted new sanctions on Russia17 (although he ultimately joined the consensus), and just a few days later the EU Commission changed regulations regarding access to the European internal gas markets in a way that favored German and Russian companies.
Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West 57 So far it seems that the main message of those who are trying to shape the Trump Administration’s foreign policy attitudes is a vague promise to the Russian leadership of reciprocity and mutual respect.
With regard to Ukraine, he speculated that “Russia can contribute to this by forgoing its aspiration to make Ukraine a satellite; the United States and Europe must relinquish their quest to turn Ukraine into an extension of the Western security system.
Moreover, Ukraine had non-bloc status between 2010 and 2013 and Budapest “security assurances” from the Russian nuclear power, but that did not prevent Russian aggression in 2014.
However, Ukraine’s most recent history has shown that the country lost territories not due to civil unrest but only after well-organized and disguised external military aggression, the effect of which has been to consolidate Ukrainian society and bring different regions closer.
Should political realism prevail in the new United States Administration, these facts would have to be respected.
On the other hand, if Ukraine is perceived by the new United States Administration as a “toxic asset” that only increases costs because of its domestic troubles, then the realist approach demands that the West transfer this burden to Russia, especially if Moscow wants to claim it.
In short, it is too early to make certain predictions about Trump’s attitudes toward the Russian-Ukrainian conflict, although there is a clear intention to change the basic approaches to U.S.-Russian relations set forth by Obama and George W Bush.
It should also be remembered that the probable policy shift of the new Administration is marred by Senate investigations into potential Russian links and contacts, including potential business interests, of the President and associates such as Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and, even more important, evidence of hostile Russian intrusions during the United States electoral campaign.
For a democratically elected government it would be a challenge to isolate a new approach to Russia from the need to respond to allegations that Russia sought to manipulate public opinion during the elections.
Both Moscow and Kyiv will follow the news from Washington on these matters in order to understand whether the new Administration has a new strategy toward them and their conflict, or decides to avoid making decisions and taking risks.
In sum, despite massive direct and indirect Western support during the war years, Ukraine is concerned about the short-term nature of such support and the fragile unity underpinning Western approaches when it comes to imposing real costs on Russia.
Western Perceptions of the Conflict Between Ukraine and Russia The West is preoccupied with working with Russia on conflict resolution for a number of reasons that go beyond the Kremlin’s possession of nuclear arms, the necessity to engage Russia in Syria, on Iran or the Korean peninsula, negotiations on the Arctic, climate change, or other issues.
Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West 59 First, Russian claims over Ukraine are not considered to be completely illegitimate.
It was common practice to treat Ukraine as a “grey zone” between EU/NATO Europe and Russia22 and to consider that under certain conditions Ukraine could join re-integration projects inspired by Moscow.
The failure of the Euro-Atlantic integration reforms of the “Orange revolution” governments, and the pro-Russian stance of the Yanukovych presidency, seemed to support that view of Ukraine.
In addition, growing Russian assertiveness, which included both hostile actions toward former Soviet republics and economic incentives for key EU countries and euroskeptic or pro-Russian governments in central-eastern Europe (Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia), prompted ideas of respecting Russian “special interests” and favoring its partnership over relations with other CIS countries.
The most recent examples of using economic and trade-related arguments to justify renewed relations with Russia have been provided by center-left governments in Austria and Greece23 as well as a broad coalition of parliamentary business lobbyists in the French Senate24 and the National Assembly.
It is worth mentioning that in February 2015 Francois Fillon, the frontrunner in the 2016 French Republican presidential primary, called German and French leaders to support Russia’s interest in a neutral Ukraine and to reject the notion that Russia intended to capture Ukraine.
Since that time he has only strengthened his stance about returning to close dialogue with Putin regardless of his behavior.
These calls have been even stronger in countries that depend on Russian energy imports.
Both the center-left Prime Minister of Slovakia, Robert 22 Robert Legvold and Celeste A Wallander, eds., Swords and Sustenance.
EUROPE ’ S EAST FACES AN UNSETTLED WEST Fico, and the right-wing Prime Minister of Hungary, Viktor Orban, included revival of trade with Russia as a key concern for their countries, since each has suffered from Russian countersanctions.
According to Dariusz Kalan, much of Russia’s influence in these central-eastern European countries, especially Hungary, has been based on lucrative, corruption-laden business deals.
However, it was the Obama Administration that started the “reset policy” toward Russia, only months after the 2008 Russian-Georgian war, despite Russia’s de facto annexation of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
And it took two years for the Obama Administration to review its relations with a more authoritarian Russia, initially opposing congressional efforts to penalize Russia and then only reluctantly approving some selective restrictive measures, such as the Magnitsky Act.
The term “Ukrainian crisis,” used often in international media, is simply not correct.
Ukraine’s domestic crisis ended with the escape of Yanukovych to Russia, the return of the 2004 constitutional reform, which prevents monopoly of power, and the smooth legitimization of new Ukrainian authorities.
These developments were in fact key reasons why Putin decided to intervene, in an attempt to divert Ukrainian efforts from its reform agenda and aggravating the country’s economic and political situation.
As the war broke out, it became evident that Russia had enough strength to defeat and capture three Baltic states before NATO could respond.
Army Europe, the situation has not changed much after two years of conflict.
Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West 61 sions that raised the stakes for Russia in case of military escalation.
However, a country without NATO backing has even less chance to survive an encounter with the Russian military machine.
Therefore, the major Western powers think that re-arming Ukraine could not deter escalation of the conflict, since Russia could definitely launch a preventive invasion to defeat the Ukrainian army before Western assistance and a military buildup could make Ukraine’s defense forces strong enough to withstand full-scale attack.
In 2015, just a few days before talks in Minsk, speaking at the Munich security conference, German Chancellor Angela Merkel ruled out the idea of strengthening the Ukrainian army, since she did not believe it would persuade Putin that he might suffer military defeat.
At the same time French President Francois Hollande warned that the only alternative to negotiations was war.
However, European leaders seemed to be “led from behind” by the Obama Administration on this matter.
On the eve of the Russian assault of Debaltseve in February 2015, Ben Rhodes, a deputy national security adviser and one of President Barack Obama’s closest aides, told CNN that supplying weapons to Ukraine was not an answer to the crisis in Ukraine.
Later, in March 2015, it was revealed that this decision was made contrary to advice from the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of National Intelligence.
Hopefully, there is gradual evolution of the views in France and, especially, in Germany to support economic sanctions against Russia and backing of the EU financial aid loans for Ukraine.
EUROPE ’ S EAST FACES AN UNSETTLED WEST shape as a unilateral American decision without the consent of key EU and NATO allies.
During his confirmation hearings, Secretary of State Tillerson suggested that in 2014 he would have recommended supplying weapons and offering air surveillance to Ukraine to respond to Russian aggression in Crimea and eastern parts of the country.
Second, many Western authorities tend to believe that Ukraine is part of the problem, and that it can be influenced at relatively lower cost and can be controlled in the process of peace-making.
The West is inclined to forget about its own strategic intelligence failure when it came to Russia’s easy takeover of Crimea, and is tempted instead to lay the blame on weak Ukrainian security and defense institutions and radical nationalistic movements that were operating within the broad protest movement of the Euromaidan.
Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West 63 We expect that the new United States administration, relying on a cooperative Congress, will make its support for Ukraine even more dependent on Kyiv’s commitment to reform itself and fight corruption.
Washington, not Brussels or other European capitals like Berlin, London or Warsaw, provides the lion’s share of military and financial assistance for Ukraine and shapes IMF loan requirements, which are two crucial elements for Ukraine’s survival.
Meanwhile, the EU also faces a certain problem with influencing Ukraine.
The Dutch advisory referendum rejecting the Association Agreement and internal disagreements about reforming the Schengen regime have compromised two of the soft power tools available to the EU to influence Kyiv’s decision-makers.
Moreover, the Netherlands demanded that the European Council conclusions regarding Ukraine of December 15, 201640 be supplemented by an annex about the implementation status of the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement.
From the Ukrainian point of view, this document was approved to assure Dutch voters that the EU is not going to impose any obligations on EU member states that may go beyond what was concluded in the Association Agreement.
This impression was strengthened by the fact that the EU sanctions against Russia were extended until June 2017.
However, there is a risk that these political provisions could be used by the new governments in the Netherlands, France, Germany, and may be Italy, to block new decisions to assist Ukraine in the fields of security, mobility of citizens and support of the reform process.
In this case, this annex could be seen as the Union’s failure to conduct a proactive policy in the Eastern Neighborhood.
In addition, EU-Ukraine trade relations cannot by themselves be an immediate game changer.
Despite high expectations, the economic results of the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement between Ukraine and the EU would be rather modest.
EUROPE ’ S EAST FACES AN UNSETTLED WEST Ukraine’s exports and 34% of Ukraine’s imports, overall trade has stagnated since 2008,41 due to structural problems of the Ukrainian economy.
Third, most Western interlocutors believe that the Minsk agreements are the only real way to stop the war.
The Minsk agreements’ success, however, relies on the presumption that the gradual removal of sanctions could prompt Russia to withdrawal from the Donbas.
This view is shared by the German,43 French,44 and former Italian45 ministers of foreign affairs.
Many Western leaders are attracted to the theory that deep and comprehensive economic ties serve as safeguards against hostility.
Therefore, according to this line of thinking, improving economic relations would nudge positive domestic developments in post-Soviet Russia.
These expectations grew bolder in 2008–2012, during the Presidency of Dmitry Medvedev, despite Russia’s invasion of Georgia.
Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West 65 of engine in developing a strategic partnership between the EU and Russia.
Despite growing evidence of the Kremlin’s authoritarian turn, key European states sought to maintain a cooperative approach toward Russia.
Indeed, there was an evident asymmetry in economic relations between Ukraine and Russia.
This was the largest share among the Commonwealth of Independent States, and Ukraine was one of Russia’s largest trading partner.
EUROPE ’ S EAST FACES AN UNSETTLED WEST making it clear that it was prepared to incur some economic losses in exchange for political concessions.
Furthermore, Putin authorized the invasion in Ukraine despite the risk of losing one of its biggest natural gas markets, its traditional transit route for energy into Europe, an important market for Russian exports, and severing cooperation between Russian and Ukrainian companies in certain sensitive areas.
From this point of view, the EU’s search for a modus vivendi with Moscow cannot ignore Russia’s interpretation of interdependence as a kind of weapon.
In this context, proposing the gradual removal of sanctions without a clear demonstration of how and when they can also be expanded and strengthened only proves to Moscow that it can wait and influence certain European countries to secure more favorable conditions.
In short, sanctions are not goals in themselves in the context of conflict in the Donbas, they have become a test of the EU’s ability to carry out a coordinated and substantive response to violations of the post-WWII order in Europe and of the United States commitment to protect its democratic allies.
To conclude, the West is facing a difficult dilemma as it approaches the limits of its limited engagement in the conflict between Russia and Ukraine.
It faces suspicion, hidden agendas, and zero-sum game thinking on the Russian and, to some extent, the Ukrainian side.
According to polls, 52% of Ukrainian would choose armed or civil resistance against foreign intervention, while 3% would flee abroad.
Support for joining NATO skyrocketed to 43% (25% is in favor of non-bloc status), and a potential referendum would be won by NATO supporters.
These changes in geopolitical attitudes happened in all regions of Ukraine.
Also, DIF polls in the liberated areas of the Donbas show that a majority of respondents choose an all-Ukrainian identity over a regional one.
Even in the Donbas (which is under control of Ukraine), less than 7% of respondents said they support the separation of the so-called ‘LNR’ and ‘DNR’ (“People’s Republic of Luhansk” and “Donetsk National Republic”) from Ukraine.
However, to a great extent they are demoralized and not politically active.
According to the polls, if referenda on EU and NATO membership would take place, they would be won in the east and south as well.
EUROPE ’ S EAST FACES AN UNSETTLED WEST • At times the Ukrainian leadership plays into Russian hands and damages the trust of Western partners by discrediting its own reform processes.
Its bargaining position on the occupied territories is also not very clear, even to Ukrainian experts.
There are significant limits to Ukraine’s ability to negotiate compromise in the framework of the Minsk agreements.
A closer examination of the implementation elements within the Minsk agreements reveals that they cannot result in stable peace.
Although military cooperation with the West is very important for Kyiv, the main point of concern is Western attitudes towards Ukraine’s economic restructuring.
Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West 69 olistic economy, which can result only in another destabilization and violent turmoil in the next election cycle.
And the resulting domestic troubles will invite just another Russian invasion, as in 2014.
So far, Ukraine has no additional resources to sustain the postwar reconstruction of the Donbas.
However, the West is reluctant to commit even more resources or relieve Ukraine from its sovereign debt,59 so that the country can channel saved money to the post-conflict areas.
As an example, Ukraine’s negotiations in March 2015 with a pool of private lenders and bondholders, most of them from United States,60 resulted in no necessary assistance from the United States government, as if there was no war going in the Donbas or the annexation of Crimea had never happened.
Indeed, it was not feasible to let Ukrainian elites become “free riders” and main beneficiaries of a “haircut” and debt relief.
However, a restructuring deal between private lenders and Ukrainian government placed the debt burden on the public and over the medium term undermined the well-being of the common people, who remain the main agents of civil society and proponents of Western institutions of democracy and rule of law61.
It is true that the Ukrainian economy is struggling to find its way to recovery and modernization.
In addition to the negative impact of the Crimea annexation and war in the Donbas, the performance of the national economy is constrained by such serious factors as corruption, lack of innovation, an absence of long-term capital investment, depreciation of critical infrastructure, the low labor costs and high capital outflow rates.
According to the latest WEF Competitiveness Index, Ukraine’s basic requirements for competitiveness, so far, have been extremely low.
EUROPE ’ S EAST FACES AN UNSETTLED WEST implementation of the long-term decisions to reform the economy, the Ukrainian government cannot endure external and internal security threats linked to the conflict in the Donbas.
The most important counterargument about the Minsk agreements is that their implementation has not been owned by the Ukrainian people, including those who live in the conflict zone.
From the very beginning the work of the trilateral contact group and its foreign facilitators on ceasefire, demining, exchange of POWs, election issues has been carried out without the consent of the people and their representatives in the national parliament and local councils, volunteer organizations and civil activists.
According to the May 2016 poll of the Democratic Initiatives Foundation, only 13% of Ukrainians believe that elections in the DNR/LNR or their ‘special status’ would lead to peace in the Donbas. 43% of Ukrainians consider these elections impossible in the near future, and 21% consider that these elections may happen, but only under Ukrainian law.
As a consequence, it is crucial that Western powers understand and agree with the red lines Ukraine has established as necessary to maintain Ukraine’s sovereignty and essential for any sustainable peace, as they engage in peace negotiations with Russia.
Finally, Ukraine wants to understand how the West views the future of Crimea’s status and ways of defusing possible conflicts between Russia and Ukraine over this territory.
In an interview on ABC’s “This Week” on July 31, 2016, Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump suggested that the people of Crimea would rather be part of Russia.
Although his remarks were widely condemned, there is no secret that the West de facto accepted the seizure of Crimea.
Sanctions related to Crimea are quite weak and often violated by Western companies.
While Western powers and institutions do not recognize elections to the Russian Duma from Crimea, in general they seem to accept tacitly the results of Russian Duma elections, despite illegitimate voting in the occupied Crimean constituen63 Ilko Kucheriv Democratic Initiatives Foundation, “Donbas.
Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West 71 cies for all-national Russian parties’ slates.
Also, this attempt would lead to destabilization, as he would be accused of having betrayed national interests.
Clause 8 would make Ukraine pay for the reconstruction of the destroyed Donbas economy.
Second, trying to avoid new escalation, Western partners have pressed Ukraine to implement Clause 11 on constitutional changes, ahead of implementing ceasefire and ahead of implementing other clauses from 1 to 10.
In the eyes of Ukrainians this smacks of “appeasing” Russia for its aggression.
Kyiv stresses that it can have dialogue only with those representatives of the occupied areas who are legitimately elected, that is, according to Clause 9, under Ukrainian law and OSCE monitoring.
Kyiv also demands withdrawal of foreign troops, according to Clause 10.
It is difficult to imagine free and fair elections on the territory controlled by Russian security services and armed half-criminal units.
More than one and a half million pro-Ukraine voters have left the Donbas, but they need to have the right to vote.
At present, there are no Ukrainian media at all in these areas, only Russian channels.
First, Kyiv’s control over the Ukrainian-Russian border has not been restored.
Kyiv asked the EU to consider deploying an EU mission on the border but there has been no response yet.
Without demilitarization of the region it is difficult to imagine free elections.
By agreeing to formal elections, Russia would like to create a camouflage for presenting the RussianUkrainian conflict as Ukraine’s internal problem and involve Kyiv into direct dialogue with Russia’s proxies.
These concerns are shared not only by political opponents of President Poroshenko but also by the expert community in Ukraine.
Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West 73 Poroshenko will be able to collect enough votes to get the special election law passed.
His idea is to proceed after the elections to restore Ukraine’s border control (which is questionable, given Russia’s position) and to involve former separatists into the formal structures under control of Ukrainian state.
By doing that he may be able to present himself as a peacemaker for domestic consumption and to secure Western approval, but this long and controversial approach could also erode his support and thus risk further destabilization.
Recommendations • Increase military assistance to Ukraine both by providing necessary equipment for the army and supporting modernization of Ukraine’s indigenous defense industry.
Support for the army should entail defensive lethal arms, encrypted command and communication systems, unmanned aerial vehicles and modern reconnaissance equipment.
Modernization of Ukraine’s indigenous defense industry should include joint ventures to restore naval, air and missile defense capabilities.
EUROPE ’ S EAST FACES AN UNSETTLED WEST international monitoring of the situation in Crimea, including defending the rights of Crimean Tatars, who are again facing repression.
Illegitimate voting in occupied Crimean constituencies for allnational Russian parties’ slates is cause not to recognize the legitimacy of the entire Duma.
The best case scenario presumes EU-U.S. cooperation to reduce the share of Russian oil and natural gas in the European markets, including its substitution with alternative sources and reversing existing joint projects between Russian and European energy companies.
It is especially important to support Ukrainian efforts to substitute Soviet-era nuclear power stations with modern Western stations and assist in the development of indigenous Ukrainian nuclear fuel production and alternative renewable energy installations.
It is essential to make such support conditional on Ukraine’s achievement of real transparency and accountability in domestic politics.
For example, it is important to put under severe scrutiny and audit all kinds of foreign assets, including offshore entities, owned by Ukrainian public persons.
One of the most effective mechanism of Western assistance has been support of non-governmental watchdogs, think tanks and independent media, including the emerging Suspilne Movlennia (state-owned former national broadcasting company), which has investigated corruption cases and helped to launch e-declarations for civil servants and government leaders.
The model for such a legal step is provided by the draft of the Global Magnitsky Human Rights Accountability Act.
Without that, both special status as well as elections in the occupied areas look like legitimization of Russia’s de facto control over occupied areas.
If Russia agrees to leave the Donbas but has reservations against hypothetical injustices there once it is gone, it is possible to use the experience of IsraelEgypt relations over Sinai to reach agreement on a gradual disengagement and demilitarization of the Donbas according to a negotiated division of the occupied territories into the zones.
This should include lower presence of both Ukrainian and Russian armed forces on the Ukrainian-Russian border, enforced by an international observer contingent on all roads and transport routes between two countries in the former area of conflict.
If this does not work, one can not exclude that the Minsk agreements need to be renegotiated.
In any case, until withdrawal and restoration of Ukraine’s sovereign control over its border, sanctions cannot be reduced.
They appear to have been the main tool stopping Russia’s military attack.
There are successful examples of countries like West Germany, South Korea, and Israel where Western economic and security assistance appeared to be decisive factors.
In the latter case, despite Western overtures Moldova’s ruling coalition was unable to start effective struggle against corruption.
That is why Western support and pressure for reforms in Ukraine remain crucial.
